United Nations

S/PV.5881 (Resumption 1)

Security Council

Provisional

Sixty-third year

5881st meeting
Wednesday, 30 April 2008, 3 p.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Sangqu/Mr. Kumalo . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(South Africa)

Belgium . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Burkina Faso . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Costa Rica . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Croatia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Indonesia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Italy . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Libyan Arab Jamahiriya . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Panama . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . .
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Viet Nam . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Mr. Belle
Mr. Tiendrébéogo
Ms. Song Danhui
Mr. Urbina
Mr. Mutavdžić
Mr. Badirou-Gafari
Mr. Natalegawa
Mr. Mantovani
Mr. Dabbashi
Mr. Suescum
Mr. Safronkov
Mr. Etherington
Mr. DeLaurentis
Ms. Nguyen Thi Thanh Ha

Agenda
Small arms
Report of the Secretary-General (S/2008/258)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the
delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room C-154A.

08-32416 (E)

*0832416*

S/PV.5881 (Resumption 1)

The meeting resumed at 3.05 p.m.
The President: I should like to inform the
Council that I have received letters from the
representatives of Colombia and the Syrian Arab
Republic, in which they request to be invited to
participate in the consideration of the item on the
Council’s agenda. In conformity with the usual
practice, I propose, with the consent of the Council, to
invite those representatives to participate in the
consideration of the item, without the right to vote, in
accordance with the relevant provisions of the Charter
and rule 37 of the Council’s provisional rules of
procedure.
There being no objection, it is so decided.
At the invitation of the President, the
representatives of the aforementioned countries
took the seats reserved for them at the side of the
Council Chamber.
The President: I wish to remind all speakers, as
indicated this morning, to limit their statements to no
more than five minutes, in order to enable the Council
to carry out its work expeditiously. Delegations with
lengthy statements are kindly requested to circulate
their texts in writing and to deliver a condensed
version when speaking in the Chamber.
The next speaker inscribed on my list is the
representative of the Netherlands, to whom I now give
the floor.
Mr. Majoor (Netherlands): Thank you,
Mr. President, for providing my delegation with the
opportunity to participate in this open debate. The
recent developments regarding possible arms
shipments to Zimbabwe have shown once again how
topical this issue is, both in the context of the General
Assembly and for the Security Council.
Building on the statement made this morning by
the representative of Slovenia on behalf of the
European Union, I would like to emphasize that we
agree with the Secretary-General’s analysis of the
current state of affairs regarding the issue of small
arms.
The
Netherlands
fully
supports
the
recommendations made in his report (S/2008/258), and
we are pleased and encouraged by his fresh approach
to this important topic. In particular, my delegation
welcomes the broad approach to the issue, the
connection to capacity-building and development, the

2

focus on improving cooperation between national law
enforcement authorities and the inclusion of issues
such as ammunition flows and poor end-use
verification.
The problems arising from small arms
proliferation are still plentiful. We need to continue
striving for full implementation of the United Nations
Programme of Action. We are confident that the
upcoming Biennial Meeting of States will propel and
steer action on international cooperation, marking and
tracing, stockpile management and surplus disposal,
and illicit brokering.
The recommendations made by last year’s United
Nations expert group on illicit brokering, which was
chaired by my fellow countryman Mr. Prins — who is
sitting next to me — deserve follow-up, while our
ambitions for a legal instrument should not be
abandoned. And we need to weigh and reweigh our
methods of curbing the proliferation of small arms in
the light of the knowledge we have gained.
In recent years, the international community has
become more aware of the connection between armed
violence and development. It is increasingly
understood that the problems arising from small arms
need to be addressed not as a separate technical issue,
but as an issue that is embedded within a broader
development approach. The 2005 World Summit
Outcome (General Assembly resolution 60/1) is a
confirmation, at the highest level, of the new consensus
that security and development are intimately linked.
Armed violence has a major impact on the often
vulnerable countries that suffer from it, as it affects
economies, health sectors, budding democracies and, in
general, the fabric of society. To deal with small arms
and light weapons effectively is to recognize the
myriad ways in which armed violence affects society
and to act on it accordingly. If the international
community is serious about achieving the Millennium
Development Goals — which I believe it is — we need
to start looking beyond the efforts directly aimed at
achieving those goals and realize that armed violence
will thwart any substantial improvement in levels of
development.
The Secretary-General recommended that we
develop key indicators for the area of small arms and
use those to determine a set of measurable goals. In
that respect, the efforts in the framework of the Geneva
Declaration on Armed Violence and Development are

08-32416

S/PV.5881 (Resumption 1)

mentioned as being encouraging. The signatories to the
Declaration, which come from all regional groups,
have started to work on measurability in the field of
armed violence and are currently reflecting on the
possibility of developing so-called security for
development
goals.
Those
goals
could
be
complementary to the Millennium Development Goals
and, as such, bridge the gap between security and
development.
It is our hope that the understanding of the
correlation between armed violence and development
will become firmly rooted both in United Nations
standards and in international action on small arms
proliferation.
The President: I
representative of Congo.

give

the

floor

to

the

Mr. Okio (Congo) (spoke in French): It is a true
pleasure for my delegation and me to see you, Sir,
presiding at the close of your presidency of the
Security Council over this meeting on a subject that is
of great importance to us: small arms. Allow me also to
point out that, under your presidency, the most
important questions affecting our continent have been
considered by the Council and Member States. Congo
thanks you for that and offers its sincere gratitude to
your delegation.
Most present-day conflicts, as the SecretaryGeneral says so well in his report, contained in
document S/2008/258, are fought primarily with small
arms and light weapons. Africa, the largest dumping
ground for such weapons and host to the greatest
number of armed conflicts, is without doubt the
continent that most suffers the damaging consequences
of that scourge.
Hence, this meeting, taking place a few weeks
before the third Biennial Meeting to review the 2001
Programme of Action, is most timely. It offers Member
States and this organ, primarily responsible for the
maintenance of international peace and security, an
excellent opportunity to consider appropriate solutions
to the threat represented by such weapons in certain
parts of the world.
I should like to paraphrase a great French
statesman, President Jacques Chirac, as he spoke of
another, equally important challenge at the World
Summit on Sustainable Development in September
2002 in Johannesburg, South Africa, to the effect that,

08-32416

so long as the threat of small arms and light weapons
remains both pressing and ongoing, the world must not
look away. A sense of realism demands it of us.
As we all know, the primary role in the struggle
against the illicit trade in those weapons belongs to
Member States. It is also clear, however, that in
addressing that and other challenges, partnerships are
equally necessary, particularly when complemented by
the coherent action of the United Nations.
My delegation welcomes the many initiatives that
have been taken at various levels, including the
meetings of experts organized by the Department for
Disarmament Affairs and other regional and
subregional meetings. We also note with pleasure the
decision taken by the States members of the Economic
Community of Central African States (ECCAS), our
own subregional organization, at the twenty-fifth
ministerial meeting of the United Nations Standing
Advisory Committee on Security Questions in Central
Africa, held in Sao Tome and Principe in May 2007, to
draw up a legal instrument to monitor small arms and
light weapons in Central Africa and a code of conduct
for defence and security forces. Congo takes this
opportunity to appeal to our ECCAS partners to
support such projects.
Congo recalls here that the Security Council
should, as it has with respect to other issues on its
agenda, demonstrate both its determination and its
unity by taking active measures to fight the scourge of
the illicit trade in small arms and light weapons, which
has incalculable consequences for our peoples. Indeed,
the introductory words of Ms. Hannelore Hoppe,
Deputy to the High Representative for Disarmament
Affairs, as well as paragraphs 5, 6 and 7 of the
Secretary-General’s report, are sufficiently eloquent
concerning its physical, human, material and other
consequences. It is therefore unnecessary for me to
revisit the harmful effects of the use of those weapons
in many countries in conflict.
In the light of all that I have just said, and with
respect to our rightful objectives concerning the threat
to international peace and security posed by the illicit
trade in small arms and light weapons, my delegation
should like to make the following comments.
First, the question of small arms and light
weapons should be addressed in parallel with that of
ammunition in the context of the drafting of a binding
legal instrument, which we strongly advocate. Indeed,

3

S/PV.5881 (Resumption 1)

the Secretary-General’s report notes that “[m]ore than
80 per cent of ammunition trade seems to remain
outside of reliable export data” (S/2008/258, para. 19).
And yet, ammunition is essential to the functioning of
those weapons. There is thus a need for joint and wellcoordinated action on the part of the international
community to monitor the circulation of ammunition
and improved stockpile management.
Secondly, the question of the responsibility of the
manufacturers of such weapons must be raised with
respect to export, transfer, licensing, marking and
tracing. Indeed, without the participation of
manufacturers and the assistance of the States where
they operate, no action by the international community
can have the desired results, given the complexity of
the present-day structure of the arms trade and the
existence of numerous brokers and points of sale.
Thirdly, the issue of respect for embargoes should
enjoy greater attention because it has been relentlessly
demonstrated that the perpetuation of some conflicts is
linked to the ease with which certain illegal armed
groups obtain weapons. Respect for embargoes is all
the more essential in that it allows us to reduce, to a
certain extent, the capacity for harm of illegal groups
and to prevent the emergence or resurgence of certain
conflicts.
The Secretary-General’s 13 recommendations
could represent an equal number of steps forward if
they were converted into consensual decisions, despite
the fact that they do not all go as far as we should have
wished, as the representative of the United States
pointed out this morning in referring to certification.
While we recognize the impact of this debate, we
regret that the Security Council has been unable to
make a far-reaching decision commensurate with the
expectations of peoples throughout the world who are
suffering the plague of war.
The President: I
representative of Iceland.

give

the

floor

to

the

Mr. Hannesson (Iceland): I have the honour
today to speak on behalf of the five Nordic countries:
Denmark, Finland, Norway, Sweden and Iceland.
It is a well-known fact that small arms and light
weapons maim and kill hundreds of thousands of
people every year, create fear and insecurity, divert
resources needed elsewhere and hinder post-conflict
recovery. Security is a precondition for development,

4

and the interlinkages among security issues,
humanitarian
problems
and
development
are
increasingly recognized. Combating and eradicating
the illicit trade in small arms and light weapons in all
its aspects is therefore fundamental to improving
global, regional and national security and necessary
social and economic development.
Let me reiterate that the five Nordic countries
fully support the efforts to deal with the challenges
posed by man-portable air defence systems.
The United Nations Programme of Action of
2001 remains the global framework for cooperative
efforts to combat illicit arms. The five Nordic countries
firmly support the full implementation of the
commitments set out in the Programme of Action.
In doing so, we call for enhanced partnerships
with all relevant stakeholders. We call for enhanced
cooperation among Governments. All relevant parts of
the United Nations family must contribute. In this
respect, let me reiterate the importance of the Security
Council. It is vital for the Council to address the
challenges posed by small arms and light weapons in
relation to human security. In this respect, we must
fully recognize the gender implications of this threat.
Likewise, we believe that the Peacebuilding
Commission must take fully into account the
complexities in carrying out its task. We cannot
achieve progress unless we engage regional
institutions. We must further strengthen the partnership
with civil society.
The five Nordic countries intend to continue
contributing in this joint undertaking. We are ready to
provide financial resources, as we have done in recent
years. Within the framework of the Nordic-African
ministerial meeting, we have met with African
colleagues both in Geneva and in New York to discuss
specific issues relating to the illicit trade and the
proliferation of small arms and light weapons and their
negative impact on development in Africa.
We cannot allow the third Biennial Meeting of
States under the Programme of Action to fail, as was
the case with the 2006 Review Conference. We must
aim for a successful third Biennial Meeting that brings
the Member States together around the priority issues
identified by the Chair-designate and that makes
recommendations on improved implementation of the
Programme of Action. This will be crucial in order to
strengthen international efforts on small arms and light

08-32416

S/PV.5881 (Resumption 1)

weapons. A successful third Biennial Meeting will pave
the way for more ambitious and more effective global
work to combat the illicit trade in small arms and light
weapons in the coming years.
First, we must take stock of where we stand on
the implementation of the 2005 Instrument on marking
and tracing. Most of us would have preferred a legally
binding instrument. Yet, now the challenge is to ensure
that all countries adhere to this politically binding
Instrument.
Secondly, the Nordic countries have for years
called for more effective international cooperation in
addressing the question of brokering in small arms and
light weapons. We have advocated an international
instrument against illicit brokering. Yet, we note that
the recent United Nations Group of Governmental
Experts has drawn other conclusions. Our challenge is
now to identify practical measures which will make a
difference in our common efforts to fight illicit
brokering. The recommendations made by the Group of
Governmental Experts should form the basis of this
discussion during the third Biennial Meeting.
Thirdly, the upcoming third Biennial Meeting, to
be held in New York, should also consider national
implementation of the Programme of Action. It is
therefore vital that all Member States submit their
national reports in a timely manner.
Fourthly, we consider civil society, such as
non-governmental
organizations
(NGOs)
and
academia, to be important partners, both in shaping
policy and in implementation. We support enhanced
NGO participation in meetings under the Programme
of Action, and not least at the upcoming third Biennial
Meeting of States.
While the Programme of Action is valuable, we
need a legally binding treaty to regulate the arms trade.
We look forward to the outcome of the Group of
Governmental Experts which has been established to
clarify the modalities for an arms trade treaty.
Last year, all the five Nordic countries articulated
their views on such a treaty to the Secretariat. From
our perspective, an arms trade treaty is feasible, doable
and desirable. We are convinced that such as treaty
could facilitate the task for the Security Council. We
are also of the view that an arms trade treaty should
properly capture key dimensions such as human rights,

08-32416

and development and should contribute to a broader
humanitarian agenda.
Illicit small arms and light weapons represent a
threat to human security, peacebuilding efforts and
development. We must forge an even stronger global
partnership to combat this menace. The United Nations
must be in the lead, but regional institutions play a
vital role in our broader international efforts.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Canada.
Mr. Normandin (Canada): I would first like to
thank you, Mr. President, and South Africa for
convening this meeting. Canada appreciates the
opportunity to participate in this important and timely
debate on small arms. I would also like to thank
Ms. Hoppe for her briefing.
We welcome the excellent report put forward by
the Secretary-General (S/2008/258), and, in particular,
its emphasis on the harmful impact of illicit small arms
on security, human rights and social and economic
development. The recommendations in the report serve
as a useful guideline to encourage further action to
address the proliferation and misuse of small arms.
Measures to address the impact of illicit small
arms must be considered as part of the broader context
of promoting international peace and security,
including peacebuilding and conflict prevention
initiatives. Increased interaction among the various
bodies involved in these issues, including the Security
Council, the General Assembly and the Peacebuilding
Commission, would allow for creative approaches to
the small arms issue from a broader perspective. The
Secretary-General’s
report
provides
useful
recommendations on ways to enhance the synergies
among those bodies.
Canada applauds the Security Council’s work in
addressing critical issues such as small arms through
targeted sanctions, an important and effective tool of
the Security Council. Targeted sanctions have been
used to embargo arms sales to conflict zones and to
prevent certain armed groups from trading in highvalue natural resources, such as diamonds and timber,
which can provide the means to finance arms purchases
and other conflict-related activities.
We have long sought to improve the effectiveness
of sanctions while reducing their humanitarian impact,
including during our most recent term on the Security

5

S/PV.5881 (Resumption 1)

Council, and have supported a number of studies and
other initiatives to that end. Canada is currently
working closely with the United Nations Department of
Political Affairs to develop an information
management system for use by panels of experts
monitoring sanctions.
We
welcome
the
Secretary-General’s
recommendations on possible measures to improve the
monitoring of arms embargoes currently mandated by
the Security Council and to strengthen practical
cooperation between relevant sanctions monitoring
groups, peacekeeping missions and Member States.
Canada supports the inclusion of United Nations arms
embargoes monitoring functions in the mandate of
United Nations peacekeeping missions and the
recommendation in the Secretary General’s report that
this task be given to a dedicated unit equipped with the
capacity to carry it out comprehensively.
The management of existing stockpiles and the
destruction of surplus arms and ammunition must also
be a priority for States and the larger international
community in order to prevent their diversion for illicit
use. Canada has already assisted a number of countries
in destroying surplus arms and ammunition. Through
the NATO Partnership for Peace Trust Fund, we are
also assisting Afghanistan in rendering ammunition
stockpiles more secure and improving stockpile
management practices.
In order to combat illicit flows of small arms, we
must continue to strengthen the global regulatory
framework governing small arms transfers.
(spoke in French)
In this regard, Canada was heartened by the
strong support among Member States for the General
Assembly resolution calling for a comprehensive,
legally binding instrument, establishing common
international standards for the import, export and
transfer of conventional arms, including small arms.
We look forward to the report of the Group of
Governmental Experts on the feasibility, scope and
parameters of an arms trade treaty.
As stated at the Small Arms Review Conference
held in New York in 2006, Canada maintains that
strengthening the global framework governing small
arms transfers in order to combat illicit flow of small
arms and light weapons should not impair the

6

legitimate interests of owners, manufacturers and
vendors of legal firearms.
Implementation of regional instruments must also
be strengthened in order to stem the illicit flows of
small arms, which are frequently traded from one
conflict to another in unstable regions. Canada has
contributed to a number of initiatives to examine,
promote and strengthen the implementation of small
arms instruments at the regional and subregional level,
especially in Africa and the Americas.
The adoption in 2001 of the Programme of Action
to Prevent, Combat and Eradicate the Illicit Trade in
Small Arms and Light Weapons in All Its Aspects was
a major achievement. Ensuring its full implementation
will remain a challenge for years to come. The
upcoming biennial meeting of States provides an
opportunity to take stock of progress in implementing
the Programme of Action and to look at challenges that
remain. Canada is working with other States,
international and regional organizations and civil
society to demonstrate that such meetings can be
effective and useful to accelerate global action on this
critically important issue.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Ecuador.
Ms. Espinosa (Ecuador) (spoke in Spanish):
Mr. President, my delegation would like to thank you
for holding this thematic debate, the Secretary-General
for his report on small arms and light weapons and
particularly Ms. Hoppe for presenting the report.
The United Nations plays a fundamental role
when it comes to disarmament and the prevention of
conflict. There can be no doubt that we need to
strengthen its action in this area, and to improve its
internal coordination in order for it to have a greater
impact in its work.
My delegation considers that it is a matter of
urgency to bring about greater cooperation between the
various organs of the United Nations, bearing in mind
that the General Assembly is the deliberative forum
and that it is the only body that can provide a
normative framework to guide the decisions of all
States with regard to the subject we are discussing
today.
In this respect, my delegation would like to
highlight the importance of referring in this debate to
the negative effect that illicit small arms have on

08-32416

S/PV.5881 (Resumption 1)

security, particularly in countries experiencing a crisis
or in a post-conflict situation, and of stressing the work
done by the Security Council in these cases.

Governmental Experts on small arms and light
weapons, leading to cooperation between States in the
implementation of this legislation.

The efforts undertaken by States and the
international community in order to meet the
Millennium Development Goals are a matter of priority
in order to help reduce sources of tension in countries
which are most vulnerable to conflicts. It is for this
reason that we reaffirm our belief that in countries in
conflict or post-conflict situations we must provide a
minimum set of living conditions for the population.
Likewise, we also feel it necessary that these efforts be
supported by decisive and robust action in order to deal
with those that benefit directly from the industry of
war and facilitate arms trafficking. However, having
said this, we must be clear with regard to the direct
link that we wish to attribute to underdevelopment and
armed conflict, for, while violence can be exacerbated
by poverty, in no circumstances can it be said to be
caused by poverty. Urban violence in certain sectors of
developing countries does not obey the various norms
of social, political and economic inequality and is not
related directly to poverty. Instead, it stems from
external factors, such as drug trafficking and other
transnational crimes. Furthermore, we have seen how
the use and abuse of small arms and light weapons in
developed countries has led to the loss of innocent
lives on a daily basis and caused public massacres.

For Ecuador, this is particularly important,
because over the past few years we have experienced
the effects of an armed conflict beyond our borders,
which has brought in its wake a huge demand for
refuge in our country and much immigration. For this
reason, my delegation attaches importance to the
multilateral discussion of small arms and light weapons
and views with concern the proliferation of these kinds
of weapons, given their links to violence, terrorism and
social disintegration.

My delegation takes note of the recommendations
provided by the Secretary-General in his report, and we
are heartened to learn of the initiatives approved by the
Security Council and its sanctions monitoring groups
in the work with post-conflict States. We hope that in
the future, design and vigilance will be optimized and
that the recent progress in disarmament practice,
demobilization and reintegration and the security
sector reform will continue. In this respect, we must
stress that these initiatives should be confined to the
current specific cases and should not become general
practice or be included as a matter of course in the
work of the rest of the United Nations system.
My delegation agrees with the urgency of
strengthening practical measures to combat the
trafficking in small arms and light weapons and to give
the Programme of Action on Small Arms and the
International Tracing Instrument the necessary support
and the teeth to be successful in achieving its
objectives. We are sure that this process will end in the
consideration of the recommendations of the Group of

08-32416

In this context, Ecuador is meeting its
international obligations, particularly with regard to the
Inter-American Convention Against the Illicit
Manufacturing of and Trafficking in Firearms,
Ammunition, Explosives, and Other Related Materials,
via the national arms control computer system
designed by Ecuadorian military engineers. Moreover,
as a demonstration of its commitment to the small arms
biennial meeting next July, Ecuador will present its
report under General Assembly resolution 62/45,
adopted in December 2007.
Finally, allow me to reiterate the importance of
working together and being able to continue to rely on
international cooperation to achieve our disarmament
objectives. The national efforts of developing countries
in this area can only be successful if the international
community continues to provide its support.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Chile.
Mr. Muñoz (Chile) (spoke in Spanish): Firstly,
Mr. President, we would like to thank you for holding
this debate on small arms and light weapons. It is a
matter of extreme importance for Latin America, as
was just said by my colleague from Ecuador. Small
arms and light weapons do not themselves cause the
conflicts in which they are used, but the ease with
which they are obtained and their excessive
accumulation tend to worsen those conflicts. Their use
claims large numbers of victims, prolongs conflicts and
increases the feeling of insecurity among the
populations suffering from this scourge. Because they
are easy to transport and conceal, they are difficult to
control.

7

S/PV.5881 (Resumption 1)

Chile has been concerned with controlling small
arms and light weapons as well as their ammunition,
explosives and related elements. States are the actors
that bear the primary responsibility for providing
security to populations, which they must do in
compliance with the rule of law. In accordance with the
guiding principles of human security, Chile assigns to
the State the role of protecting fundamental freedoms,
which are the essence of life.
My delegation agrees with and supports the
agreements and resolutions adopted by the General
Assembly with regard to conventional weapons,
particularly those related to the illicit trade in small
arms and light weapons. My country attaches particular
importance to the Programme of Action to Prevent,
Combat and Eradicate the Illicit Trade in Small Arms
and Light Weapons in All Its Aspects, which provides a
good basis for States to incorporate some of its
provisions into their national norms. In addition, we
look forward with interest to the commencement of
negotiations on instruments for tracing illicit small
arms, as suggested in the Programme of Action. We
believe that to be highly important.
It is also important that States adopt the
Programme and that they be able to incorporate into
their national legislation all the aspects it covers, in
keeping with their national capacities. The
international assistance and cooperation provided to
States can be an important incentive in the
implementation of this and other international
instruments.
We are prepared to participate in the third
Biennial Meeting of States to Consider the
Implementation of the Programme of Action, to be held
in New York in July, and in the activities that will be
carried out in our region to prepare for that event, such
as the preparatory meeting for Latin America and the
Caribbean, to be held in Bogotá, Colombia, on 17 and
18 June.
My country agrees that the problems related to
small arms and light weapons as a source of conflict
should be addressed in the Security Council, which is
the organ that has responsibility for the arms
embargoes and sanctions that it applies to achieve the
stabilization of regions in post-conflict situations. If
embargoes are to have real impact, the Council must
carry out effective monitoring together with the
affected State, respecting its national capacities and

8

helping it to develop that capacity if the State does not
possess it or has lost it as a result of the conflict. There
must also be effective exchange of information among
the various actors participating in the control regime,
including national authorities and peacekeeping
missions as well as international and regional
organizations.
The Peacebuilding Commission has an important
function in this area. The Commission can play an
important role by creating the necessary synergies
among United Nations organs so that the countries
under
consideration
in
its
country-specific
configurations can consider including the Programme
of Action to Prevent, Combat and Eradicate the Illicit
Trade in Small Arms and Light Weapons in All Its
Aspects, adopted by the Assembly, as well as the
related international instruments, as effective tools for
peacebuilding in societies emerging from conflict.
The conclusions reached by the SecretaryGeneral in his report on small arms (S/2008/258) are
appropriate for the existing international situation and
challenge us to continue the efforts to reduce the
worldwide circulation of these weapons and to control
their illicit trafficking. Chile would like to see the
establishment of global and regional norms and
agreements prohibiting transfers of weapons and
ammunition that cause or spread armed conflicts or
that worsen existing ones. Adequate international
control, based on an integrated and broad strategy that
responds to the challenges posed by the excessive
circulation of small arms and light weapons and their
illicit trafficking, would undoubtedly contribute to the
prevention of threats to international peace and
security, to respect for the norms of international
humanitarian law and, finally, to the enjoyment of
human rights.
The President: Before I call on the next speaker,
I should like to remind delegations once again to limit
their statements to no more than five minutes. The list
of speakers has grown, and we want to give everyone a
hearing on this matter.
I now call on the representative of Austria.
Mr. Ebner (Austria): Austria fully associates
itself with the statement made by the representative of
Slovenia on behalf of the European Union (EU). I
would therefore like to make just the following brief
comments.

08-32416

S/PV.5881 (Resumption 1)

The availability of and the easy access to small
arms and light weapons have terrible consequences,
such as crime, terrorism, the destabilization of State
structures and societies and national and international
conflict. We encounter human rights violations, as well
as long-term displacement and poverty. Small arms
contribute to undermining the attempts of millions of
people to enjoy development opportunities in peace
and security.
Together with its EU partners and individually,
Austria strives to support the fight against the illicit
accumulation of and trafficking in small arms and light
weapons. Despite a lack of tangible progress in global
efforts against illicit small arms and light weapons in
recent years, there have been significant advances at
the regional level. We have therefore focused our
support on these regional initiatives.
In Africa — the continent most affected by the
uncontrolled spread of small arms — Austria supports
the strengthening of national and regional legal
regimes and capacity-building, as well as practical
disarmament measures. We provide funding, totalling
more than half a million euros, to a number of critical
projects implemented by the United Nations Regional
Centre for Peace and Disarmament in Africa. One such
project seeks to curb the illicit brokering of small arms,
through the establishment of a regional register of
authorized arms dealers in the States that participate in
the Small Arms Transparency and Control Regime in
Africa. Another project envisages the establishment of
a new legal instrument to control the trafficking of
small arms and light weapons among Central African
States. Yet another project is aimed at supporting the
implementation of the Convention on Small Arms of
the Economic Community of West African States.
Austria has made a long-term commitment to those
multi-year projects.
In the Asian and Pacific region, Austria focuses
its support on capacity-building as well as on
strengthening the rule of law by supporting a project to
curb the illicit brokering of small arms and light
weapons. That project will be implemented by the
United Nations Regional Centre for Peace and
Disarmament in Asia and the Pacific, in Kathmandu,
Nepal.
In our immediate neighbourhood of Eastern
Europe and Central Asia, Austria supports the
destruction of stockpiles and ammunition, in line with

08-32416

the recommendation, made by the Secretary-General in
his recent report (S/2008/258), that the destruction of
surplus ammunition stockpiles be made a priority.
We view our financial support for all of these
projects as concrete contributions that assist States in
implementing the United Nations Programme of
Action, as recommended by the Secretary-General in
his recent report.
Before concluding, let me briefly mention the
valuable contribution of the Organization for Security
and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE). Its contributions
to standard-setting are well recognized and comprise,
inter alia, a landmark document: the Handbook of Best
Practices on Small Arms and Light Weapons. Besides
norm-setting, the OSCE places priority on assistance to
affected States and on weapons destruction.
Austria supports continued attention by the
Security Council to the overarching problem of illicit
small arms and light weapons. Furthermore, we look
forward to the third Biennial Meeting to consider the
implementation of the United Nations Programme of
Action, to be held in July. We welcome the
determination that exists at the regional level to move
forward in the fight against small arms and light
weapons. At the same time, the continuation of a small
arms and light weapons process at the global level
remains indispensable. After all, in our interconnected
world, the human security of all of us depends on it.
The President: I now call on the representative
of Peru.
Mr. Voto-Bernales (Peru) (spoke in Spanish): I
am pleased to commend you, Sir, on the last day of
your second presidency of the Security Council. I
welcome your initiative to convene this open debate of
the Security Council on small arms, a matter of great
importance to the international community.
We also thank the Secretary-General for his
valuable report.
In addressing the serious problem of small arms
and light weapons and ammunition, we must consider
the issue comprehensively, taking supply and demand
into account. From that dual perspective, the adoption
in 2005 of the International Instrument to Enable States
to Identify and Trace, in a Timely and Reliable Manner,
Illicit Small Arms and Light Weapons, was a most
positive measure. In conjunction with the 2001 United
Nations Programme of Action to Prevent, Combat and

9

S/PV.5881 (Resumption 1)

Eradicate the Illicit Trade in Small Arms and Light
Weapons in All Its Aspects, it represents substantial
progress in our approach to the subject.
However, we would have wished the Instrument
to be legally binding, include the aspect of
ammunition, set out specific goals and facilitate
assistance and cooperation among States. We hope that
the report of the Panel of Governmental Experts will
soon spark negotiations on a legally binding
international treaty on small arms and light weapons.
The dimensions of the problem are reflected in
the assessment that more than 875 million small arms
and light weapons are in circulation. It is worrisome to
note that this category of weapons is subject to the
fewest registers because most are in private hands.
When we match such data with the increase of violence
in conflict zones, armed crime, the activities of
insurgent groups that challenge legitimate democracies,
and other phenomena that claim countless victims and
foment social and political instability, it is clear that we
need coordinated international measures to exercise
greater control over the illicit trade in and circulation
of small arms and light weapons.
No threat arising from weapons of mass
destruction should allow us to neglect the fact that
small arms and light weapons cause thousands of
deaths every day throughout the world and are wielded
against peace, security and human rights in myriad
forms. Stopping or reducing that illicit trade is
therefore not just a moral imperative that cannot be
shirked by the manufacturing States and to which all
States must contribute. Above all, it is a shared
responsibility deriving from the United Nations
Charter itself, whereby we have undertaken to maintain
peace and security and to take effective collective
measures to prevent and eliminate all threats. That will
be possible only if we proceed to adopt a series of
common and mandatory measures.
I should like to reiterate that small arms and light
weapons constitute the only category of arms that is
not under the exclusive control of States. Their
manufacture, trade and use are also in private hands.
However, the primary responsibility for controlling the
flow of arms lies with States, be they manufacturers,
exporters, re-exporters, importers or transit points. In
that respect, the Secretary-General has proposed some
measures that we endorse and which should be given
due attention by States as soon as possible. In

10

particular, we must work to standardize end-user
certification, reduce the excessive accumulation of
ammunition, and develop assistance and cooperation to
enhance States’ capacities to halt the proliferation of
small arms, light weapons and ammunition.
Such measures should complement the work of
the Security Council in monitoring arms embargoes;
strengthening synergies between embargoes and the
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration of excombatants; and developing practical measures for
cooperation between the sanctions monitoring groups
of the Security Council, peacekeeping missions,
Member States and their investigating authorities, and
the relevant regional and international organizations.
Finally, we believe it important that the Security
Council has decided to address the serious problem of
small arms and light weapons on a biennial basis as of
this year.
The President: I give
representative of the Philippines.

the

floor

to

the

Mr. Davide (Philippines): The Philippines
commends the presidency of the Security Council for
organizing this debate on the important and urgent
need to address the problem of the proliferation and
illegal trafficking of small arms and light weapons.
Among the many types of armaments that are
available in today’s global arms market, small arms
and light weapons, although not the most lethal and
destructive, because of the prevalence and openness of
their use throughout the world have killed and maimed
and struck fear into millions of people and will
continue to do so unless controlled. Those killings have
brought untold fear, suffering and misery to the
affected families and loved ones, as well as relatives
and friends.
Worse yet, so many small arms and light weapons
have been produced — and there seems to be no limit
or end to such production — by and/or in different
countries throughout the years. Since those weapons
can easily be transported and are less expensive, they
are bound to proliferate, especially since they can be
used in times of both peace and conflict, for good or
bad.
The Philippines recognizes the fear, suffering,
misery and pain brought upon innocent peoples by
small arms and light weapons. The harm they have
brought to entire populations is immeasurable. The

08-32416

S/PV.5881 (Resumption 1)

Philippines believes that it is imperative for all States
Members of the United Nations to account for their
stockpiles of small arms and light weapons and to
ensure that they do not fall into the hands of
irresponsible persons, such as criminals, or groups,
such as terrorists, that espouse a culture of death or
cause the aggravation of conflicts for the ascendancy
of their anti-social ends or causes.
Thus, the Philippines has complied with General
Assembly resolution 62/47 on the implementation of
the International Instrument to Enable States to
Identify and Trace, in a Timely and Reliable Manner,
Illicit Small Arms and Light Weapons and of the
United Nations Programme of Action to Prevent,
Combat and Eradicate the Illicit Trade in Small Arms
and Light Weapons in All Its Aspects.
The Philippines considers the marking of firearms
with a unique identifier to be an essential element in
preventing their illegal transfer. All firearm
manufacturers in my country are required to mark their
products. Government authorities, such as the
Philippine National Police, the Armed Forces of the
Philippines and others, only use small arms and light
weapons that are properly marked.
By legislation through Presidential Decree 1866,
as amended by Republic Act 8294, the Philippines
requires licensed manufacturers of small arms and light
weapons to apply an appropriate and reliable marking
system on each weapon as an integral part of the
production process. The Philippines maintains
comprehensive records on the manufacture and
distribution of small arms and light weapons. The
Firearms and Explosives Division of the Philippine
National Police meticulously records all data on
confiscated, captured, surrendered and deposited small
arms and light weapons. That agency has upgraded its
firearm management information system, which allows
for the identification and verification of the routes and
destinations of small arms and light weapons.
On the other hand, the Philippines has thrown its
full might against illegal arms manufacturers in the
country, both through tighter laws that impose heavy
imprisonment penalties even for the manufacture of
parts only, and through new regulations and stricter
administrative procedures.
The Philippines has made progress in the
implementation of the Programme of Action to
Prevent, Combat and Eradicate the Illicit Trade in

08-32416

Small Arms and Light Weapons in All Its Aspects. It
maintains appropriate partnerships with the local
firearms industry, private security providers, gun clubs
and civil society. The country has several laws to
prevent the illicit transfer of small arms and light
weapons, such as Republic Act 8294, which codifies
the laws on the illegal and unlawful possession,
manufacture, dealership, acquisition or disposition of
firearms, ammunition or explosives. Based on our
national legislation, the term “firearms” is used in an
even stricter sense than the definition in the
Programme of Action. Also pending in the Philippine
Senate are SB No. 1615, entitled “Act to Prohibit
Certain Firearms Especially Useful to Terrorists”, and
SB No. 837, entitled “An Act Defining the Crime of
Firearms Smuggling, Providing Penalties Therefor and
for Other Purposes”, among others.
The Philippines observed Small Arms Destruction
Day in July 2007 by destroying thousands of
confiscated or surrendered firearms. It is reported that
over 50,000 more captured small arms and light
weapons are scheduled to be destroyed by the Armed
Forces of the Philippines at its supply units.
The Philippines submits that full and unrelenting
cooperation with the United Nations system on the
issue under consideration is of paramount importance.
Hence, in addition to what I have just stated, the
Philippines is undertaking appropriate measures to
prevent exports of small arms and light weapons that
would violate sanctions issued by the United Nations
or contravene bilateral, regional or multilateral
commitments on the non-proliferation of small arms
and light weapons. It shares information on illicit
transfers with like-minded States through international
instruments, such as the Agreement on Information
Exchange and Establishment of Communication
Procedures. On the export and import of small arms
and light weapons, the Philippines ensures that there is
control over the use of end-user certificates or letters of
intent. The Philippines also does not re-export or
retransfer previously imported small arms and light
weapons.
In conclusion, the Philippines will always be
prepared and ready to contribute to and join the global
fight against illicit transfers of small arms and light
weapons so as to save lives and reduce the human
misery and suffering caused by those weapons.
International cooperation and sharing of information
are key factors if we are to effectively combat and

11

S/PV.5881 (Resumption 1)

eliminate that international problem. A nation acting
alone, without the cooperation, assistance and support
of others, particularly those with large stockpiles of
small arms and light weapons, would be helpless; its
efforts would be futile. All nations must work together
and remain in concord and solidarity to achieve
decisive, positive results in solving the problem. The
time to do so cannot be delayed a moment longer.

Development. Open to all States, the initiative has
already been endorsed by more than 70 countries,
which have committed themselves to achieving
measurable reductions in the global burden of armed
violence, as well as tangible improvements in human
security, by 2015. In view of today’s debate, the
Geneva Declaration, as well as a short briefing note,
were distributed in advance to all Member States.

The President: I give
representative of Switzerland.

Switzerland is pleased to note that the SecretaryGeneral recommends in his report the identification of
key indicators for the area of small arms. Such
indicators should serve as a basis for setting the
measurable goals needed to achieve progress in the
fight against the scourge of armed violence. In
particular, we share the Secretary-General’s view that
developing measurable goals on armed violence
towards 2015 will offer the opportunity to integrate
security-related themes in the follow-up to the
Millennium Development Goals.

the

floor

to

the

Mr. Baum (Switzerland) (spoke in French): I
thank you, Sir, for having convened this open debate
on small arms.
Switzerland welcomes the report of the SecretaryGeneral on small arms and the recommendations
contained therein. We appreciate the holistic approach
of the report and agree with its analysis, in particular
on the impact of armed violence on human security,
human rights and social and economic development.
The United Nations Programme of Action to
Prevent, Combat and Eradicate the Illicit Trade in
Small Arms and Light Weapons in All Its Aspects is
key. Switzerland will continue to support its full and
comprehensive
implementation.
The
upcoming
Biennial Meeting of States will give us the opportunity
to review the achieved results and to further enhance
our implementation efforts. In that context, particular
attention should be given to the International
Instrument to Enable States to Identify and Trace, in a
Timely and Reliable Manner, Illicit Small Arms and
Light Weapons.
Despite the efforts undertaken to date, the
problem of the illicit trade in light weapons remains
acute. We need to continue to act in light of experience
on the ground.
In recent years, intensive research has been
undertaken into the links between security and
development. The findings confirm, as the SecretaryGeneral’s report notes, that armed violence represents a
major constraint to achieving the Millennium
Development Goals because it diverts means and
resources.
Convinced of the importance of addressing the
problems arising from armed violence in a broader
development approach, Switzerland, together with
other like-minded countries, launched in June 2006 the
Geneva Declaration on Armed Violence and

12

In that respect, I would like to mention that the
core group of States promoting the implementation of
the Geneva Declaration — which is coordinated by
Switzerland — is developing a measurability
methodology in the field of armed violence. The core
group has also initiated discussions in view of
developing security for development goals. We hope
that this work will support the United Nations efforts.
The President: I
representative of Nigeria.

give

the

floor

to

the

Mr. Onemola (Nigeria): On behalf of the
Nigerian delegation, I wish to convey our appreciation
for the opportunity to participate in the Security
Council’s open debate on small arms.
I thank the Secretary-General for his report,
contained in document S/2008/258 of 17 April 2008.
The report highlights various aspects of the issue of
small arms, with emphasis on the negative impact that
illicit small arms continue to have on security, human
rights and socio-economic development, in particular
in areas of crisis and in post-conflict situations. The
issues raised remain a major challenge to the
international community and require multidimensional
responses.
The complexity of the issue of small arms
challenges the mandate of the United Nations. Nigeria
would therefore continue to support the collective
action of Member States to advance the achievements

08-32416

S/PV.5881 (Resumption 1)

made since the adoption of the United Nations
Programme of Action to Prevent, Combat and
Eradicate the Illicit Trade in Small Arms and Light
Weapons in All Its Aspects in 2001. However, if the
Programme of Action is to be successfully
implemented, there is a need to integrate national,
subregional and regional strategies to complement the
international dimension of the problem. In addition,
collaborative efforts between the Security Council, the
General Assembly and the Peacebuilding Commission
in integrating a framework related to the issue of small
arms and light weapons should be devised.
Nigeria remains convinced that the best and most
effective strategy for achieving our goals is through the
elaboration of a legally binding global instrument to
stem the uncontrolled proliferation of small arms,
including the full implementation of the United
Nations Programme of Action to Prevent, Combat and
Eradicate the Illicit Trade in Small Arms and Light
Weapons in All Its Aspects. We further believe in the
development and implementation of other international
instruments, such as the Protocol against the Illicit
Manufacturing of and Trafficking in Firearms, Their
Parts
and
Components
and
Ammunition,
supplementing the United Nations Convention against
Transnational Organized Crime; the International
Instrument to Enable States to Identify and Trace, in a
Timely and Reliable Manner, Illicit Small Arms and
Light Weapons; and instruments on trade, brokering
and end use. The United Nations Register of
Conventional Arms and Security Council embargoes
should also be included.
Furthermore, we reiterate Nigeria’s support for
the enforcement of Council resolutions on arms
embargoes and believe that the maximum cooperation
of Member States in providing requisite information on
violation of those embargoes would strengthen the
common resolve to address the problem. It is not
insignificant in that regard to point out the role of
producers in furnishing accurate data on their trade in
those weapons with Member States.
Nigeria also wishes to emphasize the importance
of ensuring the effective collection of weapons, their
storage and destruction in post-conflict situations in the
context
of
disarmament,
demobilization
and
reintegration (DDR) programmes. The inclusion of
DDR programmes in the peacekeeping mandate for
States emerging form conflict situations will serve the
early integration of the affected States. We are

08-32416

confident that those programmes will continue to form
part of future mandates of peacekeeping operations in
order to avoid relapses into conflict.
The adoption of the International Instrument to
Enable States to Identify and Trace, in a Timely and
Reliable Manner, Illicit Small Arms and Light Weapons
is indicative of what can be achieved when political
will is backed by action. For the Nigerian Government,
that could only be a stopgap measure. We reiterate that
only a legally binding international instrument on the
transfer of small arms and light weapons would satisfy
the yearnings and aspirations of victim States and
peoples. We appreciate General Assembly resolution
60/81 of 8 December 2005 establishing a group of
governmental experts to enhance international
cooperation on brokering.
We are pleased to note that the group of
governmental experts set up pursuant to resolution
61/89 of 6 December 2006, entitled “Towards an arms
trade treaty: establishing common international
standards for the import, export and transfer of
conventional arms”, has commenced its deliberations,
and we await its findings.
Nigeria’s efforts in those matters are reflected in
its firm commitment to regional cooperation, as well as
to the implementation, jointly with other countries in
the subregion of the Economic Community of West
African States (ECOWAS), of the ECOWAS
Convention on Small Arms. Together with States
members of the Community, we have converted the
moratorium into a legally binding instrument. We trust
that the support of the international community for
those efforts will remain strong. That, in the end,
would constitute for our countries an endorsement of
the path that our leaders have chosen to tread, as well
as a contribution to peace, security, stability and
development in our region.
Let me conclude my remarks by emphasizing the
need to strengthen international cooperation, assistance
and capacity-building. We hope that we can count on
our international development partners in that regard.
Finally, we want to thank the Security Council
and South Africa for convening this meeting.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Kazakhstan.
Ms. Alzhanova (Kazakhstan): Let me start by
expressing our gratitude to you, Sir, for convening this

13

S/PV.5881 (Resumption 1)

important debate on the problem of small arms. I
would also like to commend Secretary-General Ban Kimoon for his report in document A/2008/258, which
contains, in particular, recommendations for this
Council that in our view can play a significant role in
tackling the destabilizing accumulation and illicit
proliferation of small arms and light weapons.
My delegation fully shares the concern that, as
stated in the report under consideration, illicit small
arms have a negative impact on security, human rights
and social and economic development, in particular in
areas of crisis and in post-conflict situations. The
accumulation, illicit manufacture, trade and circulation
of small arms nurture inter-State conflicts as well as
civil wars, terrorism, organized crime and gang
warfare, thereby undermining the sustainability of
international peace and security.
Kazakhstan recognizes the need to develop
legally binding international documents regulating the
production, stockpiling, marking and tracing of small
arms and light weapons and related illicit brokering, as
well as achieving effective monitoring and compliance
with United Nations arms embargoes.
In that context, we advocate strengthening and
further developing such international mechanisms on
small arms and light weapons as the United Nations
Programme of Action to Prevent, Combat and
Eradicate the Illicit Trade in Small Arms and Light
Weapons in All Its Aspects; the International
Instrument to Enable States to Identify and Trace, in a
Timely and Reliable Manner, Illicit Small Arms and
Light Weapons; the United Nations Register of
Conventional Arms; and the United Nations System for
the Standardized Reporting of Military Expenditures.
As duly pointed out by the Secretary-General in his
report, the revitalization of the Coordinating Action on
Small Arms can improve coordination on that issue
within the United Nations system.

Prevent, Combat and Eradicate the Illicit Trade in
Small Arms and Light Weapons. The timely submission
of national reports on the implementation of the
Programme of Action would facilitate effective
preparations for and the process of the third Biennial
Meeting.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Australia.
Ms. Lisson (Australia): I thank you, Sir, for
organizing today’s debate. Australia welcomes the
opportunity to participate, thanks the SecretaryGeneral and congratulates him on his latest report on
small arms. It marks a welcome return of this
important issue to consideration by the Council.
Recognizing the significant and interlinked arms
control, humanitarian, peacebuilding and development
aspects inherent in the issue, we urge the Council to
continue to make an active contribution towards
combating the illicit proliferation of small arms and
light weapons in all its aspects.
We recognize that the Council cannot work on its
own in addressing the small arms threat. It is critical
that all Member States continue to work actively to
implement the United Nations Programme of Action to
Prevent, Combat and Eradicate the Illicit Trade in
Small Arms and Light Weapons in All Its Aspects,
including the International Instrument to Enable States
to Identify and Trace, in a Timely and Reliable Manner,
Illicit Small Arms and Light Weapons.

The delegation of Kazakhstan supports the United
Kingdom’s initiative on universal standards in the
sphere of transfers of conventional weapons and is of
the view that additional mechanisms of multilateral
consultations would help to fill in the gaps in order to
reach consensus among Member States.

Australia is also committed to working with
regional partners and civil society to address the
challenge of illicit small arms proliferation in the AsiaPacific region. Recognizing, as noted in the SecretaryGeneral’s report, that leakage from official stockpiles
is a significant source of illicit weapons, Australia has
taken practical measures to assist regional States, at
their request. Through its Defence Cooperation
Programme, Australia provides assistance on matters
such as the construction and refurbishment of official
armouries and magazines, support for training in
firearms and armoury maintenance and accountability,
and identification and destruction of surplus weapons.
Similar work is also undertaken to assist regional
police forces.

We express our hope that this open debate will
significantly contribute to the productive work of the
upcoming Third Biennial Meeting of States to consider
the implementation of the Programme of Action to

The challenges presented by unstable and
conflict-prone environments highlight the urgent need
for the international community to improve the
effectiveness of its assistance in restoring access to

14

08-32416

S/PV.5881 (Resumption 1)

justice and security. The intrinsic link between
peacebuilding and development and a secure enabling
environment is acknowledged and promoted as a key
contribution to the effectiveness of development
cooperation. However, as noted by the SecretaryGeneral in his report, “key quantitative indicators …
should be developed and used as a base against which
to set measurable goals” (A/2008/258, recommendation 2,
p. 15) in order to facilitate effective project
development and evaluation.
In March, Australia funded a United Nations
Institute for Disarmament Research activity facilitating
the matching of needs to resources for the effective
implementation of the Programme of Action on small
arms and light weapons in the Pacific region. That
study will develop a mechanism to help States identify
their priorities for small arms assistance and
communicate those priorities to potential donors. We
encourage Member States to take advantage of the
results of the study when they are released later in the
year.
The Australian Government places a high priority
on preventing the illicit trade in not only small arms,
but all conventional weapons. To that end, we are
proud to be one of the authors of General Assembly
resolution 61/89, “Towards an arms trade treaty”. We
are encouraged by the spirit of cooperation displayed at
the first meeting of the Group of Government Experts
in February, and anticipate further progress on
examining the scope, feasibility and parametres of an
arms trade treaty at subsequent meetings in May and
July.
Australia believes that some forms of small arms
and light weapons pose such a significant threat in
unauthorized hands that they should be subject to
specific transfer controls. In 2005, Australia announced
an initiative to address the threat posed to civil aviation
by man-portable air defence systems (MANPADS).
Our initiative has sought to encourage practical
implementation of existing controls over the
manufacture, storage and transfer of MANPADS and
related equipment, training, and technology to prevent
the illicit transfer of MANPADS to terrorists and other
non-State groups. These efforts culminated in General
Assembly resolutions that Australia coordinated in
2004, 2005 and 2007. We will continue to work with
all interested Member States in a variety of forums to
address this particular aspect of illicit small arms
proliferation.

08-32416

Finally, Australia strongly supports initiatives for
reflecting this practical approach in our formal
discussions on the Programme of Action. We warmly
welcome the proposals put forward by the Chairdesignate of the next Biennial Meeting of States
Parties, Ambassador Čekuolis of Lithuania, for
focused, structured, detailed and results-oriented
discussions. We also agree that the specific themes
identified for the Meeting represent a strategic focus on
key areas of the Programme of Action, which will
facilitate fruitful and targeted discussion. We look
forward to working closely with the Chair, the
facilitators and all other Member States to achieve
concrete outcomes in July.
The President: I give the floor next to the
representative of Sri Lanka.
Mr. Kariyawasam (Sri Lanka): Let me thank
you, Mr. President, for convening this debate on this
important issue, which begs for the attention of the
international community because of its impact not only
on peace and security, but also on the well-being of
societies in several parts of the world. The SecretaryGeneral’s report on small arms, in document
S/2008/258, is a stark reminder of the adverse impact
of small arms and light weapons. It contains valuable
information and several worthy recommendations.
As stated in the report, most of the present-day
conflicts are fought primarily with small arms and light
weapons. Though the weapons may be small, they
cause mass destruction in terms of their effects in many
parts of the world. They are the weapons of choice in
several intra-State conflicts and are used by terrorists
and criminal gangs who gain easy access to those
weapons and connected ammunition.
In most situations, unbridled violence unleashed
by the use of those weapons affects civilians as well.
And it has become evident that one primary cause that
engenders and sustains conflicts resulting in violence
affecting civilians is the uncontrolled proliferation of
small arms and light weapons. We recall that in 2001,
in recognition of this fact, the Members of the United
Nations launched by consensus the Programme of
Action to Prevent, Combat and Eradicate the Illicit
Trade in Small Arms and Light Weapons in All Its
Aspects. However, even that Programme failed to
recognize the one major cause driving conflicts and
spreading terrorism worldwide. That is the reality of

15

S/PV.5881 (Resumption 1)

easy availability of, access to and illicit possession of
small arms and light weapons by non-State actors.
The involvement of non-State actors, who often
thrive on the power of the bullet to settle political
scores, ostensibly fighting for political aspirations, is
yet to receive adequate attention in most international
forums. For instance, the issue of non-State actors was
not adequately addressed by the United Nations at the
time the Programme of Action was adopted in 2001.
Therefore the 2006 Review Conference of the
Programme of Action was seen by a very large number
of States as an opportunity to strengthen the
Programme through further agreements that would
expand its scope on important issues, such as action
against non-State actors, that were left unresolved in
2001. Regrettably, however, the Review Conference
neither made progress in that direction nor was able to
agree on adequate global measures for the
Programme’s full implementation, simply due to the
intransigence of a few, defying an emerging global
consensus.
The Secretary-General’s report once again
provides useful information to enable us to address
several issues that could help the international
community come to terms with the scourge of illicit
trafficking and trade in small arms and light weapons.
This is the core issue in achieving success in any
endeavour to cope with and mitigate the adverse
impact of the proliferation of small arms. Illegal
possession of small arms and light weapons by
non-State actors is an attendant issue that cannot be left
out in any meaningful discussion of this issue.
Sri Lanka, like several other countries in Asia,
Africa and Latin America, suffers from violence and
terrorism perpetrated by a non-State actor using illgotten small arms and light weapons and ammunition.
This terrorist group wreaks havoc in some parts of the
country, and their campaign of terror has continued
unabated despite all efforts by the Government to seek
a solution to the conflict by political means of dialogue
and democratic accommodation. All such efforts have
failed, primarily as a result of the phenomenon of illicit
trafficking and trade in small arms and light weapons,
which make it easy for this misguided terrorist group to
sustain their campaign of violence and keep faith in the
bullet rather than the ballot.
In this context, Sri Lanka joins other concerned
parties in appealing to the international community to

16

take urgent action by all available means to stem the
flow of weapons into the hands of non-State actors like
terrorist groups who do not respect internationally
accepted civilized norms and conduct. Unbridled
violence and abominable terrorist acts can be stopped
only if the supply of and access to such weapons can
be halted immediately.
Weapons and ammunition should be held only by
legal entities and States who are responsible to the
international community for their conduct under
international law and treaty regimes that govern good
conduct and respect for human rights and humanitarian
law. It is important, therefore, to ensure that any
measure taken by the United Nations and its Member
States to curb the proliferation of small arms and light
weapons does not affect the rights of a State to procure
and hold arms to ensure the safety of its citizens.
In this regard, while commending the SecretaryGeneral and the Office of High Representative for
Disarmament Affairs for their efforts so far, we urge
action by all States, together with the United Nations,
to fully implement the Programme of Action to
Prevent, Combat and Eradicate the Illicit Trafficking
and Trade in Small Arms and Light Weapons.
However, we are convinced that to make a difference
on the ground in terms of preventing or mitigating
conflicts and violence as well as for combating
terrorism, much more needs to be done in terms of
eradicating illicit trafficking and trade in small arms by
non-State actors. Therefore, the time has come for this
Council and the United Nations to expand their scope
of action towards preventing small arms and
ammunition ending up in the wrong hands. If we fail,
violence and terrorism will continue to affect several
vulnerable regions and societies worldwide. Our choice
is simple. Either we act meaningfully now, or continue
business as usual to our own peril.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Malawi.
Mr. Matenje (Malawi): Let me begin by
congratulating you, Mr. President, on your presidency
of the Security Council for the month of April and by
thanking you for the initiative to hold this debate and
giving me the opportunity to address the Council.
We welcome the report of the Secretary-General
on small arms, which highlights adequately the
problems associated with small arms and light
weapons.

08-32416

S/PV.5881 (Resumption 1)

Over recent years Malawi has witnessed an
increased and alarming flow of small arms and light
weapons into the country from conflict-afflicted areas,
particularly in Africa. The use of such weapons,
illegally brought into Malawi, has destroyed lives and
livelihoods, bred insecurity of person and property and
caused fear and horror among the people in various
ways. That has in turn imposed enormous costs on the
Government, on communities and on individuals, and
has had a profoundly negative impact on socioeconomic and human development in the country,
particularly in the rural areas, where economic
activities have been greatly affected by armed crime
and violence. Ordinary people in rural communities
have lost valuable property and lives to criminals
armed with small arms or light weapons. Many have
been maimed or injured and are no longer able to freely
conduct their economic activities without the threat of
armed violence.
Freedom from the threat of violence is a basic
human right and a precondition for social, economic
and human development, and the dignity and wellbeing of all people. In that regard, in the 2005 World
Summit Outcome Document, our heads of State and
Government recognized the linkage between
development, peace, security and human rights and its
impact on the achievement of the internationally
agreed development goals, including the Millennium
Development Goals.
Accordingly, Malawi calls upon the international
community, led by the United Nations, to intensify its
efforts in assisting to remove illegal arms from African
countries and to prevent armed violence in order to
help Africa achieve the internationally agreed
development goals, including the Millennium
Development Goals, in a peaceful and secure
environment. After all, the vast majority of arms used
to commit armed violence and armed conflict come
from outside Africa. Africa can no longer afford the
cost of armed conflict or allow armed conflict to
continue to hold back economic growth and the
livelihoods of its people.
In her foreword to briefing paper 107, entitled
“Africa’s missing billions”, published by the
International Action Network on Small Arms, Oxfam
and Saferworld and launched on 11 October 2007,
President Ellen Johnson-Sirleaf of Liberia summarizes
the immeasurable loss of development occasioned by
armed violence and conflict in Africa in these words:

08-32416

“This is money Africa can ill afford to lose.
The sums are appalling: the price that Africa is
paying could cover the cost of solving the HIV
and AIDS crisis in Africa, or provide education,
water and prevention and treatment for TB and
malaria. Literally thousands of hospitals, schools,
and roads could have been built, positively
affecting millions of people. Not only do the
people of Africa suffer the physical horrors of
violence, armed conflict undermines their efforts
to escape poverty.”
In that regard, Malawi views the unregulated
manufacture and supply of small arms and light
weapons as a real threat to peace, security and
development. It is for those reasons that Malawi
endorsed the Geneva Declaration on Armed Violence
and Development, which emerged from a summit
hosted by Switzerland and the United Nations
Development Programme in June 2006.
Furthermore, we also associate ourselves with the
efforts of the international community to establish an
effective international regime to regulate the
manufacture and transfer of small arms and light
weapons and their ammunition. We believe that the
unregulated availability of small arms and light
weapons leads to a breakdown of the rule of law,
democracy and legitimate State structures.
Accordingly, we support ongoing efforts towards
the elaboration of an arms trade treaty aimed at ending
the illicit manufacture of and trade in small arms and
light weapons and their ammunition. We believe that
this is a significant step towards the standardization of
international trade in conventional arms and ensuring
that small arms and light weapons do not end up in the
wrong hands and are not used for illegal activities. It is
therefore our hope that the arms trade treaty will
control both the supply of and demand for conventional
weapons. In that regard, we call upon African
Governments, arms-producing countries and the rest of
the international community to vigorously and
proactively support international discussions to achieve
a robust arms trade treaty to ensure that Africa is
protected from armed violence.
In the meantime, we support all the efforts being
made in the implementation of the United Nations
Programme of Action to Prevent, Combat and
Eradicate the Illicit Trade in Small Arms and Light
Weapons in All Its Aspects.

17

S/PV.5881 (Resumption 1)

In conclusion, we commend the Peacebuilding
Commission for its integrated approach to post-conflict
peacebuilding and its central role in addressing the
problem of armed violence and conflict in Africa.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Liechtenstein.
Mr. Frommelt (Liechtenstein): We welcome the
report of the Secretary-General on small arms and light
weapons and commend you, Sir, for organizing this
timely and important open debate. We hope that it
constitutes the resumption of the leadership role of the
Council on this topic.
The enormous socio-economic costs caused by
small arms and small light weapons are one of the big
obstacles to the efforts of many countries to reach the
Millennium Development Goals, and the topic thus has
very wide ramifications. Small arms and light weapons
are widely used in inter-State and intra-State conflicts
by Government armies, paramilitaries and rebel forces.
In situations outside of armed conflicts, they are the
weapons of choice of organized crime groups and
criminal gangs.
The numbers speak for themselves. Small arms
and light weapons kill at least 300,000 people a year in
both conflict and non-conflict situations, and are
responsible for 60 to 90 per cent of direct conflict
deaths. Some 640 million small arms and light
weapons, which are frequently exchanged between
various conflicts, are already in circulation. Another
8 million new weapons enter the market every year.
With all the attention paid to weapons of mass
destruction, the weapons with the most lethal impact
are small arms.
The proliferation of small arms and light weapons
can be regarded as a cluster of related problems
stretching from the illicit trade and transfer of weapons
to production, ammunition and brokering. We believe
that strict domestic brokering legislation is a
prerequisite for effective international cooperation in
that area and adopted such legislation in 1999. But
better control should not be limited to brokering
activities; it should also encompass the physical
transfer of small arms and light weapons. Such control
of arms transfers should be based on international
standards, which prohibit in particular the transfer of
small arms and light weapons to end users who do not
respect international human rights and humanitarian
law. We therefore support all efforts geared towards an

18

international
framework
for
authentication,
reconciliation and standardization of end-user
certificates. The improvement of end-user certificates
for man-portable air defence systems could set an
important precedent in that regard.
The adoption of an international instrument on
marking and tracing was an important step towards
achieving a comprehensive regime in the global fight
against the spread of small arms and light weapons.
The use of the new politically binding International
Instrument to Enable States to Identify and Trace, in a
Timely and Reliable Manner, Illicit Small Arms and
Light Weapons should, however, not be limited to
Member States. If it were incorporated into the
mandates of future peacekeeping missions, it could
significantly reduce the number of small arms and light
weapons available in conflict and post-conflict
situations.
Although the International Tracing Instrument
includes provisions for marking new weapons
production, Government stocks and imports, it does not
cover the marking or tracing of ammunition. That
shortfall contradicts the main purpose of the
Programme of Action to Prevent, Combat and
Eradicate the Illicit Trade in Small Arms and Light
Weapons in All Its Aspects, which, as its name
suggests, is to address the issue of the illicit trade in
small arms and light weapons in all its aspects. We
therefore believe that the question of ammunition must
also be addressed over time. Here, the safeguarding of
ammunition warehouses and the destruction of surplus
stockpiles should be among the priorities of relevant
peacekeeping missions and an initial part of any
peacebuilding effort.
The link between small arms, violence and lack
of development is undeniable. Moreover, the direct and
indirect human, social and economic costs of armed
violence are tremendous. Halting the spread of small
arms and light weapons would therefore make an
important contribution to the achievement of the
Millennium Development Goals.
In that regard, Liechtenstein supports multilateral
initiatives beyond the United Nations framework and
commends those States that have adopted the Geneva
Declaration on Armed Violence and Development.
Given our belief that effective arms embargoes depend
upon the removal of arms from circulation within the
embargoed State and that the problem of small arms

08-32416

S/PV.5881 (Resumption 1)

and light weapons cannot be solved by arms control
measures alone, we will further support activities in the
field of the disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration of former combatants.
The President: I now call on the representative
of Jamaica.
Mr. Wolfe (Jamaica): The Jamaican delegation
welcomes the opportunity to participate in this open
debate on an agenda item that is of critical importance
to the international community. We view this debate as
a chance for the international community to renew its
focus and commitment with regard to ending the
catastrophic consequences caused by small arms and to
garnering the political will necessary to create and
implement the appropriate measures to curb the illicit
trafficking of these weapons. In that connection, my
delegation welcomes the report of the SecretaryGeneral to this body contained in document
5/2008/258, dated 17 April 2008.
Jamaica reaffirms its commitment to the United
Nations Programme of Action to Prevent, Combat and
Eradicate the Illicit Trade in Small Arms and Light
Weapons in All Its Aspects and continues to work
towards effectively implementing its provisions
through our domestic legislation. To further
consolidate that position, we have ratified related
international conventions, including the United Nations
Firearms Protocol.
At the same time, however, Jamaica continues to
be concerned at the lack of progress towards curbing
the illicit trade in small arms and light weapons.
Indeed, while we acknowledge that a few steps have
been taken in the right direction with regard to specific
areas of the Programme of Action, my delegation
remains strongly of the view that, if we are to achieve
meaningful and sustainable outcomes to the
Programme of Action, great emphasis must also be
placed on the area of ammunition.
In taking stock of the implementation of the
Programme of Action, we are also of the conviction
that the global effort should also focus on the need to
examine how implementation can be made more
relevant, given that the illicit trade in small arms and
light weapons is still prevalent seven years after the
Programme of Action was adopted. That will, of
course, necessitate consideration of an approach that
would encompass the wider work and activities of the
United Nations. In that regard, we look forward to the

08-32416

upcoming third Biennial Meeting of States to Consider
the Implementation of the Programme of Action.
As noted in the Secretary-General’s report, the
illicit proliferation of small arms facilitates a wide
array of human rights violations, relating to murder;
rape and other forms of sexual violence; kidnapping;
torture; and the trafficking of persons, including
children. We fully agree that, where armed violence
becomes the established means for resolving
grievances and conflicts, legal and peaceful dispute
resolution mechanisms could in fact be eroded,
consequently posing severe difficulties for upholding
the rule of law and ensuring the dispensation of justice.
In such scenarios, the devastating effects of illicit small
arms and light weapons are usually felt most by the
vulnerable in our societies, including women and
children, and ultimately challenge the development
priorities of States by causing the diversion of efforts
aimed at attaining the Millennium Development Goals.
It is indeed not surprising that the Small Arms
Survey informs us that much more is known about the
number of nuclear warheads, stocks of chemical
weapons and transfers of major conventional weapons
than about small arms. The international community
has failed to respond to this alarming threat, especially
where it affects developing countries and where the
real impact of these weapons, in terms of criminal,
gang-related and narco-trafficking activities, is felt
daily at an astounding level. If we are to reverse that
trend, it is important that all Member States cooperate
and engage in meaningful action, including the
exchange of information among law enforcement
authorities, and implement such measures as will lead
to a reduction in the illegal trade of the approximately
875 million small arms and light weapons reported to
be currently in circulation globally.
Since 2001, our efforts in Jamaica, with the
assistance of our partners, to reduce the volume of
illegal guns and ammunition on our streets, have met
with some success. My delegation would like to take
this opportunity to express our appreciation for the
assistance provided to Jamaica at the bilateral and
regional levels, which has allowed for the
implementation of the Programme of Action in areas
such as the provision of training for legal officers,
policy-makers and law enforcement and customs
officials. We also express our gratitude to the United
Nations Regional Centre for Peace, Disarmament and
Development in Latin America and the Caribbean for

19

S/PV.5881 (Resumption 1)

its assistance in training programmes for law
enforcement officials. We certainly look forward to
continued cooperation and support in other areas as we
seek to comprehensively implement the Programme of
Action.
Jamaica hereby reiterates its call for the
international community to work resolutely and
steadfastly towards the adoption of a legally binding
instrument to enable States to identify and trace illicit
small arms and light weapons. At the same time, with
the constant changes in global patterns of the supply of
small arms and light weapons, there is an equal need
for the international community to examine and come
to terms with the problem of illicit brokering — a
situation that presents the greatest risk of the diversion
of these weapons to the underground market and
consequently into illegal hands. As stated by the
Secretary-General in paragraph 14 of his report, “it is
of the highest significance that countries enact
effective laws and regulations to govern this wide
spectrum of present-day arms brokering”. My
delegation welcomes that very important and timely
injunction by the Secretary-General, which emphasizes
the need for the international community to proceed to
take urgent action in this critical area.
The nexus between small arms and light weapons
and ammunition is indissoluble. Accordingly, while
paying due attention to illicit small arms, we must also
be resolute in our commitment to regulate the illicit
proliferation of ammunition. This is of prime concern
to Jamaica. A gun without ammunition is merely a
mechanical contraption, a device that is practically
useless. So all efforts to curb, regulate or stem the flow
of illegal small arms and light weapons must be
accompanied by similar, multiple efforts to effectively
regulate the illegal flow of ammunition.
As a member of the Peacebuilding Commission,
Jamaica is fully aware of the arduous task faced by the
Commission in restoring and maintaining stability in
post-conflict situations. The issue of small arms and
light weapons is relevant to the work of the
Commission, as the levels of illegal weapons
circulating in the countries concerned are usually
higher at the end of a conflict. In that regard, we
support the view that the strategic frameworks
developed by the Commission could benefit from
coordination with existing instruments such as the
Programme of Action and the United Nations Register
of Conventional Arms, and also with the work done in

20

other forums to curb the proliferation of illicit arms.
The Jamaican delegation certainly looks forward to
supporting efforts to that end as the Commission
continues to develop the tools necessary to assist in
facilitating total recovery from conflict and in
achieving sustainable development in all countries
faced with such situations, in particular those countries
currently on its agenda.
Finally, Jamaica is currently reviewing the
recommendations offered by the Secretary-General in
his report on small arms and will express its views in
the upcoming Biennial Meeting and in other pertinent
forums.
Before concluding, I think it is incumbent on
Jamaica to express its appreciation and commendation
to you, Sir, for your able stewardship of the Council
during this month. We wish you all the best in the last
few hours of your presidency.
The President: Thank you very much. Those
hours seem to be growing longer and longer.
I now give the floor to the representative of
Uganda.
Mr. Butagira (Uganda): First of all, I should like
to thank you, Mr. President, for organizing this debate,
which has enabled non-members of the Security
Council to participate.
In most parts of Africa and, indeed, of the world,
the AK-47 rifle has become a menace. Lives have been
destroyed, livelihoods disrupted and many people
herded into camps for refugees and internally displaced
persons as a result of use of that weapon. It has been
used by gangsters, robbers and rebels.
Even in some developed countries where the
bearing of arms is a constitutionally guaranteed right,
easy access to small arms has resulted in many deaths.
In some communities, such as that of the Karamojongs
of north-eastern Uganda, the possession of firearms is
seen as a protection measure, mainly against cattle
rustlers from other communities. Those weapons have
also been used to carry out raids to capture cattle. All
the scenarios that I have described are alarming.
Something must be done.
First, the root causes of the proliferation of small
arms in illegal hands must be addressed. Poverty is
sometimes at the centre of the matter, and measures to
eradicate poverty must be put in place.

08-32416

S/PV.5881 (Resumption 1)

Secondly, the law and order regime must be
strengthened, including through the provision of
efficient courts and law enforcement agencies, to
obviate the need to defend oneself.
Thirdly, incentives have to be put in place to
encourage the voluntary surrender of arms. For
example, in the Karamoja area of Uganda, such
incentives have included the setting up of business
enterprises and the provision to communities of ox
ploughs and seeds for planting, as well as measures
such as the provision of water to herdsmen to enable
them to live a settled life. The Government of Uganda
has put in place a programme known as the Karamoja
Integrated Disarmament and Development Programme,
which includes some of the measures that I have
outlined. We call on the international community to
support this Programme.
What else has Uganda done? We have put in
place a national action plan on small arms and light
weapons, which was adopted in June 2004. It is a fiveyear plan focusing on the strategic themes of control,
reduction and prevention, setting out a framework for
action at the national level. A functional analysis of the
Uganda plan on small arms and light weapons was
carried out in September 2007 by a consultancy
commissioned by the Regional Centre on Small Arms
and Light Weapons in the Great Lakes Region, the
Horn of Africa and Bordering States with a view to
rationalizing the functioning of the national plan and
streamlining its organization, structure and staffing.
The report setting out the analysis has already been
released and outlines the challenges at hand.
The key objective in developing a comprehensive
national policy was to address the full spectrum of
issues related to small arms and light weapons and to
provide a basis for the review of national legislation,
regulations and administrative procedures governing
small arms and light weapons. A legal drafting
committee, comprising legal experts, has since
embarked on the drafting of the bill and the policy,
which, upon completion, will be presented to the
Minister of Internal Affairs for submission to the
Cabinet. It is on the basis of that policy that the review
of the Firearms Act and other relevant laws will be
carried out.
I now turn to the issue of stockpile management,
which involves the marking, collection and destruction
of illicit, surplus, obsolete and unserviceable small

08-32416

arms and light weapons. It remains an obligation of
States parties to the Nairobi Declaration and the
Nairobi Protocol within the region to mark their
weapons by the end of December 2008. So far, the
Uganda Police Force and the Uganda People’s Defence
Forces have started to mark their weapons under State
control, including those for licensed civilians.
During May and June 2006, a major destruction
exercise was coordinated under the national plan in
which more than 57,000 small arms and light weapons
were melted down at Steel Rolling Mills in the town
known as Jinja. It was billed as the largest single small
arms destruction effort in Africa. A second round of
destroying small arms and light weapons was carried
out on 25 July 2007, and more than 237 tons of such
weapons had been destroyed by November of that year.
In all these endeavours, financial and logistical support
was provided by the United Nations Development
Programme and the United States State Department,
with Saferworld extending technical assistance.
Before I conclude, I want to bring a disturbing
piece of information to the attention of the Council. It
has been reported in some international media that
there is credible evidence that some peacekeepers of
the United Nations Organization Mission in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUC) in
eastern Democratic Republic of the Congo have been
giving weapons to illegal militias in exchange for gold
and ivory. Among those militias is the notorious
Uganda rebel group known as Allied Democratic
Forces. Obviously, Uganda is concerned. A thorough
investigation should be carried out. We also call on
MONUC to undertake robust action to disarm all
negative forces on the soil of the Democratic Republic
of the Congo, which pose a threat to peace and stability
in neighbouring countries.
The President: I now call on the representative
of Uruguay.
Mr. Álvarez (Uruguay) (spoke in Spanish): At
the outset, I should like to congratulate you,
Mr. President, for the initiative to hold an open debate,
as the delegation of South Africa has done on previous
occasions. As stated by the delegation of Uruguay
during the most recent open Security Council debate on
this item (see S/PV.5390), in March 2006, we
encourage the holding of such debates, since they are
one of the Council’s main mechanisms for improving

21

S/PV.5881 (Resumption 1)

its interaction with the General Assembly and other
organs of the system.
However, we continue to regret the fact that the
item related to the Security Council’s working methods
has, to a certain extent, been postponed and unfairly
linked to resolving the more politically complex issue
of increasing the number of Council members. That has
somehow prevented us from continuing to implement,
through various mechanisms, means of improving the
Council’s working methods in a clear and defined
manner.
The delegation of Uruguay notes that the report
of the Secretary-General (S/2008/258) updates and
summarizes the information related to small arms in all
their aspects and once again alerts the entire
international community to the harmful effects of illicit
small arms on security, human rights and the social and
economic development of States. Uruguay fully agrees
that studying the phenomenon of the illicit trade in
small arms and light weapons is not limited to security
issues, but includes other, broader subjects related to
human rights and development.
As shown in the Secretary-General’s report, small
arms continue to be the weapons most used in
conflicts, particularly in those going on at present,
especially those which continue to be considered by
the Security Council. Once again, it is noted with
concern that the majority of these weapons are in the
hands of civilians, in much larger quantities than those
available to armies, police and national armed groups.
That is why, in the opinion of the Government of
Uruguay, one of the main problems that the
international community must face is the civilian
population’s access to such weapons.
The Uruguayan Government has made great
efforts to adapt its policies and legislation to
international and regional instruments related to the
illicit trafficking in small arms and light weapons.
Currently, Uruguay has a body of laws, standards and
administrative procedures that are related to small arms
and light weapons in areas such as production, export,
import, transit and retransfer. Uruguay is also party to
all international instruments in this area that are
identified in the Secretary-General’s report.
With regard to the most recent steps taken by our
country, I can report that, by Law 18.233 of
11 December 2007, Uruguay ratified the Protocol
against the Illicit Manufacturing of and Trafficking in

22

Firearms, Their Parts and Components and
Ammunition. That instrument, which is a protocol to
the United Nations Convention against Transnational
Organized Crime — the Palermo Convention —
establishes the obligation to draw up standards for
marking in order to identify and track firearms.
Therefore, and in conformity with that Protocol,
in 2007 the Interior Ministry of Uruguay approved a
circular that requires that all firearms and ammunition
imported into the country, as well as small arms and
light weapons destined for use by the armed forces, the
national police and other authorized official
institutions, be marked. According to the INTERPOL
database, in Uruguay there is no illicit trade in small
arms and light weapons. Nor are they currently any
national firearms manufacturers in Uruguay.
Nevertheless, the Government of Uruguay has
begun campaigns to destroy small arms and light
weapons that are not duly registered or that have been
confiscated because they have been traced back to
illegal activities. Thus, in the period from 1998 to
2008, Uruguay, through its competent bodies and in
close cooperation with the United Nations, destroyed
more than 35,000 illegal weapons.
The delegation of Uruguay would like to express
its support for the recommendations of the SecretaryGeneral, especially those calling for the unconditional
application of all Security Council resolutions
concerning sanctions, including those that impose arms
embargoes, in order to effectively control the
proliferation of small arms and light weapons in
conflict situations.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Lesotho.
Mr. Maema (Lesotho): At the outset, let me say
how pleased I am to participate in this open debate on
the subject of small arms under your presidency, Sir.
We look forward to a successful and fruitful conclusion
of the debate under your able leadership. I also wish to
thank, through you, Ms. Hannelore Hoppe for her
informative and detailed presentation of the report of
the Secretary-General.
My delegation considers this debate an excellent
opportunity for the Security Council to complement the
work of the General Assembly aimed at tackling the
issue of illegal small arms. We are elated that this
debate comes on the eve of the Third Biennial Meeting

08-32416

S/PV.5881 (Resumption 1)

of States on the 2001 Programme of Action to Prevent,
Combat and Eradicate the Illicit Trade in Small Arms
and Light Weapons in All Its Aspects. The Meeting will
focus on, among other things, illicit brokering,
stockpile management and surplus destruction, as well
as on the implementation of the International Tracing
Instrument. In our view, some of the observations
contained in the report of the Secretary-General on
those pertinent issues, as well as his analysis of the
relevant multilateral instruments, provide Member
States with some food for thought as they prepare for
Third Biennial Meeting.
It is an undisputable fact that excessive
accumulation and uncontrolled spread of small arms
and light weapons pose a significant threat to
international peace and security, human rights and to
social development in many countries. It is also a hard
fact that in Africa — a continent that continues to be
engulfed by internal armed conflicts — these weapons,
which are easily accessible, cause untold humanitarian
suffering. A close link between illicit transfers and
trade in small arms and light weapons, terrorism and
organized crime is also well acknowledged.
Yet there are still no accurate figures for the
number of small arms and light weapons currently in
circulation globally, as highlighted in the report of the
Secretary-General. We share the view expressed in the
report that Security Council embargoes, if well
enforced by States, can have a destabilizing effect on
the circulation of illegal small arms and light weapons.
We therefore encourage the Council, as one of the
relevant actors in the fight against illicit transfers of
small arms, to continue to improve the enforcement of
the arms embargoes.
Our general view is that the United Nations
Member States, at large, still have to garner the
necessary political will to be able to effectively tackle
illicit trade in small arms in all its aspects. Since the
2001 Programme of Action remains the main reference
that regulates the United Nations in that area, we wish
to reiterate our firm commitment to its full
implementation. Nonetheless, the fact remains that its
effective implementation is a challenging task for those
countries, like Lesotho, that have the political will but
do not have sufficient resources — hence our repeated
pleas for technical and financial assistance to those
States in need to enable them to implement the
provisions of the Programme of Action.

08-32416

Lesotho remains committed to regional and
global efforts aimed at addressing the problems related
to illicit trade in small arms. To that end, we are
committed to the full implementation of these
instruments, to which Lesotho is a party: the 2001
South African Development Community Protocol on
Control of Firearms, Ammunition and other related
materials; and the United Nations Convention against
Transnational Organized Crime and its supplementing
Protocol against the Illicit Manufacturing of and
Trafficking in Firearms, Their Parts and Components
and Ammunition. Lesotho also fully subscribes to the
2000 Bamako Declaration on an African Common
Position on the Illicit Proliferation, Circulation and
Trafficking of Small Arms and Light Weapons, of the
Organization of African Unity.
The Government of Lesotho has made significant
strides on the ground regarding the reduction of the
number of small arms held by official institutions, as
well as in the collection and destruction of illegal small
arms. In that regard, we express our gratitude to our
partners for their assistance.
In conclusion, we commend you, Mr. President,
for your able leadership under your presidency, which
ends today.
The President: I now call on the representative
of Colombia.
Mr. Montoya (Colombia) (spoke in Spanish):
First allow me, Mr. President, to congratulate you on
behalf of my delegation for your work in the
presidency of the Security Council during the month of
April and to thank you for convening this open debate.
We also wish to express our gratitude to Ms. Hannelore
Hoppe for her presentation at the beginning of the
meeting, as well as to the Secretary-General for the
preparation of the report that has served as the basis for
the debate.
Seven years after the United Nations Conference
on Small Arms and Light Weapons and almost nine
years after the Security Council first debated this
matter, the diversion of small arms and light weapons
to illicit trade continues to be a threat to peace and
security. Its devastating effects continue.
According to the 2007 Small Arms Survey, more
than 875 million small arms and light weapons are in
circulation today. It is estimated that eight million arms
of this type enter the market each year. The

23

S/PV.5881 (Resumption 1)

consequences in terms of loss of human lives have
been worse than those caused by nuclear weapons.
Given the existing stockpiles, small arms and light
weapons truly are weapons of mass destruction.
Nevertheless, the level of commitment to address their
illicit trade has been much less than that devoted to the
problem of nuclear, chemical or biological weapons.
Greater decisiveness is required in acting and moving
forward towards universal and legally binding
instruments that effectively address that phenomenon.
Meanwhile, it is necessary to use all the tools
available to the international community, which
requires the will and resolve to fully implement
existing legislation and international instruments on the
matter. The Programme of Action to Prevent, Combat
and Eradicate the Illicit Trade in Small Arms and Light
Weapons in All Its Aspects is one such instrument. It
offers precise recommendations for progress in the
fight against the scourge. We are confident that the
Biennial Meeting of States, to be held in July within
the framework of the Programme of Action, will lead
to substantive progress and concrete results. We will
work tirelessly towards that end. The Biennial Meeting
is an opportunity to strengthen the Programme of
Action and to promote its proper implementation at the
global, regional and national levels.
Colombia will have the honour to be a Vice-Chair
of the Meeting and will facilitate the segment on
cooperation and international assistance. Additionally,
Colombia will host the Latin American and Caribbean
meeting aimed at outlining a regional position in
preparation for the Biennial Meeting. All States must
offer their committed support to the process. In that
context, identifying international cooperation and
assistance measures is of particular importance. Such
issues as national capacity-building, the training of
police and customs officers, the rapid and timely
exchange of information, and support for prevention
campaigns must be given priority.
The report of the Secretary-General submitted to
the Council today contains various relevant
recommendations that once again put the issue of small
arms and light weapons, as well as the actions that
must be carried out to address the problem, into
perspective.
My delegation agrees with the emphasis placed
on the first recommendation on the need for States to
enhance their efforts to collect, maintain and share data

24

on small arms and ammunition. Government
transparency in that area is critical in order to fill the
gaps in the implementation of current international
instruments. In that regard, the issue of ammunition
must be addressed as an element inseparable from the
problem of small arms and light weapons. Any effort
on the latter will be inoperative if the supply of
ammunition is not effectively controlled.
The development of quantitative indicators in the
area of small arms, referred to in the second
recommendation, would also be a step forward in the
right direction. Such indicators should be limited
exclusively to small arms and light weapons. In
particular, the development of an arms-stock baseline
could allow for a genuine and reliable assessment of
the magnitude of the problem. On the other hand, it is
true that the illicit traffic in small arms and light
weapons can be related to other factors, such as
security, violence, crime, trade, human rights and even
development, among others, as suggested in the third
recommendation of the report. Nevertheless, the
existence of such a broad spectrum of factors should
not distract us from the concrete actions that must be
taken to handle that phenomenon — in other words, the
specific measures that must be taken to control the
trade in small arms and light weapons.
It would also be useful to understand in greater
depth the scope of the recommendation included in the
report on the subject of cooperation between the
Peacebuilding
Commission,
the
Office
for
Disarmament Affairs and the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General for Children and Armed
Conflict. No explanation is given in the
recommendation of either the objectives or the areas of
that cooperation.
The issue under discussion is of particular
relevance to Colombia. My country has suffered more
than most from the consequences of the illicit traffic in
small arms and light weapons. However, it would not
be appropriate to frame the problem as if some
countries have been more victimized than others. That
would not be within the constructive spirit of joint
action that characterizes our Organization. All States
have a responsibility in the face of that illicit trade.
Collective commitment and genuine cooperation,
including regional and bilateral cooperation, are
needed to confront it.

08-32416

S/PV.5881 (Resumption 1)

A clear and firm political signal from the Council
on the various aspects of the illicit trade in small arms
and light weapons would be in harmony with the need
to provide decisive support for the tasks of the General
Assembly and to strengthen the interaction between
our two bodies within their respective mandates. It
would also be a positive contribution to the main role
that falls to States in the fight against such illicit trade,
within the framework of shared responsibility. Only
with such an approach can more effective cooperation
and international assistance mechanisms be developed
and more dynamic action developed to rid the world of
that scourge.
The President: I give the floor
representative of the Syrian Arab Republic.

to

the

Mr. Hallak (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in
Arabic): At the outset, allow me to congratulate you,
Sir, on your outstanding presidency of the Security
Council this month. We also thank you for convening
this important debate on small arms.
The Secretary-General has submitted a report on
small arms that contains important information on the
various aspects of the problem throughout the world.
The report also identifies the different international
instruments that allow us to stem the proliferation of
small arms and light weapons, including the United
Nations Programme of Action to Prevent, Combat and
Eradicate the Illicit Trade in Small Arms and Light
Weapons in All Its Aspects. In that respect, my
delegation appeals to all to make a firm commitment
fully and optimally to implement the Programme of
Action in order to curb the illicit trade in small arms
and light weapons. My delegation believes that we
must commit ourselves to that important instrument,
which must enjoy international support. Such support
will make the third Biennial Meeting, to be held in
July, a success.
My country submitted its report on the
Programme of Action at the United Nations Conference
to Review the implementation of the Programme of
Action on the Illicit Trade in Small Arms and Light
Weapons, held in new York in June and July 2006. We
thereby affirmed our support for and cooperation with
the international community through Governments,
non-governmental organizations and civil society in
combating the scourge of the uncontrolled
proliferation, illicit trade and brokering of small arms
and light weapons.

08-32416

The danger posed by those weapons in the hands
of gangsters and terrorists threatens societies at every
level. My country, Syria, does not produce such
weapons, yet it enjoys the right to maintain them for its
own defence and for liberating its occupied land in the
Golan, and for all the reasons previously cited. The
Secretary-General’s report insists on the fact that,
while only about 30 countries produce small arms and
light weapons, they manufacture approximately
8 million such weapons every year. It is to be noted
that the 2006 report of the Stockholm International
Peace Research Institute, which deals with issues of
armament and disarmament, refers to the fact that the
four major arms manufacturers of Israel exported
weapons worth some $3.5 billion in 2006.
While the credibility of confidence-building
measures in the field of conventional arms and
adequate arms control must be ensured, it is
unfortunate that Israel has not respected the deadline
for a just and comprehensive peace in our region by
withdrawing from all occupied territories to the 4 June
1967 lines in conformity with the terms of reference
for peace known to the Security Council.
The situation in the Middle East could be the best
possible example in this context. The Israeli
occupation of Arab territories is directly supported by
certain major States that are exporters of conventional
weapons. Those very States, indeed, are engaged in
joint projects with the Israeli military industry to
perfect technologies for the manufacture of Israeli
weapons and to open export markets for Israel. That is
enough to encourage Israel to reject the hand of peace
that the Arab States are extending. It also encourages
Israel to continue to occupy Arab territories and to
escalate tension and violence in the region.
For decades, Israel has practiced what it calls
weapons diplomacy. That was stated explicitly in 1981
by Israel’s then economic affairs minister, Yaakov
Meridor. He said, “We are going to say to the
Americans, ‘Do not compete with us in South Africa;
do not compete with us in the Caribbean or in any
other country where you cannot operate in the open.
Let us do it. You sell the ammunition and equipment by
proxy. Israel will be your proxy’”.
It is absolutely clear that the Israeli
representative’s statement during this Council meeting
was not consistent with Israel’s actions. Israel has been
illegally trading in arms worldwide. That in fact fuels

25

S/PV.5881 (Resumption 1)

international terrorism; it protects drug traffickers and
secessionist movements and saps all international
efforts in those areas.
The President: I call now on Mr. Daniel Prins,
Chief of the Conventional Arms Branch of the Office
for Disarmament Affairs, to respond to comments that
have been made.
Mr. Prins: The Secretariat is encouraged by
today’s rich and constructive debate and by the
Council’s commitment to take further action in the
field of small arms. The urgency of the issue was
highlighted once again with the just-released news
message from the World Food Programme (WFP)
stating that in Darfur, in 2008 alone, 60 WFP trucks
have been hijacked, with 39 trucks still missing – and,
most horrifyingly, with 26 drivers unaccounted for.
Small arms always play a central role as enablers of
such violence.

26

For the Secretary-General’s recommendations to
be followed up, it will be important that all continue to
pay close attention to the issue. It is up to Member
States whether, for instance, they want to establish an
ad hoc working group to examine those
recommendations, as was suggested this morning, or to
agree on a presidential statement, or to take other
action. The debate shows clearly the importance of
consistently including the small arms situation in
almost any other debate the Council holds.
For its part, the Secretariat will work actively on
integrated and coordinated measures stemming the
excessive accumulation and universal availability of
small arms.
The President: There are no further speakers
inscribed on my list. The Security Council has thus
concluded the present stage of its consideration of the
item on its agenda.
The meeting rose at 5.30 p.m.

08-32416
