S/PRST/2002/33

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
12 December 2002
Original: English

Statement by the President of the Security Council
At the 4661st meeting of the Security Council, held on 12 December 2002, in
connection with the Council’s consideration of the item entitled “The situation in
Bosnia and Herzegovina”, the President of the Security Council made the following
statement on behalf of the Council:
“The Security Council welcomes the briefing by the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General and Coordinator of the United Nations
Operations in Bosnia and Herzegovina.
“The Security Council reaffirms its commitment to support the
implementation of the General Framework Agreement for Peace in Bosnia and
Herzegovina and the annexes thereto (collectively the Peace Agreement,
S/1995/999, annex), as well as the relevant decisions of the Peace
Implementation Council (PIC).
“The Security Council takes this opportunity to express its deep
appreciation for the efforts of the Secretary-General, his Special
Representative Mr. Jacques Paul Klein and the personnel of the United Nations
Mission in Bosnia and Herzegovina (UNMIBH), which includes the
International Police Task Force, for their contributions to the implementation
of the Peace Agreement. The Council highly appreciates the achievements of
cooperative efforts in bringing about the successful conclusion of UNMIBH’s
mandate, which will expire on 31 December 2002, and expresses its thanks to
all of the countries which took part in and contributed to the accomplishments
of this Mission.
“The Security Council welcomes the decision of the European Union
(EU) to send a Police Mission (EUPM) to Bosnia and Herzegovina from 1
January 2003, as part of a broader rule of law approach, as well as the close
coordination between all those concerned to ensure a seamless transition of
responsibilities from IPTF to the EUPM, with the participation of the
interested States non-members of the EU.
“The Security Council reiterates that the primary responsibility for the
further successful implementation of the Peace Agreement lies with the
authorities in Bosnia and Herzegovina themselves and that the continued
willingness of the international community and major donors to assume the
political, military and economic burden of implementation and reconstruction
efforts will be determined by the compliance and active participation by all the

02-73711 (E)

121202

*0273711*

S/PRST/2002/33

authorities in Bosnia and Herzegovina in implementing the Peace Agreement
and all reforms needed to rebuild a civil society.
“The Security Council reaffirms its commitment to the principles of the
sovereignty and territorial integrity and inviolability of the borders of Bosnia
and Herzegovina. The Council encourages continued commitment by Bosnia
and Herzegovina to the promotion of peace and stability in the region,
including through enhanced political and economical cooperation.
“The Security Council expresses its intention to keep the implementation
of the Peace Agreement, and the situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina under
review. The Council invites the EU to keep it regularly informed as appropriate
on the activities of EUPM.”

2
