UNITED
NATIONS

Security Council
PROVISIONAL
S/PV.3274
13 September 1993
ENGLISH

PROVISIONAL VERBATIM RECORD OF THE THREE THOUSAND
TWO HUNDRED AND SEVENTY-FOURTH MEETING
Held at Headquarters, New York,
on Monday, 13 September 1993, at 3.45 p.m.

President:

(Venezuela)

Brazil
Cape Verde
China
Djibouti
France
Hungary
Japan
Morocco
New Zealand
Pakistan
Russian Federation
Spain
United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland
United States of America

Mr. de ARAUJO CASTRO
Mr. JESUS
Mr. LI Zhaoxing
Mr. DORANI
Mr. MERIMEE
Mr. ERDÖS
Mr. HATANO
Mr. BENJELLOUN-TOUIMI
Mr. KEATING
Mr. MARKER
Mr. VORONTSOV
Mr. YAÑEZ BARNUEVO

Members:

Mr. TAYLHARDAT

Sir David HANNAY
Mr. WALKER

This record contains the original text of speeches delivered in English and
interpretations of speeches in the other languages. The final text will be
printed in the Official Records of the Security Council.
Corrections should be submitted to original speeches only. They should be
sent under the signature of a member of the delegation concerned, within one
week, to the Chief, Official Records Editing Section, Office of Conference
Services, room DC2-794, 2 United Nations Plaza, and incorporated in a copy of
the record.

93-86503 (E)

S/PV.3274
2

The meeting was called to order at 4.50 p.m.
ADOPTION OF THE AGENDA
The agenda was adopted.
THE SITUATION IN MOZAMBIQUE
REPORT OF THE SECRETARY-GENERAL ON THE UNITED NATIONS OPERATION IN
MOZAMBIQUE (S/26385 and Add.1)
The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Spanish):

I should like to inform

the Council that I have received a letter from the representative of Mozambique
in which he requests to be invited to participate in the discussion of the item
on the Council’s agenda.

In conformity with the usual practice, I propose, with

the consent of the Council, to invite that representative to participate in the
discussion without the right to vote, in accordance with the relevant provisions
of the Charter and rule 37 of the Council’s provisional rules of procedure.
There being no objection, it is so decided.
At the invitation of the President, Mr. Afonso (Mozambique) took a place at
the Council table.
The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Spanish):

The Security Council

will now begin its consideration of the item on the agenda.
The Council is meeting in accordance with the understanding reached in its
prior consultations.
Members of the Council have before them the report of the Secretary-General
on the United Nations Operation in Mozambique, documents S/26385 and Add.1.
Members of the Council also have before them document S/26426, which
contains the text of a draft resolution prepared in the course of the Council’s
consultations.
I should like to draw attention to the following revision to be made to the
draft resolution contained in document S/26426, in its provisional form:

at the

end of operative paragraph 7, the words "and information" should be deleted.

S/PV.3274
3
(The President)
Members of the Council have also received photocopies of a letter dated
8 September 1993 from the Permanent Representative of Mozambique to the United
Nations addressed to the Secretary-General, which will be issued as document
S/26432.
It is my understanding that the Council is ready to proceed to the vote on
the draft resolution before it, as orally revised in its provisional form.

If I

hear no objection, I shall take it that that is the case.
There being no objection, it is so decided.
Before putting the draft resolution to the vote, I shall call on those
members of the Council who wish to make statements before the voting.
Mr. de ARAUJO CASTRO (Brazil):

First of all, I wish to congratulate

you warmly as a distinguished diplomat and as the representative of Venezuela on
your assumption of the presidency of the Security Council for the month of
September.

Your unique diplomatic experience and skills are guarantees that the

conduct of the work of the Council will be in good hands.

I should also like to

convey a well-deserved word of recognition to Ambassador Madeline Albright,
Permanent Representative of the United States, for the intelligence and
enthusiasm with which she guided the work of the Council last month.
Close and solid ties link Brazil to the Portuguese-speaking community of
nations.

It is thus with great attention that the Brazilian Government has been

following the evolution of the situation in Mozambique and the commendable work
of the United Nations in that country, to which we are connected by history,
culture and the common quest for economic development and social progress.
The latest report of the Secretary-General on the United Nations Operation
in Mozambique (ONUMOZ) confirms that important positive developments have
recently enhanced the advancement of the peace process.

Those developments,

which include a fruitful series of meetings in Maputo between the President of
the Republic of Mozambique and the leader of RENAMO, allow for a certain sense
of optimism.
The Final Document of the meeting between
President Joaquim Alberto Chissano and Mr. Afonso Macacho Dhlakama spells out
measures related to the territorial administration of the country and the

S/PV.3274
4-5
(Mr. de Araujo Castro, Brazil)
running of police activities that, once put into practice, should help in the
smooth implementation of the General Peace Agreement.

Some progress has also

been achieved on the humanitarian front, despite financial shortcomings that we
expect can be overcome soon.

The successful implementation of the comprehensive

humanitarian programme remains an essential aspect of the United Nations efforts
in Mozambique.
This encouraging picture, however, must under no circumstance overshadow
the need for the Security Council to keep a watchful eye as the peace process
unfolds.

The revised timetable for the implementation of all provisions of the

General Peace Agreement must be applied in a timely fashion, as stated in
operative paragraph 4 of the draft resolution now before the Council.
We expect that current problems, such as the question of the composition of
the National Electoral Commission, the adoption of the electoral law and the
delay in the initiation of the cantonment and demobilization process, will be
solved in the light of the newly improved political climate.

The holding of

democratic elections by October 1994 must be kept as a fundamental objective.
The steadfastness and commitment to the peace process displayed by the
Mozambican Government, under the leadership of President Chissano, are to be
commended.

As rightly stated in the draft resolution before us, it is essential

that RENAMO and other political parties join with the Government in ensuring the
full and undelayed implementation in good faith of the General Peace Agreement.
Only a lasting peace will make it possible for the Mozambican people to
regain the path to development and to embark upon the challenging task of
national reconciliation and reconstruction.

For its part, the international

community must stand ready to do its share and contribute to the successful
outcome of the peace process and to the reconstruction efforts that will follow.

S/PV.3274
6

The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Spanish):

I thank the

representative of Brazil for his kind words addressed to me.
Mr. LI Zhaoxing (China) (interpretation from Chinese):

Please allow

me to congratulate you, Sir, on your assumption of the presidency of the Council
for this month.

I am confident that with your rich diplomatic experience and

talents you will successfully guide the work of the Council for this month.

I

would also like to take this opportunity to thank your predecessor,
Ambassador Albright of the United States, for her outstanding contribution to
the successful conclusion of the work of the Council last month.
The General Peace Agreement of Mozambique has brought hope for an end to
the civil war which has lasted for more than 10 years, and has opened up new
vistas for the restoration of peace and economic revitalization there.

The

Chinese delegation is glad to note that, through the efforts of the United
Nations and the two Mozambican parties, initial progress has been made in the
peace process in Mozambique and that agreements on state administration and the
impartiality of the national police force were reached in the wake of the direct
talks between President Joaquim Chissano and President Afonso Dhlakama of the
RENAMO.

This gives powerful impetus to the peace process in Mozambique.

However, owing to various reasons the implementation of the peace agreement is
still faced with many difficulties, and the two sides have yet to reach
agreement on questions such as that of the future National Electoral Commission.
We wish to express our deep concern about this.
The peace process in Mozambique is now at a crucial stage.

In order to

ensure that the general elections are held on schedule in October 1994, the two
Mozambican sides must adopt practical measures, fulfil their commitments,
cooperate with the United Nations Operation in Mozambique (ONUMOZ) and act
strictly in accordance with the new timetable.

The current priority is for the

two sides to complete the assembly and demobilization of their troops as early
as possible and form a new national defence force so as to create conditions for
the early realization of national reconciliation.

The draft resolution before

us exactly reflects this desire of the members of the Council.
delegation will therefore vote in favour of it.

The Chinese

S/PV.3274
7
The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Spanish):

I thank the

representative of China for his kind words addressed to me.
The Council will now vote on the draft resolution contained in document
S/26426, as orally revised in its provisional form.
A vote was taken by show of hands.
In favour:

Brazil, Cape Verde, China, Djibouti, France, Hungary, Japan,
Morocco, New Zealand, Pakistan, Russian Federation, Spain,
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United
States of America, Venezuela

The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Spanish):
favour.

There were 15 votes in

The draft resolution, as orally revised in its provisional form, has

therefore been adopted unanimously as resolution 863 (1993).
I shall now call on those members of the Council who wish to make
statements following the voting.
Sir David HANNAY (United Kingdom):
congratulating you, Sir,

I would like to begin by

on your assumption of the office of President of the

Security Council and by thanking your predecessor, Ambassador Albright, for her
splendid work in the previous month.
I would like to make a few remarks about the resolution we have just
adopted.

Firstly, my Government welcomes the positive developments, and

welcomes in particular the useful outcome of the talks that have been held
between President Chissano and Mr. Dhlakama.

We would, however, like to

underscore how important we feel it is for these two leaders to continue to meet
frequently during the process of implementation of the peace agreements, because
we believe that is the best way to ensure a continuing momentum in applying the
agreements.
Secondly, I would not wish to conceal that we are concerned at continuing
slippage in the timetable that was laid down when the two parties first came to
the negotiating table and reached agreement.

I think it is important that the

parties to this Agreement in Mozambique should be aware that the resources of
the international community are finite and are under great strain at the moment.
There are many calls on these resources from many parts of the world, so if

S/PV.3274
8
(Sir David Hannay, United Kingdom)
international commitment is to be sustained in the Mozambique peace process and my Government is very strongly devoted to sustaining that international
commitment - it really is essential for progress to be continuous, visible and
sustained.

Otherwise, it will not be easy to maintain that support, and we

would wish to do so.
As we see it, the priorities that lie immediately ahead are:

Firstly, the

assembly and demobilization of troops, which is absolutely crucial if the
timetable for holding the elections is to be retained and met.

Secondly, the

arrival of the remainder of the RENAMO trainees for the joint U.K./Zimbabwe
military training at Nyanga.

This is equally important because it is the basis

of the future National Army of Mozambique.

And, thirdly, progress in the multi-

party consultative conference on the electoral law, in order to prepare for
elections by October 1994, is now urgent.

The process of agreeing on those

preparations for elections has become temporarily halted, and the resolution
does refer critically to that hesitation.

We hope that it can be overcome very

rapidly and we would strongly express the hope that there will be no further
conditions placed in the way of the work of the Electoral Commission.

In that

respect, we believe that RENAMO has a particular responsibility not to raise
further difficulties.
Finally, we very much look forward to the Secretary-General’s report on the
possibilities for responding to the two parties’ wish that the United Nations
monitor police activities.

We hope that in the interests of timeliness and

economy, the Secretariat will consider transferring some of the elements of
ONUMOZ that are already deployed to meet this task.

We for our part will be

ready to take decisions on the report of the Secretary-General when it is
submitted to us, and we hope that report can come forward, as the Council has
asked, before the end of October.
I will conclude by saying that we very strongly support and welcome the
work done by the Special Representative of the Secretary-General.

Mr. Ajello

seems to us to be navigating with great skill under quite difficult
circumstances to apply a very complex Agreement, and he has all our support.

S/PV.3274
9-10

Mr. MARKER (Pakistan):

I would like to begin by extending to you,

Mr. President, a very warm welcome to New York, not that you are a stranger
here.

The facility and ease with which you have settled into your new position

is just one indication of your experience and capabilities.

In the few days

that you have been here, you have indeed proved to be a worthy successor to your
brilliant predecessor.
Immediately upon arrival, you have been straddled with the difficult and
demanding task of presiding over the Security Council.

I wish to congratulate

you not only on assuming the office of President of the Council but also on the
skilful manner with which you are discharging your onerous responsibilities.

I

pledge to you the unqualified cooperation of my delegation.
May I also place on record our special thanks and sincere appreciation for
the leadership that Ambassador Madeleine Albright, Permanent Representative of
the United States, provided to the Council last month.

Her presidency bore the

stamp not only of diligence, thoroughness and efficiency but also of her
personal charm, warmth and a particularly strong human touch.

My delegation was

profoundly impressed by her sincerity and her most effective leadership.

S/PV.3274
11
(Mr. Marker, Pakistan)
My delegation is grateful to the Secretary-General for his report of
30 August 1993 on Mozambique.

The report is informative and lucid.

We also

appreciate the information provided subsequent to the report.
There are a number of positive developments in the ongoing process in
Mozambique which are a source of satisfaction to my delegation.

We are pleased

that the military component of the United Nations Operation in Mozambique
(ONUMOZ) is now fully deployed and that considerable progress has been made in
the establishment of assembly areas for the cantonment and eventual
demobilization of Mozambique Government troops and RENAMO troops.

We are

thankful to all the troop-contributing countries, as without their contributions
this would not have been possible.
The continuing flow of Mozambican refugees back to their country is another
encouraging sign.

This shows that, despite some initial hesitation, the process

set in motion under United Nations auspices and within the framework of the
General Peace Agreement enjoys credibility among the people of Mozambique.
We are encouraged that some of the Commissions set up under the General
Peace Agreement have continued their work and made headway in a number of areas.
However, the failure of the Commission for State Administration, the National
Information Commission and the Police Affairs Commission to convene is indeed
disturbing.

We urge the Mozambique Government as well as RENAMO to immediately

resolve their differences in this context and to make the Commissions functional
without any further delay.
Perhaps the most significant recent development is the commencement of
direct talks between President Chissano and Mr. Dhlakama.
already led to an important agreement.

These talks have

We endorse their joint request for

United Nations monitoring of police activities in Mozambique, and would
encourage the Secretary-General to move as expeditiously as possible in this
regard.

We also welcome the readiness of RENAMO to accept the principle of a

single Administration for all of Mozambique.
Despite the recent forward movement in the implementation of the Mozambique
Peace Agreement, the delays that have already occurred have not been fully

S/PV.3274
12
(Mr. Marker, Pakistan)
overcome.
slow.

The progress towards the finalization of the election law is much too

The apparent deadlock over the question of the composition of the

National Electoral Commission is unfortunate.

If work relating to the election

law, as well as in other areas, is not completed in time, the entire programme
could be thrown into disarray, making it impossible to hold the general
elections in October 1994, as presently envisaged.
The imbroglio in Mozambique is basically an internal problem of that
country.

The international community has already invested a lot of time, effort

and money, and is prepared to continue to assist the Mozambicans in restoring
democratic institutions, stability and law and order in their country.

But the

leaders of Mozambique would be well advised not to treat the international
commitment as open-ended nor to regard the resources being made available to
help them as inexhaustible.
My delegation voted in favour of the resolution just adopted, since it
addresses adequately the concerns and views of the Government of Pakistan on the
peace process in Mozambique.
The President (interpretation from Spanish):

I thank the

representative of Pakistan for his kind words addressed to me.
Mr. HATANO (Japan):

Allow me to express to you, Sir, my

congratulations on your assumption of the presidency of the Council for the
month of September.
I also wish to convey my warm thanks and appreciation to
Ambassador Albright for the skilful manner in which she guided the Council’s
work last month.
Japan welcomed the start of the meetings between Mr. Chissano, the
President of Mozambique, and Mr. Dhlakama, the President of RENAMO.

But

unfortunately the peace process does not appear to be advancing smoothly, and
the delay that continues to beset the peace process is a source of profound
concern to all.

For this reason, Japan supported the resolution we have just

adopted and is gratified that by virtue of its unanimous adoption it conveys the
unity of the Council’s views on this matter.

S/PV.3274
13
(Mr. Hatano, Japan)
The resolution reaffirms the international community’s commitment to
restore peace to Mozambique and its insistence that the elections be held no
later than October next year.

Past experience in Africa has taught us that the

assembly and demobilization of troops should be effected before the elections
take place, and that if the scheduled date of the elections is to be met this
effort of cantonment and demobilization should begin immediately.
My Government has been approached on the need for economic support and
foreign investment for the economic reconstruction of Mozambique.

But progress

in the peace process is perhaps essential for smooth and effective
implementation of assistance and investment from abroad.
In their first direct talks the two leaders reached agreement on a number
of elements that are critically important to the implementation of the peace
process.

It is now time for both sides to demonstrate their good faith by

translating their words into actions that will restore genuine peace and
democracy to Mozambique.
The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Spanish):

I thank the

representative of Japan for his statement.
Mr. YAÑEZ BARNUEVO (Spain) (interpretation from Spanish):

First, Sir,

I wish to congratulate you on the effective way in which you are carrying out
your functions.

Your well-known diplomatic skill is the best guarantee of

positive results from the Council’s work this month.

I also wish to express my

delegation’s appreciation to Ambassador Albright of the United States for the
excellent way in which she conducted our work during August.
The report of the Secretary-General on the situation in Mozambique, and in
particular the document signed on 3 September in Maputo by the President of the
Republic of Mozambique, Mr. Chissano, and the leader of RENAMO, Mr. Dhalakama,
emphasize the importance of the recent progress achieved in the peace process in
that country in order to bring about the rapid implementation of all the
provisions of the General Peace Agreement.
The Council can congratulate itself on the fact that since the adoption of
resolution 850 (1993) two months ago the parties to the conflict have
demonstrated to the international community, through concrete facts, their

S/PV.3274
14-15
(Mr. Yañez Barnuevo, Spain)
determination to resolve their differences and make progress in the peace
process.

The recent meetings between President Chissano and Mr. Dhalakama are

clear proof of this.

We sincerely hope that this dialogue will maintained as an

essential part of the peace process and will make it possible to make progress
on the various outstanding issues, with a view to ensuring that the process
leads to a happy conclusion with the holding of democratic elections in
October 1994.
We must also congratulate ourselves on the fact that the United Nations
Operation in Mozambique (ONUMOZ), in which my country participates, is
effectively carrying out its mandate under the skilful leadership of the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, Mr. Ajello.

The completion of the

deployment of ONUMOZ is good news, as is the progress in the work of the Joint
Commission for the Formation of the Mozambican Defence Force, which is
permitting the training of instructors in Nyanga, as well as other far-reaching
measures.
The work of helping the people of Mozambique, who for 16 years have
suffered the consequences of a bloody conflict, and of making it possible to
rebuild their society is an integral part of the work of the United Nations
forces in that country.

Therefore, we must reaffirm the need for the

humanitarian assistance programme to continue to have the cooperation of the
Government of Mozambique and RENAMO in order to give the civilian population
full access to humanitarian aid.
The agreement reached on 3 September embodies the principle of a single
Administration for the whole country.

This matter, which was formerly one of

the main difficulties between the Government of Mozambique and RENAMO, has been
satisfactorily resolved by the two parties.

We appeal to them to ensure that

the agreement is rapidly and effectively put into practice in the field, thus
creating the necessary basis for the development of democracy and the holding of
elections.

S/PV.3274
16
(Mr. Yañez Barnuevo, Spain)
We are certain that the Security Council will consider favourably the
proposals to be submitted to it by the Secretary-General in order to respond to
the request of the Government of Mozambique and RENAMO that the United Nations
carry out police activity observer missions in the country.

This aspect is of

crucial importance in order to build confidence among all parties and citizens,
and the United Nations must continue to play an active role in this area.

We

also trust that this will give the Secretary-General an opportunity to review
the current deployment of ONUMOZ in order to adapt it to the new circumstances.
In connection with these facts, which are very encouraging, we must also
express our concern at the difficulties that persist in certain essential points
of the compliance with the provisions of the General Peace Agreement.

The hopes

of the people of Mozambique and the international community cannot be
disappointed, particularly now that there is a dynamic of progress.
Accordingly, the Council has adopted resolution 863 (1993), which reflects both
its satisfaction and its impatience to see the light at the end of the tunnel,
which is only too slow in coming.
The will of the parties, and RENAMO in particular, must be reconfirmed by a
rapid start of the process of cantonment and demobilization of troops in
accordance with the revised timetable for the implementation of the provisions
of the General Peace Agreement.

It must also be reconfirmed with the beginning

and development of the work of the various national commissions.

Lastly, it

should be reaffirmed, and speedily, by the agreement of all parties on the draft
election law, including the establishment of a national election commission that
is balanced and effective.

These are the steps to be achieved and they must be

achieved relatively quickly, if there is any true desire to hold democratic
elections by October 1994.
My delegation would like to express its concern that any delay in this
process will eventually wear out the international community, adversely
affecting external support for the entire process.

Spain is committed to the

peace process in Mozambique, and we are therefore hopeful that the interests of
the people of Mozambique will prevail above all else in the priorities of the
Government and RENAMO.

Those priorities, which the international community

S/PV.3274
17
Mr. Yañez Barnuevo, Spain)
shares, are peace, reconciliation and development.

The 3 September document

shows the path to be followed.
The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Spanish):

I thank the

representative of Spain for his kind words addressed to me.
Mr. ERDÖS (Hungary) (interpretation from French):

I should like to

thank Ambassdor Albright of the United States for her excellent guidance of the
Security Council’s work during the month of August.
I should also like to take this opportunity to welcome you, Sir, and to
express my certainty that you will guarantee the effective functioning of the
Council’s deliberations during the month of September.
The adoption of resolution 863 (1993) is an important stage in the
settlement process that will lead Mozambique to a state of lasting internal
peace and security.

If, as we would wish, this process is accompanied by the

necessary wisdom, clear-sightedness and political will of the Mozambican
leaders, the efforts to establish democratic political institutions in that
southern African country will be crowned with success.

If, however, these

essential elements are missing, the situation can only culminate in a new and
bloody tragedy for the Mozambican people.
We believe that the Security Council’s action is timely, because the
positive internal developments within the country now need fresh political
stimulus from the outside so as to give fresh impetus to the talks between the
Mozambican Government and RENAMO and to halt unjustified attempts to slow and
harmfully delay the settlement process.

In this context, we attach importance

to the firm language of the resolution, particularly as regards the cantonment
and demobilization of troops, as well as the establishment of the revised
calendar for the implementation of the General Peace Agreement.

The political

attention and commitment of the Security Council are, we are sure, a significant
contribution to the holding of free and fair elections in Mozambique in
October 1994, at the latest, and to respect for the results of these elections
by the parties involved.

In this way, we will avoid repeating the poor example

recently set in the same area of Africa, the consequences of which continue to
afflict the Angolan people.

S/PV.3274
18
(Mr. Erdös, Hungary)
For the settlement process to achieve results, it is essential to establish
a single administrative system covering the entire territory of the country.

We

expect the Government of Mozambique and RENAMO alike to permit without further
delay the effective functioning of the National Commission for Administration,
the National Information Commission and the Police Affairs Commission.

In any

case, the Security Council will continue to follow closely the evolution of the
situation relating to the implementation of the provisions of the General Peace
Agreement.

It should also be noted that, in accordance with resolution

863 (1993), the Council will receive a further report of the Secretary-General
on this matter before the end of October.
The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Spanish):

I thank the

representative of Hungary for his kind words addressed to me.
There are no further speakers on my list.

The Security Council has thus

concluded the present stage of its consideration of the item on its agenda.

The meeting rose at 5.30 p.m.
