General Assembly-Twenty-eighth Session

80

6. Expresses the ·conviction that the Committee, by
fulfilling its Tesponsibilities under the International
Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Racial
Discrimination, will contribute to the implementation
of General Assembly resolution 3057 (XXVIII) relating to the Decade for Action to Combat Racism and
Racial Discrimination;
7. Urgently requests all States which are not yet
parties to the International Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Racial Discrimination to ratify
or accede to the Convention as soon as possible.

2201st plenary meeting
14 December 1973

3135 (XXVIII). Status of the International Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of
Racial Discrimination

The General Assembly,
Recalling that, in its resolution 3060 (XXVIII) of
2 November 1973 relating to the observance of the
twenty-fifth anniversary of the Universal Declaration
of Human Rights, the General Assembly invited States
which had not yet done so to ratify, inter alia, the
International Convention on the Elimination of All
Forms of Racial Discrimination, 30
I. Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General
on the status of the International Convention on the
Elimination of All Forms of Racial Discrimination; 31
2. Requests the Secretary-General to continue to
submit to the General Assembly annual reports conecrning the state of ratifications of the Convention in
accorlance with its resolution 2106 A (XX) of 21
December 1965.
2201st plenary meeting
14 December 1973

3136 (XXVIII). Creation of the post of United
Nations High Commissioner for Human
Rights

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 2841 (XXVI) of 18 December 1971 and Economic and Social Council resolution 1237 (XLII) of 6 June 1967,
Taking note of the deliberations of the General
Assembly, since its twentieth session, on the item entitkd "Creation of the post of United Nations High
Commissioner for Human Rights",
Taking note also of the note by the Secretary-Gen:.:ral on the question,:;z
Bearing in mind the Proclamation of Teheran of 13
J\fay l 968. 3 ~
Having regard to the existing machinery and procedmcc:, within the United Nations system for the implement1tion of human rights and fundamental freedoms,
to the J)rncecdings of th-: various organs and bodies of
:i(,

Resolution 2106 A (XX), annex.

the United Nations and to the various modalities suggested in the course of the deliberations of those bodies
for the more effective implementation of human rights
and fundamental freedoms,
Expressing the hope that the International Covenants
on Human Rights: 14 will enter into force in the near
future,
I. Reaffirms its conviction that further measures
should be considered to ensure universal realization of
human rights and fundamental freedoms for all with:mt
distinction of any kind;
2. Decides to keep under review the consideration
of alternative approaches and ways and means within
the United Nations system for improving the effective
enjoyment of human rights and fundamental freedoms;
3. Decides accordingly to include in the provisional
agenda of its thirtieth session an item entitled "Alternative approaches and ways and means within the
United Nations system for improving the effective enjoyment of human rights and fundamental freedoms".

2201st plenary meeting
14 December 1973

3137 (XXVIII). Question of the elderly and
the aged

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 2842 (XXVI) of 18 December 1971 on the question of the elderly and the
aged,
Noting Economic and Social Council resolution 1751
(LIV) of 16 May 1973 on the aged and social security,
Bearing in mind the Universal Declaration of Human
Rights, which emphasizes respect for the dignity and
worth of the human person, especially article 25 thereof,
Bearing in mind also that the protection of the rights
and welfare of the aged is one of the main goals of
the Declaration on Social Progress and Development, 311
Recognizing the growing interest for developing and
developed societies alike in the fuller participation of
the elderly in the mainstream of national societies,
Noting that the status of the elderly in society varies
from country to country,
Having considered the report of the Secretary-General on the question of the elderly and the aged:10 and
the recommendations contained therein,
Concerned about the growing magnitude of the problems of the aged accompanied by changes in the age
structure of societies and the consequent increase in the
proportion of the older sector of populations in a
growing number of countries,
1. Expresses appreciation for the report of the
Secretary-General on the question of the elderly and
the aged::o and the note prepared by the World Health
Organization on the health concerns of the elderly and
the aged;n
2. Draws the attention of Member States affected
by the problem to the need for short-term and longterm policies and programmes for the elderly;

·11 A-"l\39.

:c A 1 9074.

Act of the International Conference on Human
Rights ( United Nations publication, Sales No.: E.68.XIV.2),
p. 3.
:13 Final

34 Resolution 2200 A

35 Resolution 2542

(XXI), annex.
(XXIV).

so A/9126 and Corr.I.
87 Ibid., annex Ill.
