S/2018/530

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
1 June 2018
Original: English

Special report of the Chairperson of the African Union
Commission and the Secretary-General of the United
Nations on the strategic review of the African Union-United
Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur
I. Introduction
1.
The Peace and Security Council of the African Union, in its communiqué of
12 June 2017 (PSC/PR/COMM.(DCXCI)), and the Security Council, in its resolution
2363 (2017), authorized a two-phase reconfiguration of the African Union-United
Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur (UNAMID). In accordance with the request to
conduct a review contained in the statement by the President of the Security Council
of 31 January 2018 (S/PRST/2018/4), a joint African Union-United Nations review
team visited Khartoum and Darfur from 2 to 13 April 2018. The team was co-led by
the African Union Commission and the Department of Peacekeeping Operations, and
comprised representatives of the African Union Commission and the United Nations
Secretariat, including the Peacebuilding Support Office. The team also included staff
from the United Nations Development Programme (UNDP) and the Deputy
Humanitarian Coordinator for Darfur, representing, respectively, the United Nations
country team and the humanitarian country team. The review team held consultations
with UNAMID, officials of the Government of the Sudan and the United Nations
country team, visited all five states of Darfur and a number of team sites, and met
with state and local authorities, the native administration and representatives of the
communities of internally displaced persons.
2.
The present report covers the period from 1 July 2017 to 15 May 2018, and
provides an analysis of the conflict, depicting the current security situation and
conflict drivers in Darfur, the political and humanitarian situation and the
development needs critical to avoiding a relapse into conflict. It assesses the situation
in line with the requirements of the statement of the President of the Security Council
(S/PRST/2018/4) and presents a whole-of-system approach for Darfur, which
includes a new mission concept that contains adjusted priorities for UNAMID and a
transition concept for withdrawal over a two-year time frame, during which the
mission will work in collaboration with the United Nations country team in order to
sustain peace in Darfur.

18-08414 (E)

040618

*1808414*

S/2018/530

II. Conflict analysis
3.
The security situation in Darfur has remained relatively stable, following
military gains by the Government of the Sudan against the rebel movements since
2016 and a decrease in large-scale intercommunal clashes as of mid-2015, leading to
the consolidation of State authority across Darfur, except for small pockets in the
Jebel Marra area. Overall, the situation in Darfur has evolved significantly from the
height of the conflict in the late 2000s, when the situation was marked by an armed
conflict between Government forces and non-State actors. Today, conditions are
better described as those of lawlessness and criminality, aggravated by a protracted
humanitarian crisis, continued human rights violations and the lack of development.
On the political front, the Darfur peace process remains incomplete, and
implementation of the outstanding provisions of the Doha Document for Peace in
Darfur requires new impetus. There have been, however, encouraging developments
regarding the constitutional review based on the outcome of the national dialogue.
Security analysis
Fighting between the Government of the Sudan and armed groups
4.
No major armed confrontations have taken place between the Government of
the Sudan and Darfur rebel groups since 1 July 2017, except for small-scale clashes
in eastern Jebel Marra from March to May 2018. The Sudan Liberation Army -Minni
Minawi (SLA/MM), the Sudan Liberation Army/Transitional Council (SLA/TC) (a
splinter faction of the Sudan Liberation Army-Abdul Wahid (SLA/AW)) and the
Justice and Equality Movement (JEM) have been unable to maintain a sustained
presence in Darfur or elsewhere in the Sudan, despite being involved in minor clashes
described in the assessment of phase one of the reconfiguration of UNAMID
(S/2018/12). In its letter dated 28 December 2017 (S/2017/1125), the Panel of Experts
on the Sudan confirmed the involvement of those groups in mercenary and other
illegal activities in neighbouring Libya and South Sudan. Recent reports indicate that
SLA/MM is currently not capable of launching offensive operations against
Government forces in Darfur, and that JEM is under significant pressure to leave
South Sudan, as it is militarily weakened and fragmented.
5.
The limited area and scale of the clashes observed in eastern Jebel Marra since
early March 2018 testify to the fact that, while the small groups associated with
SLA/AW continue to have some operational capabilities, they are la rgely contained. 1
The letter from the Panel of Experts on the Sudan and other reports indicate the
involvement of SLA/AW in extortion against internally displaced persons and acts of
criminality contributing to intercommunal clashes. The recent fighting, a ccording to
a UNAMID fact-finding mission, may have been associated with the burning of a
number of villages and the displacement of several thousand people in the area of
Rockero in April 2018.
6.
Although the Government and the armed groups have not agreed on a permanent
ceasefire, they continue to extend temporary cessations of hostilities. On 19 March,
the President of the Sudan, Omar Hassan al-Bashir, extended the Government’s
unilateral ceasefire until 30 June 2018, while SLA/MM, SLA/TC and JEM have
extended theirs until 6 August 2018.

__________________
1

2/19

See the report of the Secretary-General on UNAMID dated 25 April 2018 (S/2018/389) for a
detailed account.
18-08414

S/2018/530

Security sector issues
7.
Structural adjustments to the security sector are required to reflect post -conflict
realities, and militia groups and the proliferation of weapons remain two immediate
issues of concern (see also S/2017/437). Despite the capture of two notorious militia
leaders, Abdallah Rizkallah and Musa Hilal, in November 2017 (see S/2018/12,
para. 12), militia groups of particular communities continue to hamper the return of
internally displaced persons over land and natural resources, with long -term
implications for stability. In North Darfur, the northern Rizeigat militias associated
with the Border Guards remain a challenge for the Beni Hussein in Sereif and Saraf
Omra, due to their stake in gold mining. In South Darfur, Fallata militias often attack
Masalit communities over land ownership around Graida, and militias from the
Misseriya, northern Rizeigat and Zaghawa tribes frequently attack Fur displaced
around Kass. In addition, during the recent clashes in eastern Jebel Marra, militias
were responsible for the destruction of several villages and the displacement of the
population in the area. In East Darfur, militias of the southern Rizeigat and Ma ’aliya
tribes are heavily involved in the conflict over land and resources in the areas north
of Ed Daein. Many northern Rizeigat and Salamat militias associated with the Border
Guards continue to harass Fur displaced in the areas of Mukjar, Bindisi and Um
Dukhun of Central Darfur. Finally, in West Darfur, militias mainly from the northern
Rizeigat and the Misseriya and Chadian Zaghawa tribes prevent local farmers and
internally displaced persons from accessing their farmlands around El Geneina and in
Kuraynik.
8.
The weapons collection campaign and the deployment of Government security
forces have largely improved security across Darfur. While the overall numbers
remain unknown, local authorities and the native administration credit the campaign
with a reduction of intercommunal violence and criminality. However, some
communities of internally displaced persons believe that the campaign targets specific
communities.
9.
Security has been negatively affected by the limited presence and capacity of
law enforcement and rule of law institutions outside the main population centres.
Although there is a steady increase in the number of cases resolved by rural courts,
which are at the forefront of addressing land disputes, their geographical reach
remains limited. In addition, the limited presence and capacity of the Sudanese police
forces in rural areas leave returnees, internally displaced persons, women and children
particularly vulnerable, including to sexual violence.
10. It is necessary to stabilize the security sector within the framework of the Doha
Document for Peace in Darfur and the African Union policy framework on security
sector reform. A wider reform of the security sector in line with the Doha Document
(art. 67, para. 399 and art. 74, para. 463) could be conducted in line with the principles
of the framework on security sector reform, which ensures national ownership and
alignment with conflict prevention, peace processes and post -conflict reconstruction.
Intercommunal conflicts
11. Large-scale intercommunal clashes have subsided since mid-2015 and the
majority of conflicts over land and natural resources are now also of a significantly
lesser scale. Exceptions include clashes between the Ma’aliya and southern Rizeigat
over land and cattle rustling in East Darfur, which in July 2017 killed 43 on both
sides; between the Zaghawa and various nomadic tribes in West Darfur over natural
resources in October 2017, leading to fatalities on both sides; and among the Fallata,
the Masalit and the Salamat, and between the Habbaniya and the Salamat in South
Darfur, over land and access to water.

18-08414

3/19

S/2018/530

12. Interventions by the Government and reconciliation efforts by the native
administration, supported by UNAMID, have mitigated the escalation of
intercommunal conflicts in Darfur. In the case of the clashes between the southern
Rizeigat and the Ma’aliya in East Darfur, the Governor intervened by arresting native
administration leaders accused of inciting the communities, and deployed the Rapid
Support Forces in late July 2017 to disarm the tribal fighters. In the wake of the
clashes between the Zaghawa from Chad and nomadic tribes in West Darfur in early
2018, the Joint Chad-Sudan Border Monitoring Force intervened effectively to pacify
the security situation and the local authorities mediated a solu tion.
Political analysis
Darfur peace process
13. Despite continued efforts to reach a negotiated settlement with the
non-signatories, the negotiation process has not yielded any tangible results during
the reporting period. In February 2018, the African Union High-level Implementation
Panel, which continues to lead the political process at a national level, briefed the
Peace and Security Council on the challenges they faced with regard to the peace
process within the context of the Roadmap Agreement for Ending the Conflicts in
Sudan of March 2016. Subsequently, in its communiqué dated 20 February 20 18
(PSC/PR/COMM.(DCCLIV)), the Peace and Security Council urged the
non-signatory Darfur armed movements to commence, within three months,
engagement for peace and reconciliation in Darfur on the basis of the Doha Document
for Peace in Darfur. The opposition Sudan Call, including the Darfur armed
movements, then met in Paris from 13 to 17 March to adopt a joint position on the
review of the Roadmap Agreement. On 17 April, the pre-negotiation talks between
the Government of the Sudan and two of the non-signatory groups (SLA/MM and the
Gibril Ibrahim faction of the Justice and Equality Movement (JEM/Gibril)) organized
in Berlin by the Government of Germany failed to reach an agreement on a declaration
of principles, as both movements continued to dispute the status of the Doha
Document for Peace in Darfur as the framework for negotiations.
Implementation of the Doha Document for Peace in Darfur
14. Modest progress has been made since the submission of the letter dated
30 August 2017 from the Secretary-General addressed to the President of the Security
Council (S/2017/747) on the implementation of the Doha Document for Peace in
Darfur, but the status of the commissions related to the Doha Document and the
implementation of projects from the Darfur Reconstruction and Development Fund
remain largely the same as reported in the assessment of phase one of the
reconfiguration of UNAMID (S/2018/12).
15. Consultations related to the Darfur Internal Dialogue and Consultation process
at the national and local levels were completed in 2017, and preliminary consultations
were conducted with refugees in Chad from 11 to 26 April 2018. On 7 April, the
Government of the Sudan signed an agreement with the Islamic Development Bank
for a grant of $63.3 million to South Darfur to support the implementation of the
United Nations Fund for Recovery, Reconstruction and Development in Darfur.
16. In an important development, on 15 and 16 April 2018, the Darfur Land
Commission, in coordination with UNDP, the United Nations Human Settlements
Programme and the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations,
organized a conference on land in the Sudan to discuss progress on land management
programmes, issues of land tenure and the establishment of a national land
commission to oversee the implementation of the Unregistered Land Act of 1970.

4/19

18-08414

S/2018/530

Land issues and impact on return of internally displaced persons
17. Land and natural resources remain at the heart of intercommunal conflicts and
constitute the key to durable solutions for internally displaced persons. Taking into
account the impacts of climate change and desertification in Darfur, accountable and
effective land management is also a key factor for stability in Darfur in the long run.
Those issues pre-date the conflict in Darfur, which exacerbated a system already
under pressure from a dysfunctional legal framework, the environment and
contentious political decisions. The war resulted in significant displacements
whereby mainly Fur and Masalit tribes lost their fertile lands to several Arab nomadic
tribes and, in search of pasture and livelihood, joined the counterinsurgency. Political
will and long-term interventions are required regarding those issues.
18. The right of return and the restitution of property is stipulated in the Doha
Document for Peace in Darfur (art. 52, para. 260). The Property Claims and
Restitution Committee of the Voluntary Return and Resettlement Commission, part
of the Darfur Peace Follow-Up Office as of January 2017, has made some progress,
but has suspended its work owing to a lack of funds. In addition, the Doha Document
provides for the establishment a land database and a land commission mandated to
develop recommendations for state legislatures and serve as an arbitration forum on
disputes related to land rights.
19. In North Darfur, the Governor directed local commissioners to collaborate with
the native administration and the Ministry of Physical Planning and Public Utilities
to register individual lands, and settlers have also been notified to leave occupied
plots of land to enable returns. However, recently some 176 households from the
Sortony internally displaced persons site, who had voluntarily returned to their areas
of origin, were subsequently forced out by the current occupants.
20. In Central Darfur, in March 2018, a joint committee of Fur leaders, the native
administration and members of the peaceful coexistence committees arbitrated
disputes over land between internally displaced persons and Khozam, Beni Halba and
Salamat settlers, agreeing that the settlers would not cultivate new crops without the
permission of the landowners.
21. In South Darfur, in May 2016, the Governor issued a decree restoring the rights
of internally displaced persons and refugees to the lands and houses they had left
behind in February 2003, and issued land ownership certificates for returnees in some
areas. Despite that, in January 2018, the Fallata denied Masalit returnees access to
land, and the internally displaced persons returned to the camp in Graida to avoid
conflict.
22. In East Darfur, the state government amended the Land Acquisition Act of 1930
by adding a restitution policy to provide an opportunity to reclaim and formalize land
ownership rights through the courts. In support of that policy, the state government
has established two committees to verify proof of land ownership and registration and
to conduct a sensitization campaign on the state government ’s return strategy.
Humanitarian situation
23. The Sudan has faced two major overlapping humanitarian challenges since
2003: one triggered by the impact of the conflict, which has led to large-scale
population displacement; and another due to climate conditions, which has
contributed to food insecurity and malnutrition. Many communities continue to lack
access to services and support. Humanitarian assistance to the Sudan has declined
over the years, and Darfur remains the most affected region. The implementation of
the humanitarian response plan for the Sudan developed by the Office for the
Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs of the Secretariat (see www.unocha.org/sudan)
18-08414

5/19

S/2018/530

faces serious funding challenges, and at the time of writing was 23 per cent funded.
In Darfur there are 159 humanitarian entities, including 14 United Nations agencies
and other international organizations, 39 international non-governmental
organizations (NGOs) and 106 national NGOs.
24. According to the report of the Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian
Affairs entitled “Sudan 2018 humanitarian needs overview” and its report entitled
“Sudan 2018 humanitarian response plan, January–December 2018” (see
www.unocha.org/sudan), there are 1.997 million internally displaced persons in the
Sudan, some 1.6 million of whom are registered as living in camps in Darfur. While
assessments of the number of unregistered internally displaced persons vary
considerably, United Nations humanitarian agencies and partners estimate that an
additional 500,000 internally displaced persons live in host communities and
settlements in Darfur. The number of refugees from South Sudan in Darfur curre ntly
stands at about 174,000. Some 625,000 people have returned to their places of origin
since 2003, including 301,000 civilians, approximately 197,000 internally displaced
returnees and 104,000 refugee returnees between the beginning of 2015 and October
2017. Internally displaced persons most frequently cite safety and security, access to
land and access to basic social services as the primary conditions for their voluntary
return.
25. With regard to food security, the Famine Early Warning System Network has
reported very poor pastoral and agricultural seasons in North Darfur, which could
result in increased need for food assistance and agriculture and livestock -based
livelihood support until mid-2018. In addition, the current economic crisis and recent
fuel shortages have a negative impact on agriculture and are pushing more people into
food insecurity. Restricted access to land, limited agricultural labour opportunities
and low asset holdings resulting from insecurity in Jebel Marra continue to limit
household production. The clashes in east Jebel Marra since March 2018 have had an
impact on humanitarian operations, causing three NGOs to temporarily suspend or
delay activities.
Development needs to avoid relapse
26. Since 2016, improvements in the security situation have led to a shift towards
early recovery and peacebuilding. Recovery and development efforts are hampered
by low confidence in governance and rule of law institutions, the destruction of
infrastructure, limited livelihoods and employment opportunities, the erosion of
social cohesion and community stability, unresolved land ownership, the unsustainable
management of natural resources and poor access to basic social services. As a result,
many conflict-affected people are still dependent on humanitarian assistance. Climate
change is having severe consequences in the form of land degradation and
desertification and competition over land and water, which is further aggravated by
poor management and low institutional capacities to mitigate risks.
27. A low percentage of children in Darfur have safe access to basic education, and
its primary health-care services are characterized by low coverage, the inadequate
provision of essential services and limited accessibility. In addition, certain practices
raise serious protection concerns, specifically with regard to the security of women
and girls, who are subjected to gender-based and sexual violence.

6/19

18-08414

S/2018/530

III. Progress on implementing phases one and two
Two-pronged approach
28. The UNAMID two-pronged mission concept combines peacebuilding/
stabilization measures and peacekeeping tasks to adapt to the needs of the population
in Darfur. While UNAMID successfully set up the Jebel Marra task force at the end
of phase one, conducting operations in accordance with the priorities within the
peacekeeping prong, the mission encountered challenges in the implementation of its
peacebuilding/stabilization strategy within the parameters of its mandate. Even
though the integrated strategic framework was adopted in September 2017,
insufficient emphasis was put on communication and cooperation with the United
Nations country team with regard to joint planning, programming and
implementation. The mission’s limited peacebuilding activities in the rule of law,
police, child protection, human rights and community stabilization sectors continued,
but without any coherent overarching guidance or strategy in support of the United
Nations country team or the local governments.
Closure of team sites and impact of the mission’s withdrawal
29. The closure of 11 team sites during phase one of the mission’s overall
reconfiguration has not had a negative impact on the security situation in the areas of
withdrawal. Government authorities, including the police and judiciary, are gradually
establishing their presence, and local communities generally cite humanitarian and
development needs as their greatest concerns. However, the mission’s withdrawal has
reduced its monitoring and reporting capacity in those areas.
30. In North Darfur, UNAMID withdrew from six team sites, namely Um
Kaddadah, Mellit, Al-Malihah, Tine, Zamzam and Abu Shouk camp. In all locations
the security situation was stable and the withdrawal of UNAMID has not had, fo r the
time being, a negative impact. In Um Kaddadah, the local authorities raised concerns
about the lack of land registry, as well as concerns about the lack of water, seeds and
fertilizer. In Mellit, internally displaced persons raised concerns about the absence of
Sudanese police forces inside the camps and outside Mellit town, while locals raised
concerns about the lack of medicine and water. Plans for the return of internally
displaced persons are being hampered by the lack of basic services and protec tion
concerns, including the establishment of police presences in the areas of return. In
Al-Malihah, the Rapid Support Forces are heavily present to ensure the control of the
border with Libya and to prevent the infiltration of armed rebel groups. In Tine , the
Joint Chad-Sudan Border Monitoring Force is providing effective security, which is
creating conducive conditions for the expected return of up to 20,000 Sudanese
refugees from Chad. In Zamzam, internally displaced persons raised concerns about
the low presence of Sudanese police forces and the occupation of their lands by new
settlers, while in Abu Shouk camp concerns were raised regarding the lack of access
to food, water and health services.
31. In South Darfur, the closures of Tulus and Edd al-Fursan have also not had, for
the time being, a negative impact on the security situation. In Tulus, a number of
refugees from the Central African Republic arrived, while in Edd al -Fursan the
weapons collection campaign contributed to the absence of clashes be tween farmers
and herders. Some community leaders raised concerns about the Rapid Support
Forces harassing the local communities. International NGOs reported unhindered
access to the target communities. In Tulus and Edd al-Fursan, there were specific
requests for tools to enhance agricultural production.

18-08414

7/19

S/2018/530

32. In West Darfur, the closure of the Habila and Foro Burunga team sites did not
have an adverse impact on security. However, in both locations, the number of
Sudanese police force personnel remained the same despite plans to deploy additional
police officers. In East Darfur, the closure of the Muhajiriyah team site did not affect
security, but community leaders requested more food, shelter, seeds, farming tools
and medical care.
Team sites handed over to formed police units
33. As at 31 May 2018, the handover from the military to formed police units was
completed at six team sites, and the final handover, at Kalma, is scheduled for June
2018, as planned. Since the handover of those sites, no threats o f a military nature
have been observed. The presence of Sudanese police forces and the judiciary remains
limited in Korma, Sereif and Saraf Omra, where militia elements are increasingly
turning to criminality. Communities have raised concerns that the form ed police units
are not engaged sufficiently in outreach and patrolling, particularly in Saraf Omra. It
was noted during the review mission that the current formed police unit strength of
140 officers is insufficient to adequately cover camp security and p erform mandated
tasks, and that the support provided by the units to the activities of individual police
officers is very limited.
Operating environment
Attacks and threats of attacks
34. During the reporting period, UNAMID was not the target of any armed groups
or entities in Darfur. However, banditry and criminal activities remain a prominent
feature of the security situation in Darfur owing to several factors, including the
deterioration of economic conditions, the conflict over natural resources and the
presence of weapons among citizens. From July 2017 to 15 May 2018, 184 criminal
incidents affected United Nations personnel, facilities and operations, including 63
cases of theft/break-in/burglary/intrusion, 36 attempts of theft, 5 carjackings, 11 cases
of robbery/road banditry, 7 shootings and 33 cases of stone -throwing.
Access restrictions
35. Over the past two years the number of access restrictions experienced by the
mission has decreased significantly. There were nine cases of restriction s from 1 July
to 31 December 2017, and four cases from 1 January to 31 March 2018. In April and
May 2018, there were three cases of denials of access registered in the Jebel Marra
area as clashes with rebel groups continued. Restrictions on direct flights between
team sites continued as the Government insisted that flights be routed through state
capitals.
Visas and customs clearance issues
36. Since 1 July 2017, the Government has granted 2,854 visas to UNAMID,
including 441 for military personnel, 980 for police personnel, 91 for civilian staff
and 1,342 for other categories. A total of 130 visa requests are still being processed,
while 161 visa requests have been pending beyond the normal approval period of
15 days, some since April 2017. For the Human Rights Section, 17 visa applications
remain pending, including for the Head of the Section, resulting in a vacancy rate of
32 per cent, while the overall vacancy rate for the mission’s international civilian staff
decreased from 17 to 6 per cent, of which 3 per cent is due to pending visas.
37. The Government of the Sudan continues to release food ration containers from
Port Sudan. While progress has been recorded in clearing other shipments,
23 shipments of contingent- and United Nations-owned equipment are still pending.
8/19

18-08414

S/2018/530

UNAMID continues to hold monthly technical-level meetings with Government
officials in an effort to address pending issues. The Government informed UNAMID
in February 2018 that it would receive a communication detailing new procedu res
that would replace the tax exemption certificate; however, the mission has yet to
receive it.

IV. Whole-of-system approach to Darfur
38. For the second dry season in a row, fighting between the Government and the
rebel groups has subsided and has remained sporadic in some areas of the Jebel Marra.
However, while the security situation is much improved and the Government has been
successful in consolidating authority across most of Darfur, the underlying conflict
drivers, including land and resource distribution, remain largely unaddressed. Until a
comprehensive solution to those difficult issues is reached, the possibility of a relapse
into conflict cannot be entirely discounted. While peacekeeping activities should
focus on the most precarious areas, where the protection of civilians, humanitarian
support and the mediation of local conflict remain a necessity to further the peace
process, a substantive investment in peacebuilding, recovery and development
throughout Darfur is crucial to furthering the peace process in Darfur. The United
Nations country team and UNAMID should define joint priorities and work hand in
hand, including with other partners, and focus on activities and issues to prevent a
relapse into conflict.

A.

Peacekeeping concept
Redefined priorities
39. Within the whole-of-system approach, UNAMID would focus on mediation of
the political process and at the local level, physical protection, the clearance of
explosive remnants of war and emergency relief. Those tasks would be co mbined and
coordinated with the humanitarian country team in order to focus efforts on stabilizing
a redefined, smaller area of operations. The redefined priorities would include: (a) the
protection of civilians, human rights monitoring and reporting, the facilitation of
humanitarian assistance and the safety and security of humanitarian personnel;
(b) mediation between the Government of the Sudan and non-signatory armed
movements on the basis of the Doha Document for Peace in Darfur; and (c) mediation
at the local level to address intercommunal or other local conflict that could
undermine the security situation in the area of operations.
Redefined area of operations
40. Within the refined priorities of the peacekeeping operation, UNAMID would
have its headquarters in Zalingei (Central Darfur), and its area of operations would
include the following 13 team sites: Kutum, Saraf Omra, Kabkabiyah, Tawilah,
Sortony and Shangil Tobaya (North Darfur), Zalingei, Nertiti and Golo (Central
Darfur) and Kalma, Kass, Menawashei and Khor Abeche (South Darfur). All other
team sites and supercamps would be closed. The supercamp in El Fasher would be
downsized and serve as the main logistics hub until the liquidation of the mission.
Building on existing United Nations country team structures, the state liaison offices
in El Fasher, El Geneina, Nyala and Ed Daein would be managed by the United
Nations country team and fall under its respective security arrangements. Each office
would consist of United Nations country team staff, including 20 to 25 civilian staff
and police from UNAMID. Details for each liaison office would be tailored to the
respective context in the respective Darfur state and elaborated jointly by the United

18-08414

9/19

S/2018/530

Nations country team and UNAMID. The mission would be fiscally responsible for
the establishment and sustainment of those offices for two years, as of July 2018.
Military concept
41. With the closure of 14 sites, the operational capability of the mission ’s force in
Jebel Marra would be improved by allocating more military assets, mainly enablers
and reserves, for peacekeeping operations, improving the force ’s outreach in the new
area of operations. Of the 13 team sites in the new area of operations, the Kutum,
Tawilah, Shangil Tobaya and Khor Abeche team sites would be handed over to
UNAMID formed police units. Separate troops would be earmarked to provide
protection to the supercamps until their respective closures or transitions.
42. By 31 December 2018, the force would comprise three components: (a) the force
for mandate implementation (force headquarters, three battalions, one reserve
battalion, a military police unit and enablers); (b) the temporary protection element
for the El Fasher logistics hub (two companies); and (c) the temporary protection
element for the three supercamps at Nyala (two companies), Ed Daein (one company)
and El Geneina (two companies and a level 2 medical facility) for a total of five
companies and one medical facility. The present level 3 medical facility at Nyala will
be downgraded to level 2 and shifted to Zalingei as part of component (a). The overall
strength of the force would be reduced by 31 December 2018 from 8,735 to 5,470
military personnel, including 4,220 personnel for component (a), 350 personnel for
component (b) and 900 personnel for component (c). The seven companies (two for
component (b) and five for component (c)) and the level 2 medical fa cility at El
Geneina, nominated as the temporary protection element for the supercamps at El
Fasher, El Geneina, Nyala and Ed Daein, and one engineering company would be
repatriated no later than 30 June 2019. The overall strength of the force would be
reduced to 4,050 by 30 June 2019.
43. The mandate implementation component of the force would operate from force
headquarters in Zalingei and out of six team sites: Kabkabiyah and Sortony, Kass and
Menawashei, and Nertiti and Golo. To ensure permanent presence in the area of
operations, UNAMID would conduct operations in a coordinated and decentralized
manner, operating from permanent, temporary and mobile bases, and conduct robust
patrols, establish checkpoints and perform observation and escort activities w hich
would be complemented by active liaison and coordination with parties to the conflict
at all levels. To ensure a timely response to any changes in the situation, the reserve
force, including military aviation assets, would be maintained and kept in a state of
high readiness to facilitate deployment in extremis.
Police concept
44. The police component would focus on: (a) supporting the physical protection of
civilians and facilitating humanitarian assistance; (b) creating a protective
environment by coordinating the development and training of the Sudanese police
forces; and (c) conducting community-oriented policing initiatives in conjunction
with the United Nations country team, including on gender-based and sexual violence
and child protection, pursued through engagement with the state liaison offices and
at the national level. The police concept foresees enabling the host State authorities
to tackle rule of law challenges and build trust between the local communities and
Government entities.
45. The current number of personnel in formed police units charged with security
tasks of team sites in Saraf Omra should be adjusted from 140 to 180, in order to
provide for the increased security measures at the team site and for an operational
capacity to support activities conducted by individual police officers, and to allow for
10/19

18-08414

S/2018/530

an operational reserve to react to changes in the security situation. In view of the
particular security requirements, two formed police units (140 personnel each) would
be deployed to Kalma. Continued deployment of one formed police unit of 140
personnel would be required in Zalingei in order to tackle security issues of a
non-military nature, such as demonstrations and engagements with internally
displaced persons. Formed police units with 180 personnel each would take over the
security tasks of the team sites in Kutum, Tawilla, Shangil Tobaya and Khor Abeche.
46. A maximum of 10 individual police officers would deploy to each of the newly
established state liaison offices, and a maximum of 5 to the Khartoum liaison office.
The strength of the police component would be reduced from 2,500 to 1,870
personnel, and would include 550 individual police officers and 1,320 formed police
units.
Clearance of explosive remnants of war
47. The improved security situation is offering opportunities for increased clearance
of explosive remnants of war as additional areas become accessible for the first time
since the mission’s establishment. As a result, systematic survey and clearance
operations are now possible with little risk of recontamination. Thus far, the present
reporting period has seen an increase in the detection and disposal of unexploded
ordinance of roughly 31 per cent, compared with the previous reporting period. Since
such clearance is a key enabler of the mission’s military and protection work and is
crucial to the facilitation of voluntary returns, it will remain a key component of the
mission’s work. At the same time, a transition of the expected remaining workload to
partners, including the National Mine Action Centre of the Sudan, the United Nations
Children’s Fund and the International Committee of the Red Cross, should be
prepared.

B.

Transition concept
48. The whole-of-system transition concept would focus on providing sustainable
solutions to the critical drivers of conflict, within a two -year time frame, through four
substantive areas identified as critical to preventing relapse and enabling the
Government, the United Nations country team, civil society partners and international
actors to prepare for the mission’s envisaged exit. The transition phase would provide
an opportunity for UNAMID and the United Nations agencies, funds and programmes
to identify key shared priorities in those four areas and to collaborat e, through joint
planning and delivery, towards their achievement. The conclusions of the strategic
review point to the adoption of a pragmatic approach during the transition phase that
focuses on concrete joint transition activities in areas where collabo ration between
UNAMID and the United Nations country team is already in place and the focusing
of attention on ensuring that sufficient resources are made available to the United
Nations country team to ramp up its peacebuilding and development work in Dar fur.
Joint efforts would be made to ensure that gains in humanitarian access are maintained
during and following the drawdown, including continued United Nations
Humanitarian Air Service flights to areas in need.
49. Given that the African Union remains an integral partner during the transition
period in Darfur, it is expected that the African Union Commission, through its
relevant departments, would also engage the Government, the United Nations country
team and UNAMID to provide the necessary assistance. The Commission would play
a key role in furthering the political process towards a sustainable resolution to the
Darfur conflict and in areas such as security sector reform, disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration and other key governance areas, as h as been
highlighted in various Peace and Security Council communiqués on Darfur.

18-08414

11/19

S/2018/530

50. Shared priorities are being drawn from the critical needs identified in existing
planning documents, including the integrated strategic framework, the Darfur
Development Strategy, the United Nations Development Assistance Framework and
the Multi-Year Humanitarian Strategy 2017–2019 for the Sudan. Priorities for Darfur
are also being drawn from the United Nations country team/humanitarian country
team approach to durable solutions, which has been piloted in the Sudan as part of
the “New Way of Working”. During the transition phase, United Nations country team
and UNAMID partners would focus on the priorities set out below.
Rule of law: police, justice, corrections
51. Joint UNAMID-United Nations country team support in the rule of law area
would focus on supporting Government authorities in extending the rule of law
(specifically access to justice) and State authority to remote areas to build public
confidence in rule of law and law enforcement institutions, reduce intercommunal
conflict, enhance accountability and create conditions conducive to durable solutions
and the voluntary return of displaced populations. Interventions would strengthen the
capacities of State authority and community-based conflict management and
reconciliation mechanisms to mediate and address resource -based and local conflicts
and strengthen legislation and policies on land and resource management.
52. The transition in the rule of law area would require a two-pronged approach that
identified: (a) areas of intervention that could be completed by UNAMID within a
two-year time frame and handed over to national authorities, such as capacity building programmes for rural court judges (to be handed over to the federal judicial
training centre), trial monitoring (to be handed over to national NGOs) and the
capacity-building and professionalization of the prison service; and (b) areas of
intervention that would require continued support from United Nations country team
partners to prevent a relapse into conflict, such as the presence and functioning of
rural courts, community policing, capacity-building and legal aid. Considering the
nature of the support provided to the Special Court and Special Prosecutor for Crimes
in Darfur, the mission is best placed to continue its support to that process and should
prioritize it.
Resilience and livelihoods/durable solutions for the displaced population and
host communities
53. Strategies and plans to implement integrated durable solutions would be
developed in a participatory and consultative manner that involved local partners and
communities. They would include interventions that respond to the needs of the
highly vulnerable populations, including nomads and pastoralists, and conflictaffected communities, with the objective of protecting and recovering assets and
stabilizing livelihoods. To ensure the success of and benefits from durable solutions,
beneficiaries must enjoy safety, integrity and protection, there fore protective
environments in the areas of displacement and return are crucial. Durable solutions
would work towards achieving socioeconomic integration within communities
through strengthening access to essential services (health, education, nutrition),
utilities (water, energy, land) and shelter. In that context, land issues are central to the
return of internally displaced persons and refugees, and to achieving durable
solutions, which makes cooperation on and the continuation of existing projects with
the Darfur Land Commission and State authorities essential.
Immediate service delivery for internally displaced persons
54. Immediate needs in Darfur remain focused on delivering services to the most
vulnerable persons. Assistance would be needs-based, and the issues of protection,
livelihoods, reinforcing community assets and services and social cohesion would be
12/19

18-08414

S/2018/530

the focus of programming. Vulnerability assessments have identified 376,000
internally displaced persons who would be able to transition to livelihood activities
or seasonal food distributions, while 716,000 would continue to receive year -round
food assistance. Those vulnerable households that remain in need of relief assistance
would continue to receive the required humanitarian support. The goal would be to
improve access, in a more sustainable manner, to basic services such as health, Water,
Sanitation and Hygiene for All and education.
Human rights
55. Outside the mission’s redefined area of operations, UNAMID would contribute
to monitoring and reporting on human rights and to capacity-building to strengthen
Government institutions and civil society and communit y-based organizations with
regard to good governance. UNAMID, with increased support from the United
Nations country team, would prioritize strengthening State institutions, awareness raising, education and support to community structures that empower righ ts-holders,
including internally displaced persons and returnee populations. The United Nations
country team would assume some of those functions, including mainstreaming work
on protection, child protection, the prevention of sexual and gender-based violence
and the return of internally displaced persons. The Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Human Rights (OHCHR) should open a fully mandated office in
the Sudan in order to assist in the strengthening of human rights protections, despite
the lack of progress to date regarding the engagement of OHCHR with the
Government of the Sudan on a possible technical cooperation programme.
Implementation
56. To facilitate the transition of the above priority areas, it is crucial that United
Nations partners reinforce collaborative efforts to enable joint planning and delivery
towards clearly defined shared objectives. That should include collaboration at the
strategic level, including structural links between the Deputy Joint Special
Representative and the Resident and Humanitarian Coordinator, and at the technical
level through the establishment of joint teams at the state level and an enhanced
UNAMID presence in Khartoum. With that in mind, the recommendation of the
strategic review is to establish liaison offices in the capitals of four Darfur states
(except Central Darfur, where the mission headquarters would be), where key
substantive UNAMID components and United Nations country team staff should be
co-located, to the extent possible, to form joint teams. The composition of those
offices would be determined by the needs of the location. In terms of logistical
considerations, existing UNAMID offices could be used in some areas, while in other
places existing United Nations country team offices could be upgraded or new spaces
identified. UNAMID should provide funding for those offices for the remainder of
the mission’s lifespan and UNDP, as the common service manager, would manage
them. Available headquarters resources to help plan and initiate join t approaches,
including through the global focal point arrangement and the Justice and Corrections
Standing Capacity, should be considered as required. While such an arrangement
would enable support for the capacities of the United Nations country team, in cluding
on human rights, the proposed reconfiguration would no longer allow UNAMID to
continue the monitoring, verification and reporting of protection of civilians issues
outside the greater Jebel Marra area, and the United Nations country team has limite d
scope to monitor, raise and address protection concerns.
Funding for longer term development in Darfur
57. As the mission withdraws, it is critical that longer-term funding arrangements
be put in place to prevent a relapse into conflict. A succes sful transition from
18-08414

13/19

S/2018/530

peacekeeping to a peacebuilding- and development-oriented United Nations
engagement requires an integrated resource mobilization strategy as well as high level efforts to mobilize donor funding. The United Nations joint financing appro ach
for sustaining peace in Darfur calls for the financing approach to be centred on the
political engagement of the United Nations system, to reach out to traditional and
non-traditional partners and to involve the Government of the Sudan in both
facilitating the implementation of the integrated strategic framework and seeking the
allocation of its own resources. In addition, as a transitional measure, the joint
approach should focus on both raising voluntary contributions and acquiring funding
from the assessed budget. Those transitional funding arrangements would ensure the
establishment and operationalization of the state liaison offices and support for the
implementation of the shared priorities in order to sustain gains in peace and security.
58. The Secretary-General’s Peacebuilding Fund could be a crucial enabler for the
transition. Ongoing efforts with the Peacebuilding Support Office should be
reinforced to access funding for transition priorities and piloting other potential
initiatives through the New Way of Working and for durable solutions that contribute
to consolidating peace in Darfur. In response to the mission ’s transition, the United
Nations country team in the Sudan is in the process of finalizing a project on durable
solutions and support for the rule of law in Darfur with the support of the Immediate
Response Facility of the Peacebuilding Fund. In addition, the Secretary -General also
received a request from the President of the Sudan in late December 2017 expressing
his interest in having the Sudan be declared eligible to receive funds from the
Peacebuilding Fund.
59. Bringing those different strands together, new funding should be channelled
through the existing United Nations Fund for Recovery, Reconstruction and
Development in Darfur. As the contribution to the Fund from Qatar will be exhausted
in 2018, it is important to diversify its funding base. For the new phase of support
during the transition process, the Fund could potentially consist of funding from:
(a) the Peacebuilding Fund (if the Sudan qualifies for full eligibility), to be allocated
towards specific projects; (b) assessed contributions from Member States, if approved
by the General Assembly; (c) seed funding from UNDP; and (d) a targeted effort to
encourage existing partners to renew their funding commitments beyond 2018,
coupled with attracting new donors to support the Fund. Channelling resources
through the Fund would allow the United Nations country team to strengthen
programming on peacebuilding and provide a framework for other donors to
contribute voluntary contributions in a strategic manner.

C.

Implementation arrangements, time frame and mission leadership
60. The main components of the implementation of the revised mission concept
would be: (a) the mission drawdown and repositioning, which would consist of the
repatriation of the military and police elements, the closure of team sites and
supercamps, the right-sizing of the civilian staff and the enhanced joint working
modalities with the United Nations country team; (b) the operationalization of the
new mission headquarters, consisting of the functional establishment of all mission
components in Zalingei; (c) the establishment of state liaison offices in El Fasher, El
Geneina, Nyala and Ed Daein; and (d) liquidation. The reconfiguration of the
Operation would start immediately following the adoption of a new mandate by the
Security Council, and its liquidation phase would be completed, at the latest, by
December 2020. As different elements in the four component s would take place
simultaneously, mission support should be organized into two focus areas: the
delivery of the mandated tasks in the mission’s new area of responsibility, and the
mission’s drawdown and closure.

14/19

18-08414

S/2018/530

61. In the context of the new mission concept, the Joint Special Representative for
Darfur would be located in Khartoum with immediate effect, to follow up on the
implementation of the Doha Document for Peace in Darfur and on the peace process
and to maintain a close interaction with the Government. The Joint Special
Representative would continue to exercise overall authority over the mission ’s
strategic objectives and operations and frequently travel to the area of operations. The
Deputy Joint Special Representative for Darfur would be posted in Z alingei to lead
the day-to-day operations of the mission. The leadership of the military and police
components, as well as the heads of sections/divisions of the civilian components,
with the exception of mission support, should be right-sized to reflect the reduced
footprint of the Operation, in line with levels of other operations of a similar size.
62. Provided that there will be no significant change in the security situation in
Darfur and key indicators are fulfilled (see annex), the implementation tim e frame
would adhere broadly to the following schedule: (a) by 31 August 2018, all planning
processes and institutional arrangements with the Government should be completed,
including a revised budget submission containing the new staffing structures; (b) by
31 December 2018, the UNAMID headquarters in Zalingei and the state liaison
offices should be functional and the right-sizing of the civilian staff, following an
alignment of the staffing requirements with the reconfigured mission staffing
structures, should be completed; (c) the closure of the team sites outside the UNAMID
area of responsibility and the repatriation of the assigned military and police units
should be completed by 31 March 2019; (d) by June 2019 at the latest, the former
sector headquarters in El Geneina, Nyala and Ed Daein should be closed down and
handed over; and (e) the Operation would exit on 30 June 2020, and its liquidation
would be completed by December 2020.
63. The cooperation of the Government with the reconfiguration is essential in order
to facilitate the closure of team sites and the repatriation of equipment, a s well as to
enable freedom of movement within the new area of operations. The Government ’s
further and continued investment in Darfur and the proactive cooperation o n the
transition concept, not least with regard to human rights, will also be of paramount
importance to ensure the security and delivery of services to its population.
64. To monitor progress against the priorities of the mission and the transition, a
two-year action plan should be developed on the basis of the provisions of the Doha
Document for Peace in Darfur. As noted in the letter dated 30 August 2017 from the
Secretary-General addressed to the President of the Security Council ( S/2017/747) on
the implementation of the Doha Document for Peace in Darfur, provisions from the
Doha Document could serve as the basis for indicators of achievement for the
eventual exit of UNAMID (see annex). Proven progress with respect to the action
plan during the two-year transition period and further improvements in the security
situation, accompanied by sustained Government investment in Darfur, would be
essential in order to allow UNAMID to exit Darfur.

V. Financial aspects
65. The General Assembly, in its resolution 72/259, appropriated the amount of
$910.9 million for the maintenance of the Operation for the period from 1 July 2017
to 30 June 2018, inclusive of the amount of $486.0 million previously authorized for
the Operation for the period from 1 July to 31 December 2017 under the terms of its
resolution 71/310. The proposed budget in the amount of $782.6 million for the
maintenance of the Operation for the period from 1 July 2018 to 30 June 2019
(A/72/794) has been submitted to the Assembly for its consideration during the

18-08414

15/19

S/2018/530

second part of its resumed seventy-second session. It should be noted that proposed
requirements are based on the prevailing mandate and scope of the Operation.
66. As at 16 May 2018, unpaid assessed contributions to the Special Account for
UNAMID amounted to $244.7 million. Total outstanding assessed cont ributions for
all peacekeeping operations as at that date amounted to $2,147.0 million.
67. Reimbursement of troop and formed police costs has been made for the period
up to 31 January 2018, while reimbursement of the costs of contingent -owned
equipment has been made for the period up to 30 September 2017, in accordance with
the quarterly payment schedule.

VI. Observations
68. Improvements in the overall security situation in Darfur have created the
conditions for UNAMID to prepare its exit after more than 10 years in the Sudan. The
military successes of the Government against the rebel movements have visibly
changed the landscape, despite the failed incursion of two rebel groups from Libya
and South Sudan in May and June 2017 to establish a foothold i n Darfur, and for the
second dry season in a row no major operation has taken place. The weapons
collection campaign, initiated in August 2017, has strengthened the control of the
Government over the territory and created the conditions for the extension o f State
authority across Darfur. In the light of that, the presence of the African Union and the
United Nations needs to adapt so as to serve the current needs of the population of
Darfur. It is in that spirit that we propose a reconfiguration of our prese nce to deploy
peacekeeping where it is still needed and to increase early recovery and development
efforts to address root causes of conflict and consolidate and sustain peace. We
therefore present to the Peace and Security Council of the African Union and the
United Nations Security Council a whole-of-system approach for Darfur, which
includes a new concept of operations for UNAMID and a transition concept that maps
an exit for the peacekeeping mission, during which UNAMID would work in
collaboration with the United Nations country team over a two-year time frame.
69. Crucial grievances at the origin of the conflict, however, remain unaddressed.
The parties continue to extend their unilateral ceasefires, but a comprehensive
cessation of hostilities has yet to be finalized. The implementation of the Doha
Document for Peace in Darfur is slow, and roughly one third of the population of
Darfur continues to bear the consequences of displacement. Although no major
displacement has taken place during the past two years, durable and pragmatic
solutions need to be found to enable the settlement of almost 2 million internally
displaced persons. The recent practices of some state governments in Darfur in that
context need to be considered, as does advocating for the pri nciples of voluntary
return and the right to access land. The successes of the local governments and the
native administration in reducing intercommunal violence, with the mission ’s
support, should be sustained through adequate measures for addressing issu es related
to land and resources. The positive impact of the weapons collection campaign on the
security situation and the control over the armed militia need to be reinforced with
measures based on the provisions of the Doha Document for Peace in Darfur.
70. The full implementation of the Doha Document for Peace in Darfur in order to
benefit the people of Darfur and avoid relapse into conflict is crucial. Our proposal
and the exit of UNAMID are intrinsically linked to that implementation, and we urge
the Government to do its utmost to provide security, rule of law and basic services to
all its citizens in Darfur, and to address the root causes of the conflict within that
framework. We also call on donor countries to provide the necessary financial support
so that early recovery, peacebuilding and development activities can be undertaken in
16/19

18-08414

S/2018/530

a sustainable manner. We have invested too much in Darfur over the past decade and
a half to risk it backsliding into conflict due to a lack of resources. Such support is
even more critical in the light of the current economic crisis, w hich has had a serious
impact, especially in rural areas, and is a threat to stability.
71. Finally, we would like to extend our gratitude to the men and women of
UNAMID, the United Nations and the humanitarian community, who continue their
relentless efforts to improve the lives of the people of Darfur. We would also like to
thank and commend the African Union-United Nations Joint Special Representative
for Darfur, Kingsley Jeremiah Mamabolo, the Special Envoy of the Secretary-General
for the Sudan and South Sudan, Nicholas Haysom, and the former President of South
Africa, Thabo Mbeki, and the former President of Nigeria, Abdulsalami Abubakar, of
the African Union High-level Implementation Panel, for their steadfast commitment
to sustainable peace and stability in the Sudan.

18-08414

17/19

S/2018/530

Annex
Indicators of achievement for the proposed two-year time frame
for the withdrawal of the African Union-United Nations Hybrid
Operation in Darfur
In view of the letter dated 30 August 2017 from the Secretary-General addressed
to the President of the Security Council (S/2017/747) on the implementation of the
Doha Document for Peace in Darfur, the provisions from the D oha Document set out
below could serve as indicators of achievement for the proposed two -year time frame
for the withdrawal of the African Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur.
1.

Security sector
• Reform of some military institutions in Darfur and need for funding and experts
[art. 74, paras. 463–464]
• Disarmament of militia groups and the responsibility of the Government of the
Sudan [art. 67, paras. 399–401]
• Voluntary civilian arms control [art. 71, paras. 416–417]
• Disarmament and demobilization of Movements’ combatants [art. 72,
paras. 422 and 430–432]

2.

Rule of law: police, justice, corrections
• Facilitate access to justice [art. 56, para. 296]
• Truth, Justice and Reconciliation Commission fully functioning [ art. 58,
paras. 311–321]
• Special Court for Darfur [art. 59, paras. 322–328]

3.

Durable solutions for the displaced population and host communities
• Mechanisms and modalities in place to ensure freedom of movement of
internally displaced persons [art. 46, paras. 235–237; art. 47, para. 238;
art. 48, paras. 239–240]
• Conditions in place to ensure the right to voluntary return [ art. 49,
paras. 241−246]
• Mechanisms in place to ensure necessary conditions for return of internally
displaced persons [art. 50, para. 249]
• Voluntary Return and Resettlement Commission fully functioning [ art. 51,
paras. 252–259]
• Compensation/Jabr
paras. 301−304]

Al-Darar

mechanism

fully

functional

[art.

57,

• Establish mechanisms to ensure sustainable management and use of lands and
other natural resources [art. 33, para. 186]
• Modify the laws to include rights to land and its use (hawakeer) [art. 33,
para. 182]
• Darfur states land use mapping database developed [art. 38, para. 197]
• Darfur Land Commission exercising full competences [art. 38, paras. 196–207]
• Darfur states to be represented by three non-permanent members in the National
Petroleum Commission [art. 41, para. 214]

18/19

18-08414

S/2018/530

• Oil-producing states to benefit 2 per cent of oil revenue [art. 41, para. 215]
4.

Immediate delivery of services for internally displaced persons
• Modalities in place to provide security and protection from all forms of physical
attack [art. 44, paras. 226–229; art. 45, paras. 230–231]
• Joint coordination committees to deal with early warning and prevention of
escalation: local government and native administrations are empowered to
address consequences of the conflict [art. 13, para. 86]

5.

Human rights
• Promotion of human rights and fundamental freedoms [art. 1, paras. 1–18;
art. 61, para. 331]

18-08414

19/19
