S/2021/844

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
1 October 2021
Original: English

Situation in Mali
Report of the Secretary-General

I. Introduction
1.
By its resolution 2584 (2021), the Security Council extended the mandate of the
United Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in Mali
(MINUSMA) until 30 June 2022 and requested the Secretary-General to report to the
Council every three months on the implementation of the resolution. The present
report covers major developments in Mali since the previous report ( S/2021/519)
dated 1 June 2021.

II. Major developments
2.
The reporting period was marked by a change in the leadership of the
transitional Government, following the coup d’état of 24 May. On 20 July, the new
President of the transitional Government, Colonel Assimi Goïta, was the target of an
assassination attempt at the Great Mosque in Bamako. While the action plan of the
new Government was endorsed by the National Transition Council, the parliament of
the transition, on 2 August, preparations for the holding of legislative and presidential
elections, scheduled to take place in February and March 2022, and bring the
transition to its end were delayed. Meanwhile, there was limited progress in the
implementation of the Agreement on Peace and Reconciliation in Mali, signed in
2015, as the focus of key political stakeholders appeared to shift.

A.

Political transition
3.
Following the coup d’état of 24 May, a new President and Prime Minister of the
transitional Government took office. On 7 June, Colonel Assimi Goïta, the former
Vice-President of the transitional Government, was sworn in as the President of the
transitional Government. On the same day, he appointed the President of the Strategic
Committee of the Mouvement du 5 juin-Rassemblement des forces patriotiques
(M5-RFP), Choguel Kokalla Maïga, as Prime Minister of the transitional
Government. These developments were met with mixed reactions. Some political
actors generally welcomed the developments and expressed hope that the new
authorities would surmount the challenges facing Mali and make progress towards a
successful return to constitutional order, whereas other stakeholders expressed
reservations and criticized the new Government.

21-13338 (E)

061021

*2113338*

S/2021/844

4.
On 11 June, the President signed a decree appointing a new Government of
28 members. Eleven ministers from the previous cabinet kept their portfolios,
including Colonel Sadio Camara, Lieutenant Colonel Abdoulaye Maïga and Colonel
Major Ismaël Wagué. Colonel Modibo Kone, who until then had been the Minister of
Security, was appointed Director of State Security. M5 -RFP, which had boycotted the
previous Government, was allocated seven ministries. The new Government includes
representatives of signatory armed groups, trade unions and civil society, of whom
six are women, representing 21.4 per cent, which is well below the legal re quirement
of 30 per cent.
5.
Some political parties and platforms criticized the new Government. The
Ensemble pour le Mali, the Alliance pour la démocratie au Mali -Parti africain pour la
solidarité et la justice, the Parti pour la renaissance nationale an d the Rassemblement
pour le Mali, criticized the composition of the Government, arguing that it was not
inclusive enough. The Administrative Secretary of the largest labour union, the Union
nationale des travailleurs du Mali, regretted the presence of only two trade unionists
in the new Government, which, in his view, would prevent it from addressing workers’
grievances. Conversely, the national civil society forum welcomed the new cabinet,
especially the inclusion of its President, Bakary Doumbia.
6.
After his appointment, the Prime Minister initiated consultations with national
stakeholders on the establishment of a single election management body and the
holding of a wide-ranging national dialogue on reform (Assises nationales de la
refondation) long demanded by M5-RFP. In July, the Government announced the
future establishment of the election management body and later confirmed plans to
hold the national dialogue by the end of September.
7.
On 20 July, the President was the victim of an assassination at tempt at the Great
Mosque of Bamako, where he was attending the celebration of Eid al -Adha. The
suspect was subdued and arrested. On 21 July, authorities opened an investigation
into the incident. On 25 July, the Government announced that the suspect had d ied
while in custody, adding that the investigation would continue as the evidence
gathered appear to indicate that the suspect had not acted alone.
8.
On 30 July, at the request of the President and the Prime Minister of the
transitional Government, the National Transition Council convened an extraordinary
session during which the Prime Minister presented the Government’s action plan. The
plan is built around four axes articulated by the previous Government, specifically:
(a) improving national security; (b) political and institutional reforms; (c) the
intelligent implementation of the Agreement; and (d) the organization of credible
elections. The plan was debated upon and subsequently approved by the National
Transition Council on 2 August, with 102 votes in favour, 2 votes against and
9 abstentions. Overall, the plan was welcomed by political parties and civil society
groups, although several political stakeholders expressed concerns regarding its
feasibility given the limited timeframe and resources.
9.
On 26 August, the former Prime Minister, Soumeylou Boubeye Maïga, and the
former Minister of Economy and Finance, Bouare Fily Sissoko, were arrested on
charges of irregularities in the purchase of a presidential jet and military equipment
during the tenure of the former President, Ibrahim Boubacar Keïta.
10. The local follow-up committee on the transition, composed of the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for Mali and Head of MINUSMA and the
representatives of the Economic Community of West A frican States (ECOWAS) and
the African Union in Mali, held several meetings with transition authorities and
national interlocutors, calling for the prioritization of reforms and the publication of
an updated timeline for the elections planned in February 2 022. The committee also

2/20

21-13338

S/2021/844

laid the groundwork for regional and international actors to remain engaged in support
of the transition process.
11. The Special Envoy of ECOWAS and Mediator to Mali, the former President of
Nigeria, Goodluck Jonathan, led missions to Bamako on 8 and 9 June and
5 −7 September, to assess progress in the implementation of the various decisions by
the ECOWAS Authority of Heads of State and Government. After meeting with
transition authorities and representatives of the diplomatic commu nity, the delegation
issued a communiqué on 9 June, calling on the new transition authorities to respect
their commitments regarding the implementation of the Agreement, reiterating the
call for the formation of an inclusive Government and urging the trans ition authorities
to identify priority actions to implement in the coming months, including the holding
of inclusive, transparent and credible elections. During his visit in September,
Mr. Jonathan and his delegation held consultations with the President a nd the Prime
Minister of the transitional Government, members of the diplomatic corps accredited
to Mali, as well as other key stakeholders, including political parties, signatory armed
groups, civil society organizations and religious leaders. Discussions were focused
mainly on the progress recorded within the framework of the transition, including the
priority actions of the Government and preparations for elections.
12. The Mediator presented his report during a virtual extraordinary session of the
ECOWAS Authority of Heads of State and Government on 8 September. On
16 September, ECOWAS Heads of State and Government reiterated their demand for
strict adherence to the transition timetable and for presidential and legislative
elections to be held in February 2022 and decided to impose targeted sanctions against
actors impeding progress in the transition.
13. On 27 August, following efforts by the local follow -up committee on the
transition, the Government lifted all restrictions imposed on the former President, Bah
N’Daw, and the former Prime Minister, Moctar Ouane, who had been under house
arrest since May.
Preparations for the holding of elections
14. Significant challenges were faced in the preparations for presidential and
legislative elections to be held in February and March 2022. The coup d’état on
24 May and its aftermath delayed key activities, including the revision and the audit
of the electoral lists; however, it did not delay the conclusion, on 30 June, of the
special voter registration operation, which had begun in December 2020, resulting in
the enrolment of 789,403 voters. Furthermore, the coordination mechanisms established
in April to reach consensus on the electoral process were suspended, as discussions
on the establishment of a single independent electoral management body took
precedence.
15. MINUSMA continued its support towards creating a conducive environment for
elections through the organization of a series of workshops. These included
workshops on electoral transparency from 17 to 30 June, on the role of the media and
social media from 1 to 2 July and on human rights and the impact of social media on
elections from 29 June to 8 July. In addition, the Mission provided two electoral
material storage facilities in the northern regions in June and provided technical
expertise to the Constitutional Court and the National Transition Council to enhance
the capacities of their members. Preparations were also initiated by the diplomatic
community in Bamako for its support to the electoral process.

21-13338

3/20

S/2021/844

B.

Agreement on Peace and Reconciliation in Mali
16. The parties to the Agreement were not able to make real progress towards its
full implementation, owing mostly to their lingering differences.
17. On 29 June, the Agreement Monitoring Committee held its forty -third session
in Bamako, almost six years to the day after the signing of the Agreement. The
Committee called for the renewed commitment of all stakeholders to enable the Malian
people to benefit from the dividends of the peace process. The Minister of National
Reconciliation, who is in charge of the implementation of the Agreement, highlighted
the progress made, inter alia, with regard to the appointment of interim authorities for
Ménaka and Taoudéni Regions and the operationalization of the Achibougou and
Almoustarat cercles; the preparations for the submission of a draft law on the creation
of the territorial police to the National Transition Council; the deployment of the third
company of the reconstituted army battalion to Kidal on 25 June; and the resumption
of the meetings of the technical security committee on 8 June. MINUSMA briefed the
Agreement Monitoring Committee on the recommendations of the International
Commission of Inquiry. The signatory movements committed to working closely with
the Commission, and MINUSMA will establish a mechanism to follow up on the
operationalization of the body’s key recommendations.
18. On 27 July, at the forty-fourth session of the Agreement Monitoring Committee,
the international mediation team expressed concern about the lack of progress in the
implementation of the Agreement. It reiterated its availability to support the Malian
parties in the implementation of the outstanding recommendations of the Committee,
including the operationalization of the reconstituted army battalions in Gao, Kidal
and Timbuktu, and the establishment of a reconstituted company in Ménaka; the
deployment of the remaining 1,265 combatants as part of the accelerated
demobilization, disarmament and reintegration process; the resumption of discussions
on the draft law on the creation of the territorial police; and the launch of the
16 authorized projects of the sustainable development fund.
Disarmament, demobilization and reintegration, and redeployment of the
reconstituted, reformed and inclusive Malian Defence and Security Forces
19. In spite of the ongoing efforts of MINUSMA and the international mediation
team, minimal progress was made in the implementation of the security and defence
aspects of the Agreement. The movements continued to link progress in this area to
an agreement between the Government and signatory movements on global
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration and to progress on institutional reforms.
20. On 23 June, the remaining 111 soldiers of the Kidal reconstituted battalion of
the armed forces who had been integrated into the defence and security forces were
redeployed from Bamako and Gao to Kidal, with the support of a MINUSMA escort
convoy. On 23 August, 241 soldiers of the reconstituted Malian Armed Forces were
redeployed from Bamako to Ménaka, with the support of MINUSMA, to complete
that battalion.
21. As at 28 August, 2,300 combatants had gone through the accelerated
demobilization, disarmament and reintegration process; 1,765 among them had been
trained and integrated into the Malian Defence and Security Forces, out of the
envisaged 3,000. Most of the integrated soldiers had been redeplo yed within the four
reconstituted battalions in Gao, Kidal, Ménaka and Timbuktu. Those in Gao, Ménaka
and Timbuktu were conducting regular patrols and other duties as required by the
Malian Armed Forces, while the one in Kidal was yet to become fully opera tional. In
a symbolic move, however, the reconstituted battalion in Kidal conducted its first
patrol on 26 August.

4/20

21-13338

S/2021/844

22. MINUSMA continues to provide technical expertise, as well as logistical and
financial support, in the implementation of security sector reform, including the
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration aspects of the Agreement on Peace
and Reconciliation in Mali. The Mission organized training for 100 women staff of
the Malian Civilian Protection Services on security sector reform and di sarmament,
demobilization and reintegration, in addition to capacity-building training sessions
for Inspectors of the armed forces and Gendarmerie.
Territorial police
23. On 1 July, a draft law on the creation of the territorial police was submitted for
review and adoption by the National Transition Council. Following initial
discussions, the legislative body returned the document to the Government for further
consultations among all stakeholders.
Northern Development Zone
24. No progress was recorded in the implementation of the nine approved projects
of the Northern Development Zone. In addition, protracted negotiations on relocating
the seat of the Zone from Gao to Bamako continued to impede progress on
operationalizing the programme.
Women’s participation in peace and political processes
25. The appointment of 15 additional women to the monitoring mechanisms of the
Agreement (3 in the Agreement Monitoring Committee and 12 in the four thematic
subcommittees), in compliance with the recommendations from the fifth high-level
meeting of the Agreement Monitoring Committee in Kidal, is still pending, owing to
unresolved disputes between the two factions of the Plateforme. Work is ongoing to
establish an independent women’s observatory, with a view to monitoring the
participation of women in the political and peace processes and assessing the impact
of the implementation of the Agreement on vulnerable populations.

C.

Stabilization and the restoration of State authority in the centre
26. Intercommunity violence in central Mali continued during the reporting period,
with significant variations across the regions. A high number of security incidents
continued to be recorded in Douentza, a significant increase in incidents was reported
in Niono, an uptick was registered in both Djenné and Bankass, while a reduction in
violent acts was recorded in Koro, Bandiagara and Mopti. Overall, abductions of
civilians and theft of livestock, grains and goods increased, particularly in Bandiagara
and Douentza Regions.
27. The security situation in Niono cercle, Ségou Region, remained of serious
concern. In early July, the locality of Songho was encircled by violent extremist
groups, who set up a blockade around the village, preventing local farmers from
accessing their fields. The intensified armed conflict bet ween traditional hunters
belonging to the dozo community (dozos) and violent extremist groups forced the
inhabitants of several villages in the region to flee their homes.
28. In Koro cercle, Mopti Region, the embargo imposed since 30 April by presumed
radical armed groups on the village of Dinangourou was lifted on 18 August after
successful negotiations by community leaders from a Koro-based civil society
organization with the presumed radical armed groups.
29. In response to these worrying trends across central Mali, the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General launched a 50-day plan for the centre and

21-13338

5/20

S/2021/844

inaugurated several MINUSMA-funded projects on 15 June for the extension of State
administration and reinforcement of civil society. The plan is an initiative covering
political good offices, the rehabilitation of infrastructure, intercommunity
reconciliation and trust-building with the State institutions to accelerate United
Nations support for the stabilization of the centre. Building on this plan, additional
initiatives have been identified and are being implemented. In parallel, the Special
Representative intensified his engagement with the Malian authorities in support of
the elaboration of a Malian-led political strategy for the stabilization of the centre.
The authorities have increased efforts to that end. In response to immediate needs, the
Mission transported over 25 tons of food assistance provided by the Malian armed
forces for the population of villages cut off by extremist groups. To addr ess needs in
the medium term, over 24 quick-impact projects were approved, with a total
commitment of over $925,000.
30. MINUSMA continued to support reconciliation efforts in Ogossagou, Bankass
cercle, Bandiagara Region, between the two villages of Ogossagou Peulh and
Ogossagou Dogon, where massacres occurred in March 2019 and February 2020,
respectively. On 6 August, following successive peace initiatives supported by
MINUSMA, representatives of Fulani and Dogon communities agreed to the
establishment of local mechanisms for an amicable settlement of conflicts.
31. MINUSMA pursued its efforts to reduce community-based violence and foster
reconciliation in close partnership with the regional reconciliation support teams. On
1 June, a joint mission involving the regional reconciliation support teams,
MINUSMA and the United Nations country team visited Dioungani municipality,
Koro cercle, to follow up on the reconciliation process and identify opportunities for
peace dividends and returnee assistance. This paved the way for a subsequent
intercommunity dialogue in Dounapen, Dioungani municipality, from 30 July to
1 August to consolidate previous reconciliation gains.
32. The MINUSMA force continued Operation Buffalo and has now planned
Operation Beaver for Douentza cercle and Operation Badger, involving airmobile
operations west of the River Niger, both jointly implemented with United Nations
police to improve the protection of civilians, support the Mission’s civilian
components, facilitate restoration of State presence and authority, and reduce violence
while creating conditions for long-term stability.
Restoration of State authority
33. The re-establishment of State presence and authority in central Mali remained
challenging. During the reporting period, 40 gendarmes, 70 police and 7 civil
protection officers were redeployed in the region, notably in Bankass, Koro, Sofara
and Somadougou. No judicial authorities were redeployed to the centre owing to
continued insecurity and lack or weakness of State administrative services in the
concerned areas.
34. Despite insecurity in the sector, the building of a new prison in Koro, with
MINUSMA support, was completed in August. This will contribute to improving
prison security and conditions.
Fight against impunity
35. The authorities continued with efforts to investigate and prosecute alleged
perpetrators of serious human rights violations and abuses in Mali. On 30 June, the
Court of Assizes of Mopti tried the case related to the attack on Koulogon Peuhl,
Bankass cercle, during which 37 people were killed and buildings were burned and
looted. The 12 accused were found guilty of the charges again st them (criminal

6/20

21-13338

S/2021/844

conspiracy and illegal possession of weapons of war) and were sentenced to death, in
absentia.
36. With MINUSMA support, 42 members of the judicial authorities were trained
in Mopti on military justice procedures and material jurisdictio n to enhance
investigations into crimes committed by the Malian armed forces and to prevent
further crimes.

D.

Regional developments
37. National and international forces continued their efforts against armed terrorist
groups across the Sahel. However, these groups remained active and even appeared
to be expanding their presence and influence, particularly in the tri-border area where
frequent attacks were recorded. On 9 July, the Heads of State of the Group of Five for
the Sahel and France held a summit to assess the security situation in the Sahel and
follow up on the recommendations of the summit in N’Djamena, as well as to
exchange views on the announced reconfiguration of Operation Barkhane. Major
General Oumar Bikimo of Chad was appointed Force Commander of the Joint Force
of the Group of Five for the Sahel, replacing Brigadier General Oumarou Namata of
the Niger.
38. On 21 August, Chad announced the redeployment of 600 of its troops, part of
the Joint Force of the Group of Five for the Sahel, fro m the border area between
Burkina Faso, Mali and the Niger. Chadian authorities stated that the decision
followed a re-assessment of the footprint of terrorist armed groups in the region and
was taken in coordination with the Joint Force.
39. MINUSMA continued to coordinate with the United Nations Office for West
Africa and the Sahel through regular consultative meetings and engaged with other
regional stakeholders, notably ECOWAS, the African Union Mission for Mali and the
Sahel and the executive secretariat of the Group of Five for the Sahel.

III. Major security developments
40. Against the backdrop of the announced reduction in the presence of the French
Operation Barkhane in parts of northern Mali, armed terrorist groups in the region
stepped up their rhetoric and attacks. The MINUSMA camp in Aguelhok, Kidal
Region, was the target of an unprecedented wave of attacks. In central Mali, as
reported above, the security situation deteriorated significantly in Niono cercle,
starting in early July, as violent extremist groups put more villages under siege.
41. In a statement issued on 25 July, Jama’a Nusrat ul-Islam wa al-Muslimin (JNIM)
claimed responsibility for eight attacks in northern Mali, including improvised
explosive device and direct fire attacks on MINUSMA bases and convoys in Gao,
Kidal, Tabrichat and Tessalit. These attacks followed increasing extremist calls to
action in Mali. The recently appointed leader of The Organization of Al -Qaida in the
Islamic Maghreb (AQIM), Yazid Mubarak, issued a statement on 20 June calling for
increased pressure and attacks on Malian and foreign forces. Following this call, on
9 July, AQIM and JNIM released a joint video – the first after three years without
major communication – urging their fighters to continue the battle against local and
international forces.
42. The MINUSMA camp in Aguelhok continued to be the target of attacks. Limited
protests by some elements calling for its relocation away from the city were also
recorded. The protesters argued that the camp posed a security risk to the population.
On 8 and 25 July, the camp was targeted with rockets and mortars. On 11 August,
21-13338

7/20

S/2021/844

direct and indirect fire attacks against the camp resulted in the injury of three
peacekeepers and three civilians. Protests for the removal of the camp stopped,
following dialogue between community leaders and MINUSMA, and the situation
subsequently calmed.
43. In parts of the centre, the security situation deteriorated significantly. On 3 July,
extremist elements informed dozos in Niono cercle, Mopti Region, of their decision
to withdraw from a ceasefire agreement, which had been in place since 14 March,
leading to an uptick in violence. On 3 and 4 July, in separate incidents, four Bambara
farmers were killed in Dogofri commune, Niono cercle. On 7 July, nearly 2,000 new
internally displaced persons were registered in Dogofri commune. By 8 July, nearly
a dozen villages in Diabaly commune were reportedly under threat from or
surrounded by extremists. On 11 July, extremist elements killed seven dozos in
Siribala commune, and, on 14 July, it was reported that extremist elements had set up
a base outside Dogofri town, leading to an increase in harassment. The leader of Dan
Nan Ambassagou, Youssouf Toloba, announced in the same month that all Fulani
residents in areas under his control must declare their presence to the dozos or risk
being assumed jihadists and killed as a result. The group also set up checkpoints
around Petaka and imposed movement restrictions on the road after dark, ostensibly
to improve security.

A.

Asymmetric and other attacks
44. A total of 69 asymmetric attacks were carried out against national and
international forces, MINUSMA and signatory armed groups, 42 of which occurred
in the north, including 8 in Timbuktu, 16 in Gao, 15 in Kidal and 3 in Ménaka
Regions. There were 27 attacks carried out in the centre: 24 in Mopti and 3 in Ségou.
This marked an increase in attacks in central Mali as compared with the previous
reporting period, in which 21 attacks had been recorded against security forces and
signatory groups.
45. International forces were targeted in eight attacks, including three in Mopti, two
each in Gao and Timbuktu and one in Ménaka, with one person killed and five injured.
46. There were 31 attacks against MINUSMA during the reporting period, including
15 in Kidal, 8 in Gao, 4 in Mopti, and 2 each in Ménaka and Timbuktu, resulting in
48 persons injured. One MINUSMA contractor died from injuries sustained in an
attack against a logistics convoy on 30 June in Gao region. This marked an increase
in the number of attacks compared with the previous period, in which 14 attacks
against MINUSMA had been reported, resulting in 4 peacekeepers killed and
50 injured.
47. The Malian Defence and Security Forces were targeted in 31 attacks, including
17 in Mopti, 6 in Gao, 3 in Ségou, 4 in Timbuktu and 1 in Ménaka, with 40 persons
killed, including 25 members of the Malian Armed Forces, 14 police and gendarmes
and 1 member of the National Guard, and 72 persons injured, including 47 members
of the Malian Armed Forces and 25 police and gendarmes.
48. The deadliest attack occurred on 19 August, when a complex attack against
Malian Defence and Security Forces was carried out approximately 69 km east of
Douentza in Hairé commune, Douentza cercle, Mopti Region, killing 4 members of
the Malian Armed Forces and 13 police and gendarmes and injuring 17 members of
the Malian Armed Forces and 25 police and gendarmes.

8/20

21-13338

S/2021/844

B.

Support for Malian defence and security institutions
49. MINUSMA continued to support the Malian Defence and Security Forces, the
Group of Five for the Sahel, Operation Barkhane and the European Union training
mission in Mali with logistics, in accordance with relevant Security Council
resolutions and standing technical agreements.
50. During the reporting period, 898 officers of the Malian security forces, 129 of
them women, were trained, including 93 in central Mali, 12 of whom were women.
United Nations police conducted one training session on post-blast investigation in
the Mopti Region. Two training sessions were organized on the elector al process in
partnership with the United Nations Institute for Training and Research and the
European Union capacity-building mission in Mali.

C.

Small arms, light weapons and explosive threat mitigation
51. In support of the redeployment of the Malian Defence and Security Forces in
the centre and the north of Mali, MINUSMA continued to enhance the national
capacity to mitigate explosive threats, notably through training of response teams of
the Malian Defence and Security Forces in explosive search and detection activities.

IV. Rule of law
52. MINUSMA continued to provide support to Mali in the area of rule of law. On
15 and 16 June, the Mission organized ethics and integrity training for 50 members
of the judiciary to contribute to reinforcing the trust and confidence of the population
in State institutions.
53. MINUSMA continued to provide technical and material assistance to reinforce
prison security, including through the rehabilitation of the Gao prison. In June, the
Mission also enhanced coordination among 382 representatives of defence an d
security forces through simulation exercises in five prisons in northern and central
Mali to allow for optimum implementation of their respective security plans.
MINUSMA further supported the implementation of the national policy on the
prevention of and fight against violent extremism and terrorism in the country’s
prisons, including through the promotion of non -violence in prisons, the adoption of
a national policy on the social integration of prisoners and the drafting of an action
plan. It also supported the training in the United Nations Standard Minimum Rules
for the Treatment of Prisoners (the Nelson Mandela Rules) and the United Nations
Rules for the Treatment of Women Prisoners and Non-custodial Measures for Women
Offenders (the Bangkok Rules) for 136 newly recruited prison officers.
54. MINUSMA and the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime continued to
support the Specialized Judicial Unit against Terrorism and Transnational Organized
Crime, including through the organization of capacity -building for trial and appeal
magistrates to enhance the effective handling of terrorism-related cases, on 21 to
22 June.

V. Protection of civilians
55. Between 26 May and 26 August, a total of 326 attacks against civilians had been
reported, an increase compared with the period between the end of March and the end
of May, during which there had been 307 attacks. The latest attacks resulted in
181 civilians killed, 145 injured and 178 abducted. As indicated above, the overall
21-13338

9/20

S/2021/844

security situation remained volatile in the centre, where the majority of attacks against
civilians were recorded. Civilians continued to suffer from direct violence (killings
and abduction) and indirect violence (threats, intimidation and improvised explosive
devices). However, some positive developments were reported from Djenné and Koro
cercles, which have seen a sustained reduction in attacks against civilians in recent
months.
56. In Gao and Timbuktu Regions, the main threat to civilians remained the
activities of violent extremist groups, including abduction and intimidation, illegal
taxation, criminality linked to illegal goldmining and attempts to impose their own
interpretation of sharia law. The Gourma area was affected by numerous attacks on
civilian villages accused of supporting opposing violent extremist groups. Several
civilians were killed in such attacks and houses were burned, leading to forced
displacements towards nearby localities. The Mission also continued to receive
reports of local communities forced to accept the imposition of a rigid version of
sharia law in exchange for guarantees of safety and security.
57. Security in Ménaka Region deteriorated sharply. There was a significant surge
in armed banditry, which was compounded by the continuing absence of justice
authorities and the antagonizing role played by signatory armed groups. Local
initiatives to secure Ménaka town, through the “Ménaka without weapons” initiative,
had only short-lived successes. In addition, violent extremist groups seemed to be
gaining ground and were effectively asserting control over the main road axes.
Extremist elements often infiltrated the local populations, extorting or, as punishment
for resistance, forcibly displacing them. Similarly, regular clashes between violent
extremist groups for control over territory and, possibly, smuggling routes further
increased the humanitarian crisis in Ménaka town with the arrival of new waves of
internally displaced persons fleeing violence.
58. In response to these trends, the Mission continued to undertake a series of
initiatives aimed at enhancing its support to the Malian authorities in protecting
civilians. In Timbuktu Region, the MINUSMA force, United Nations police and the
Malian Defence and Security Forces coordinated patrols to secure populat ions in
hotspots and to protect civilians at risk. In Gao Region, the Mission’s civilian
components continued to rely on temporary operating bases to gain access and
conduct activities. Elsewhere, including in central Mali, the Mission’s civilian staff
used temporary operating bases as staging points and were able to access remote areas
that would otherwise be out of reach, gathering critical information for follow -up by
MINUSMA and the United Nations country team. While these crucial efforts helped
to prevent a further deterioration of the security situation in parts of central Mali and
its negative impact on civilians, without additional capacity, the Mission’s efforts will
remain limited.
59. During the reporting period, 23 civilians were killed and 13 were injured in six
incidents involving improvised explosive devices in the Koulikoro, Mopti and Gao
Regions, marking an increase in fatalities, while the number of incidents remained
similar to the previous reporting period.
60. In the central regions of Mali, 1,300 cases of gender-based violence were
recorded during the past six months, including 186 cases of rape, with the most cases
recorded in Mopti.

VI. Human rights situation
61. The human rights situation continued to worsen, owing largely to an
intensification of violence involving extremist groups, community -based armed

10/20

21-13338

S/2021/844

groups and militias. Issues of particular concern included an increase in killings,
abductions, cases of violations against children, conflict-related sexual violence and
concerns around slavery. In some instances, counter-terrorism or military operations
conducted by national or regional forces also had an adverse impact on human rights.
62. In this respect, MINUSMA documented 725 human rights violations (159) and
abuses (566), 303 more than in the previous reporting period. These included
extrajudicial, summary or arbitrary executions (17), other killings (198), injuries
(176), abductions and enforced or involuntary disappearances (210), torture or
ill-treatment (5), illegal arrests and detentions, including notably prolonged
detentions and violations of due process guarantees in terrorism -related cases (119),
instances of death threats and intimidation, destruction and looting of civilian
property and forced displacement of civilians.
63. Most of these violations and abuses were documented in central Mali, including
in the Regions of Bandiagara (105), Douentza (82), Mopti (68) and Ségou (89).
Violations and abuses were also documented in the Regions of Bougouni (20), Gao
(121), Kayes (42), Kidal (3), Koulikoro (6), Koutiala (3), Ménaka (31), Nara (2),
Sikasso (1) and Timbuktu (28), as well as in Bamako (124). These violations or abuses
were perpetrated by national forces (36), regional forces (4), signatory and compliant
armed groups (6), community-based armed groups and militias (171), and extremist
armed groups (389). Judicial authorities also failed to respect the due process rights
of 119 individuals suspected or accused of involvement in terrorism -related offences.
64. On 8 August, alleged elements of Islamic State in the Greater Sahara conducted
simultaneous attacks on at least two villages in Ouattagouna commune, Gao Region,
close to the border with the Niger. A MINUSMA human rights investigation
established that at least 42 civilians, including a 10-year-old child, were killed and
11 others were wounded. The investigation also identified at least 17 individuals who
reportedly participated in these attacks. The findings of this investigation will be
shared with the Malian authorities to support their efforts in holding the perpetrators
accountable.
65. Cases of abductions continued to be perpetrated by various armed groups in the
north and the centre, mainly to intimidate civilians into supporting their cause or raise
funds by seeking ransoms. Humanitarian and medical personnel were also victims of
abductions.
66. In the central regions, members of JNIM attacked several villages primarily to
compel inhabitants to engage in local peace agreements with the armed group, leading
to civilian casualties and destruction. In addition, local “peace or reconciliation
agreements” championed by extremist groups were often inconsistent with
fundamental freedoms, especially as they relate to the situation of women, and a
breakdown in the agreements often led to a sudden outbreak of violence, as has been
witnessed in Ségou Region between elements of JNIM and dozo traditional hunters
since 2 July.
67. Insecurity continued to spread in some areas of the southern regions, which had
a negative impact on human rights, with MINUSMA documenting attacks on schools
perpetrated by extremist groups and a series of attacks on victims of contemporary
forms of slavery conducted by pro-slavery elements.
68. Civilians continued to suffer harm during some military or counter-terrorism
operations conducted by national or regional forces. For example, on 31 July,
members of the Malian armed forces, reportedly accompanied by elements of the Dan
Nan Ambassagou militia, summarily executed two adult male shepherds fr om the
Fulani community in Goro village, Bandiagara Region, with one of the victims killed
in front of his 12- and 14-year-old sons.
21-13338

11/20

S/2021/844

69. The United Nations recorded an increase in grave violations against children.
During the reporting period, 228 violations committed against 158 children were
verified, compared with 172 violations against 126 children during the previous
period. Most of the verified violations were attributed to unidentified armed elements
(177), with others attributed to Katiba Macina (19), Coordination des mouvements de
l’Azawad (10), JNIM (8), dozo traditional hunters (7), national forces (5), Islamic
State in the Greater Sahara (1) and international forces (1). Most of the violations
were verified in the central regions (145), with oth ers in Gao (33), Timbuktu (17),
Kidal (17), Ménaka (12), Koulikoro (3) and Bamako (1). Fifty-five children (37 boys,
12 girls and 6 of sex unknown) were killed (20) and maimed (35). Eighty-two children
(74 boys and 8 girls) aged between 14 and 17 years wer e recruited by armed groups;
66 of these children have subsequently been separated from the armed groups and
handed over to civilian child protection actors.
70. The upward trend in the number of schools closed owing to insecurity has been
consistent over the year: from 1,344 schools closed in January 2021 (403,000 students
affected) to 1,595 schools in June 2021 (478,500 students affected). Initially confined
to the central and northern regions, school closures have also affected the southern
areas, including Sikasso (115 schools and 34,500 students affected) and Koulikoro
(92 schools and 27,600 students affected).
71. Through the monitoring, analysis and reporting arrangements, MINUSMA
documented three cases of conflict-related sexual violence perpetrated against four
women and girls, one more case than in the previous reporting period. These included
the gang rape of one woman and her 16-year-old sister by four armed men on 23 July,
the rape of a 14-year-old girl by an armed individual on 25 July (both incidents
occurring in Ménaka) and the gang rape of a 30-year-old woman by armed men on
25 August in Gao. In the last case, the perpetrators falsely claimed to be affiliated
with MINUSMA and had initially promised the woman a non -existent “job” in the
Mission. The one-stop centres (United Nations-supported centres providing holistic
care for survivors of conflict-related sexual violence) in Mopti and Gao reported
26 cases of such violence, including 6 perpetrated by Malian Defence and Security
Forces and 20 perpetrated by non-State armed groups. On 18 July, MINUSMA and
the National Police signed an agreement for the integration of a conflict-related sexual
violence module in the police academy’s curriculum, aimed at enhancing the capacity
of police officers to prevent and adequately respond to cases of such violence. The
first training sessions were delivered between 6 and 10 September for 700 police
officers.
72. Regarding the fight against impunity, MINUSMA continued its active
engagement with key judicial actors, including the Minister of Justice and Human
Rights, to advocate for accountability for serious crimes under applicable domestic
and international laws as a critical tool in stemming the cycle of violence and the
spread of violent extremism, particularly in central Mali.
73. As at 6 September, the Truth, Justice and Reconciliation Commission of Mali
had registered 22,507 depositions from victims and witnesses and investigated
14 emblematic cases of serious human rights violations and abuses. MINUSMA
continues to support the Commission.
74. Consistent with the human rights due diligence policy on United Nations
support to non-United Nations security forces, MINUSMA conducted 10 risk
assessments before applicable assistance was provided to non-United Nations forces
in support of the implementation of the Agreement and stabilization efforts in the
centre.

12/20

21-13338

S/2021/844

VII. Humanitarian situation
75. The humanitarian situation in Mali continued to deteriorate. The blockade of
villages by armed groups, restrictions on the freedom of movement of civilians, the
denial of access to basic social services and livelihoods have become increasingly
common warfare tactics, especially in intercommunal conflicts in the centre of the
country, with worrisome humanitarian consequences exacerbated by limited
humanitarian access. As a result, forced population movements increased within and
outside Mali, further increasing the need for humanitarian assistance.
76. The unstable security context continued to trigger large population movements.
Internal displacement figures had almost quadrupled in two years to exceed 386,000
people, as at June 2021. Moreover, while 154,000 Malian refugees remained in
neighbouring countries of asylum, Mali hosted and provided protection and assistance
to nearly 48,000 refugees, including 13,000 from Burkina Faso, 17,000 from the
Niger and 16,000 from Mauritania.
77. Access restrictions and protection remained significant concerns generated by
the activities of armed groups, the presence of improvised explosive devices or mines
and the security vacuum. These issues affected civilians, in particular the most
vulnerable in society. In addition, access to rural areas required localized community
acceptance and negotiated mobility for humanitarian actors.
78. Despite ongoing efforts, the nutritional situation was alarming: one in four
children continued to suffer from chronic malnutrition, and 10 per cent of children
under 5 years of age were acutely malnourished.
79. The challenge of the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic persisted, with
14,803 officially reported cases and 537 officially recorded deaths as at 26 August.
To date, 267,620 people have been vaccinated through the immunization campaign.
80. Of the 1.3 million people to be assisted through the lean season response in
2021, 600,000 people have received assistance to date through a vouchers
programme. In addition, to address the socioeconomic effects of COVID -19, a safety
net intervention is being implemented for 181,800 vulnerable pe ople. As at August
2021, the humanitarian response plan is 21.7 per cent funded, with clusters such as
protection, food security and education poorly funded, thereby hindering the ability
to meet acute and basic humanitarian and social needs in 2021.

VIII. Economic development
81. The COVID-19 crisis has reversed much of the progress made in poverty
reduction in Mali over the past decade. Between 2011 and 2019, 1 million people rose
above the poverty line. In 2020, nearly 900,000 people were estimated to have become
poor. The economic toll of the pandemic and the slowdown in international trade have
dampened domestic revenues. The country’s budget deficit increased to 5.5 per cent
of gross domestic product in 2020, up from 1.7 per cent in 2019.
82. At the conclusion of the 2020/21 fiscal year on 30 June, MINUSMA had fully
committed its $4.8 million annual quick-impact project budget. Of the 100 projects
that the Mission supported, 71 covered infrastructure and basic needs, 17 capacity building and training, and 12 livelihood and income generation. During the reporting
period, 24 projects were approved, including 18 as part of the Special
Representative’s 50-day priority plan.
83. Seven projects under the trust fund were approved, totalling $3.5 million,
including initiatives to: support the preparation of the 2022 electoral process; enhance
21-13338

13/20

S/2021/844

Malian Armed Forces defence infrastructure in Ansongo; support the intervention and
surveillance platoon of the Gendarmerie in Gao; construct and equip community
spaces to welcome victims of sexual and gender-based violence and local security
committees; and support the construction of dormitories for female personnel in three
police stations and three gendarmerie brigades in Gao, Mopti and Timbuktu Regions.

IX. External communications
84. MINUSMA increased its communication, enhancing the Mission’s political and
military engagements, successes and achievements through articles, social media and
radio productions, as well as initiatives with Malian artists, with the objective of
engaging Malian cultural entities to publicize the Mission’s work and disseminate
messages of reconciliation. MINUSMA also increased communication on its role in
and support to the electoral process and the Malian political transition. Outs ide the
capital, Bamako, outreach sessions disseminated multilingual campaigns and
products targeting specifically youth, women and vulnerable groups of society. The
Mission continued to promote inter-community dialogue with tailored radio and
outreach programmes in several languages.

X. Capacities of the Mission
Military
85. As at 15 September, 12,789 military personnel had been deployed, corresponding
to 96.2 per cent of the authorized strength of 13,289 personnel, including 51 8 staff
officers and 12,271 contingent personnel. Women accounted for 3.82 per cent of
military personnel.
Police
86. As at 15 September, 1,745 United Nations police personnel had been deployed,
corresponding to 90.8 per cent of the authorized strength of 1,920 personnel,
including 296 individual police officers and 1,449 formed police unit personnel.
Women accounted for 22.29 per cent of individual police officers and 13.94 per cent
of formed police unit personnel.
Civilian personnel
87. As at 1 September, 93 per cent of all MINUSMA civilian staff had been
deployed, including 43 per cent of international staff, 10 per cent of United Nations
Volunteers and 47 per cent of national staff. Women accounted for 29 per cent of
international posts, 42 cent of United Nations Volunteers positions and 19 per cent of
national staff posts.
Implementation of the adaptation plan
88. MINUSMA continued to implement its adaptation plan. Through its mobile task
force, the MINUSMA force has improved its mobility across its operational area and
its ability to respond more quickly. The ability of the mobile task force units to deploy
quickly and respond to security situations throughout the theatre of operations has
significantly enhanced the way that the MINUSMA force operates. Its agility and
flexibility to intervene in remote areas has contributed to reassuring the local
population and deterring the activities of terrorist armed groups.
89. The mobile task force conducted the following operations: Operation Meerkat,
a security and protection operation in the Ansongo -Intellit-Tessit area south of Gao;
14/20

21-13338

S/2021/844

Operation Mongoose III, phase II, as a supplementary security and protection
operation supporting Sector East; Operation Mongoose III, phase III, acting as theatre
reserve for Sector West; and Operation Boni, an airlanding operation to provide
security for a MINUSMA human rights investigation team in Boni. These operations
are aimed at enhancing the understanding of the security dynamics in the area of
operation, as well as facilitate civilian-led activities.
Efforts to optimize performance
90. MINUSMA continued to implement measures to mitigate threats against
convoys, including by integrating air support over identified hotspots, allocating
additional forces to convoy protection.
91. In addition to the new operations in Sector Centre, two new operations in Sector
West have been developed: Operation Wyvern and Operation Wildebeest. As a result,
both Sector West and Sector Centre have ongoing operations covering key areas that
will allow continuous assessment to constantly refine and adapt to cha nging
circumstances, as required.
92. As part of ongoing efforts to ensure the preparedness and safety of
peacekeepers, the two MINUSMA explosive ordnance disposal companies are now
delivering explosive ordnance disposal and improvised explosive device dis posal
training to their personnel prior to deployment.
Safety and security of United Nations personnel
93. In the light of the resumption of large-scale terrorist attacks, including direct
and indirect fire, as well as the frequent use of unidentified unmanned aerial vehicles
flying over MINUSMA camps, the security of United Nations premises underwent
maintenance, improvements and the deployment of innovative technical solutions.
Security and defence systems were enhanced at MINUSMA camps in Aguelhok, Ber,
Douentza, Gao, Goundam, Kidal, Mopti and Timbuktu.
94. COVID-19 protection and prevention measures continued to be applied
throughout the Mission, including self-isolation upon return from abroad. As at
31 July, MINUSMA had administered 25,410 doses of the COVID-19 vaccine
(13,694 individuals had their first dose and 11,716 their second dose).
Conduct and discipline
95. One allegation of sexual exploitation and abuse was recorded during the period
under review. MINUSMA continued to implement its strategy to prevent misconduct,
particularly sexual exploitation and abuse, by delivering online induction and
refresher trainings to all categories of personnel, as well as conducting risk
assessments aimed to provide recommendations for mitigating measures in its areas
of operations. MINUSMA also continued to conduct outreach activities, including
awareness-raising for local populations, and provided assistance to the victims of
sexual exploitation and abuse. MINUSMA and the United Nations country team
continued to address sexual exploitation and abuse in a coordinated manner through
the mechanism of protection against sexual exploitation and abuse.
Environmental issues
96. MINUSMA continued to ensure environmental monitoring of camps an d
contractor facilities. Sessions were held to raise staff members’ awareness of the
Mission’s environmental mandate and promote good environmental stewardship. The
Mission also completed its environmental data submission as part of its

21-13338

15/20

S/2021/844

environmental risk and performance management framework for the 2020/21 fiscal
period.

XI. Observations
97. A year ago, the military seized political power and committed to undertake a
major overhaul of the State, fight corruption and impunity, tackle security challenges
facing the northern and central regions, conduct political and institutional reforms,
implement the Agreement, and hold credible and transparent elections leading to the
return to constitutional order. While the transitional authorities continue to reaffirm
their resolve to carry forward their agenda, progress has been limited and the situation
remains fragile, with a need for more determined efforts to address the challenges at
hand. Delayed action will fuel political and social instability and allow extremist
groups to continue to expand their control over swathes of Malian territory. I call
upon the Malian stakeholders to seize the moment.
98. I note with great concern the delays in the preparations for the holding of general
elections and the completion of the political transition by March 2022. The
preparations for the constitutional referendum set for 31 October to adopt key
institutional and political reforms are also behind schedule. I urge the Government of
Mali and other national stakeholders to reach a compromise, through dialogue, on the
necessary reforms and measures required to conclude the transition in a timely and
constructive manner. The United Nations will continue to work closely with the
African Union and ECOWAS in support of Malian stakeholders towards ensuring that
the political transition is brought to a peaceful and timely conclusion.
99. I am concerned about the increasing territorial control and violent activities of
extremist groups. I strongly condemn the brutal and cowardly killing of at least 42
civilians and the wounding of several others in Ansongo cercle on 8 August. I am also
appalled by the illegal and inhumane blockades imposed by extremist elements on
villages in the central regions, resulting in human rights abus es and a dire
humanitarian situation. These heinous acts must be brought to a halt, and the
perpetrators must be swiftly prosecuted and punished. Impunity for serious human
rights violations and abuses undermines the fight against violent extremism. I
encourage the Government of Mali to deploy the required defence and security forces
and allocate the financial resources necessary to ensure the return of the civilian
authorities and the provision of basic socioeconomic services throughout the country,
particularly in the north and the centre.
100. Increasing attacks by extremist groups on MINUSMA camps in northern Mali
over the past months are unacceptable and should stop immediately. I condemn the
repeated attacks against the MINUSMA camp in Aguelhok. I cal l upon the local
population and leaders to work closely with MINUSMA in the implementation of its
mandate in Aguelhok and other northern regions, and note the progress made in this
respect, including the commitment of key stakeholders to facilitate the Mis sion’s
work on the ground. I count on the support of the Security Council in taking the
measures necessary to address the actions of spoilers.
101. I take note of the decision of the Government of France to restructure the
presence of the Operation Barkhane force in the Sahel and close three outposts in
northern Mali by January 2022. I also note the partial withdrawal of Chadian troops
of the Joint Force of the Group of Five for the Sahel from the Liptako -Gourma area.
I commend the efforts of Chadian and French forces in addressing the threat posed by
extremist groups in the Sahel region. The fresh wave of violence unleashed on
civilians by extremist elements in Burkina Faso, Mali and the Niger over the past
months requires sustained international engagement. I call upon all stakeholders to
16/20

21-13338

S/2021/844

continue to closely coordinate these restructuring and drawdown processes with a
view to preventing any security vacuum that could be exploited by armed groups and
terrorists.
102. The human rights and humanitarian situations remain of deep concern. I urge
the transitional Government to take urgent action on emblematic cases of human
rights violations and abuses. The United Nations stands ready to provide the necessary
support to this effect. I am encouraged by progress ma de by the parties to the conflict
to address issues related to sexual violence in conflict and children in armed conflict.
I welcome, in this regard, the signing by leaders of the Plateforme of action plans to
curb the recruitment and use of children. I call upon donors and partners to provide
much-needed financial and material assistance to address the acute humanitarian
situation in the central and northern regions of Mali. National and international
support is also required to deal with the increasingly concerning situation of school
closures.
103. MINUSMA faces complex challenges, particularly in central Mali where
civilians and critical infrastructure are increasingly at risk. In this context, scaling up
the Mission’s uniformed personnel capacity, as recommended in my recent report on
the adaptation and authorized strength of MINUSMA ( S/2021/657), coupled with a
comprehensive Malian strategy to address the challenges at hand, would greatly
enhance the Mission’s ability to protect civilians, support the restoration of an
effective State presence and improve the safety and security of peacekeepers. I also
reiterate my call to troop-contributing countries to provide MINUSMA with the
urgently needed armed helicopter capacity. I urge countries in the region to ensure
full cooperation with the United Nations for the deployment of contingent -owned
equipment. Delays in supplying equipment affect the performance of troops and the
implementation of the mandate. Crucially, I call upon the Malian authorities to
continue to extend their cooperation to MINUSMA. The partnership between the
country’s civilian and military leadership is central to the Mission’s ability to fully
implement its mandate and assist the Malian people.
104. I wish to express my gratitude to my Special Representative, the uniformed and
civilian personnel of MINUSMA and members of the United Nations country team
for their commendable contributions to peace, security, humanitarian and
development initiatives in an extremely hostile security environment. I appreciate the
continued commitment of international and regional actors, donors and troop - and
police-contributing countries to stabilization efforts in Mali. I also thank civil society
and non-governmental organizations, including humanitarian actors, for their active
role in the quest for multidimensional responses to the crisis facing Mali.

21-13338

17/20

S/2021/844

Annex I
United Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization
Mission in Mali: military and police strength as at
15 September 2021
Military

Police

Experts on mission, staff officers
and units
Country

Individual police officers

Formed police units

Total police

Male

Female

Total

Male

Female

Total

Male

Female

Total

Male

Female

Total

Armenia

1

–

1

–

–

–

–

–

–

–

–

–

Australia

1

–

1

–

–

–

–

–

–

–

–

–

Austria

2

–

2

–

–

–

–

–

–

–

–

–

Bangladesh

1 071

42

1 113

1

–

1

217

63

280

218

63

281

Belgium

6

3

9

–

–

–

–

–

–

–

–

–

Benin

236

25

261

19

–

19

132

8

140

151

8

159

Bhutan

5

–

5

–

–

–

–

–

–

–

–

–

Bosnia and
Herzegovina

2

–

2

–

–

–

–

–

–

–

–

–

Burkina Faso

959

22

981

11

17

28

129

11

140

140

28

168

Burundi

1

–

1

–

–

–

–

–

–

–

–

–

Cambodia

266

23

289

–

–

–

–

–

–

–

–

–

Cameroon

2

1

3

7

–

7

–

–

–

7

–

7

Canada

5

2

7

8

5

13

–

–

–

8

5

13

Chad

1 398

41

1 439

13

2

15

–

–

–

13

2

15

China

426

14

440

–

–

–

–

–

–

–

–

–

Côte d’Ivoire

773

31

804

20

5

25

–

–

–

20

5

25

Czechia

3

1

4

–

–

–

–

–

–

–

–

–

Denmark

2

–

2

–

–

–

–

–

–

–

–

–

1 063

3

1 066

2

–

2

144

14

158

146

14

160

165

11

176

–

–

–

–

–

–

–

–

–

Estonia

2

–

2

–

–

–

–

–

–

–

–

–

Ethiopia

1

–

1

–

–

–

–

–

–

–

–

–

Finland

4

–

4

4

–

4

–

–

–

4

–

4

France

21

–

21

9

4

13

–

–

–

9

4

13

Gambia

5

1

6

4

1

5

–

–

–

4

1

5

Germany

437

32

469

3

4

7

–

–

–

3

4

7

Ghana

136

18

154

4

–

4

–

–

–

4

–

4

2

–

2

–

–

–

–

–

–

–

–

–

Guinea

624

42

666

9

3

12

–

–

–

9

3

12

Indonesia

9

–

9

–

–

–

–

–

–

–

–

–

Iran (Islamic
Republic of)

2

–

2

–

–

–

–

–

–

–

–

–

Ireland

12

–

12

–

–

–

–

–

–

–

–

–

Italy

2

–

2

3

–

3

–

–

–

3

–

3

Jordan

391

–

391

16

–

16

–

–

–

16

–

16

Egypt
El Salvador

Guatemala

18/20

21-13338

S/2021/844
Military

Police

Experts on mission, staff officers
and units

Individual police officers

Formed police units

Total police

Country

Male

Female

Total

Male

Female

Total

Male

Female

Total

Male

Female

Total

Kenya

9

3

12

–

–

–

–

–

–

–

–

–

Latvia

1

–

1

–

–

–

–

–

–

–

–

–

Liberia

146

16

162

–

–

–

–

–

–

–

–

–

Lithuania

42

3

45

–

–

–

–

–

–

–

–

–

Luxembourg

2

–

2

–

–

–

–

–

–

–

–

–

Mauritania

7

–

7

–

–

–

–

–

–

–

–

–

Mexico

4

–

4

–

–

–

–

–

–

–

–

–

Nepal

196

5

201

–

–

–

–

–

–

–

–

–

Netherlands

6

–

6

4

–

4

–

–

–

4

–

4

Niger

868

5

873

19

6

25

–

–

–

19

6

25

Nigeria

65

13

78

2

4

6

104

36

140

106

40

146

Norway

12

1

13

4

–

4

–

–

–

4

–

4

Pakistan

215

–

215

–

–

–

–

–

–

–

–

–

Portugal

62

5

67

2

–

2

–

–

–

2

–

2

Romania

4

1

5

–

–

–

–

–

–

–

–

–

Senegal

965

35

1 000

18

5

23

279

34

313

297

39

336

Sierra Leone

16

3

19

–

–

–

–

–

–

–

–

–

Spain

1

–

1

1

1

2

–

–

–

1

1

2

Sri Lanka

242

–

242

–

–

–

–

–

–

–

–

–

Sweden

177

10

187

2

–

2

–

–

–

2

–

2

6

1

7

5

2

7

–

–

–

5

2

7

Togo

878

53

931

20

4

24

244

36

280

264

40

304

Tunisia

83

3

86

14

2

16

–

–

–

14

2

16

Turkey

–

–

–

6

1

7

–

–

–

6

1

7

Ukraine

10

–

10

–

–

–

–

–

–

–

–

–

United Kingdom
of Great Britain
and Northern
Ireland

238

18

256

–

–

–

–

–

–

–

–

–

United States of
America

9

–

9

–

–

–

–

–

–

–

–

–

Zambia

2

1

3

–

–

–

–

–

–

–

–

–

12 301

488

12 789

230

66

296

1 249

202

1451

1 479

268

1 774

Switzerland

Total

21-13338

19/20

S/2021/844

Map
20/20

Annex II

21-13338
