84

General Auembly-Thirty-third Session

Libyan Arab Jamahiriya
Madagascar
Malawi
Malaysia
Maldives
Mali
Mauritania
Mauritius
Mongolia
Morocco
Mozambique
Nepal
Niger
Nigeria
Ornan
Pakistan
Papua New Guinea
Philippines
Qatar
Republic of Korea
Rwanda
Sao Tome and Príncipe
Saudi Arabia
Senegal
B.

LIST OF STATES INDICATED IN SECTION 11, PARAGRAPH 4 (b)

Australia
Austria
Belgium
Canada
Cyprus
Denmark
Finland
France
Germany, Federal Republic of
Greece
Iceland
Ireland
Italy
Japan
Liechtenstein
C.

Luxembourg
Malta
Monaco
Netherlands
New Zealand
Norway
Portugal
Spain
Sweden
Switzerland
Turkey
United Kingdom of Great
Britain and Northem
lreland
United States of America

LIST OF STATES INDICATED IN SECTION 11, PARAGRAPH 4

Argentina
Bahamas
Barbados
Bolivia
Brazil
Chile
Colombia
Costa Rica
Cuba
Dominican Republic
Ecuador
El Salvador
Grenada
Guatemala

D.

Seychelles
Sierra Leone
Singapore
Solomon Islands
Somalía
South Africa
Sri Lanka
Sudan
Swaziland
Syrian Arab Republic
Thailand
Togo
Tunisia
Uganda
United Arab Emirates
United Republic of Cameroon
United Republic of Tanzania
Upper Volta
Viet Nam
Yemen
Yugoslavia
Zaire
Zambia

33/81.

(e)

Guyana
Haiti
Honduras
Jamaica
Mexico
Nicaragua
Panama
Paraguay
Peru
Suriname
Trinidad and Tobago
Uruguay
Venezuela

LIST OF STATES INDICATED IN SECTJON JI, PARAGRAPH 4 (d)

Albania
Bulgaria
Byelorussian Soviet Socialist
Republic
Czechoslovakia
German Democratic Republic
Hungary

held at United Nations Headquarters from 15 to 26
May 1978, 19
Deeply concerned about the magnitude of the unrnet
needs of children in developing countries,
Afjirming the need for intensified intemational cooperation for sustained activities on behalf of children
in response to the International Year of the Child,
1. Commends the policies and activities of the
United Nations Children's Fund;
2. Endorses Economic and Social Council resolution 1978/56 and, in particular, the target of $240
million in annual revenue for the United Nations
Children's Fund in 1980, as approved by the Executive
Board of the Fund and endorsed by the Economic and
Social Council at its second regular session of 1978;
3. Urges ali Governments, especially those that are
not contributing at a level commensurate with their
capacity, to increase as rapidly as possible their contributions to the United Nations Children's Fund.
85th plenary meeting
15 December 1978

Poland
Romania
Ukrainian Soviet Socialist
Republic
Union of Soviet Socialist
Republics

United Nations Children's Fund

The General Assembly,
Taking note of Economic and Social Council resolution 1978/56 of 2 August 1978,
Having considered the report of the Executive Board
of the United Nations Children's Fund on its session

of

Palestinian

refugee

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 212 (III) of 19 November
1948 on assistance to Palestine refugees,
Recalling its resolution 32/ 111 of 15 December
1977 on the health needs of Palestinian refugee
children,
Recalling Economic and Social Council resolution
1978/40 of 1 August 1978 on the International Year
of the Child,
1. Expresses its appreciation to the SecretaryGeneral for his report on the health needs of Palestine
refugee children,20 and to the host Governments, the
United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine
Refugees in the Near East and the World Health Organization for conducting the survey on this question;
2. Requests Member States and the agencies concerned, in particular the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations, the World Health
Organization and the United Nations Children's Fund,
to co-operate with the United Nations Relief and
Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East
in taking effective action to remedy the basic deficiencies identified in the annex to the report of the
Secretary-General;
3. Rcquests the Secretary-General to keep the
situation under constant review and report his findings
to the General Assembly at its thirty-fourth session.
85th plenary meeting
15 December 1978
33/82.

33/80.

Health needs
children

Report o{ the Governing Council of the
United Nations Development Programme

The General Assembly,
Having considered the report of the Governing
Council of the United Nations Development Pro19 Official Records of the Economic and Social Council, 1978,
Supp/ement No. 14 (E/1978/54).
20 A/33/181.

V,

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Second Committee

gramme on its twenty-fifth session,21 the statement by
the Administrator of the Programme22 and the views
expressed during the debate,
1. Endorses Economic and Social Council decision
1978/54 of 2 August 1978, in which the Council took
note with approval of the report of the Governing
Council of the United Nations Development Programme on its twenty-fifth session and of the conclusions and recommendations contained therein;
2. Expresses its satisfaction with the measures
taken by the Governing Council and the Administrator
to strengthen the activities of the United Nations Development Programme;
3. Notes the increase in the contributions for 1979
announced at the 1978 United Nations Pledging Conference for Development Activities and urges all Governments to continue their efforts to provide the United
Nations Development Programme with the necessary
support to enable it to achieve thc targets set for the
1977-1981 development cycle.
85 th plenary meeting
15 December 1978
33/83.

lnternational Year of the Child

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 2626 (XXV) of 24 October 1970 containing the International Development
Strategy for the Second United Nations Development
Decade, 3201 (S-VI) and 3202 (S-VI) of 1 May
1974 containing the Declaration and the Programme
of Action on the Establishment of a New International
Economic Order, 3281 (XXIX) of 12 December 1974
containing the Charter of Economic Rights and Duties
of States and 3362 (S-VII) of 16 September 1975 on
development and international economic co-operation,
Recalling also its resolution 31/169 of 21 December 1976, in which it proclaimed the year 1979 International Year of the Child,
Recalling further its resolution 32/109 of 15 December 1977 and Economic and Social Council resolutions 2105 (LXIII) of 3 August 1977 and 1978/40
of 1 August 1978,
Recognizing the fundamental importance in all countries, both developing and developed, of programmes
benefiting children, not only for promoting their wellbeing but also as part of broader efforts to accelerate
the economic and social development process,
Believing that the concept of basic services for
children is a vital component of social and economic
development,
Noting with satisfaction the progress made in the
preparation for the International Year of the Child at
the national, regional and international levels,
Convinced that the International Year of the Child
provides a unique opportunity for all countries to
undertake an in-depth review and evaluation of their
policies for children and to establish programmes of
action to be undertaken, and for the world community
2 1 O/ficial Records of the Economic and Social Council, 1978,
Supplement No. 13 (E/1978/53/Rev.1).
22 Official Records of the General Assembly, Thirty-third
Session, Second Committee, 27th meeting, paras. 1-11.

85

to renew and reaffirm its determination to meet
children's needs and to secure their fundamental rights,
Bearing in mind, in this connexion, the preparations
for a new international development strategy,
Having considered the report of the Executive Director of the United Nations Children's Fund on the
activities being undertaken in the United Nations system in connexion with the International Year of the
Child, 2 :i
1. Expresses its appreciation to the United Nations
Children's Fund for the manner in which it has discharged the responsibilities entrusted to it as lead
agency by the General Assembly in resolution 31 / 169;
2. Reaffirms that the major focus of the International Y ear of the Child is at the national level and,
in this regard, urges countries to intensify their preparations for the Y ear and to determine priorities for
action and set appropriate targets as the basis for
short-term, medium-term and long-term planning and
programming benefiting children;
3. Notes with appreciation the active participation
of organizations of the United Nations system and of
non-governmental organizations to ensure the success
of the International Year of the Child, and also the
valuable co-ordination being achieved through the Interagency Advisory Group for the International Year
of the Child;
4. Reaffirms that the International Year of the
Child, in accordance with its objectives, should provide
an ímpetus to be followed by a rising level of resources
for services benefiting children, through the United
Nations Children's Fund and other channels, in order
to enable developing countries to extend, strengthen
and implement their programmes for children;
5. Expresses its gratitude to those Governments
that have contributed to the costs of the secretariat
of the International Year of the Child and urges all
Governments to contribute to its full financing;
6. Requests the United Nations Children's Fund to
prepare a comprehensive, action-oriented report on the
basis of information received from Governments and
from specialized agencies and other United Nations
bodies concerned on their respective projects and programmes initiated in connexion with the International
Y ear of the Child and on the follow-up activities
foreseen for the years ahead, and furthermore requests
that the report be submitted to the General Assembly
at its thirty-fourth session and that a preliminary
version of that report be considered by the Executive
Board of the Fund at its 1979 session and by the
Economic and Social Council at its second regular
session of 1979;
7. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of
its thirty-fourth session an item entitled "International
Y ear of the Child: plans and action to improve the
situation of children in the world, particularly in the
developing countries", and recommends, in view of its
importance, that this item be considered by the General
Assembly in plenary meeting, in observance of the
Year;
8. Invites the current President of the General
Assembly, the Secretary-General and the Executive
Director of the United Nations Children's Fund to
issue messages at the beginning of 1979 on the Inter28 A/33/338,

annex.
