UNZTED NATIONS

SECURITY

COUNCIL

OFFICIAL

RECORDS

THIRTY-THIRD

YEAR

2058
th

MEETING:

NEW

30 JANUARY

1978

YORK

CONTENTS
. . . . . . . .. . . . , . . . . . . . . . . . .. . . . .

Page
1

. . . . . . . . . . . , . . . . . . . .. . . . , . . . , . . . , , .. . .

1

The question of South Africa:
(a) Letter dated 25 January 1978 from the Permanent Representatives of Gabon,
Mauritius and Nigeria to the United Nations addressed to the President of the
Security Council (S/ 12538);
(bl Note by the Secretary-General (S/12.536) . . . , . . . , . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

1

Provisional

agenda (S/Agenda/2058)

Adoption

of the agenda

SlPV.205 8

NOTE
Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined with
figures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United Nations document.
Documents of the Security Council (symbol S/, . .) are normally published in quarterly
Supplements of the Official Records of the Security Council. The date of the document
indicates the supplement in which it appears or in which information about it is given.
The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a system
adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of Resolutions and Decisions of the
Security Council. The new system, which has been applied retroactively to resolutions
adopted before 1 January 1965, became fully operative on that date.

2058th MEETING
Held in New York
President: Mr. L. 0, HARRIMAN

on Monday,

30 January

1978, at 3 p.m.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Thunborg
(Sweden) and Mr. Mwangaguhunga (Uganda) took the
places reserved.for them at the side of the Council chamber.

(Nigeria).

Present: The representatives of the following States:
Bolivia, Canada, China, Czechoslovakia, France, Gabon,
Germany, Federal Republic of, India, Kuwait, Mauritius,
Nigeria, Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United States
of America, Venezuela.

3. Mr. FUENTES IBAREZ (Bolivia) (interpretation from
Spanish): At last Thursday’s meeting, on 26 January
(2056th meeting/, I had the pleasure of offering the tribute
of my admiration of the great co&try represented by the
Commissioner for External Affairs of Nigeria, Mr. Garba,
who presided over the first Security Council meeting in
1978. However, I should be remiss if I did not take this
opportunity to convey to you, Mr. President, my pleasure
at seeing you presiding over these Council meetings.

Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/2058)
1. Adoption of the agenda

4. For those of us who have for many years been involved
in the United Nations, albeit in modest and inconspicuous
positions in the groups that adopt major decisions, your
merits could not go unnoticed, Indeed, we know you to be
a talented and indefatigable tighter for the causes of human
liberty and dignity and this makes you an archetype of the
new Africa and truly a man of our time. You are an
exponent of the humanitarian trends of which the United
Nations has become the focal point. You are promoting a
revitalized philosophy based on equality and universahsm
without any odious distinctions as to race, creed, language
or colour. That is the reality on which we are building the
only kind of world that can be accepted by the large
majority of mankind represented by the developing countries. This large majority of those who have been cast out
and humiliated, those who have been silenced and rendered
defenceless has contributed to building the civilization of
our time, although their only reward has been to gather up
the crumbs from the banqueting table of the powerful.

2. The question of South Africa:
(a) Letter dated 25 January 1978 from the Permanent
Representatives of Gabon, Mauritius and Nigeria to
the United Nations addressed to the President of
the Security Council (S/12538);
(b) Note by the Secretary-General (S/12536)
The meeting was called to order at 4.05 p.m.

Adoption of the agenda
7Ee agenda was adopted.
The question of South Africa:
(a) Letter dated 25 January 1978 from the Permanent
Representatives of Gabon, Mauritius and Nigeria to the
United Nations addressed to the President of the
Sexxrity Council (S/l 2538);
(b) Note by the Secretary-General (S/12536)

5. Bearing in mind your valuable contribution in enhancing the effectiveness of the tenets of the Charter of the
United Nations, and also in your position as Chairman of
the Special Committee against Apartheid, my delegation
believes that it is a good sign that the Council should have
this year begun its work under your presidency. With the
same consistency and vigour with which any Bolivian would
act in any forum with regard to the historical injustice
inherent in Bolivia’s position as a geographical enclave, you,
as a true and loyal son of Africa, are determined that the
Council should put an end to rhetorical declarations that
are as innocuous as they are ineffective, in order to adopt
concrete measures and assume full responsibility as the
chief guardian and executor of the Charter and its own
decisions.

1. The PRESIDENT: I should like to inform the members
of the Council that I have received letters from the
representatives of Sweden and Uganda in which they
request to be invited to participate in the discussion. In
accordance with the usual practice, I propose, with the
consent of the Council, to invite those representatives to
participate in the discussion, without the right to vote, in
conformity with the provisions of the Charter and rule 37
of the provisional rules of procedure.
2. In view of the limited number of places available at the
Council table, I invite the representatives of Sweden and
Uganda to take the places reserved for them at the side of
the Council chamber, on the usual understanding that they
will be invited to take a place at the Council table whenever
they wish to speak.

6. As the Commissioner for External Affairs of Nigeria
said in his statement here last Thursday:
1

I’

community has brought about human solidarity and a
high level of civihzation. Hence we believe that the
struggle for liberation which various peoples have been
waging in an attempt to bring about genuine indepen.
dence and nationhood is closely related to tlze universal
;struggle here to set aside practices of intolerance. Bolivia
has traditionally supported these efforts.“’

“The year 1978 is a crucial one which poses the Council
its greatest challenge to date. Nigeria and the rest of
Africa look to it for support in staving off a fratricidal
and racial war in both Rhodesia and Namibia that would
only bring disaster and tragedy to all people in the region.
Internal solutions designed to protect certain group
interests but forged in flagrant disregard of the genuine
aspirations of all peoples of the area to genuine independence are doomed to fail.” [Ibid., porn. 27.1

In support of that statement, on 8 November 1977, the
same Bolivian statesman sent a telegram to the Secretary.
General [S/12449]
announcing that the Government of
Bolivia was studying very carefully the implementation of
resolution 418 (1977), and he repeated:

7. My Government shares the just concerns of the African
peoples. We view with growing concern the escalation of
the violence that has been unleashed by the Government of
South Africa in its desire to perpetuate a form of
government and a system of apartheid that turns out to be
a sort of medieval obscurantism inconceivable in our times.

“ 4 . . Bolivia has traditionally condemned all forms of
discrimination and deplores the escalation of violence in
South Africa, hoping [at the same time] that a peaceful
solution is found for that situation in the interest of
world coexistence and respect for human dignity.”

8. The letter you, Mr. President, sent to the SecretaryGeneral on 19 January /see S/12536] contains a report
that is surprising-indeed, overwhelming, It is an offence to
the most stoic conscience to see that such flagrant
violations of human dignity can continue. And that dignity
is degraded not only by unpremeditated acts but also
methodically by actions that form part of a system that is
in itself a crime and an offence to the rest of the world.

11. My Government, as is clear from this text, joins with
all free countries in a wish to see an early settlement of the
racial problem in South Africa, a settlement that would be
entirely satisfactory to the African majority. As is natural,
we are also concerned that the means used to resolve the
problem should be peaceful.

9. My country has also suffered from the trials of
conquest and colonialism, but with the advent of freedom
we were able to affirm and consolidate our historical
position more and more surely. We know that colonial
regimes, intoxicated by their conquests and by the resultant
economic prosperity, have on many occasions tried to
eliminate all vestiges of the local ancestral culture. They
have systematically denied the past, without in exchange
giving the subjugated peoples access to new knowledge. In
this way they produced a state of lethargy and created a
subhuman type, the slave or “the tool that speaks”, as
Cicero called it, that is to say a pariah doomed by his
ignorance to be only a tool for work. This is the philosophy
underlying apartheid. This is the policy on which are based
racist regimes such as that of Prime Minister Vorster when
he holds elections earlier than planned and has his position
confirmed by the minority that constitutes the beneficiaries
of the system in complete disregard of the African
population that forms the majority in that country. That is
the law that he invokes in order to ban the organizations
opposed to apartheid and even the white citizens opposing
the regime. Under that law he sentences men, women, old
people and children without trial or hope of appeal; they
sre arrested and thrown into prison and also subjected to
refined methods of psychological torture, and at times they
are assassinated, as was the case with Steve Biko, Bonaventura Sipho Malaza and Patricia Esther Mnisi.

12. We know that there have been many who have warned
the regime at Pretoria not to continue stubbornly
to
perpetuate a situation that is untenable from any point of
view. Regrettably, nothing has been achieved thus far and
the escalation of violence over the last few months, together
with the creation of puppet States, is a clear demonstration
of the diabolical arrogance with which that regime disregards the threat of a bloody civil war that hangs over the
country and that would entail incalculable risks for world
peace,
13. My delegation is in a position to express Bolivia’s full
support for resolution 418 (1977), whose provisions and
considerations are, we believe, the logical consequence of
the flagrant rebellion of the rebel regime at Pretoria against
the international community.
14. There is no excuse for the position adopted by the
Government of South Africa, since it has been given every
opportunity to adopt a reasonable attitude and not to
increase resentment and hatred between the white and
native populations in that country.
15. However, my delegation does not wish to end its
statement on this gloomy note without expressing a
glimmer of hope. We believe that the system of apartheid,
precisely because of its selfishness and cruelty, cannot be
supported by the entire white population of South Africa.
It is the portion that is left, a portion which may be small
or numerous, but whose numbers are difficult to establish
because of the tremendous psychological pressure being
brought to bear by the State police, that could be won over
to our cause. There is evidence that that minority exists,
There are the white friends of Mrs. Mandela who would

10. My Government has given its fullest support to all
resolutions of the General Assembly condemning apartheid.
The Minister for External Relations of Bolivia, Mr. Oscar
Adririzola Valda, in his statement in the General Assembly
on 26 September 1977, called the system one of the
problems afflicting the world, adding:
“The policy of racial discrimination and apartkeid
is an
offence against Our sense of justice. Its continuation
makes it difficult for us to consider that the international

1 Official
sion, Plenary

2

Records
of the General Assembly,
Meetings,
7th meeting,para. 239.

Thirty-second

Ses-

both in the realm of bilateral relations and in the
international arena at large. In this regard, we cannot fail
to express our satisfaction at another fact, namely that
many initiatives of the Soviet Union designed to bring
about an easing of international tension, disarmament and
improvement of relations between States have been
supported by Nigeria at the United Nations and other
international forums.”

prefer to go to prison rather than to testify against her.
There are writers and newspapermen such as Mr. Woods,
and there must be many others who must be given the
opportunity to combat error and to prevent a widening of
the gap of hatred that is caused by injustice.
16. The reluctance of the Government of Pretoria to
comply with the provisions of the Charter and to implement the resolutions of the Security Council places the
Council and the Organization in a delicate situation. It is
not a question of mere differences of opinion or of a
position that is in dispute by reason of different interpretations. What we are faced with is an attitude of out-and-out
rebellion, and the situation is aggravated by the creation of
faits accomplis and the production of sham solutions such
as the bantustans that are aimed only at maintaining the
system. And meanwhile in everyday life the press, the
radio, the theatre and the television poke fun at international condemnations, and everything is done to lull
consciences and to dissipate fear,

It is our firm conviction that those favourable trends in the
development of our relations will also have a positive effect
on co-operation between our two countries in the Security
Council.
21. Furthermore, I should like to point to the valuable
contribution to the work of the CounciI made by your
predecessors, the Minister for External Affairs of Mauritius
and Ambassador Ramphul, who presided over the Council
last December.
22. Speaking for the first time this year in the Council, I
should like to address words of welcome to the other new
members: the representatives of Czechoslovakia, Gabon,
Kuwait and Bolivia.

17. It seems that the time for persuasion has come to an
end. Faced with the arrogance of a government that clings
to its erroneous ways, we are compelled to seek new
methods that are not merely persuasive, since the arrogance
that underlies the power of that government is leading it to
provoke the anger of the gods and to dig its own grave.

23. We esteem and value most highly our relations of
cordial friendship and fraternal solidarity with socialist
Czechoslovakia, and we are pleased that our view of those
relations is constantly shared by Czechoslovakia. There is
no doubt that relations between our two countries guarantee the possibility of further joint efforts and accomplishments on the part of the socialist countries in the United
Nations in general, and here in the Council in particular,in
the cause of strengthening international peace and security.

18. But those measures must be based on prudence and
wisdom, so that at the same time as we correct a grave
injustice we do not open the way for a conflict of
hegemonic interests in the area. If the responsibility
assumed by the Security Council is to be discharged
effectively, it must be based not only on the express
consent of each and every member but also on a sincere
determination not to take advantage of a cause on which
the international community is united for the dishonest
promotion of political and economic interests; for that
might only lead South Africa into a civil war, fomented
abroad, and in the long term might lead to outside
intervention and perhaps also to a world conflagration with
unpredictable results.

24. We welcome independent Gabon-which
is, as we
know, the current President of the Organization of African
Unity-Kuwait
and Bolivia, which, I have no doubt, have
great potential for constructive and useful participation in
the Council’s work.
25. This year we shall no longer be able to profit from the
experience and co-operation of the outgoing members of
the Council: Romania, Benin, the Libyan Arab Jamahiriya,
Panama and Pakistan. Their. work in the Council has been a
worthy contribution to the struggle for international peace
and security and for the affirmation of progressive principles in international relations.

19. Mr. TROYANOVSKY
(Union of Soviet Socialist
Republics) (interpretation from Russian): Permit me first
of all to congratulate you, Sir, on your assumption of the
important post of President of the Security Council. We
should like to express our profound satisfaction at the fact
that the work of the Council for this month is being
presided over by the representative of a major African
State, fighting for the cause of peace and justice, for the
freedom and independence of the peoples of the world, and
for the final liberation of Africa from the colonial yoke.

26. The last year has been replete with extremely important events for the national liberation movements of the
African continent. The countries which have freed themselves from colonial dependence are continuing to wage a
hard struggle for the elimination of the consequences of
foreign domination, the consolidation of independence and
the development of their economies. In the Soviet Union
and the other States of the socialist community, those
countries have trusty and reliable friends ready to afford
them support of all kinds in their further advance along the
road towards progressive reforms. That solidarity, which
has stood the test of time and has been consolidated by
genuine accomplishments, is a guarantee of further victories
for the national liberation movements and further social
and economic progress for the independent countries of
Africa.

20. It is a pleasure to note that relations of mutual
understanding and co-operation exist between our countries. As a result of the recent visit of the Commissioner for
External Affairs of Nigeria, Mr. Garba, to the Soviet Union
those relations have been developing ever more fruitfully.
As was pointed out by Andrei Gromyko, Foreign Minister
of the USSR in his speech at the luncheon in honour of
Mr. Garba on 28 November of last year:
“There exist between the Soviet Union and Nigeria
possibilities for a further intensification of co-operation,
3

in the country in their unsuccessful attempts to repress and
stifle the mass movement of the African population against
the policy of apartheid. Many members of that movement
have been murdered or thrown into gaol, and the police
forces of the Pretoria regime continually have recourse to
firing on peaceful demonstrations. A great deal of extremely convincing evidence of this is adduced in, inter alia,
the report of the Special Committee against Apartheid that
is now before the Council [See S/12536].

27. The Soviet Union cannot be and never has been
indifferent to the problems of Africa. And the aims, the
purport and the content of Soviet policy with regard to the
countries of the African continent are crystal clear. They
flow from the general goals that the Soviet Union has set
itself in international policy; they are the struggle for peace
and security, freedom and independence of peoples.
28. Those general principles have found concrete ex.
pression in alI the foreign-policy actions of the Soviet
State, including the signature by the Soviet Union of
bilateral agreements with a number of African countries.
The joint Soviet-Algerian communique issue on 1.5 January
last on the outcome of the visit to our country of the
Chairman of the Revolutionary Council of the Algerian
People’s Democratic Republic, Mr. Boumediene, states
that:

32. We share the deep concern evinced in regard to the
events in South Africa. These events demonstrate a
further dangerous exacerbation of the situation. As has
been repeatedly pointed out in resolutions and decisions of
international bodies, this situation creates a serious threat
to peace and security in southern Africa and beyond. It is
natural, therefore, that the Soviet delegation should support the initiative of the African countries which requested
the convening of the Security Council for urgent consideration of ways and means of bringing international action to
bear on the apartheid regime and of taking urgent measures
leading to the total isolation and boycotting of that regime.

“The Soviet Union and the Algerian People’s Demo.
cratic Republic confirm their firm and unswerving support for the struggle of the peoples of Zimbabwe,
Namibia and South Africa for their freedom and national
independence. The parties condemn all manoeuvres aimed
at bringing about a pseudo-settlement of the problems in
that part of the world for the purpose of preserving the
interests of neo-colonialism and of racist regimes.”

33. We support the demands of the African countries
contained in the decisions of the twenty-ninth session of
the Council of Ministers of the Organization of African
Unity, held last summer at Libreville, Gabon. In those
decisions, as we know, it is proposed that States should
intensify the international isolation of the Pretoria regime
and take the necessary measures in accordance with
Chapter VII of the Charter of the United Nations.

Speaking on 12 January at a dinner in the Kremlin in
honour of President Boumediene, the Chairman of the
Council of Ministers of the USSR, Mr. Kosygin, stated:
“The Soviet Union is behind all the peoples of Africa
which are fighting for their national liberation, against
colonialism, racism and apartheid. We are bound by ties
of solidarity with the oppressed African peoples of
Namibia, Zimbabwe and the Republic of South Africa
which are waging a just struggle for their liberation, and
we are convinced that the day of final freedom is not far
off now.”

34. The Soviet Union has repeatedly warned that continued inaction on the part of international bodies and their
failure to take genuinely effective measures against the
apartheid regime, and, in particular, the direct connivance of
certain circles with that regime, are fraught with serious
dangers for the cause of peace. We should not forget
another thing: that such inaction, such connivancesometimes camouflaged by trumped-up arguments about
“dialogue” and various kinds of “settlements’‘-leads
to an
increase in the severity of the mass repressions, to loss of
human life and to intensification of the most barbarous
manifestations of social ostracism, under the uncontrolled
domination of the racists within the country.

29. The policy of the enslavement of peoples stands
convicted before the bar of history. If now in southern
Africa the last hotbeds of colonialism, racism and
apartheid continue to be preserved, if the racists continue
flagrantly to defy the entire international community, then.
it becomes even more imperative to take urgent and
effective measures to put an end to a situation which is
intolerable in the world today.

35. We cannot close our eyes to another factor: If
economic and military co-operation with the Pretoria
regime has so far not been halted, if all initiatives aimed at
putting a halt to such co-operation are still being sabotaged
and blocked, that is to be explained by a desire on the part
of certain circles to preserve their positions in southern
Africa. It is precisely for that reason that the representatives of a number of Western countries have attempted to
prevent the taking of effective economic sanctions against
the Vorster regime.

30. Last year, the Security Council repeatedly expressed
support for measures which, in one way or another, would
lead to the attainment of these goals. In its resolution
417 (1977) it demanded that the racist regime of South
Africa end violence and repression against the black people
and other opponents of apartheid, abolish the policy of
bantustanization and all other measures of apartheid and
racial discrimination, abandon the policy of apartheid and
ensure majority rule based on justice and equality.

36. It suffices to recall that, according to data in the world
press, the total capital investment of Western countries in
South Africa amounts to no less than $20 billion. More
than 500 British companies and more than 400 American
companies are operating in that country, and they are
responsible for, respectively, $7 billion and $2 billion of
capital investment. Active business relations with the

31. However, the Pretoria r6gime not only refused to
comply with that resolution but even increased the severity
of its. repressive measures. As has been shown by recent
events at New Brighton, Soweto and other places in South
Africa, the racist rulers have practically unleashed racial war
4

Pretoria rdgime are maintained by other Western Powers
too, and it is very profitable business. In 1974, the income
from investment in South Africa considerably exceeded the
average world level; it amounted to 19.1 per cent. The
volume of trade of Western Powers with South Africa must
also be reckoned in billions of dollars. Financial operations,
loans and issuance of credits have assumed similar proportions.

all peoples and the final elimination of the last vestiges of
colonialism from the African continent. The proposals of
the African countries include a programme of effective
measures against the racist rdgime of Pretoria, including the
cessation of capital investment, loans and credits, an
embargo on oil products and, in the final analysis, the
application of other effective sanctions in the fields of the
economy, trade and military and nuclear co-operation.

37. There is another factor which should alert us. In
recent years, in order to finance the South African
economy, wider and wider use has been made of international organizations, including those that have connexions with the United Nations system. In the past two
years alone, the Pretoria rigime, with the support of the
Western countries, has received from the International
Monetary Fund the vast sum of $463 million. All the other
African countries combined-and there are about 50 of
them-have received far less from the Fund.

43. We consider that the time for executing this programme of action pursuant to Chapter VII of the Charter
has long been ripe, The current situation in southern Africa
makes it absolutely clear that the embargo on the delivery
of arms to the Pretoria regime is by itself insufficient, and
that the decision of the Council in that regard can be
viewed only as a first step towards the full international
isolation of the South African racists. We continue to
believe and to be convinced that only new effective
measures, the first steps towards which have been taken in a
number of previous decisions of the Council, will in the
fmal analysis lead to the elimination from among mankind
of the shameful vestiges of the past.

38. To justify the refusal to cut off economic links with
the racist rdgimes, the argument is often used that there
exist in various countries all kinds of constitutional and
legislative restrictions which, it is alleged, make it impossible for the Governments of those countries effectively to
control the subsidiaries of their companies operating in
southern Africa. However, the practice and experience of
international relations make it quite clear that such
restrictions disappear as soon as it comes to a question of
economic blockading of progressive or revolutionary
rdgimes.

44. Mr. BARTON (Canada): Mr. President, I wish, first of
all, to express the pleasure of my delegation in serving
under your presidency and that of Mr. Garba, the Commissioner for External Affairs of Nigeria. If I recollect
correctly, when I was President of the Council in June last,
I had the privilege of presiding when statements were made
by both you and him and I am glad that the shoe is now on
the other foot.
45. I should like also to welcome the new members of the
Council: Bolivia, Czechoslovakia, Gabon, Kuwait and, of
course, your own country, Nigeria. We look forward to
working with them and getting to know them better and to
profitable and effective co-operation in the months to
come.

39. In the circumstances of the profound political crisis
which has gripped the whole country and of the exacerbation of racial and national class and all other kinds of
contradictions, at a time when the shameful system of
Upmfheid is beginning to crack in various places, the rulers
at Pretoria have been obliged to have recourse to manoeuvring. By means of empty promises, they attempt to create
the appearance of a readiness to come to an agreement on
the problem of Namibia. But it should be obvious to
everyone that the racist rggime is simply looking for ways
to preserve its domination in that Territory,

46. Finally, I would just say a word of appreciation to the
representative of Mauritius for the good work done by him
and his Minister for External Affairs in December.
47. We listened with attention and respect on Thursday
[2056th meeting/ to the words of Mr. Donald Woods, a
man who has devoted much of his time and energy in
recent years to the struggle to convince his fellow countrymen of the need for a fair and just reorganization of human
relationships within South Africa. We greatly appreciated
his contribution to our proceedings and the wisdom of
many of the thoughts and recommendations he presented
to us for consideration. It is our hope that the efforts of
men and women of all races within South Africa combined
with the moral authority of support from abroad will result
in the rapid and peaceful evolution of South African
society which he seeks and which we all seek. We wish for
Mr. Woods an early end to his exile from his African
fatherland, which for him as well as for countless other
South Africans must be a matter of great personal sorrow.

40. Another feature of the present policy of the racists is
the creation of tribal reservations or bantustans. This policy
continues to be pursued in spite of protests, nonrecognition and condemnation throughout the world. Its
purpose is clear to everyone: to divide up Africans
according to their tribal origins, to deprive them of the
rights of citizenship in their own country and thus to raise a
barrier against the growing tide of national liberation
movements. It is no exaggeration to say that the policy
of
bantustanization will go down in history as one of the most
evil inventions of the system of apartheid in its last and
desperate attempts somehow or other to perpetuate its
existence.
41. That is an outline of some of the fundamental aspects
of the situation in southern Africa now under consideration
in the Security Council.

48. Today we are continuing our debate on the policies of
South Africa. Over the past 12 months, the Council has
embarked upon two major debates on this subject, the most
recent of which was concluded only in Noveniber. It is not

42. We support any effective decisions of the Council that
are likely to bring nearer the day of the total liberation of
5

companiesoperating in South Africa designedto govern
their employment and similarpractices. This is to be done
asquickly aspossible.

my intention therefore to repeat the substance of my
comments of last March 11998th meeting] and October
[2043rd meeting] in which I explained in some detail the
attitude of the CanadianGovernmenttowards the policies
of apartheid. I shall simply reiterate that Canadaremains
committed to promoting efforts to bring about the elimination of racial discriminationin all its forms thoughout the
world. We cannot help but be particularly concernedabout
the situation in South Africa, which is the solenation that
hasinstitutionalized racialdiscrimination.

53. A further measureannouncedrelates to the former
common membershipwhich Canada and South Africa
shared in the Commonwealth,a relationship terminated
many years ago. From a date to be announced,we shall
require non-immigrant visas from all residents of South
Africa comingto Canada.Wehave, in addition, decidedto
review the application to Canadiantrade with South Africa
of the Commonwealthpreferential tariff which is still in
effect, despite the termination of the Commonwealth
membershipof South Africa.

49. 1 should like, at this time, to draw the attention of the
Council to recent developmentsin Canadianpolicy regarding its relations with South Africa. On 19 Debmber, the
Secretary of State for External Affairs, speakingin the
foreign-affairs debatein the CanadianHouseof Commons,
drew attention to Canada’snew policy towards South
Africa, This policy emergedas a result of an in-depth
examination of the status of our relationshipwith South
Africa in connexion with developmentsin that troubled
country. For many years, the CanadianGovernment has
sought, primarily through dialogueandnormal contacts, to
convince the Government of South Africa and those who
elect it that the policy of aparfheid is a self-defeating
anachronismthe inevitable result of which will be chaos
andracial violencein that country.

54. More than once I have emphasizedin this chamber
that it is an essentialelementof Canadianforeign policy to
trade in peacefulgoodswith all countries, even those with
whosepolicieswe arein profound disagreement,subject,of
course, to our obligations under Chapter VII of the
Charter. Action of the kind I have just outlined is,
therefore, for Canada,exceptional. In taking that action,
he were alsogreatly influenced by the tremendousswellof
international concern, evidencedby the resultsof the Lagos
Conference*and by the Security Council’simplementation
of an arms embargo againstSouth Africa under Chapter
VII.

50. Since the elimination of racialdiscriminationthxoughout the world is an objective to which all Member States
subscribe,it seemedto usinevitablethat the South Africans
would also realize the necessityof changeif their country
werenot to be bypassedby history.

55. 1 believe that the CanadianGovernment’s decision
indicates that there are a number of ways of attempting to
influence and shapepublic opinion in South Africa in the
directions which we all seek.Each country hasa different
relationshipwith South Africa, and the type of relationship
will determinethe kind of action which can be considered
by each and the impact which that action will have on
South African public opinion, There is, we believe, a time
for unilateral action and a time for multilateral action
under the Charter. We believe that each step must be
consideredin the light of developmentsand taken only
after the most serious consideration.Mr. Woods has sug
gested that we should adopt a pragmatic but substantive
approach andidentify at eachstagethe objectiveswhich we
seek to achievewithin a given time-frame.We believethis is
a wise courseof action and one which we might begin to
examine. Above all, we believe that the Council should
continue, as it has through the past 12 months, to seek
unanimity of opinion in order that we may continue to
speakwith one voice to South Africa.

51. Mr. Woodsspoke of the level of anger amongblacks
which existsin South Africa and of the increasingretrenchment of white South Africans towards the laager.We can
see this road leading only to a dead end. Fundamental
changemust take placein South Africa, and the time span
for effecting suchchangewithout continuing andincreasing
violenceandbloodshedis becomingdangerouslyshort.
52. It waswith thesethoughts that the CanadianGovernment determinedthat it must take further stepsbeyond its
arms embargo of 1963 and its policies of discouraging
sporting contacts with South Africa and of speakingout
against apartheid to demonstrateto South Africans the
intensity of our concern and our disapprovalof apartheid.
It was for these reasonsthat, on 19 Decemberlast, the
Government announced that henceforth it would, take
measuresto reduce the level of its commercial contacts
with South Africa and that, in particular, it would
undertake a processof phasingout Government-supported
activities. For example,the decisionwastaken to withdraw
all CanadianTrade Commissioners
from South Africa, and
that action will result in the closing of the ConsulateGeneral at Johannesburg.The CanadianGovernment will
also
withdraw all export-development-corporationGovernment account support from any transactionsrelating to
South Africa, and this affects, for example, export credit
insuranceand loan insuranceaswell asforeign investment
insurance. The Government is examining the implications
and the possibility of other such actions. Furthermore,
after consulting the Canadiancompaniesconcerned,it will
be publishing a code of conduct and ethics for Canadian

56. Mr. LA1 Ya-li (China) (interpretation from Chinese):
As the New Year begins, in the name of the Chinese
delegation, I should like to extend our warm welcometo
the representativesof the five new membersof the Security
Council, and I wish cordially to congratulate Mr. Garba,
Commissionerfor External Affairs of the FederalRepublic
of Nigeria, who came here personally to presideover the
first meetingof the Council of 1978.
57. When the Security Council consideredthe questionof
South Africa at its meetingson 25 October and9 December
1977 [2037th and 2052nd meetings], and when the
2 World Conference for Action against Apartheid,
from 22 to 26 August 1977.

6

held at Lagos

General Assembly discussed the question of apartheid in
South Africa in its plenary meeting held on 15 November,3
the Chinese delegation fully expounded the Chinese Government’s position on the relevant questions. Now, I should
like to make some further observations.

scaleand is gaininggreater momentum,There hasbeen a
new developmentin the armedstruggleof the black people
againstthe racist regime. The fighting goal of the broad
massesof the black people has developed from the
elimination of racialdiscriminationin generalto the seizure
of political power. The brutal murder of Steve Biko, who
advocated non-violence, and the ruthless suppressionof
peacefulappeals,ralliesand demonstrationshave madethe
broad masses
of the black peoplereal&emore clearly that
in dealing with the white racist regime, the use of
non-violent meansdoesnot suffice andthat it is imperative
to userevolutionary violence againstcounter-revolutionary
violenceif they are to win final victory in their strugglefor
nationalliberation.

58. The South African racist regime has long been
strongly condemned by numerous African countries and by
justice-upholding countries and peoples throughout the
world for its reactionary activities in its pursuit of the
brutal system of racial oppression and in its ruthless
suppression of the people of Azania. Thus the South
African racist regime has found itself increasingly isolated.
It has met with the heavy blows of the valiant Azanian
people who are fighting a just struggle against the racist
regime and for national liberation, and it is finding the
going tougher and tougher, However, like all the other
reactionary forces, these few racists are becoming more
desperate in their last-ditch struggle as they draw nearer to
their doom. Recently, having brutally murdered the black
nationalist leader Steve Biko and unscrupulously banned 18
anti-apartheid organizations, the Vorster racist regime
frenziedly searched for and arrested black students, killed
black youths and a white university lecturer, carried out
bloody suppression of the blacks attending the funeral of
the victims, illegally tried and persecuted nationalist
fighters and demolished large numbers of shanties that were
the only shelter of the black people, thus leaving them
destitute and homeless. Meanwhile, it continued to step up
the bantustan plan and concocted the sham independence
of Bophuthatswana in an attempt to fool the black people
and world public opinion. In order to strengthen the
privileged status of the minority whites and further
intensify its Fascist rule, it stage-managed an election farce
which was attended by whites only.

63. Today the just struggle of the Azanian people is
developingin tandemwith the armedstruggleof the people
of Namibia and Zimbabwe. Surging forward in close
co-ordination, these struggles have converged into an
irresistiblerevolutionary torrent forcefully poundingaway
at the last bastionsof colonialismand racismin southern
Africa. One can predict that the dayis not far off when the
racistrule will meetits doom,
64. The developmentin depth of the just struggleof the
Azanian people constitutes a powerful blow to the two
superPowersthat are intensifyingtheir rivalry in southern
Africa. One super-Power
is trying hard to protect its vested
interests and maintain the reactionary rule there. Over a
period of time, in close collaboration with the racist
regimes,it has beenplaying the tricks of “reconciliation”
and “peace talks” in anattempt to paralyseandundermine
the revolutionary fighting will of the people in southern
Africa. The other super-Power,motivated by its global
strategicneedsof seekinghegemonyin Africa andencircling
Europe, is frenziedly steppingup its aggression
and expansion in Africa. The tense situation in the Horn of Africa,
that people have been following recently with concern,
is one created singlehandedlyby none other than this
super-Power.In order to contend with the other superPower for this important strategicspot which can secure
a strangleholdon the Red Sea area, it is resorting to
blatant retaliation againstthe SomaliGovernment, which
has taken the just action of abrogating the “friendship and co-operation treaty” with it in order to
safeguard Somalia’s independence and sovereignty.
Not long ago, it sent large amounts of war materials
by air and seato this areain an attempt to provoke greater
conflicts for its own gain. However, those who play with
fire are bound to get burnt. This super-Power’s
aggression
and expansionis being strongly condemnedby more and
more African countries.The voicesprotestingsuper-Power
interference in African internal affairs are resounding
throughout the African continent. A new upsurge to
combat super-Powerhegemonismis emergingin Africa. h-r
southernAfrica, this super-Powerhas deckeditself out as
the “natural ally” of the African people,declaringthat it
“supportsthe nationalliberation struggle”,in an attempt to
bring the nationalliberationmovementin Azania andother
areaswithin its orbit of contendingfor hegemonyso as to
squeezeits way into southernAfrica and control the area.
However,the awakenedsouthernAfrican peoplewill not be
taken in, Through their own experiencein strugglethey
have become awarethat, like the peoplesin many other

59. All this has further shown that the so-called “racial
reconciliation”, “ improvement of racist relations”, “greater
power to the urban blacks” etc., profusely talked about by
Vorster and his like is sheer nonsense. They are merely
attempts at deluding the Azanian and other African people
and the people of the rest of the world,
60. Facing the atrocious rule of the South African racist
tigime, the courageous and indomitable Aza&n people
have been advancing wave upon wave and carrying on
unremitting and persistent struggles for their national
liberation. No outrageous actions of the racists can intimidate or deceive them. On the contrary, these actions have
served as negative examples that have accelerated the new
awakening of the Azanian people.
61. Since the Soweto massacre of June 1976, the mass
struggles of the Azanian people against the racist rule have
been developing vigorously without let-up. Their struggles
have markedly developed in depth and scale. Not long ago,
as many as 200,000 black students joined the demonstrations in protest against the murder of Steve Biko. People
from other circles including the whites have also joined the
protest rallies and demonstrations.
62. The black students’ struggle against the upavtheid
system of “Bantu education” is developing on a larger
3 Official Records of the General
sion, Plenary Meetings, 70th meeting.

Assembly,

Thirty-second

SeS-

7

70. Mr. Garba has pertinently asked what steps the
Council should take. The mandate of the arms embargo was
in any case a belated step that is unlikely to have any
significant impact on the apartheid regime. Your delegation, Mr. President, has indicated certain other measures,
such as the withholding of new credits, bank loans and
investments, There are no doubt other measures too.

areas of the world, they are confronted with the arduous
task of “repelling the tiger whiie chasing away the wolf”,
Therefore, they are combining further the struggle against
imperialism, colonialism and racism with that against
super-Power hegemonism in order to achieve true national
independence and liberation.
65. The just struggle of the peoples in southern Africa is
an important component of the struggle of the numerous
third-world countries and peoples against imperialism,
colonialism and hegemonism. Today the numerous thirdworld countries and peoples constitute the main force in
the struggle against imperialism, colonialism and hegemonism. They are fighting in unity and have won great victories
on various fronts. This favourable situation will unquestionably give impetus to the further development of the
southern African peoples’ struggle for national independence and liberation.

71. What is sad about apartheid, which everyone here
condemns, is that it has been left to the African members
alone to put forward measures for its abolition. We should
like the Western members to come up with their own ideas
and proposals, because they have assumed, together with
others, the common obligation to do away withapartheid,
They have the greater opportunity for inducing peaceful
social change in South Africa in the direction of racial
equality, and above all they have the means to do so. If we
are critical of them for not doing enough in an increasingly
Intolerable situation, it is not without reason.

66. The Chinese Government and people have always
supported the just struggle of the Azanian people, and we
strongly condemn the South African racist regime for its
pursuit of the reactionary policy of barbarous racial
discrimination, apartheid and racial oppression and for its
crimes of ruthless suppression of the Azanian people. The
Chinese delegation supports the just proposals of the
African countries for applying economic sanctions against
the South African racist regime.

72. In saying this, I am awareof certain Western initiatives
in regard to Southern Rhodesia and Namibia which we
have, in fact, welcomed in principle. But, in regard to
apartheid, we have heard from them strong words of
denunciation, None of them defends apartheid or is an
apologist for it. And yet, when effective action is called for
there is a curious paralysis of political will. Mr. Garba has
wisely said that Western interests could be preserved if the
West were to come over “to the side of natural justice,
equality and freedom in its dealings with South Africa”
[ibid., para. 261. Will the West do so and how soon? War
and peace depend on the answersto these questions.

67. At the beginning of the year 1978, we are looking at
the situation in southern Africa with full confidence. We
are deeply convinced that, so long as the Azanian people
continue eliminating super-Power interference and sabotage, carrying on extensive mass struggles and persevering in
unremitting armed struggle, they will certainly be able to
overthrow the Fascist rule of the racist regime and bring
about a bright future of national liberation with the
support of the African people and the people of the world
over.

73. But let us seewhat Mr. Donald Woods has to say as a
white South African dissident. It is extraordinary the
amount of interest there is in the Western press about
political dissidents. Let us hope that the Western press’s
interest in Mr. Woods will be sustained and matched by its
interest in other types of dissidents. I must say that I was
deeply impressed by the sincerity, conviction and modem
tion displayed by Mr. Woods. He has naturally expressed
concern for his white countrymen, whose psychological
enslavement to apartheid,he says,“threatens . . . to unleash
upon them . . . the violent consequences of such enslavement” [ibid., para. 471. Are these white people not entitled
to be liberated from their “psychological enslavement” ?

68. Mr. JAIPAL (India): I wish first of all to extend our
hearty welcome to the new Council members-Bolivia,
Czechoslovakia, Gabon, Kuwait and Nigeria-and
assure
them of my delegation’s full co-operation.
69. Mr. President, my delegation would also like to place
on record its appreciation to you and your country for
taking the initiative in bringing up for consideration once
again the question of South Africa and for making it
possible for the Council to hear Mr. Donald Woods, a white
South African dissident. May I say that we share the view
expressed by Mr. Garba that the Council should take action
this year, “since to postpone effective steps would be
tantamount to missing the last train to peace and stability
in the region” [2056th meering, para 5/. We agree with
him that the Council should bear in mind the supreme
necessity of placing in clear perspective at all times the
moral principles of natural justice, equality, freedom and
human dignity. The obligation of the Council to prevent a
racial conflict in South Africa is clear enough, for apartheid
has been rightly condemned as a monstrous crime against
humanity. Some members--notably the so-called Western
members-are clearly in a better position to stop the
present dangerous drift towards a race war.

74. Mr. Woods has called for non-violent United Nations
action, practical and effective action that depends, he says
quite rightly, on the nations of the West. I think we are
bound to wait for the Western response to his plea for
practical and effective non-violent action which the West
alone can deliver. He reminds us that, if the West fails in
this, tragedy will certainly overtake the people of South
Africa.
75. Now here is a white South African pleading with
Western nations for economic sanctions against his own
misguided racist regime, in the name of Western values and
ideals, in the name of the enlightened self-interest of the
Western world, and even in the name of moral duty and
Mahatma Gandhi. My own appeal to the West, in the name
of the Charter of the United Nations, is unavoidably tinged
with my colour. Mr. Woods has made eloquent appeals
8

--

separately to the Americans, to the French, to the
Germans, to the Canadians and last, but not least, to the
British. We shall wait for equally eloquent responsesfrom
the West, and I believe that their response will not be the
eloquence of silence. I am fortified in this belief by the
encouraging response heard this afternoon from the representative of Canada.

82. The treatment meted out to Mr. Donald Woods, who
spoke here in the Council last week[2056rh meeting], is a
dramatic example of the constant pressurethat the Pretoria
regime tries to exercise to silence the last manifestation of
the freedom of thought of an entire people: the right to
information.
83. The injustice in South Africa and the suffering of the
majority population of the territory require us to redouble
our efforts to find a solution, and forthat reason we believe
that it is important to maintain the momentum begun in
the Security Council with the adoption of resolution
418 (1977).

76. We were informed that Mr. Vorster regarded the
United Nations as a joke, and that he had told the rest of
the world to do its damnedest. I wonder who these jokers
are in the United Nations: those who condemn apartheid
and are powerless to act, OYthose who condemn when they
have the power to act.

84. Those who have the primary obligation to resolve the
problem of the people of South Africa have committed
themselves here to carry out the necessarymeasures in the
search for solutions. Only decisive action on the part of
those countries, in other words the cessation of any
co-operation with the racist regimes in southern Africa, will
bring us closer to our goals.

77. Thirty years ago, apartheid became law in South
Africa. Thirty years ago today, Mahatma Gandhi died at the
hands of an Indian assassinwhose country he had freed
through non-violent means. If Mahatma Gandhi were alive
today, he would surely call upon the United Nations to
take collective non-violent action against the apartheid
rbgime. He would not doom the black people of South
Africa to fight alone against apartheid. Those among us
who want them to use only non-violent methods should
support the full scope of economic sanctions available to
the Security Council under Chapter VII of the Charter. The
time has come for the West to face up to the challenge of
Vorster, which is really a challenge to the credibility of the
West and all that it stands for. How can one justify the
stopping of economic assistance to countries that violate
human rights and at the same time continue to collaborate
politically and economically with a white rtSgimethat is the
only one in the world to have elevated racism to official
State policy? The West would be well advised to review
once again its over-all policies towards the apartheid rkgime.

8.5. My delegation hopes that very soon it will see the
results of the implementation of resolution 418 (1977) and
we shall follow closely the work of the Committee created
to supervise the observance of the arms embargo against
South Africa. We are anxiously awaiting a positive response
on the part of those countries which bear a major
responsibility for the implementation of that resolution.
86, Decisive action in the struggle against upurrheid has
been taken in other forums of the Organization. One such
action has been the dissemination of information to create
and develop a universal awareness,at all levels, of the need
to repudiate and condemn the apartheid rhgime. To the
extent that world public opinion fully understands the
gravity of the problem, it will be in a position to influence
Governments and prompt them to give more v@,orous
support to action against the South African rdgime. A
well-informed international public opinion can be a valuable ally in the struggle against apartheid.

78. Miss LOPEZ (Venezuela) (interpretation from
Spanish): Mr. President, I should like to congratulate you
on your assumption of the presidency of the Council for
the month of January. We admire your devotion to the
struggle against apartheid not only in this forum but in all
those forums in which the aim is to combat racism and
racial discrimination.

87. We cannot fail to repeat that, aseverybody knows, the
survival of the racist regimes is directly connected with the
economic and other ties which they have with certain
Powers. Those relations hinder the effectiveness of the
action against upurrheid taken by the Organization and by
most of the Member States. The loosening of those ties
would greatly facilitate the task of putting an end to
apartheid. Accordingly, we are determined to support all
efforts that the Council may advocate. We hope that those
efforts will not only receive verbal or symbolic support but
will also be given concrete support by those States which
really have the power and ability to implement the kind of
measures stipulated in Chapter VII of the Ch.arter.

79. We are also grateful to the representative of Mauritius
for the excellent way he presided over the Council last
month.
80. We have supported the appeal of the African delegations in the Security Council that a study should be made
once again of the question of South Africa and of the
problem of apurrheid. Until there are signs of a solution of
the problem, we must assume the responsibility of continuing the debate on its various aspects and of promoting
ways and means finally to eradicate the rbgime.
81. It is difficult to add anything new to our deliberations.
Other speakers have amply described the situation in South
Africa and the policy of apartheid. They have spoken about
the increasingly repressive measures that have been used by
the Pretoria Government to curtail the fundamental freedoms of the people of South Africa and to suppressany
action aimed at promoting a change favourable to the
majority population of the territory.

88. I should not like to conclude my brief statement
without bidding welcome to the new delegations which
have joined the Council to reinforce our mission: Bolivia,
Czechoslovakia, Gabon, Kuwait and Nigeria. I also wish to
express our appreciation to those delegations which have
recently completed their term: Benin, Libya, Pakistan,
Panama and Romania.
9

4

89. The PRESIDENT: The next speaker is the representative of Sweden, I invite him to take a place at the Council
table and to make his statement.
90. Mr. THUNBORG (Sweden): Let me first thank the
Security Council for giving me the opportunity to speak on
a topic which continues to be of the highest priority to the
international community-the situation in South Africa. Let
me also say how happy we are to see you, Mr. President,
presiding over this important meeting, in view of the
outstanding role that you and your country play in the
field of international relations, and not least in the context
of ongoing efforts to solve the problems in southern Africa.
91. In March of last year /199&h meeting/, Sweden
participated in a similar way in the debate on South Africa
in the Council. We did so against the background of the
initiative taken by us and other delegations during the
thirty-first session of the General Assembly to urge the
Council to take steps to achieve the cessation of further
foreign investments in South Africa. That Assembly resolution-31/6K
of 9 November 1976-was adopted by 124
votes to none, with 16 abstentions. A similar recommendation was made to the Council in General Assembly
resolution 32/105 0 of 16 December 1977. That resolution
was adopted by 120 votes to none, with only 5 abstentions
that time.
92. That development shows an increasing support among
United Nations Members for the idea that this kind of
united action against South Africa is a necessary means of
pressure upon South Africa to change its apartheid system.
The categorical rejection and condemnation of that system
by Sweden have been stated and explained on many
occasions in the past, and I need not go into any lengthy
elaboration of that here today.
93. The apartheid system is used to suppress and exploit
the majority of the South African population in brutal and
degrading ways. It is maintained by means of a strong
police and military apparatus. The white regime has also
used its rapidly expanding military power to consolidate its
illegitimate occupation of Namibia and to perpetrate acts of
aggression against neighbouring countries.
94. The increasing threat to international peace and
security caused by South Africa’s military build-up spurred
the Security Council to ad,opt resolution 418 (1977), by
which a mandatory arms embargo against South Africa was
unanimously decided upon. That was an important breakthrough. It was the first time that all the members of the
Council had accepted the principle that sanctions under
Chapter VII of the Charter should be applied to the
situation in South Africa. Although not as comprehensive
as we would have liked it to be, that step constitutes a
major political setback for the leaders of South Africa and
should be a clear sign to them that all countries are
prepared to go from verbal condemnation and harsh
criticism to effective action,
95. However, we believe it is important not only to secure
the full implementation of resolution 418 (1977) but also
to complement it with other measures. The regime in South
Africa continues its disgraceful racial segregation policy and

thus continues to steer its country ever closer to racial war
and disaster. Therefore, there are many compelling reasons
why we consider that a decision by the Security Council to
consider steps to achieve, at an early date, the cessation of
further foreign investments in South Africa would be the
best warning to the racist regime there that the members of
the international community were determined to apply ever
stronger means of pressure to make that regime change its
apartheid policy.
96. First, the decision by the Security Council on a
mandatory arms embargo against South Africa was an
important step; but it was not enough. South Africa is
making great efforts to achieve a high degree of selfsufficiency in its arms production. The aim is to make the
local production, based to quite an extent upon licences,
adequate to fulfi immediate needs and keep the South
African military forces reasonably well stocked. However,
that capacity for domestic military production is very much
dependent on and enhanced by the inflow of foreign capital
into South Africa in the form of new investments-be they
channelled directly to defence-related industries or used to
prop up the South African economy in general. The
cessation of further foreign investment would therefore be
a necessary complement to the arms embargo and would
forestall some of South Africa’s efforts to evade that
embargo and erode its impact by increasing its own military
production.
97. Secondly, such measures to curb the flow of capital to
South Africa would also have an impact on the South
African economy in general. It would, in other words, hit
the most sensitive nerve in the South African society. Since
the South African economy is heavily dependent upon
access to new capital from the Western world for development and expansion, for instance in the energy field, such a
step is likely to have quite a noticeable effect on that
economy. The decrease of investments in the various
economic sectors of the country that would follow must
therefore be taken seriously by those who are responsible
for the economic stability and welfare of the country.
98. Thirdly, the psychological impact of such a cut-off of
new investments would probably be as important. So far
the white establishment in South Africa has felt that it is
part and parcel of the Western political and economic world
and linked to it through heavy flows of trade, investments
and loans and all kinds of business contacts. This economic
interdependence has always convinced the leaders at
Pretoria that they could continue as before, since the
important Western countries were not supposed to endanger their economic interests in South Africa. The lack of
effective action by the Western world so far has therefore
no doubt helped the South African regime in its efforts to
sustain an aura of respectability and legitimacy. That
unjustified complacencywould most likely be shakenif the
Western countrieswere to demonstratethat they would be
prepared to sacrifice some of these short-term economic
interests. Sucha determination by the Westernworld would
be m tne long-terminterest not only of the oppressedpeople
in South Africa but also of the industrialized Western
countries from a political aswell asan economic point of
view. We note that certain important African countries have
adopted a policy of non-co-operationwith firms which have
heavy investmentsin South Africa.
10

99. Fourthly, in this context we must also remember the
crucial role of apartheid in the functioning of the South
African economy. The repressive laws of apartheid and the
methods used by the police in upholding these laws offer
the investor a source of cheap labour and a virtual
guarantee against strikes and unrest among the workers.
Therefore, any calculation of the profitability of investments in South Africa should also include a human and
moral consideration of the reasons for the high returns.

important internal efforts to change the apartheid society
were supported by effective actions by the outside world to
achieve this goal. The regime that upholds this abominable
system is now devoting a great deaf of its resources to
extinguishing these hopes for a change. Determined and
effective Council action would prove to the South African
leaders that they could not count on any further respite or
feel that they had been given carte blanche for continued
consolidation of the apartheid system.

100. In that context let me also refute the argument
sometimes advanced that economic development in South
Africa, particularly if managed by international firms
pursuing progressive employment policies, will erode the
apartheid system. This is an illusion, because all commercial
and economic enterprises will have to work within the
apartheid framework decided upon by the political leadership in South Africa. A change of this policy will come as a
result of pressure, not of appeals to goodwill.

102. Finally, the action we now propose is in fact quite
modest. It would, however, present a clear warning to the
South African Government that the outside world WAS
determined and prepared to go further in its efforts to put
pressure on and isolate South Africa. It should leave South
Africa in no doubt that a stubborn continuation of the
apartheid policy can only result in even stronger decisions
and recommendations by the Council.
103. The lesson that has to be brought home to the South
African regime should be clear: the pressure will continue
inexorably and increasingly until the apartheid system is
eradicated.

101. Fifthly, a Security Council resolution on investments
would undoubtedly also give great encouragement to those
people from all strata of the South African society who are
now bearing the brunt of the oppressive system. They
would know that their struggle for a just and humane South
Africa was not being carried out in isolation and that their

The meeting rose at 5.40 p.m.

11

HOW

TO OBTAIN

UNITED

NATIONS

PUBLICATIONS

Unite4
Nations
publications
may be obtained
throughout
the world.
Consult
your bookstore
Section. New York or Geneva.
COMMENT

SE PROCURER

IX3

PUBLICATIONS

from bookstores
and distributors
or write to: United
Nations,
Sales

DES

NATIONS

UNIES

Les publications
des Nations
Unies sont en vento dans les librairies
et les agences
depositnires
du mondc entier. Informez-vous
aup&
de votre libraire
ou adressez-vous
A : Nations
Unies, Section des ventes, New York ou Gen&ve.

COMO

CONSEGUfR

PUBLICACIONES

DE

LAS

NACIONES

UNIDAS

Las public&ones
#de las Naciones
Unidas es&m en vcnta en librerias
y casss distribuidoras
en todari pa&es de1 mundo.
Consulte
a su librero o dirfjase
a: Naciones
Unidas. Section de Ventas, Nueva York o Ginebra.

Litho

in United

Nations,

New York

Price:

$U.S.

1.00

(or equivalent

in other

currencies)

78-.7QOOS-January

1980-2,200
