UhrrTTEDNATIONS

SECURITY
OFFICIAL
THIRTY-FOURTH

COUNCIL
RECORDS

YEAR

2129th

JlJN 3lf?@

MEETING:

NEW

16 MARCH

1979

(JN/S,fi\
CXXi.,&:
Ti
SD,)+

YORK

CONTENTS
Page
Provisional
Adoption

agenda (S/Agenda/2129)
of the agenda

. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . , . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

The situation in South-East Asia and its implications
for international
peace and
security. [Letter dated 22 February 1979 from the representatives of Norway,
Portugal, the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland and the
United States of America to the President of the Security Council (S/131 1 1)] . .

WPV.2129

NOTE
Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of cap&al letters combined
with figures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United Nations
document.
Documents of the Security Council (symbol S/. . .) are normally published in quarterly Supplements of the OficialRecorris of the Security Council. The date of the document
indicates the supplement in which it appears or in which information about it is given.
The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a system
adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of Resolutions and Decisions of the
Security Council The new system, which has been applied retroactively to resolutions
adopted before 1 January 1965, became fully operative on that date.

2129th MEETING
Held in New York on Friday, 16 March 1979, at 7 p.m.
President: Mr. Leslie 0. HARRIMAN

(Nigeria).

Present: The representatives of the following States:
Bangladesh, Bolivia, China, Czechoslovakia, France,
Gabon, Jamaica, Kuwait, Nigeria, Norway, Portugal,
Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, United Kingdom of
Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United States of
America, Zambia.

Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/2129)
1. Adoption of the agenda
2. The situation in South-East Asia and its implications
for international peace and security. [Letter dated 22
February 1979 from the representatives of Norway,
Portugal, the United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland and the United States of America to
the President of the Security Council (S/131 1l)]
The meeting was caIied to order at 7.40 p.m.

Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.

The situation in South-East Asia and its implications
for international peace and security. [Letter dated 22
February 1979 from the representatives of Norway, Portugal, the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern
Ireland and the United States of America to the President
of the Security Council (S/13111)]
1. The PRESIDENT:
In accordance with the decisions taken by the Council at its previous meetings on this
item [2114th-2128th meetings], I invite the representatives
of Angola, Australia, Bulgaria, Canada, Cuba, Democratic Kampuchea, the German Democratic Republic,
Hungary, India, Indonesia, Japan, the Lao People’s
Democratic Republic, Malaysia, Mongolia, New Zealand, Pakistan, the Philippines, Poland, Singapore, Thailand, Viet Nam and Yugoslavia to take the places
reserved for them at the side of the Council chamber.
At the invitation of the President, Mr. de Figueiredo
(Angola). Mr. Anderson (Australia), Mr. Kostov (Bulgaria),
Mr. Barton (Canada), Mr. Roa Kouri (Cuba), Mr. Thiounn
Prasith (Democratic Kampuchea), Mr. Florin (German
Democratic Republic). Mr. Hollai (Hungary), Mr. Jaipal
(India), Mr. Anwar Sani (Indonesia), Mr, Abe (Japan),
Mr. Sangsomsack (Lao People’s Democratic Republic), Tan
Sri Zaiton Ibrahim (Malaysia), Mr. Dashtseren (Mongolia), Mr. Francis (New Zealand), Mr. Naik (Pakktan),
Mr. Yang0 (Philippines), Mr. Jaroszek (Poland), Mr. Koh
(Singapore), Mr, Guna-Kasem (Thailand), Mr. Ha Van

Lau (Vie? Nam) and Mr. Komatina (Yugoslavia) took the
piaces reserved for them at the side of the Council
chamber.

2. The PRESIDENT:
Members of the Council have
before them document S/13162, which contains the text
of a draft resolution sponsored by Indonesia, Malaysia,
the Philippines, Singapore and Thailand.
3. The first speaker is the representative of Viet Nam. I
invite him to take a seat at the Council table and to make
his statement.
4. Mr. HA VAN LAU (Viet Nam) (interpretation froh
First of all I should like to express my gratitude
to the Council for allowing me to speak once again in the
course of this debate.
French):

5. During the meetings in February, my delegation
clearly described the situation of the war of aggression
unleashed by the Peking authorities against the Socialist
Republic of Viet Nam, its deep-seated origins as well as its
direct causes, and at the same time we proposed a correct
solution to the problem, in accord with reality and in
conformity with the principles of the Charter of the
United Nations, which would respond to the people’s
aspirations.
6. However, as the representatives of the Soviet Union
and of Czechoslovakia have strongly emphasized since
the beginning of this session of the Council, the United
States of America and some other countries have deliberately worded the problem in the form in which we know
it, “The situation in South-East Asia and its implications
for international peace and security”, so as to distract the
attention of the Council from the true situation, which
has meant that the debates have been fruitless.
7. Today the Council is meeting again to debate a draft
resolution submitted by the countries of the Association
of South-East Asian Nations (ASEAN) [S/23162] which,
on the one hand, reflects their grave concern at the Chinese aggression against Viet Nam but which in essenceis
designed to link that aggression with the so-called problem of Kampuchea.
8. In the hope of being able to contribute positively to
the taking of a just and soundly-based decision by the
Council, I should like once again briefly to put forward
the points of view of my Government on the present
situation in Indochina
and in South-East Asia.
9. The events which have taken place these last few days
have been quite conclusive: the war of aggression against

16. With Washington’s approval, Peking is manceuvring
so it can cling to’the political corpse that has already been
rejected by the people of Kampuchea, use what remains
of the criminal Pol Pot clique as its spokesman, in order
to mask its aggression against Viet Nam and its policy of
expansion and hegemonism in South-East Asia, and
oppose the right of self-determination of the people of
Kampuchea, which is enshrined in the Charter of the
United Nations; That is why, to this day, China has
opposed the presence in the Security Council of the representative of the People’s Revolutionary Council of Kampuchea, the sole authentic and legal representative of the
people of Kampuchea.

the Socialist Republic of Viet Nam, initiated and waged
by the Chinese authorities, has totally unmasked their
great-Power expansionism and hegemonism as well as
their reactionary policy, which constitute a very grave
threat to peace and stability in South-East Asia and in the
world.
10. Faced with the effective response which the people
of Viet Nam resolutely inflicted on them, faced with the
seyere condemnation of the peoples of the world and
confronted by strong protests from among their own
people, and even among their soldiers, the Peking authorities are now forced to withdraw their troops. But they are
still impudently threatening to make new military forays
against Viet Nam. Although, for the time being, the
Chinese war of aggression against Viet Nam hti been
checked, it can be said that the danger of a new outbreak
of this war has not be’en completely removed.

17. Collusion between the Peking reactionaries and the
United States of America is now on a global scale:In
collusion with the United States and all the reactionary
forces, Peking has ranged itself against the Arab peoples
and the peoples of Africa, Latin America and Asia. They
have become the accomplices of reactionary forces
against the peoples of Chile and Iran and the peoples and
national liberation movements of southern Africa. This
collusion was consummated in Peking’s recent criminal
aggression against the people of Viet Nam. And it can be
said that the concerted attitude of China, which committed aggression against Viet Nam, and the United States of
America, which itself committed barbarous crimes in
Viet Nam, in the Security Council against the people of.
Viet Nam, is striking proof of their collusion on a global
scale against the just cause of the peoples of the entire
world.

ii. During the entire time of the aggression against Viet
Nam, Peking continued to supply the last remnants of the
Poi Pot clique in Kampuchea with weapons. striving to
resuscitate the corpse of a political r&me already rejected by the people of Kampuchea and condemned by all
mankind, and sought to intervene in the internal affairs
of the People’s Republic of Kampuchea and to prevent
the people of Kampuchea from rebuilding their lives and
their homeland.
12. At the same time, Peking is busily intervening in the
internal affairs of Laos, concentrating its troops on the
Sino-Laotian frontier with a view to another war of
aggression against the independence, sovereignty and
territorial integrity of Laos, seeking to sow discord
between Viet Nam, Laos and Kampuchea and disturbing
peace and stability in South-East Asia.

18. In the past 30 years the United States has made use
of the Security Council to serve its imperialist interests
against the peoples of the world. The Soviet Union has
many times exercised its right of veto to counter United
States designs and support the struggles of national
liberation of peoples against imperialism and colonialism
both old and new. At present the veto in the hands of the
Soviet Union constitutes a major support for the just
cause of the peoples of the world in their struggle against
imperialism and international reactionary forces.

13. In Kampuchea the people resolutely rejected the Pol
Pot-Ieng Sary clique, the henchmen of Peking, authors of
the greatest crime of genocide of our times and the destroyers of peace and stability in South-East Asia. The
people of Kampuchea installed the new regime on a
sound basis with its external policy of peace, friendship
and international co-operation: That is a positive factor
for peace and stability in South-East Asia. That reality is
irreversible.

1,9. In our opinion, the Security Council, with its lofty
responsibility for the maintenance of international peace
and security, cannot but severely condemn the aggressive
policy of the Chinese authorities and demand that they
should put a stop to their aggression against Viet Nam,
totally and unconditionally withdraw their troops from
the territory of Viet Nam, cease any criminal act against
Viet Nam, strictly respect the independence, sovereignty
and territorial integrity of Viet Nam, cease any interference in the internal affairs of Laos and any military
threat against that country and halt any intervention in
the internal affairs of Kampuchea.

14. It is clear that the only problem in South-East Asia
is China’s aggression against Viet Nam, China’s intervention in the internal affairs of Kampuchea and China’s
threat to use force against Laos. There is no such thing as
the so-called problem of Kampuchea. Any attempt to
link the problem of Chinese aggression against Viet Nam,
to link the demand for total and immediate withdrawal
of Chinese forces from Viet Nam with the so-ealied
problem of Kampuchea, is in fact intended to justify
and encourage Chinese aggression against Viet Nam.
Thus the Chinese Vice-Premier, Teng Hsiao-ping, has,
according to Kke Washington Post of 27 February last,
seized on this proposal and defended it warmly.

20. Those are the legitimate demands of the peoples df
Viet Nam, Laos and Kampuchea as well as of the peoples
of South-East Asia and ail peoples that love peace and
justice throughout the world.

15. The public opinion of the .broad masses of the
world’s people has opposed and will continue to oppose
Chinese aggression against Viet Nam, Chinese interference in the internal affairs of Kampuchea and the escalation of Chinese military pressure against Laos.

21. In our delegation’s opinion, should the Council not
be in a position to make apositivecontribution
to the just
cause of peoples, it should at least refrain from any act
2

which might encourage the reactionaries of Pekin&@
harm the peoples of Viet Nam, Laos and Kampuchea and
to disturb peace and stability in South-East Asia and the
world.

20 February at Bangkok by the Foreign Minister of
Indonesia in his capacity as the current Chairman of the
ASEAN Standing Committee [.S/ZSZOaJ. Our primary
concern is the restoration of peace, stability and security
in the region of South-East Asia. Our other concern is to
maintain and reinforce certain fundamentalprinciples
of
international law and of international conduct, as embodied in the Charter of the United Nations! .which have
been violated. The erosion of these principles poses a (
grave threat to international order and to all of us. What
are those principles? First, that States shall refrain from
the threat or use of force; secondly, that States shail settle
their disputes by peaceful means; thirdly, that all States
respect the sovereignty, territorial integrity and independence of other States.

22. The ASEAN countries have in the past lent their
support to the American war of aggression against the
peoples of,Viet Nam, Laos and Kampuchea. They have
thus incurred a debt to those three peoples. Viet Nam, for
its part, is prepared to forget the past. In our opinion, the
ASEAN countries should, in the interests of peace and
stability in South-East Asia, look to the future andaot
again fall into the error of acting in collusion with,the
reactionaries of Peking against the peoples of Viet Nam,
Laos and Kampuchea. The Government of the Socialist
Republic of Viet Nam is always prepared to struggle,
together with the ASEAN countries, to make of SouthEast Asia a zone of peace, independence, freedom, neutrality, stability and prosperity.

28. We have sought to apply these principles uniformly
and even-handedly to the two conflicts. In both of those
conflicts we urgently call for an immediate cessation of
hostilities. We call upon all the parties to the conflicts to
withdraw their forces to their own countries. We further
call on all the parties to the conflicts, as well as on States
outside the region, to exercise the utmost restraint and to
refrain from any acts which may lead to a further escalation and a widening of the conflicts. We reaffirm that all
States shall scrupulously respect the sovereignty, territorrial integrity and independence of other States. We
call upon all parties to the conflicts to settle their disputes
by peaceful means, in accordance with the Charter of the
United Nations.‘We welcome the offer of the good offices
of the Secretary-General in the search for a peaceful
solution.

23. The PRESIDENT: The next speaker is the representative of Thailand. I invite him to take a place at the
Council table and to make his statement.
24. Mr. GUNA-KASEM
(Thailand): Permit me first of
all to offer to you, Sir, my‘warm and sincere congratulations on your assumption of the presidency of this
august Council for the month of March. With your wisdom, diplomatic skill and long-proved ability and experience in United Nations affairs, I am convinced that the
Council, under your able guidance, will succeed in
completing its work with satisfactory results. I wish also
to express my gratitude and appreciation to you and,
through you, to the other Council members for kindly
allowing me once again to take part in the present debate.

29. The draft resolution addresses itself to the two
armed conflicts. It is the ASEAN view that foreign forces
should be unconditionally withdrawn from both conflict
areas and that the parties to those conflicts should settle
their disputes by peaceful means, thus bringing about a
durable peace and harmony to the region of South-East
Asia.

25. On behalf of the five delegations of the Association
of South-East Asian Nations-Indonesia,
Malaysia, the
Philippines, Singapore and Thailand-I
have the honour
to submit the draft resolution contained in document
S/13162 for the consideration of the Councii under rule
38 of its provisional rules of procedure.

30. By analogy, if we consider the five ASEAN countries as five neighbouring houses, the fact of the matter is
that two other neighbouring houses are on fire, and there
is a real danger that those fires will spread and affect our
five houses. Our draft resolution is intended to put out
those tires in our neighbourhood.

26. None of the ASEAN countries is at present a
member of the Council; we have therefore hesitated to
take this step of submitting a draft resolution to the
Council. However, after more than two weeks of intensive consultations, we are encouraged by the general
support among the Council members for our draft. In the
light of this we finally decided to submit it, taking into
account the following factors: first, the two armed conflicts pose a grave threat to the peace, stability and security of the region of South-East Asia and, if not checked,
may still intensify and involve other parties, thereby posing a threat to international peace and security; secondly,
since our countries are closest to the conflict areas, weare
the most exposed to the danger caused by a spread of the
conflagration; thirdly, our countries have good relations
with ‘all the parties to the conflicts. We hope that our
honest efforts to help to bring about an end of the hostilities and to create conditions for the restoration of peace
and stability will be understood and appreciated by all,
including the parties to the conflicts.

3 1. The ASEAN initiative in submitting this draft resolution has been motivated solely by our deep concern to
end the hostilities and to restore peace and stability to the
region of South-East Asia. We hope .that it will be possible for the members of the Council to give their support
to this draft.
32. Mr. ALGARD (Norway): On behalf of the delegations of Portugal and Norway, I should like, in conformity with rule 38 of the provisional rules of procedure,
to request you, Mr. President, to put to the vote the draft
resolution that has just been introduced and which is
contained in document S/13162.
33. Mr. HULINSKP
(Czechoslovakia) (interpretation
from Russian): The Vietnamese people, which once again
have had to defend their freedom and the independence

27. In formulating thedraft resolution, the five ASEAN
delegations have been guided by the statement issued on
3

and territorial integrity of their country-this
time
against the Chinese aggressors-to this very day have
been forced to fight with arms in hand.

39. During meetings of the Council, representatives of a
number of States Members of the United Nations have
categorically repudiated the barbarous step taken by the
Chinese militarists and have called for the immediate
cessation of the aggression and the withdrawal of Chinese
troops from the territory of the Socialist Republic of Viet
Nam. Members of the Council have witnessed the pitiful
attempts by the Chinese delegation to represent the
aggression by China against the Socialist Republic of Viet
Nam as a “selfdefensive counter-attack” and to represent China as the victim of aggression. The Chinese delegation has done everything in its power to divert the
Council’s attention from the main task: to ensure the
immediate cessation of the arbitrary actions of the Chinese authorities. All these statements about the matter
being confined to a small frontier conflict and, now, this
farce concerning proposals about talks, with which the
Chinese are trying to lull the vigilance of public opinion,
are just empty words.

34. The hypocritical act of aggression by Peking against
Viet Nam has aroused a tidal wave df resistance throughout the world and encountered the indignation of peaceloving people of all continents. Solidarity with the
heroic, fighting patriots of Viet Nam is growing and
becoming ever stronger. By its piratical act against the
Socialist Republic of Viet Nam, Peking has revealed to
the whole world the treacherous nature of its policy. At
the present time, Maoism in actual fact represents the
most serious threat to international peace.
35. The military adventure of the Chinese reactionary
clique in Viet Nam has met with total failure. The aggressors have had to pay a very high price. They are feeling
and will continue to feel for a long time to come all the
consequences of this act. Viet Nam is tilled with determination to crush the aggressors, if China’s aggressive war
against the Socialist Republic of Viet Nam continues. The
Peking reactionary clique cannot afford to ignore the
strength and will of a people that is struggling for freedom; nor can it disregard world public opinion. The
countries of the socialist community are on the side of the
just cause of Viet Nam.

40. The Czechoslovak Socialist Republic entirely
shares the position of the Vietnamese Government that it
will not enter into negotiations with the aggressor until
the last Chinese soldier has left the territory of the Socialist Republic of Viet Nam. The Security Council is bound
to respect this entirely justified determination of the people of Viet Nam, which is supported by the peoples of the
world.

36. The Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, with the
utmost seriousness and with great insistence, issued a
warning to the Chinese aggressor to halt its attack while
there was still time and to withdraw its armed forces from
the territory of Viet Nam. Peking must have understood
that those were not mere empty words. The whole course
of events has confirmed the validity of the Soviet appeal,
with which the other socialist States and peace-loving
people throughout the world have unanimously associated themselves.

41. The Chinese delegation has attempted to justify
China’s aggression by the so-called question of Kampuchea. But is it really difficult to understand, in the light of
these treacherous Chinese tactics, that any attempts to
prompt the Council to intervene in the internal affairs of
the People’s Republic of Kampuchea, using as a pretext
even the vague formulation of the agenda item, are aimed
only at serving to cover up the naked act of aggression by
the Chinese against Viet Nam? In the concrete political
context, this would even mean acquiescing in the tactics
of Peking’s “teachers-of-lessons*’ and connivance wih the
aggressor-and even encouragement of the aggressor.

37. The Chinese aggressor, through its official telegraphic news agency, has now reported that it is withdrawing
its troops from Vietnamese territory. That statement on
the part of Peking must’be taken with a great deal of
caution. The aggressor has given no particular time schedule .for the withdrawal of its military units from Viet
Nam. Furthermore,
it reserves its “right”-if
you
please- to commit further aggression. Moreover, as our
experience here in the Security Council shows, the present Chinese representatives are in the habit of stating
one thing and acting in quite a different way.

42. Furthermore, the attempts to link discussion of the
Chinese aggression against Viet Nam with the so-called
question of Kampuchea mean making a mockery of the
people of that country. The Kampuchean people, which
have still not accounted for all their dead nor forgotten
the bloody horror inflicted on them by the Maoist maniacs, can understand these attempts only as a further
cynical effort to manipulate their fate. The people of
Kampuchea need peace and tranquillity, not a return to
the bloody regime whose leaders have hidden in Peking.

38. However that may be, the irrefutable fact remains
that the Maoists have lost face in the eyes of peace-loving
and progressive world public opinion. They have not
been able to compel the heroic people of Viet Nam to sink
to their knees. The Chinese aggression has become
bogged down in deadlock, and the offensive military
units of the occupier have been defeated militarily by the
heroic Vietnamese people and army and unable to
achieve their aggressive goals. While at the beginning of
their piratical invasion of the territory of Viet Nam the
Peking ruling circles haughtily stated that they wanted to
teach Viet Nam “a lesson*‘, now it has at least become
clear that it is precisely the Maoists who have been taught
a good lesson, militarily and politically.

43. If anyone is concerned about the situation with
regard to relations between Kampuchea and Viet Nam,
he should familiarize himself with the text of the Treaty of
Peace, Friendship and Co-operation between the Socialist Republic of Viet Nam and the People’s Republic of
Kampuchea [S/13101], dated 18 February 1979. That
Treaty is the logical culmination of the traditional militant solidarity between those countries-going
back
many, many years-and the basis for the independent
future of the two countries, including a bright future for
the Kampuchean people, without Pol Pot and Ieng Sary
and without the thousands of Chinese advisers.
4

.

44. The Security Council must rebuff %hina*s criminal.
actions in the interests of all countries and peoples of the
world. It must demand the immediate cessation of Chinese aggression and the unconditional withdrawal of Chinese troops from Viet Nam. The Council must not shirk
its responsibility and permit a platform to cover up and
give encouragement to the aggressor.

SO. The draft resolution submitted by China[S/Z3119],
however, has just one thing in common with the actual
state of affairs: the date of 17 February 1979, which it
mentions. But it is precisely that date which is famous in
the world as the beginning of the Chinese aggression
against Viet Nam, as the day ‘of the invasion by Chinese
troops of Vietnamese territory, and not as the date of the
issuing of the letter from the representative of the Pol Pot
regime, which has been overthrown by the people of
Kampuchea, as an official document of the United
Nations. The very content of this draft is just one more
manifestation of the cynicism of the Maoists and their
unbridled chauvinistic patterns in South-East Asia.

45. The representative of Viet Nam, Mr. Ha Van Lau,
ln his, brilliant statements in the Council, has opened UP
for us a few pages of the history of Vietnamese-Chinese
relations. He has clearly demonstrated that, not only
now, but even many years ago, at the time the Vietnamese
people were struggling against another aggressor, Peking
was attempting to dictate to Viet Nam, whose independent policy did not mesh with its expansionist plans.

5 1. The Czechoslovak delegation will vote against the
draft resolution submitted by Indonesia, Malaysia, the
Philippines,
Singapore and Thailand in document
S/13162, which will be put to the vote on the initiative of
the representatives of Norway and Portugal. This draft is
unacceptable to us for a number of considerations of
principle. First, although it undoubtedly has in mind the
Chinese aggression against Viet Nam, it does not contain
a clear-cut unambiguous condemnation of it. Secondly, it
does not call for the immediate and unconditional withdrawal of all Chinese troops from the whole territory of
the Socialist Republic of Viet Nam. Thirdly, because it
mentions the situation in South-East Asia without
directly naming Chinese aggression, the draft resolution
makes it possible to interpret its provisions in an
expanded way and even ambiguously and inaccurately.
The ambiguity and inaccuracy of the appeals addressed
to “all parties to the conflicts” is something we decisively
reject ‘and view as an attempt to defend the Chinese
aggressor. General appeals for the withdrawal of foreign
troops “to their own countries” in actual fact may only
serve as justification for the Chinese aggressor to continue his intervention in Viet Nam. Fourthly, in spite of
our trust of the Secretary-General, we do not see, in conjunction with other elements of the provisions of this
draft resolution, a real possibility for the use of his good
offices. We believe that to commit the Secretary-General,
in this situation, to carrying out such a task could only be
detrimental to his authority, and, incidentally, it might
have a bad effect also on the possibilities of exercising his
mediation if necessary after the total elimination of Chinese aggression against Viet Nam.

46. Incidentally, it is‘ worth pointing out in this regard
that this has been not only a history of pressure on the
Vietnamese but also a history of betrayal by the Chinese
leadership of the cause of socialism. These leaders have
betrayed socialism in China, in Kampuchea, in Viet Nam
and in Chile, and they have betrayed the national liberation struggle of the peoples of Africa. Finally, they have
demonstrated that they have absolutely nothing in common with socialism; indeed, they have become its outright foe.
47. Certain circles in the West have therefore long been
banking on the Chinese betrayal in their foreign-policy
strategies and are attempting to find ever newer ways of
using the so-called Chinese card. Certainly, they have
made a great many promises to China, and it is trying as
hard as it can to respond, to the point where it even
ventured to commit naked aggression. But all who are
banking on playing the “Chinese card” and attempting
directly and indirectly to encourage the Peking leadership
in its irresponsible policy have been shown by the Chinese
aggression against Viet Nam that they are playing with
fire and are being very short-sighted.%
48. Unfortunately we have once again come up against
the fact that even certain representatives of non-aligned
countries are closing their eyes to the real policy of China.
Certain individuals among them, in contacts with private
persons who are trying to represent themselves as representatives of Kampuchea, are in practice diverting attention from the main issue: the cessation of Chinese
aggression. I do not think that such individual representatives can call themselves non-aligned before the Vietnamese. On the contrary, whether they like it ornot, they
are practically associating themselves with those who are
encouraging and justifying the aggressor and those who
are obviously very much in tune with the reactionary
policy of the Chinese leadership.

52. Supporting draft resolution S/13162 instead of
coming out unambiguously in support of the victim of
aggression, Viet Nam, and compelling China in time to
put an end totally to its criminal expansionist invasions in .
Asia, the first victim of which has been Viet Nam, is
tantamount to making concessions to the aggressor,
accommodating it and attempting to appease it.
53. These days, which bear the imprint of Chinese
aggression against the Socialist Republic of Viet Nam,
when the sky of international life is clouded over, are for
us also a source of optimism because it has been confirmed that the strength, will and solidarity of the peaceloving peoples of the world, combined with the
peace-loving policy of the countries of the socialist community, can prevent conflicts, even dangerous ones such
as the Chinese aggression against Viet Nam, from growing into world-wide conflagrations.

49. From the very beginning of these meetings it has
been clear that, in spite of the attempts to divert the
attention of the Council, what we are discussing here is
Chinese aggression against Viet Nam. It is precisely for
that reas,on. that the draft resolution submitted by the
USSR and Czechoslovakia [5/231Za clearly calls for the
adoption’of all urgent measures necessary to resolve the
current situation.

s

54. The Czechoslovak Socialist Republic, which is on
the side of the just cause of Viet Nam and is as a matter of
principle in favour of peace, international security and
the deepening of dCtente, is firmly convinced that the
Security Council, too, can and indeed must act to prevent
Chinese expansion. Therefore, from the very beginning
of these Council meetings, the Czechoslovak delegation
has been stressing that it is only by determined action on
the part of the Council in condemning Chinese aggression against Viet Nam and forcing the aggressor anconditionally to withdraw all its forces from Viet Nam that we
can ensure the restoration of peace in that part of the
world and ward off the threat of the exacerbation of the
international situation.

Israeli representative when he asserted that Arab lands
on the West Bank of the Jordan, as he put it, were part of
the territory of “Greater Israel’*.
59. The Chinese assertions of their intention to cease
aggression are clearly meant to mollify the condemnation
of this aggression by world public opinion and are an
attempt once again to mislead it with regard to China’s
true plans. However, the arrogant statements by the
rulers in Peking about their intention to “teach a lesson”
to those who have determined to impede their
expansionist policy should not be forgotten: they should
genuinely serve as a lesson to those who have ever
harboured any illusions, or who still harbour any
illusions, about the foreign policy of the present Chinese
leaders.

55. Viet Nam has true friends that will not give way to
the asnirations of Peking to world domination. The
Czechoslovak delegation will declare by its vote its solidarity and that of the Czechoslovak people with struggling Viet Nam.

60. Nor should we forget the crimes which are being
committed by the Chinese aggressors on Vietnamese soil.
In the temporary occupied frontier regions, the Chinese
occupationists have employed the Fascist scorched-earth
tactic: many villages and populated areas have been
wiped off the face of the earth, factories and mines have
been blown up and pillaged; many peaceful inhabitants
-old people, women and children-have
been slain.
Among the numerous civilian targets which the Chinese
aggressors have reduced to ruins there was a school that
had been built with United Nations funds, and also a
recently constructed kindergarten-c&he
complex built
with the assistance of the United Nations Children’s
Fund, the opening of which at the beginning of this year
was part of the celebration of the International Year of
the Child.

56. Mr. TROYANOVSKY
(Union of Soviet Socialist
Republics) (interpretation from Russian): The Chinese
aggression against the Socialist Republic of Viet Nam
which began four weeks ago has been properly rebuffed
and opposed. The heroic Vietnamese people have
thwarted the designs of the Chinese ‘strategists to carry
out a Peking-style blitzkrieg. The boastful assertions of
the Chinese representatives that their punitive operation
would be concluded in a few days burst like a bubble.
Having come up against the invincible firmness and resistance of the Vietnamese people and their armed forces,
and having become aware of the solidarity between the
Vietnamese people and their friends and all peace-loving
forces, the Chinese interventionists have been forced to
declare their intention to withdraw their troops from
Vietnamese soil. Now, as waspointed out a few days ago
by Leonid Ilyich Brezhnev, the Chinese leaders have been
forced to sound the retreat. This is the result of the determination and valour of the Vietnamese people, the
militant solidarity with Viet Nam of the Soviet Union and
other States of the socialist community, and the support
of world public opinion. He added:

61. China’s aggression .against Viet Nam has made it
abundantly clear to the whole world what in practice is
the great-Power hegemonistic policy of the Chinese
Government.
Cloaking
themselves in hypocritical
utterances about a community of interests with the
developing countries, the Peking leaders in actual fact
have been trying to subjugate these countries to their own
diktat, and have not even shrunk from the direct use of
armed force.

“The situation in South-East Asia remainsrense and
alarming. Our course is clear. We shall do everything
necessary to assist the just cause of Viet Nam and
prevent new acts of provocation which threaten
universal peace.”

62. In accordance with the intention proclaimed by
Mao Tsetung as far back as 1965 to take over South-East
Asia, as he put it, the Chinese expansionists have turned
Kampuchea into a base for acts of military provocation
against neighbouring States. For two years, on orders
from China, the Pol Pot clique waged open war against
Viet Nam. At the same time, the Chinese rulers proceeded
to the realization of their broader expansionist plans: at
the instigation of the secret services of China, hotbeds of
so-called small wars have been maintained for many
years in Burma, Thailand, Malaysia and other States in
the area for the purpose of creating destabilization.
Thousands upon thousands of people have been dying
there at the hands of Peking’s agents, while the Chinese
hegemonists are preparing and training new Pol Pots and
Ieng Saris so that at the hands of these henchmen in the
future they may carry out their annexationist plans and
designs. One more “fifth column” in the countries of
South-East Asia is seen by Maoist Chinese strategy in the
persons of the 20 million ethnic Chinese who live there.

57. The danger of these new acts of provocation is
becoming very real. The same Huang Hua who made the
statement that the withdrawal of Chinese troops from
Viet Nam, as he put it, had been concluded, without
pausing to take-a breath, uttered the threat that Chinese
troops might once again make incursions into Viet Nam
in the future on one or another trumped up pretext.
58. The facts also demonstrate that the Chinese
aggressors, while stating that they do not need a single
inch of Vietnamese soil, at the same time are planningthe
annexation of Vietnamese territory. For this purpose
they are using a.not very clever stratagem employed by all
aggressors. declaring Vietnamese land Chinese. How
strikingly reminiscent are these statements of words
which were uttered in this chamber quite recently by the
6

a result of the armed invasion by Chinese troops of
Vietnamese territory. The Council should also callupon
all countries to halt any assistance to China of a military
nature.

63. The overthrow of the Pol Pot clique in Kampuchea
and the expulsion of the Chinese advisers who were
running things there undermined Chinese plans to
surround Viet Nam. However, it is clear that the Peking
authorities have not renounced these plans. They are
concentrating their forces on the border of the Lao
People’s Democratic Republic. They have been stepping
up the intelligence and diversionary and subversive
activities of Chinese agents in the frontier regions with
Laos. In the circumstances, the danger of military
provocations against Laos, and of their growing into
direct aggression by China, is constantly increasing. The
threat to Laos is a threat to the independence and
sovereignty of all States of South-East Asia:

68. However, we seethat the Council is not in a Rosition
to do its duty with regard to the Chinese aggression
against Viet Nam. The reason for this lies, in particular,
in the fact that the delegation of the United States and
certain other delegations from the very beginning have
deliberately tried to divert the attention of the Council
from the question of Chinese aggression against Viet
Nam and have tried to link the discussion of this matter
with the so-called problem of Kampuchea in an attempt
to impede the adoption of the necessary measures to halt
Chinese aggression and eliminate the threat which it
poses to peace in that area and throughout the world.

64. The heroic Vietnamese people, beating off the
armed aggression of Peking in their struggle for the
independence of their homeland, at the same time are
defending the peace and security of all the countries of
South-East Asia, over which has hung a genuine threat
from the Peking hegemonists. The sooner the Chinese
threat is properly understood by all the countries of that region, the easier it will be for them to
avert it.

69. The Soviet Union expresses its regret that this is the
course which has also been taken by the sponsors of the
draft resolution tabled in the Council by the five ASEAN
members [S/13162]. It should be pointed out that in the
text of this draft resolution there is a certain reflection of
the concern with Chinese aggression whicn we have heard
in statements from representatives of many States and
their demand for the immediate withdrawal of Chinese
troops from the territory of Viet Nam. However, this
draft resolution does not contain a clearcut condemnation of Chinese aggression or a demand that China
should eliminate all the consequences of the aggression it
has committed, nor does it call upon China to make
restitution for the damage done. That alone makes this
draft resolution unsatisfactory. However, that is not the
only point. In the draft the ~question of Chinese
aggression against Viet Nam is virtually linked to the
situation in Kampuchea and there is total disregard of the
actual state of affairs in that country, the people of which
overthrew a hateful regime and embarked upon the
construction of a new one. The draft resolution in essence
amounts to putting the Chinese aggressor on the same
footing as its victim, the Socialist Republic of Viet Nam.

65. It should be pointed out that in their adventures the
Chinese rulers have been aiming at obtaining the support
of militaristic and imperialistic circles, as well as of those
unprincipled politicians who are against detente and the
strengthening of international security. These manceuvres
on the part of the Chinese rulers should attract the
concentrated attention of all those who cherish peace.
Nor should we forget that any connivance, and still more
any active assistance to the aggressive course of Peking,
is a dangerous course fraught with most serious peril to
the fate of peace not only in Asia but also throughout
the world.
66. The statements of many delegations in the Security
Council have reflected the fact that the Chinese aggression has met with categorical condemnation throughout
the world accompanied by demands for its immediate
cessation and the total withdrawal of Chinese troops
from the territory of Viet Nam. In a joint Soviet-Indian
communique published yesterday on the results of the
visit to India of the Chairman of the Council of Ministers
of the USSR, Alexei Nikolayevich Kosygin, we find the
following:
“Having considered the situation which has arisen in
South-East Asia in connexion with the massive armed
invasion by China of the Socialist Republic of Viet
Nam, the Soviet Union and India call for the
immediate, unconditional
and total withdrawal of
Chinese troops from the territory of Viet Nam.”

70. The adoption of this kind of resolution could be
used by the Chinese aggressor to justify his criminal
actions and could only prompt him to undertake further
adventuristic and expansionist actions in South-East
Asia and whet the appetite of the Peking leaders for
“teaching lessons” to all those who try to prevent their
expansion. It is obvious that the Soviet delegation will
vote against the draft resolution.
71. The Soviet delegation expresses its regret that the
Security Council has not been able to measure up to the
tasks that properly belong to it and was unable to adopt
effective measures to halt Chinese aggression. However,
this will not prevent Chinese aggression from coming to
an ignominious end. The war against the Vietnamese
people is an international
crime and those who
committed that crime will not be able to evade responsibility for it. The guarantee of the total and final victory of
Viet Nam in its just struggle is the determination and
valour of the Vietnamese people and the fraternal
solidarity of the Soviet Union and other Socialist
countries and the support of the whole of peace-loving
mankind.

67. It would appear that the Security Council, in
accordance with its duties prescribed in the Charter,
should be taking the clear-cut and unambiguous stand of
condemning Chinese aggression and demanding the
immediate withdrawal of the aggressive forces of China
from the territory of Viet Nam and strict observance by
China of the independence, sovereignty and territorial
integrity of the Socialist Republic of Viet Nam. The
Council should demand that China should make full
retribution for the material damage done to Viet Nam as
‘7

Council bears an unshirkable resnonsibilitv in this
regard. All countries and people that‘love peace and uphold justice are duty-bound to take measures to urge the
Vietnamese authorities to stop immediately their acts of
aggression against Democratic Kampuchea and withdraw all their invading forces back to their own country
so as to serve the interests of the peace, security and
stability of South-East Asia and the whole Asia-Pacific
region.

72. The PRESIDENT:
It is my understanding that the
Council is now ready to proceed to vote on the draft
resolution sponsored by Indonesia, Malaysia, the
Philippines, Singapore and Thailand which the representative of Norway has requested be put to the vote. That
draft resolution is contained in document S/13162.
A vote was taken by show of hands.
In favour: Bangladesh, Bolivia,
China, France,
Gabon, Jamaica, Kuwait, Nigeria, Norway, Portugal,
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland,
United States of America, Zambia
Against: Czechoslovakia,
Republics

Union

76. As for the Chinese side, on 17 February, when we
were driven beyond forbearance to fight back in selfdefence against the Vietnamese authorities* armed
provocations, we solemnly declared to the whole world
that we did not want a single inch of Vietnamese territory,
but neither should we tolerate incursions into Chinese
territory [S/230941. All we wanted was a peaceful and
stable border. On 5 March we declared [S/Z3137J once
again in all seriousness that the Chinese frontier troops
had attained the goals set for them since they were compelled to launch a counter-attack in self-defence, and that
starting from that date, all Chinese frontier troops were
withdrawing to Chinese territory. Today, 16 March, the
Chinese frontier forces have completed their withdrawal
and returned entirely to Chinese territory, and they
will strictly keep to the defence of the border of our
country. We have kept our word by withdrawing all our
frontier forces. The facts have exploded the lies spread
by the Soviet and Vietnamese authorities about the socalled Chine& “aggression” and “expansion”.
Of
course, we have to warn the Vietnamese authorities that
they must make no more armed provocations and incursions along the Chinese border. The Chinese side will
firmly strike back in case of a recurrence of such
Vietnamese activities.

of Soviet Socialist

The result of the vote was I3 in favour, 2 against.
The draft resolution was not adopted, one of thenegative
votes being that of a permanent member of the Council.
73. The PRESIDENT:
A number of representatives
have asked to speak after the vote, and I shall now call on
them.
74. Mr. CHEN Chu (China) (interpret&ion from
Chinese): Mr. President, the Chinese delegation has carefully studied the draft resolution sponsored by the five
ASEAN countries contained in document S/13162. In
our view, the draft is not satisfactory in that it has failed
to devote closer attention to and to focus on the extremely important issue of Viet Nam’s armed invasion
and military occupation of Democratic Kampuchea,
which constitute a gross trampling upon the Charter of
the United Nations and norms of international law and
pose a grave threat to peace and security in South-East
Asia and the whole world, and that it has failed to condemn sternly the Vietnamese authorities for their crimes
of aggression as they deserve.

77. We have always held that disputes between nations
should be settled peacefully through negotiations. The
Chinese Government has repeatedly proposed that the
Chinese and Vietnamese sides should enter into
negotiations to discuss ways of ensuring peace and
tranquillity along the border between the two countries
and then proceed to settle the boundary and terrttortal
disputes. Recently, the Vietnamese Government has expressed its readiness to accept China’s proposal for
negotiations. This is welcome. So long as the Vietnamese
side is really sincere, negotiations between the two sides
can start very soon and the issues can be settled without
much difficulty.

75. In particular, the draft has failed to point out that it
was the Vietnamese authorities which had provoked the
Sino-Vietnamese border conflict. And it is entirely unnecessary and unfair, after the complete withdrawal of
the Chinese troops once their goals were attained, for the
draft to regret the just action on the part of China in being
compelled to fight back in self-defence. Therefore, the
Chinese delegation wishes to state its serious reservation
with regard to the third preambular paragraph, which
concerns China. Nevertheless, we have noted that the
wording of operative paragraph 1, which “Urgently calls
upon all parties to cease all hostilities forthwith”, and that
of operative paragraph 2, which “Further calls upon all
parties to the conflicts to withdraw their forces to their
own countries”, undoubtedly and naturally imply a
demand first of all for Viet Nam to put an immediate end
to its armed aggression against and military occupation
of Democratic Kampuchea and withdraw all its invading
forces in Democratic Kampuchea back to Viet Namunconditionally and without any delay. In this sense, we
consider the basic content of the draft resolution to be
positive, and we have voted in favour of the draft.
Forcing Viet Nam to withdraw all its invading forces
from Democratic Kampuchea is the issue at the core of
the current situation on South-East Asia. The Security

78. There is a traditional
friendship between the
Chinese and Vietnamese peoples. The Chinese people
highly value their friendship with the Vietnamese people.
Although this friendship has in recent years been
damaged, to our distress, we eagerly hope that it may be
restored. We hope that the Vietnamese authorities will
have the fundamental interests of the two peoples at-heart
and stop pursuing their hostile anti-China policy so that
the Chinese and Vietnamese peoples may live together in
friendship from generation to generation.
79. Following the flagrant Soviet veto’last January on
the draft resolution sponsored by all the non-aligned
members of the Council [S/Z3027J, calling for a halt to
Viet Nam’s aggression against Democratic Kampuchea
and for the maintenance of international peace and secu8

allGovernments and peoples that have the same purpose
in mind. At the same time, in view of the fact that the
Vietnamese auihtirities are continuing their armed
aggression against Democraiic Kampuchea, refusing to
withdraw their invading forces from Kampllchea or even
to commit themselves to do so, the Security Council,
in our view, has the responsibility, in defending the
purposes and principles of the Charter, to remain
seized of this question and to force the Vietnamese
authorities to withdraw all their aggressor forces
promptly.

rity, which won the overwhelming majority of 13
affirmative votes, the Soviet Union has once again blatantly vetoed the draft resolution to the same effect sponsored by the five ASEAN countries, which has also won
the support of 13 members.
80. What does this arbitrary Soviet action show? It
shows that it is the Soviet Union and Viet Nam, and not
anyone else, who are the real aggressors. Soviet-Vietnamese collusion for intensified expansion is the root
cause of the current tension in South-East Asia. The
Soviet Union is the behind-the-scenes boss for both Viet
Nam’s aggression against Democratic Kampuchea and
its provocation of the border conflicts between China and
Viet Nam. Soviet social-imperialism is the most ferocious
enemy of the people of South-East Asia and the whole
world.

84.

LEPRE‘ITE
(France) (interpretation from
three weeks ago, my delegation here
stated France’s deep concern about the evolution of the
situation in South-East Asia. Observing the increasingly
grave confrontations which were taking place in that
region, we warned against the perils which resulted not
only for the countries concerned but also to an increasing
degree for the peace of the world.

81. Such arbitrary Soviet action also shows that, in
pursuit of its global hegemonism, the Soviet Union has
time and again prevented the Security Council from
taking action on the grave situation of Viet Nam’s undisguised armed invasion and occupation of a sovereign
State. Such a sinister act which brazenly goes against the
will of the overwhelming majority of the Members of the
United Nations and members of the Security Council and
grossly tramples upon the Charter and norms of international law once again demonstrates the duplicity of the
line-sounding words, such as “ditente”, “disarmament”,
“respect for others’ sovereignty”, “non-use of force” and
so on, repeatedly uttered by the Soviet Union in United
Nations forums with the purpose of covering up its own
aggression and expansion.

85. ‘My delegation therefore found it natural that the
Security Council:should be seized of a problem which,
quite obviously; was within its competence, As France
sees it, the Council should seek to obtain as rapidly as
possible, with respect for the rights of each and, in the
first place, by the withdrawal of foreign forces from the
territories they occupy, the restoration of peace and
stability in that part of the world which has been most
severely tried in the still recent past.
86. This concern of my country was certainly shared by
the cast majority of the speakers who have taken part in
the debate. In these arcumstances, it may appear
surprising that the Council has not pronounced itself
earlier on a text reflecting its feeling. The reason is that we
were dealing with a most complex situation that called for
serious reflection..

82. The flagrant Soviet veto of the ASEAN draft is also
a dangerous signal showing that the Soviet Union and
Viet Nam, as major and minor hegemonism, will persistently carry on and intensify their acts of aggression and
expansion in South-East Asia. This will inevitably further endanger the peace and security of the countries
in the whole region and the world over. We cannot remain indifferent to it. All the countries and peoples
that uphold justice, cherish independence and love
peace. must get further united and take all the necessary measures and actions to halt and .frustrate those
acts of aggression and expansion.

87. The large number of draft resolutions that were
successively and discreetly submitted bears witness to the
readiness of the members of the Council and their will to
arrive at a solution in accordance with the principles of
the Charter. Ultimately and quite logically, it was left to
the countries of the region which were most immediately
exposed to a spread of the conflict to propose a text likely
to win the broadest approval.

83. Despite its veto of this draft resolution, the Soviet
Union cannot veto the iron-clad fact that the Vietnamese
authorities are stepping up their armed aggression
against and military occupation of Democratic Kampuchea, nor can it veto the Kampuchean people’s strong will
to carry to the end the war of resistance in defence of their
independence, sovereignty and territorial integrity, or the
determination and faith of all justice-upholding countries
and peoples to defend the fundamental purposes and
principles of the Charter of the United Nations. The renewed veto shamelessly applied by the Soviet Union can
only arouse the peoples of the whole world to intensified
just struggle against hegemonism, big or small. The
Chinese Government and people will, as always, unswervingly take all measures to fight resolutely against
hegemonism and national expansionism and in defence
of the independence, sovereignty and territorial integrity
of all States. To this end, we are ready to join forces with

88. A few minutes ago, France voted in favour of the
draft submitted by the five ASEAN States. The draft
explicitly refers to such fundamental principles as respect
for the territorial integrity and sovereignty of States and
its corollary, non-recourse to the use of force. Likewise,
it is intended to prevent any escalation and widening of
the conflict and thus meets our constant concern to
preserve detente .throughout the. world.
89. By our vote we meant to express both our
categorical opposition to the rule that might is right, our
faithful adherence to the ‘fundamental provisions of the
Organization and our trust in negotiation to settle disputes by peaceful means.
90. Mr. PETREE (United States of America): It has
now been over two months since Viet Nam invaded Kam.:
9

*-

Mr.

French): Almost

puchea and several weeks since China invaded Viet Nam.
Those of us who warned that the Vietnamese invasion
contained in it the seeds of wider conflict can take no
satisfaction in seeing our prediction come true. For the
fact is that the Security Council has a clearly defined
responsibility for the maintenance of international peace
and security; yet the attitudes of key members have
caused it to hesitate in meeting its obligations.

existing borders. But this broad agreement has notfound
expression in concrete steps by the parties to theconflicts
or by the Council.
96. My Government deeply regrets that the Soviet
Union has for the second time in just over a month vetoed
a draft resolution supported by the overwhelming majority of the Council and, it is’clear, by international opinion. These measures would have been instrumental in
helping to restore peace and security to an area of the
world which has suffered from armed conflict for so long.
In any case, the fact that the draft resolution proposed by
Indo-China’s immediate neighbours and supported by so
many Governments has been defeated does not bring an
end to the matter. Active armed hostilities continue, and
an end to the threat of a widened conflict is not in sight.
We must therefore continue to seek ways to deal with the
breach of international peace ‘and security, as we are
bound to do by the Charter.

91. No one can deny that the situation in South-East
Asia is more dangerous today than it was two months
ago. China has announced its withdrawal from Vietnamese territory and Viet Nam has stated publicly that it
would be willing to negotiate with China upon its withdrawal. But the withdrawal has proceeded slowly and the
qualifications each country has attached to its statement
raise the prospect that hostilities will not, in fact, end. The
continued Vietnamese occupation of Kampuchea and the
fighting in that country affect the security andstability of
the region and cause needless loss of human life. Aside
from the direct combat, there are well-substantiated
reports that the Pol Pot forces have retaliated brutally
against elements of the population they believe to have
collaborated with the Vietnamese. An end to that fighting
and bloodshed seems nowhere in sight.

97. My Government has stated on numerous occasions
that it is prepared to give strong diplomatic support to
effective measures to end the conflicts in South-East Asia
and to bring stability and peace to the region. Along with
others, we have welcomed the Secretary-General’s offer
to make his good offices available to the parties. China
and Viet Nam having declared their willingness to negotiate their differences, we believe that such third-party
assistance may well be an effective means of translating
these stated intentions into reality. We also encourage
those who have been considering the proposal for an
international conference on Kampuchea to elaborate
their views. How, for example, might a conference act to
ensure the independence, territorial integrity and neutrality of Kampuchea and the security of its neighbours?
How could such a conference assist in ensuring the
human rights of Kampuchea’s long-suffering people?
How could it contribute to the stability of the region as a
whole? What role should the Organization play in such a
conference to promote a successful outcome?

92. The ASEAN States, near neighbours to the areas of
conflict, have issued two significant statements related to
the successive invasions of Kampuchea and Viet Nam
[S/Z3014 and S/Z3106j. These statements express concern about possible escalation and widening of the
conflict, reiterate support for the principles of the
Charter of the United Nations and international law, and
urge an end to hostilities and a withdrawal of all forces
from foreign territory. They reflect the unease that has
spread throughout the region because of the resort to
military force to resolve disputes.
93. As a result of the war in Kampuchea, serious incidents have occurred on Kampuchea’s border with Thailand. Thailand’s border has been crossed on several
occasions by forces in conflict. Whether inadvertent or
not, these are further demonstrations of the difficulty of
limiting the present conflict to the parties directly
involved.

98. We must break the impasse in our deliberations.
The clear requirement that we make every effort to protect international peace and security has been obfuscated.
We must exhibit more concern for the soldiers dying on
the field of battle and for the thousands of innocent
civilians who are being rendered homeless and who are
being maimed or killed by a conflict they did not create.
This alone should impel us toward action.

94. In the .meantime. Laos has exnressed its concern
about alleged Chinese intentions and actions on its
border. Its charges have been supported by the Soviet
Union and Viet Nam. China has denied those charges in
strong terms. We cannot merely dismiss these exchanges
as meaningless rhetoric, for in the past few months we
have had ample demonstration of how threatening words
can be translated into military action.

99. My Government urges that the Council keep under
active consideration “the situation in South-East Asia”,
and continue consideration of measures which would
help in the restoration of peace, the withdrawal of forces
from foreign territory and the formation of a representative Government in Kampuchea which.would respect the
rights of its peoples.

95. The Council has had extensive deliberations. We
have consulted closely among ourselves and with other
concerned nations on ways to promote accommodation
between the parties in conflicts. Clearly, there is broad
agreement that the situation is perilous and that its solution lies in bringing about a cease-tire, a withdrawal of
forces from foreign territory and a diplomatic process to
allow the parties to compose their differences peacefully
and in a manner which will lead to a mutual respect for

100. In this regard we again welcome the SecretaryGeneral’s offer to use his good offices toward a resolution
of the conflicts. We urge that the parties directly concerned respond positively and without deIay to the
Secretary-General.
101. Let us as a first step inject into the conflicts the
mechanisms of the Organization that are readily avaiIa10

ble to us. Alternatively, we can form a Security Council
committee or dispatch a special mission to the area. We
can set in motion practical measures toward convening
an international conference. All such proposals offer the
means to inject restraint into the present conflicts and to
begin thelong process of political accommodation and
peaceful settlement. We therefore appeal to the members
of this Council, to the parties in conflict and to the
affected nations of the region to intensify their efforts to
find a way to terminate the hostilities and to achieve
peace and stability in South-East Asia.

the tragic tribute paid by the small countries for the
maintenance of world.peace.
107. I should like now to clarify this declaration
principle.

of

108. In the light of the interdependence of the world, at
this stage in the development of the world we cannot’view
with indifference any conflict which affects regional
peace and the development of which-slow or fast, but
always dangerous-turns
the conflict from its initial
bilateral confines into a multinational,
regional and,
finally, global conflict.

102. Mr. RICHARD
(United Kingdom): This debate
has served a useful purpose, even though it has not been
possible to adopt a resolution at its conclusion. It has
provided members of the Council and others with an
opportunity to place on record their views on the situation in South-East Asia. They have done so in this debate
with remarkable unanimity. Virtually every speaker,
except the parties themselves and their backers, has
emphasized the seriousness of the situation, the urgent
need for a cease-fire and withdrawal of foreign troops
from all the areas of conflict, and the need to respect the
sovereignty, territorial integrity and independence of
other States.

109. There are no longer any isolated problems; there is
no longer any absolute bilateralism. The fate of the world
is the fate of each one of our countries, and all peoples-large or small-need each other; for, as in human
society, in the international community everyone is
related to everyone else.
110. For that reason and for many others Bolivia is
keenly interested in the peace and security of all the
regions of the world. It is our aspiration to interpret the
universalist thinking of Latin America, whose sister
nations, overcoming old misunderstandings and bitter
rivalries-and
Bolivia has firmly supported this peaceful
pursuit-have
a sincere pluralistic ideology and the
deepest interest in securing peace in all the regions of the
world. Latin America is a region of constructive balance,
of acceptance of other peoples. Bolivia holds firmly to
these objectives, and we therefore reiterate our keen
interest in seeing peace restored to South-East Asia.

103. In the view of my Government, the draft resolution submitted by the ASEAN countries [S/Z3162l
admirably reflects those concerns and principles. That is
why 12 of the 15 members of the Council voted for
it-though
I appreciate, as does everybody else around
this table, that, perhaps unexpectedly, 13 votes were cast
in favour of the draft resolution. As I said at the beginning of the debate, however, a draft resolution of this
kind should have commanded unanimous support.
Those who voted against it must again bear the responsibility for frustrating the evident wish of the Council to
take effective action.

Ill.
The draft resolution-that
was regrettably not
adopted-did
have such a balance and welcomed the
good offices of the Secretary-General. It was for the
countries of Asia to take the initiative in becoming the
regional sponsors of a draft resolution that we viewed as
positive and balanced and that responded to the lofty
mandate of the Security Council, so unjustly attacked
latteiiyi when so much effort has been made through
various draft resolutions to ensure respect for the territorial sovereignty of States, as was so well said by the
representative of France and other representatives..

104. But today’s vote is not the end of the matter. The.
situation in South-East Asia remains a cause for grave
concern. The Vietnamese invasion and occupation of
Kampuchea remain an affront to the international community and a threat to stability in the region. We welcome the declared intention of the Chinese Government
to withdraw from Viet Nam, and hope that it will speedily
complete its withdrawal behind internationally
recognized borders. We welcome too the stated readiness of
the Chinese and Vietnamese Governments to negotiate.
But there is a need for action on a wider basis. For
until the underlying problems of the area, including
Kampuchea, are tackled and the underlying sources of
instability have been eradicated, the risk of conflict
will remain. Meanwhile, the subject remains on the
agenda of the Council.

112. In conclusion, I should like to praise the excellent
work done last month by Ambassador Bishara of
Kuwait, when he spared no effort, and to pay a tribute to
you, Mr. President, for you, like Ambassador Bishara,
have been a friend to the non-aligned countries. You have
been a most intelligent and selfless spokesman for your
uncompromising positions, which are ours too.
113. The PRESIDENT:
The next speaker is the representative of Australia. I invite him to take a place at the
Council table and to make a statement.

105. Mr. ROL6N

ANAYA (Bolivia) (interpretation
from Spanish): My delegation wishes to emphasize the
concern with which it, together with Latin America-the
geographical region to which Bolivia belongs, as does
Jamaica, which is also a member of the Security Council-has been following the events in South-East Asia.

114. Mr. ANDERSON
(Australia): Mr. President, I
should like through you to thank the members of the
Council for affording me this opportunity of addressing
the Council for a second time during this debate. I would
also offer my warm congratulations to you on ‘your
assumption of the presidency and upon the ability, dedication and patience with which you, like your predeces-

106. Bolivia has stated and repeats now its constant
concern at ‘the endemic repetition of armed regional conflicts which appear intermittently, as though they were
11

.

sor Ambassador
deliberations.

Bishara, are guiding

internal affairs of another countrv and non-use of
force. Secondly, all countries ouisidi Indo-China,
especially big Powers, should exercise the utmost caution and restraint so that the conflicts will not be
escalated to become a threat to the peace of the entire
world.” [2ZZ6th meeting, para. 30.1

the Council’s

115. My delegation welcomed the initiative of the representative of Thailand, acting on behalf of the ASEAN
group, in proposing the draft resolution in document
S/13162. We deeply regret that the draft has been vetoed.
We nevertheless believe that this ASEAN initiative has
made a most significant contribution to the Council’s
consideration of this question. The principles embodied
in the text, principles that are firmly founded in the
Charter of the United Nations, are identical with those
which have been enunciated in recent statements by the
Australian Government directed towards the restoration
of peace, security and stability in Indo-China. The afflrmation of these principles during the debate and their
reaffirmation this evening with the clear support of the.
great majority of members of the Council cannot fail to
have a profound effect on the international community.
We hope that they will also be heeded by the Governments concerned and that those Governments will be
responsive to the weight of international opinion.

I further stated that:
. . . my Government whole-heartedly welcomes the
timely offer of good offices for a peaceful solution
made by the Secretary-General on 22 February. We
hope that the parties involved will seriously consider the
possibility of making use of his offer.” [Zbid. para. 31.1
121. On the basis of this fundamental appioach, my
Government has repeatedly called upon the parties concerned immediately to cease all hostilities, to withdraw all
foreign forces and to initiate, as early as possible, talks for
a peaceful settlement of the conflicts.
122. Particularly with regard to the conflict tjetween
China and Viet Nam, my Government has expressed its
strong wish that any action leading to an exacerbation of
the hostilities should be avoided now that China has
pledged the speedy withdrawal of its forces from Viet
Nam, and that the Soviet Union should exercise the
utmost restraint so as to’prevent the conflict from undergoing a further escalation and widening.

116. The situarion in Indo-China must continue to
preoccupy us all until peace and stability are finally restored to that troubled area. The Australian Government
hopes and expects that the Council will continue to keep
the situation under close consideration and review. My
Government also considers that, in the present circumstances, the Secretary-General is well placed, in virtue of
his high office and responsibilities, to contribute towards
continuing efforts towards a resolution of the conflicts
and of the underlying disputes. Australia has warmly
welcomed his offer of good offices and stands ready to
support and assist him in any way possible.

123. If one compares the points I have just quoted from
my previous statement with the draft resolution introduced by the representative of Thailand on behalf of
Indonesia, Malaysia, the Philippines, Singapore and
Thailand [S/23262], all of them were in essence included
in it. I may add, moreover, that many of the statements
made during the debate also underscore the importance
of the same points as those contained in the draft of the
five countries. I .would argue, therefore, that the draft
resolution embodies the fundamental and commonly
accepted rules and norms which ought to be applied in
cases of the sort of which the Council is currently seized.
The enormous efforts that the five countries have made to
prepare this draft must be particularly commended, and I
should like to express the sincere appreciation of my
delegation to the five Governments for their initiative.

117. The PRESIDENT:
The next speaker is the representative of Japan. I invite him to take a place at the
Council table and to make a statement.
118. Mr. ABE (Japan): Mr. President, I should like at
the outset to express my appreciation to you and, through
you, to the other members of the Council for allowing me
to make a statement .on the draft resolution which the
Council has just failed to adopt.
119. I should like also to take this opportunity to extend
to you my sincere congratulations on your assumption of
the presidency of the Council for this month.
120. When I spoke in the Council on 25 February in
order to voice the view of my Government on this issue,
which is vitally important to the maintenance of international peace and security, I expressed the fervent hope
of my Government that the following points would be
incorporated in whatever form of action the Council
might eventually decide to take:

124. It is most regrettable, therefore, that, despite the
efforts of the five countries, the Council was unable to
adopt the draft resolution. It is hardly necessary to point
out that its failure was not the result of a lack of majority
support: on the contrary, more than two thirds of the
members of the Council cast affirmative votes on this
draft resolution. Surely I express the feeling shared by the
great majority of the international coinmunity when I say
that it is most regrettable that the Council was not able to
apply such fundamental and commonly accepted rules
for the settlement of international conflict.

“First, all parties to theconflicts should immediately
cease all hostilities, all foreign forces should be withdrawn from all the areas of conflict in Indo-China, and
all parties concerned should immediately initiate talks
to settle their conflicts peacefully, in accordance with
the fundamental principles of the Charter of the United
Notions, particularly those of n .-interference in the

125. Allow me to conclude by expressing the strong
wish of my country that, even though this draft resolution
was not adopted, all the parties concerned will pay maximum regard to the tenets of the draft so that peace and
stability will be restored to Indo-China as soon as possible.
12

I32. My Government has been encouraged by indications that the Governments of China and Viet Nam are
prepared to negotiate, once forces have been withdrawn
in that area of conflict. We hope that conditions will
quickly be established which will permit those negotiations to begin.

126. The PRESIDENT:
The next speaker is the
representative of New Zealand, whom I invite to take a
place at the Council table and to make his statement.
127. Mr. FRANCIS (New Zealand): Mr. President,
thank you for giving my delegation the floor for the
second time in the Council’s consideration of this item.
The last time we spoke, your predecessor, Ambassador
Bishara, was guiding the work of the Council, and he did
so, if I might say so, with great sensitivity and tact. Now it
is my pleasure to congratulate you on your accession to
the presidency and to express my delegation’s confidence
that your great diplomatic skill and your experience and
judgement will stand the Council and us all in good stead
during this critical period.

133. The problem created by the armed intervention in
Kampuchea remains; fighting is still going on. In our
view, peace cannot be achieved in that area of conflict
unless foreign forces are withdrawn, the independence of
Kampuchea is assured and Kampuchea displays willingness to co-operate with its neighbours. Some method of
bringing about a peaceful solution containing these elements needs to be found.
134. In our earlier statement in this debate, on 24 February [211&h meeting], we noted that one among a number of possible methods might be through a conference of
the parties involved. We ‘continue to believe that this
possibility has merit; we hope it will be given serious
consideration. Whatever method or mechanism for promoting a peaceful solution to the Kampuchean question eventuates, we also believe that the Council should
avail itself of the Secretary-General’s offer of his good
offices in the search for a peaceful solution to the problems. My Minister for Foreign Affairs expressed the New
Zealand view clearly in a public statement he made on
7March, when he said: “We have no doubt that the
Secretary-General has an important part to play in the
process of restoring peace to Indo-China”. We have been
encouraged in that view by the knowledge that it is shared
by a great many other nations, as this debate has shown.

128. Although New Zealand is not a member of the
Security Council, the New Zealand delegation wishes to
express its support for the initiative of the ASEAN countries in putting forward the draft resolution contained in
document S/13162 on which a vote has just been taken.
129. The draft is a balanced one. It addresses itself-and we believe rightly-to
both instances of armed
intervention which have taken place recently in SouthEast Asia, in violation of internationally accepted principles and the Charter of the United Nations. The draft
resolution avoids polemics. It makes a simple, urgent call
on the parties involved to cease hostilities and to withdraw their forces to their own countries. Its urgency and
importance is not diminished by the inability of the
Council to adopt the draft because of the negative vote of
a permanent member. We earnestly hope that the parties
involved will heed the call contained in the draft, supported as it was by the overwhelming majority of the
Council and of the non-members who took part in the
debate. Such a clear expression of opinion should not go
unheeded, for .it is -based on firm principles of international law, the violation of which endangers all States
without exception.

135. The Council will shortly conclude its present consideration of this item. That consideration has stretched
over a period of nearly a month. During that time the
fighting and killing have continued. It is a sad commentary that the Council has not been able to adopt a draft
resolution which reflects the concern of the majority of
both members and non-members who have spoken in the
debate. In our view that is unfortunate, to say the least,
for the Charter confers on the Council the primary
responsibility for the maintenance of international peace
and security on behalf of the Members of the United
Nations as a whole. It will be important to reflect, in the
aftermath of this debate, on the consequences for the
Organization, and for public confidence in it, of the
outcome of the present debate. What is. at stake here is
not only the peace of South-East Asia but also the ability of the Organization to play the role ascribed to it
of sustaining peace wherever it is endangered.

130. If the tensions, instability and conflicts in the
South-East Asian region are to be replaced by mutual
respect for the territorial integrity, sovereign inviolability
and independence of all States in the area-in a word, by
peace-then the ending of hostilities and the withdrawal
of forces is only the first step. Beyond that, the underlying
causes of tension must be tackled and, if possible, eliminated. If this does not happen, we may see only a temporary respite before the peace and stability of the region is
again jeopardized.
13 1. In this connexion, operative paragraphs 5 and 6 of
the draft resolution should be given the most serious
attention. In paragraph 5, the Council calls upon all
parties to the conflict to settle their disputes by peaceful
means in accordance with the Charter of the United
Nations. In paragraph 6 it welcomes the SecretaryGeneral’s offer of his good offices in the search for a
peaceful solution. The need to find peaceful means of
settling the conflict in South-East Asia is in no way
diminished by the inability of the Council, through no
fault of the majority of its members, to adopt the draft
resolution. If anything, it is made the more urgent by that
failure.

136. The PRESIDENT:
The next speaker is the representative of Canada. I invite him to take a seat at the
Council table and to make his statement.
137. Mr. BARTON (Canada): Mr. President, I should
first like to thank you and the members of the Council for
their courtesy in allowing me to appear before you this
evening and to make a second statement on this most
important question concerning the situation in SouthEast Asia.
138. I should also like to congratulate you, Sir, on your
assumption of the presidency of the Council for the
13

month of-March. The Council has many difficult issues to
consider this month and I am sure that its deliberations
will benefit from your experienced guidance and leadership. At the same time I should also like to pay a tribute to
your predecessor, Ambassador Bishara of Kuwait, for
the skilful manner in which he conducted the Council’s
meetings in the month of February.

ciples of non-alignment which our two Governments
have always firmly defended. Furthermore, you yourself,
with your talent, your experience and expertise have
made an active contribution to the struggle against all
forms of colonialism, expansionism, imperialism, racism
and apartheid. This means that we highly appreciate the
fact that the debates of the Council on the situation in
South-East Asia are being heId under your presidency.
/
145. .I would also express once again our great appreciation for the arduous work done by your predecessor,
Ambassador Bishara of Kuwait. He spared no physical
or intellectual effort to try to find an acceptable solution
to the tension which prevails in South-East Asia, a
tension born of aggression, invasion and occupation of
Democratic Kampuchea by the colonialist aggressors
from Viet Nam who have invaded our territory.

139. Canada would like to commend the representative
of Indonesia, Malaysia, the Philippines, Singapore and
Thailand for tabling the balanced and comprehensive
draft resolution which has just been considered by the
Council. The draft emphasized that the problems of the
South-East Asian region required .a broad approach to
ensure the long-term stability and regional security essential for each nation to grow and develop in peace.
140. In my statement on 24 February [2Zl5rh n?eeri?rg]I
expressed the view of the Canadian Government that
restraint should be exercised by all those involved
and that there should be an immediate cessation of
hostilities
in the entire region, that all foreign
farces should be withdrawn from the territory of Kampuchea and from the territory of Viet Nam and that that
difference should be treated on the political rather than the
.military level. The draft resolution which has just failed
of adoption by the Council addressed these issues and we
deeply regret the inability of the Council
to accept it.
I

146. For the second time in 60 days, the Security
Council, by an overwhelming majority of 13 votes to 2,
has denounced the invasion of Kampuchea by Viet Nam
and called upon Viet Nam to desist from further aggression against Kampuchea, to withdraw all its armed invasion forces from Kampuchea and scrupulously to respect
the independence, sovereignty and territorial integrity of
Democratic Kampuchea. For that act of justice, allow me
to say once again on behalf of the people of Kampuchea
and the Government of Democratic Kampuchea how
grateful we are to the non-aligned members of the
Council-Bangladesh,
Bolivia, Gabon, Jamaica, Kuwait, Nigeria and. Zambia-which
have unstintingly reafflrmed their determination to prevent the principles of
non-alignment and of the Charter of the United Nations
from being violated, to the United States, France,
Norway, Portugal and the United Kingdom, which have
been so good as to reiterate their support for independent
and sovereign Democratic Kampuchea, its territ%iTintegrity and their opposition to the acts of expansion
and annexation of Viet Nam, and, finally, to the People’s
Republic of China, which has once again demonstrated
to the world that it has no territorial expansionist or
hegemonistic intentions, that it in no way interferes in the
internal affairs of another country and that, in international relations, it always adheres to the principles of
good-neighbourliness, mutual respect, equality and nonaggression. Its actions against the regional ambitions of
Viet Nam have constituted and continue to constitute an
important contribution to safeguarding peace, security
and independence in South-East Asia, the Pacific, Asia
and the world.

141. I also noted in my recent statement that Canada
hoped that the Council would invite the SecretaryGeneral to explore possibilities with the parties concerned which could aim at translating into mutually
acceptable political realities the issues in contention
which have been the basis of the unacceptable military
actions. Notwithstanding the result of the vote just taken,
we continue to believe that the use of the SecretaryGeneral’s good offices should be viewed as the starting
point from which an alternative can be developed leading
towards the hoped for objective of a peaceful settlement
of the present hostilities and we expect and trust that he
will continue in his efforts to that end.
142. It is no mere coincidence that the Member States
whose representatives tabled this draft resolution compose the membership of ASEAN. The draft resolution
indicated their concern for the conflicts which are taking
place in their part of the world, and the implementation
of the provisions contained in the draft would have led to
their long-term stability and that of their neighbours. I
wish to express once again my country’s appreciation for
their courage and fortitude in tabling the draft resolution
in the Council.
143. The PRESIDENT:
The next speaker is the
representative of Democratic Kampuchea. Iinvite him to
take a seat at the Council table and to make his statement.

147. By making use for the second consecutive time of
its right of veto, the Soviet Union has confirmed that,
along with Viet Nam, it is the instigator of the war now
afflicting South-East Asia and that it is in the grip of its
ambition of global expansionism, which fits in with the
regional expansionist ambition
of its Vietnamese
satellite, thereby not hesitating to trample under foot the
most elementary principles of the Charter of the United
Nations. Furthermore, this second veto demonstrates
that the Soviet Union is responsible for the continued
aggravation of tension now prevailing in South-East Asia
and that its propaganda about detente is but a
smokescreen to conceal and serve its policy of world
expansion.

144. Mr. THIOUNN
PRASITH
(Democratic Kampuchea) (interpretation from French): Mr. President, I
would first of all address to you my warmest congratulations on your accession to the presidency of the Security
Council for the month of March. Since theestablishment
of diplomatic relations, friendly relations have been
established between our countries and peoples on the
basis of the Charter of the United Nations and theprin14

only refuses to withdraw its own armed forces from Kampuchea but takes every necessary measure to strengthen
them. The putting of 50 million Vietnamese on a war
footing and the mobiiization of all the resources of the
country, as well as the foreign assistance at the service of
its war effort, are intended mainly to make up for the increasingly heavy losses being suffered every day by&Get
Nam in Kampuchea, to intensify still further the war of
aggression against that country and to achieve at all cost
its ambition to swallow up Kampuchea. It is certain that
nothing can prevent the people of Kampuchea and its
revolutionary army from continuing to inflict increasingly heavy losses on the Vietnamese invaders. The
general mobilization’ decreed by the Hanoi administration will only result in more death and family separations
among Vietnamese youth and further aggravate the
famine and poverty from which the Vietnamese people
have been suffering for many decades. It is true that, for
the Hanoi administration, the fate and the fundamental
rights of the Vietnamese people to a better life are the
least of its concerns, as long as it can reaiize its ambition
to swallow up Kampuchea and extend Vietnamese
expansionism in South-East Asia.

148. I do not intend to reply to the base-calumnies, lies
and provocations of the representative of the Vietnamese
invaders and colonialists. The debates of the Council, the
statements made before the Council by the representatives of countries that love peace, justice and independence and the vote taken a moment ago, which confirmed
and reinforced the vote taken on 15 January last, have
clearly demonstrated that, whatever their manceuvres,
slanders and sophistries, Viet Nam, its master and confederates cannot in any way conceal the reality. The
reality is that all the countries and the peoples, all the
people’s political organizations, all the persons that love
peace, justice and independence know perfectly well that
the state of war prevailing in South-East Asia, which is,
spreading further and further, came about as a result of
the aggression against and the invasion and occupation
of Democratic Kampuchea by Viet Nam, prompted by its
insatiable expansionist ambition.
149. Scorning the unanimous condemnation of all the
peoples and the countries that love peace, justice and
independence throughout the world, Viet Nam persists in
barbarously intensifying its aggression and crimes
against Democratic Kampuchea and its people, with the
sinister purpose of proceeding to the annihilation of the
people and the nation of Kampuchea, of transforming
this country into a Vietnamese province by means of the
Indo-Chinese federation, placed under the iron rule of
Viet Nam, to be used later as a spring-board for its expansion in South-East Asia.

153. The more Viet Nam intensifies and extends its war
of aggression against Kampuchea, the more the independence, sovereignty and territorial integrity of the countries of South-East Asia are threatened and the more the
danger of regional war in South-East Asia grows, with all
the risks of expanding into a more general war. Viet Nam
bears full responsibility for the ever-growing tension in
South-East Asia. As long as it continues to commit
aggression against and invade and occupy Kampuchea,
as long as Vietnamese armed forces remain in Kampuchea, it is senseless to speak of peace, security or
stability in South-East Asia, Asia, the Pacific and the
world.

150. At the beginning of February, Viet Nam-in order
to meet the failures of its policy of Khmerization of its
war of aggression and reduce the heavy iosses in men and
mat&e/ inflicted upon it by the people and the revolutionary army of Kampuchea-sent
three additional
divisions to Kampuchea. At the same time, it redoubled
its provocations on the Chinese border and was very
active there with the main purpose of camouflaging the
escalation of its war of aggression against Kampuchea.

154. The presence of Vietnamese troops in Kampuchea
is the fundamental factor which fans the flames of war
not only in Kampuchea itself but also in all of South-East
Asia. The immediate, total and unconditional withdrawal
of all Vietnamese troops from Kampuchea is the sine qua
non for the restoration of peace, security and stability in
South-East Asia and the safeguarding of independence of
the countries of South-East Asia. The latter are perfectly
aware’of this and resolutely oppose Vietnamese expansionism. The draft resolution submitted by the fi-qc
ASEAN countries, on which the Security Council has just
taken a decision, is proof of this. We wish here to congratulate and thank them for this just and resolute position.

151. On 5 March last, when the People’s Republic of
China declared that the Chinese counter-attacks against
the Vietnamese provocations had already attained their
goal, that the Chinese troops had started to withdraw and
that disputes between countries must be resolved peacefully through negotiation, the Hanoi administration
decreed general mobilization, turning every Vietnamese
into a soldier. The purpose of this maruzuvre is clear: Viet
Nam used the conflict at the Chinese border, which it had
deliberately provoked, to divert the attention of world
public opinion from its invasion and occupation of Kampuchea and the presence of 150,000 Vietnamese soldiers
in that country. However, the Vietnamese colonialists
and invaders can deceive no one, especially not the people
of Kampuchea, who are fully aware of their perfidious
and criminal nature, and have been so for several centuries. In fact, the thundering statements of Viet Nam
on the Sino-Vietnamese border conflict and the provocations of Laos now being aimed, on Vietnamese instructions, against the People’s Republic of China are in
essence designed to. conceal the Vietnamese crimes
against Democratic Kampuchea and its people.

155. The withdrawal of Vietnamese troops from Kampuchea and an independent and sovereign Democratic
Kampuchea with its territorial integrity are in keeping
with the-direct and vital interests of all the countries and
the peoples of South-East Asia and the world, for, in the
face of the acts of Fascist aggression, invasion and expansion of Viet Nam and its masters, all the peoples and the
countries that love peace, justice and independence, particularly those of South-East Asia, find that their destinies Bre linked and that they must face a common
enemy: the regional expansionists of Viet Nam and its
masters.

152. Viet Nam clamours for the withdrawal of Chinese
troops, which has already been completed, whereas it not
15

for an lndo-Chinese federation and expansion throughout South-East Asia. Viet Nam thought it had already
realized its mad dream ot becoming a regional expansionist force. But, after a month of invasion of Democratic Kampuchea, despite every Fascist measure taken
to intensify in a barbaric fashion their aggression and
crimes against the people of Kampuchea, the Vietnamese
armed forces in Kampuchea find themselves in an increasingly diflicult position and are embroiled in the
popular war waged by the people and the revolutionary
army of Kampuchea. Indeed, they now have to hide in
villages and blockhouses along a few sections of the main
highways, surrounded by the people and the revolutionary army, which are daily inflicting heavy losses on
them in men and matkriel. Their numbers are diminishing
daily by 200 to 300 men on the average and their morale is
steadily weakening.

156. As long as the armed forces of Viet Nam remain on
the national soil of Democratic Kampuchea, nothing can
break the determination of the people and the revolutionary army of Kampuchea to fulfil their noble national
duty to wage, under the guidance of the Government of
Kampuchea, the people’s war of resistance to defend and
safeguard the independence, sovereignty and territorial
integrity of Democratic Kampuchea and the inalienable
right of the people of Kampuchea to decide their own
destiny and that of their country. Not only is that a just
war against the colonialist Vietnamese occupiers, but it
will continue and intensify increasingly. In fact, we have
all the necessary conditions to be able to fight until all
Vietnamese invaders are chased out of Kampuchea.
157. First, our Government, the Government of Democratic Kampuchea, the only legal and legitimate Government of Kampuchea, remains as it was with all its
members, each leading in his own field the popular war of
resistance. The apparatus of administration and government continues to function. The State of Democratic
Kampuchea, which the Vietnamese invaders thought
they had destroyed, continues unchanged, with all its
leaders closely linked to their people.

162. It is certain that the more obstinate the Vietnamese
colonialist invaders are in remaining in Kampuchea the
heavier will be their losses. Indeed, whatever the difficulties that will have to be faced and whatever the sacrifices
that will have to be made, the people of Kampuchea and
its revolutionary army under the leadership of the
Government of Democratic Kampuchea are firmly determined to inflict total defeat on the colonialist Vietnamese
forces of occupation and aggression. This is the only way
to defend and safeguard the people and nation of
Kampuchea and ensure their survival. It is also the only
thing that will help to eliminate tension in South-East
Asia and the threats of aggression from Viet Nam and its
master against the countries of South-East Asia, Asia, the
Pacific and the world.

158. Secondly, our Government is firmly-supported by
the entire Kampuchean people. Inspired with an implacable hatred of the Vietnamese invaders, the people of
Kampuchea has closed its ranks and united with the
Government of Democratic Kampuchea in a broad
national, democratic and patriotic front combining people from all social levels, within and outside the country.
It is firmly determined to wage the patriotic fight for
national liberation until total victory, that is to say, until
all the Vietnamese invaders have been driven out of
Kampuchea. Such a people, inspired by an unshakeable
determination and an heroic patriotism, constitutes the
inexhaustible fountain from which flow all the economic,
political and military resources that enable our people
to fight to the bitter end until final victory.

163. The Government and people of Democratic Kampuchea are well aware that the battle they are now
waging is one to safeguard and defend the independence,
sovereignty and territorial integrity of Democratic Kampuchea, for the honour and dignity of their country. But
it is also the battle of all the countries of South-East Asia,
the Pacific, Asia and of the world to defend and uphold
independence, sovereignty and territorial integrity far the
cause of world peace and security.

159. Thirdly, the revolutionary army of Kampuchea
has in no way been destroyed; quitetothecontrary,
it has
been strengthened in numbers and force with the enthu-siastic support of the population snd the support of
numerous guerrilla forces with the enormous fund of
experience acquired during many and difficult battles. A
wealth of experience has been acquired on how to supply
ourselves with weapons and munitions from the Vietnamese themselves. Furthermore, the question of numbers does not arise, because it is ourentire people which is
fighting with vigour and enthusiasm for a just and noble
cause.

164. Confronted with the insatiable ambitions of global
and regional expansionists Powers, faced with Viet
Nam’s crazy obstinacy and its barbaric crimes against
Kampuchea and its people, the solidarity and cohesion of
all eountries which love peace, justice and independence
have led them to demand urgently that Viet Nam should
cease its aggression and withdraw all its forces from
Democratic.Kampuchea.
Without the total cessation of
that aggression and without the total and unconditional
prior withdrawal of Vietnamese armed forces from Kampuchea no problem can be solved in South-East Asia.
Worse still, the situation in that region will only deteriorate.

160. Fourthly, the just struggle of the people of Kampuchea enjoys the increasingly firm support of all countries throughout the world which love peace, justice and
independence. The vote in the Security Council today
constitutes both resounding proof of that support and
important encouragement to this just struggle.

165. Independence, peace, security and stability in
South-East Asia cannot be preserved and the danger of a
regional war in South-East Asia, with all the risks of its
developing into a world conflict, cannot be eliminated
unless there is resolute action so that the Vietnamese
invaders put an end to their acts of aggression against
Kampuchea, withdraw altogether and respect the inde-

161. The Vietnamese invaders exulted after they had
occupied Phnom Penh, the capital of Kampuchea. They
thought they could easily annex Kampuchea, subjugate
its nation and people and satisfy their ancestral ambition
16

‘pendence, sovereignty and territorial
integrity of
Democratic Kampuchea. It is in this spirit and in the
common interest of all countries which love peace, justice
and independence that the Government of Democratic
Kampuchea, in its statement of 8March [S/l3ZaaJ,
launched an appeal to the noble conscience of all the
peoples and Governments of the world, particularly
those of South-East Asia, that in close unity they should
exert all their influence and take all possible action to
condemn and halt the demented acts of Viet Nam to
intensify its war of aggression against Kampuchea and
demand that Viet Nam should withdraw all its armed
forces from Kampuchean territory.

171. But I shall not reply to the scurrilous diatribe of
that person. It reveals, in the last analysis, the moral
bankruptcy of those who have transformed a glorious
people’s revolution into a pitiful remnant of Nazi-Fascist
imperialism.
172. What has happened is that the new mandarins
cannot conceal the repulsive nature of their aggression
against Viet Nam, in violation of international law and
the Charter of the United Nations. The peoples of the
world have unanimously condemned it, just as they have
repudiated the new mandarins’ grotesque presumption
and their so-called right to “punish” and to “teach a
lesson” to a tremendously heroic people, a people with
more dignity, courage and principles than all the combined bands-purged or to be purged-of the new mandarins, whom the Chinese people will purge once and for
all.

166. Before concluding, I should like to avail myself of
this opportunity to express once again, on behalf of the
people and Government of Democratic Kampuchea, our
profound and sincere gratitude to all countries, Governments, peoples, mass organizations, political parties, international organizations and eminent personalities who have supported and continue to support the
just struggle of the people and revolutionary army of
Kampuchea to drive out all Vietnamese colonialist invaders and aggressors, so that the people of Kampuchea may be their own masters and themselves decide
the destiny of their country, without any foreign interference.

173. What they cannot hide is that they prepared that
aggression with perfidy and treachery, that they obtained
the assent of their imperialist friends, and that they perpetrated that aggression, like the worst nocturnal delinquents, hiding from their own people the chauvinist and
rapacious character of this adventure which could lead
the world to a catastrophe with incalculable consequences.

167. The PRESIDENT: The representative of Cuba has
asked to speak in exercise of the right of reply. I invite him
to take a place at the Council table and to make his statement.
168. Mr. ROA KOURI

174. Has anyone forgotten the following shocking
statement by Marshal Chen-yi, former Foreign Minister
of China: “Thermonuclear war may put an end to the
world, but there will always be some Chinese to rebuild
it”. Is it not that same monstrous philosophy that is being
bandied about today by the new mandarins, imprinting
on their policy the kind of insanity that we have been
witnessing in the last few years, and especially during the
recent aggression against Viet Nam?

(Cuba) (inferprefation from

Spanish): Mr. President, I thank you and the other mem-

bers of the Council for giving me the floor once again
during this debate. I am compelled to do so because of the
gross reference to Cuba made by the representative of the
new mandarins at one of the last meetings of the Council
at which China’s cowardly aggression against the Socialist Republic of Viet Nam was considered.

175. Anyone who is able to impose on a people the
ferocious tyranny of the Pol Pots and their clique would
stop at nothing. Anyone who is capable of committing
aggression against a neighbouring independent and sovereign country such as Viet Nam, who is capable of taking
the lives of children, women and old persons indiscriminately, of bombing factories, mines, hospitals, schools
and houses, like a pirate come to seize a part of a neighbouring country’s territory-as
happened in India in
1962-does not deserve a seat in the Security Council,
much less a seat as a permanent member.

169. It is an old subterfuge of those who resort endlessly
to duplicity, hypocrisy, cynicism and banditry in international relations to attribute to others their own moral
turpitude. Thus, the spokesman of the Teng Hsiao-ping
aggressor depicted my country as “playing the jackal to
the tiger”, because of its resolute and firm position in
defence of proletariat internationalism,
socialism and
communism, so vilely betrayed by the new Peking band.
170. The late “Great Helmsman” reserved the description of “tiger” for North American imperialism,
which he then considered to be the “worst enemy of mankind” -surely because he had not been initiated into the
so-called ping-pong politics and the travels of high
United States officials, nor could he discern in the near
future the possibility of receiving money, technology and
diplomatic recognition. No sooner had all this become
possible than they rolled up the paper tiger into a ball,
white-washed it with the entrails of the Peking duck and
played with it happily, like a cat purring over a ball of
wool. That is the steadfastness of the ‘principles” of the
new mandarins and of their late soothsayer, the lord of
the great leap backward and the stentorian herald who
trumpeted the thermonuclear holocaust.

176. The Teng Hsiao-ping hordes invaded Viet Nam,
announcing that they would withdraw immediately, that
they did not want a single inch of Viet Nam’s territory.
But the truth is quite the opposite. Faced with the sound
thrashing administered by the Vietnamese people, they
have had to withdraw from the more advanced positions
within the territory of that country. But they have
entrenched themselves in zones neighbouring on the
border, on the Vietnamese side, of course, in order to
consummate their objective of conquest and plunder.
177. Those are the truths which the representative of
the new mandarins cannot refute, either with sayings by
Confucius or with the little book of the Great Helms17

,

man-a kind of sinister “Mao Kampf’ for students of
hegemonism-or
with the shrill outbursts of the vulture
of imperialism, the Teng clique.

peace-loving countries, has taught a hard lesson to the
neo-Fascist Peking adventurers. The people of Viet Nam
will, without any doubt, expel these adventurers from
each and every corner of its territory.

178. The people of Viet Nam, with the support of all
progressive mankind, of the socialist camp, of all the

The meeting rose at 10.20 p.m.

18
Litho in-UniiCd Nations, New York

Price: $U.S. 2.50

79-70002-February

1982-2.250
