V.

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Second Committee

4. Requests the Secretary-General of the United
Nations Conference on Trade and Development, with
the assistance of experts, if necessary, as envisaged in
Trade and Development Board decision 144 (XVI), to
prepare a report on this subject for consideration by the
Trade and Development Board and subsequently by the
General Assembly at its thirty-sixth session.
109th plenary meeting
19 December I 979

34/198.

Specific action related to the particular needs
and problems of land-locked developing
countries

The General Assembly,
Reiterating the specific actions in favour of the landlocked developing countries, particularly those envisaged in resolutions 63 (Ill) of 19 May 1972, 16 ' 98
(IV) of 31 May 1976 16 ·• and 123 ( V) of 3 June 1979'""
of the United Nations Conference on Trade and Development,
Bearing in mind various other resolutions adopted by
the General Assembly, its related organs and the specialized agencies emphasizing special and urgent measures
in favour of land-locked developing countries,
Recognizing that the lack of access to the sea, aggravated by great distances to seaports, by remoteness
and isolation from world markets, and by the greater
difficulties and costs of their international transport
services, constitutes a major and persistent hindrance to
the social and economic development of the land-locked
developing countries,
Recalling the provisions of its resolutions 31/157 of
21 December 1976, 32/191 of 19 December 1977 and
33/ 150 of 20 December 1978, and other relevant resolutions of the United Nations with respect to the exercise
of the right of land-locked developing countries to free
access to and from the sea as well as their right to freedom of transit,
1. Reaffirms the right of land-locked developing
countries to free access to and from the sea and their
right to freedom of transit;
2. Calls upon all countries, international organizations and financial institutions urgently to implement the
specific actions related to the particular needs and problems of land-locked developing countries envisaged in
resolutions 63 (III), 98 (N) and 123 (V) of the United
Nations Conference on Trade and Development and in
other relevant resolutions adopted by the United Nations;
3. Notes with regret that the assistance given thus
far falls far short of the needs of the land-locked developing countries;
4. Urges all donor countries as well as the international organizations concerned to provide land-locked
developing countries with appropriate financial aid and
assistance in the form of grants or concessional loans
for the construction, improvement and maintenance of
their transport and transit infrastructures and facilities;
164 See Proceedings of the United Nations Conference on
Trade and Development, Third Session, vol. I, Report and
Annexes (United Nations publication, Sales No. E.73.II.D.4),
annex I.A.
165 Ibid., Fourth Session, vol. I, Report and Annexes (United
Nations publication, Sales No. E.76.II.D.10 and corrigendum),
part one, sect. A.
168 Ibid., Fifth Session, vol. I, Report and Annexes (United
Nations publication, Sales No. E.79.II.D.14), part one, sect. A.

137

5. Commends the Governing Council of the United
Nations Development Programme, the United Nations
Conference on Trade and Development and other related agencies within the United Nations system for the
work and assistance they have provided to the landlocked developing countries;
6. Invites the United Nations Development Programme and the financial institutions of the United Nations system to take appropriate and effective measures
in order to provide additional resources within their
spheres of competence to meet the particular needs of
the land-locked developing countries;
7. Invites the Preparatory Committee for the New
International Development Strategy to take fully into
account, in the formulation of the strategy for the third
United Nations development decade, the special problems relating to land-locked developing countries;
8. Further invites the international community to
give financial support to interested transit and landlocked developing countries in the construction of alternate routes to the sea;
9. Recommends intensified activities relating to the
conducting of necessary studies and the implementation
of special actions and action programmes, including
those under "economic co-operation among developing
countries", as well as those under the United Nations
Conference on Trade and Development, at the regional
and subregional levels, in co-operation with the regional
commissions.

109th plenary meeting
19 December 1979

34/ 199.

Multilateral trade negotiations

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 3201 (S-VI) and 3202 (S-VI)
of 1 May 1974, containing the Declaration and the Programme of Action on the Establishment of a New
International Economic Order, 3281 (XXIX) of 12 December 197 4, containing the Charter of Economic
Rights and Duties of States, and 3362 (S-VII) of 16
September 1975 on development and international
economic co-operation,
Considering that the Tokyo Declaration of 1973 167
called for the Tokyo round of multilateral trade negotiations and set forth the framework, principles and objectives to govern the negotiations, especially the objectives
and commitments in favour of developing countries,
particularly those regarding the principle of nonreciprocity in trade relations between developed and
developing countries, the special and differential treatment for developing countries and the securing of additional benefits for the international trade of developing
countries and the maintaining and improving of the
generalized system of preferences,
Bearing in mind the modified part four of the General
Agreement on Tariffs and Trade stipulating, inter alia,
that the developed countries should not expect reciprocity in their trade relations with developing countries,
Recalling also its resolution 33/199 of 29 January
1979, in which it, inter alia, reiterated the need for continued efforts aimed at the reform of the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade and the international trade
167 See General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade, Basic Instruments and Selected Documents, Twentieth Supplemmt (Sales
No. GATI/1974-1), p. 19.

138

General Assembly-Thirty-fourth Session

regime in accordance with the principle of special and
differential treatment of developing countries,
Recalling further decision 132 (V) of 3 June 1979 of
the United Nations Conference on Trade and Development108 in which the Trade and Development Board was
requested to make a global evaluation of the multilateral
trade negotiations,
Regretting that, contrary to the commitments made
by the developed countries in the Tokyo Declaration, no
real attempt was made to extend special and differential
treatment to the developing countries and to secure additional benefits for them in all areas of negotiation in the
multilateral trade negotiations,
Noting that the Trade and Development Board, at its
nineteenth session, decided to conduct a global evaluation of the results of the multilateral trade negotiations, 100
1. Takes note of the note by the Secretary-General
transmitting the report of the Secretary-General of the
United Nations Conference on Trade and Development
on the multilateral trade negotiations; 110
2. Takes note also of the report of the DirectorGeneral of the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade
on the multilateral trade negotiations;171
3. Notes with deep concern that the developed
countries which are contracting parties to the General
Agreement on Tariffs and Trade did not take fully into
account in all areas of negotiation in the multilateral
trade negotiations the interests and concerns of developing countries, especially the least developed countries;
4. Notes with particular concern that the negotiations aimed at establishing an improved legal framework
for the conduct of international trade more responsive
to the needs and aspirations of developing countries had
disappointing results;
5. Affirms that the interests and rights of developing
countries must be fully safeguarded and preserved in the
process of implementation of the results of the multilateral trade negotiations;
6. Urges that the negotiations on the safeguards
code should be speedily concluded to provide for greater
discipline and fair and non-discriminatory rules for the
use of safeguard measures, with a view to contributing
significantly to meeting the main concerns of the developing countries and enabling those countries to
participate in the results of the multilateral trade negotiations on an equitable basis;
1. Reiterates the need for undertaking negotiations
on a systematic basis for the elimination of quantitative
restrictions and other non-tariff as well as tariff barriers
against the exports of the developing countries and until
the objectives and commitments undertaken in the
Tokyo Declaration, including, inter alia, the need for
preferential and special treatment in favour of developmg countries and explicit recognition of the principle of
non-reciprocity, are achieved;
8. Requests the Secretary-General of the United
Nations Conference on Trade and Development to pre168 See Proceedings of the United Nations Conference on
Trade and Development, Fifth Session, vol. I, Report and
Annexes (United Nations publication, Sales No. E.79.11.D.14),
part one, sect. A.
1 69 See Official Records of the General Assembly, Thirtyfourth Session, Supplement No. 15 (A/34/lS and Corr.I), vol.
II, part two, annex I, decision 201 (XIX).
170 A/34/443.
111 General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade, The Tokyo
Round of Multilateral Trade Negotiations: Report by the Director-General of GA.TT (Sales No. GATT/1979-3); transmitted
to the members of the General Assembly by a note of the
Secretary-General (A/34/4I8 and Corr.I).

pare, in conformity with decision 132 (V) of the Conference, a comprehensive report on the results of _the
multilateral trade negotiations in the light o~ the obJ~ctives and commitments of the Tokyo Declaration, placing
special emphasis on those sectors in which the results
obtained have not fully responded to the interests and
concerns of developing countries, for submission to the
Trade and Development Board at its twentieth session,
for the purpose of undertaking a global evaluation of
such negotiations and with a vi~w to identifying J?Oss_ible
courses of action for the attainment of the ob1ect1ves
pursued by developing countries in those negotiations;
9. Recommends that the United Nations Development Programme should favourably consider requests
for technical assistance to be given to developing countries, including for regional and interregional projects,
in order to provide them with the full benefit of the
results of the multilateral trade negotiations and recommends that negotiations should continue to be conducted
effectively in the future, upon the request of those
countries.
109th plenary meeting
19 December 1979

34/200.

Development aspects of the reverse transfer
of technology

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 3201 (S-VI) and 3202 (S-VI)
of 1 May 1974, containing the Declaration and the Programme of Action on the Establishment of a New
International Economic Order, 3281 (XXIX) of 12 December 1974, containing the Charter of Economic Rights
and Duties of States, and 3362 (S-VIO of 16 September
1975 on development and international economic
co-operation,
Recalling further its resolutions 32/192 of 19 December 1977 and 33/151 of 20 December 1978, entitled
"Reverse transfer of technology",
Taking note of the views and recommendations of the
Sixth Conference of Heads of State or Government of
Non-Aligned Countries, held at Havana from 3 to 9
September 1979, relating to economic problems, 172
Taking note further of the report of the United Nations Conference on Trade and Development on its fifth
session,1 73 the Vienna Programme of Action on Science
and Technology for Development174 and the report of
the Trade and Development Board on its nineteenth
session, 176
Considering that the outflow of skilled manpower
from developing countries may have negative effects on
the possibilities for the social and economic development of those countries and that it constitutes a reverse
transfer of technology,
Reiterating the urgent need to reduce, as part of the
efforts of the international community towards the
establishment of the new international economic order,
the reverse transfer of technology and to obviate its ad-

172 See A/34/542, annex, sect. IV.

173

Proceedings of the United Nations Conference on Trade
and Development, Fifth Session, vol. I, Report and Annexes
(United Nations pubbcation, Sales No. E.79.II.D.14).
174
See Report of the United Nations Conference on Science
and Technology for Development, Vienna, 20-31 August 1979
(United Nations publication, Sales No. E.79.l.2I and corrigenda), chap. VII.
115 Official Records of the General Assembly, Thirty-fourth
Session, Supplement No. 15 (A/34/15 and Corr.I), vol. D.
