Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Second Committee

tries in support of the objectives and policies of t~e
United Nations Habitat and Human Settlements
Foundation, having due regard to national policies,
programmes and development priorities;
2. Invites all States, the specialized agencies and
other organizations within the United Nations system
and non-governmental organizations in consultative
status with the Economic and Social Council, as well as
other non-governmental organizations having a special
interest in the field of human settlements, to undertake
or intensify, in co-operation with the Secretary-General
and within their respective spheres of competence, the
broad dissemination of infmmation referred to above.
2432nd plenary meeting
9 December 1975
3435 (XXX).

United Nations Environment
Programme
The General Assembly,
Recalling recommendations 24, 36, 37, 74, 85 and
l 02 of the Action Plan for the Human Environment21
adopted by the United Nations Conference on the
Human Environment, held at Stockholm from 5 to
16 June 1972,
Recalling its resolutions 2995 (XXVII), 2996
(XXVII) and 2997 (XXVII) <;>f 15 December 19~2
concerning, inter alia, co-operation. between Sta!e~ _m
the field of the environment, international respons1b1hty
of States in regard to the environm~nt and the es~ablishment of the Governing Council of the Umted
Nations Environment Programme,
Recalling its resolution 3336 (XXIX) of 17 December 1974, particularly paragraph 4 thereof,
Noting resolution IV of the Conference of Ministers
for Foreign Affairs of Non-Aligned Countries, held at
Lima from 25 to 30 August 1975, 22 condemning the
colonialist Powers and/ or aggressors that have neglected to remove the materi~l remnants of w~rs and
acts of aggression, such as mmes, and demanding th~t
they should remove such material remn~nts of t~eir
acts, indicate their whereabouts and proVIde techrucal
assistance for their removal,
Recognizing that most developing countries have
been subjected to foreign occupation and exposed to
wars waged by certain colonialist Powers, thus incurring tremendous losses of lives and property,
Emphasizing that it is the duty of the international
community to take adequate measures to protect and
improve the environment, including, in particular, the
continuation and strengthening of international cooperation in this field,
1. Recognizes that the development of certain developing countries has been impeded by the mat~rial
remnants of those wars, the most important of which
are mines, which continue to be present in their territories;
2. Condemns the colonialist Powers which have neglected to remove those material remnants of such
wars, particularly mines, and considers them to be
responsible for any material and moral damage suffered by the countries in which such mines were placed;
2 1 See

Report of the United Nations Conference on the
Human Environment (United Nations publication, Sales No.
E.73.U.A.14 and corrigendum), chap. II, sect. B.
22 See A/10217 and Corr.I, annex I.

53

3. Calls upon those States which took part in tl1ose
wars to make available forthwith to the affected State
all information on the areas in which such mines were
placed, incl_uding maps indicating the position of those
areas, and on the types of mines;
4. Calls upon those States which created this situation to compensate forthwith the countries in which
such mines were placed for any material and moral
damage suffered by them as a result thereof and to
take speedy measures to provide technical assistance
for the removal of such mines;
5. Requests the Governing Council of the United
Nations Environment Programme to undertake a study
of the problem of the material remnants of wars, particularly mines, and their effect on the environment,
and to submit a report on the subject to the General
Assembly at its thirty-first session;
6. Requests the Secretary-General to submit to the
General Assembly at its thirty-first session a report on
the implementation of the present resolution.
2432nd plenary meeting
9 December 1975
3436 (XXX). Conventions and protocols in the
field of the environment

The General Assembly,
Recalling the Declaration of the United Nations Conference on the Human Environment, 23 adopted at Stockholm on 16 June 1972, which was intended, inter alia,
to promote international law in the field of the environment,
Recalling with appreciation decisions 24 (Ill) of
30 April 1975 and 35 (III) of 2 May 1975 of the Governing Council of the United Nations Environment Programme,24
Expressing the conviction that the development of
adequate environmental law is an essential supporting
measure for the implementation of the policies, strategies and recommendations of the United Nations Environment Programme,
Noting with satisfaction that a number of global and
regional conventions and protocols in the field of the
environment have been negotiated and adopted since
the adoption of the Declaration of the United Nations
Conference on the Human Environment,
Concerned that existing international conventions or
protocols in the field of the environment have not yet
received the wide acceptance and application they
deserve,
Convinced of the need for further elaboration of
conventions and protocols in the field of the environment,
1. Requests the Executive Director of the United
Nations Environment Programme to iake such measures as may be necessary for the realization of the
objectives and the implementation of the strategies relating to the programme of the United Nations Environment Programme in the field of national and international environmental law and, in particular, to take
measures designed to provide technical assistance to
23 Report of the United Nations Conference on the Human
Environment
( United Nations publication, Sales No.
E.73.11.A.14 and corrigendum), chap. I.
24
See Official Records of the General Assembly, Thirtieth
Session, Supplement No. 25 (A/10025), annex I.
