S/PV.8214

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-third year

8214th meeting

Monday, 26 March 2018, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Van Oosterom. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Netherlands)

Members:

Bolivia (Plurinational State of). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Côte d’Ivoire . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Equatorial Guinea. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ethiopia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kazakhstan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kuwait. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Peru. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Poland . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Sweden . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Inchauste Jordán
Mr. Wu Haitao
Mr. Dah
Mr. Ndong Mba
Mr. Alemu
Mr. Delattre
Mr. Temenov
Mr. Alotaibi
Mr. Meza-Cuadra
Ms. Wronecka
Mr. Safronkov
Mr. Orrenius Skau
Ms. Pierce
Mr. Miller

Agenda
The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

18-08337 (E)
*1808337*

S/PV.8214

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

The meeting was called to order at 10.05 a.m.

children across the Middle East, until a just and
lasting peace is achieved. I welcome the approximately
$100 million pledged at the recent Extraordinary
Ministerial Conference in Rome. I encourage Member
States to consider urgently providing additional new
funding for UNRWA’s critical work.

Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in the Middle East, including the
Palestinian question
The President: In accordance with rule 39 of
the Council’s provisional rules of procedure, I invite
Mr. Nickolay Mladenov, Special Coordinator for the
Middle East Peace Process and Personal Representative
of the Secretary-General, to participate in this meeting.
Mr. Mladenov is joining today’s meeting via videoteleconference from Jerusalem.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

Recalling the Security Council’s latest note 507 on
its working methods (S/2017/507), I wish to encourage
all participants, both members and non-members of the
Council, to deliver their statements in five minutes or
less. Note 507 also encourages briefers to be succinct and
to focus on key issues. Briefers are further encouraged
to limit initial remarks to agreed time limits.
I now give the floor to Mr. Mladenov.
Mr. Mladenov: On behalf of the Secretary-General,
I devote my regular briefing on the situation in the
Middle East today to introducing the fifth report on the
implementation of resolution 2334 (2016), covering the
period from 18 December 2017 to 25 March 2018. I will
focus on the developments on the ground in accordance
with the provisions of the resolution, including on
the regional and international efforts to advance the
peace process.
Let me reiterate from the outset that developments
on the ground cannot be divorced from the broader
context of continued military occupation of Palestinian
territory, uncertainties about the future of the peace
process and the two-State solution, unilateral actions
that undermine peace efforts, and continued turmoil in
the wider region.
Allow me to also express my continued concern over
the $446-million funding gap for the United Nations
Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in
the Near East (UNRWA). It must be bridged urgently
to ensure that UNRWA can provide basic services to
Palestine refugees, including to school half a million
2/11

26/03/2018

In its paragraph 2, resolution 2334 (2016) calls
on Israel to “immediately and completely cease all
settlement activities in the occupied Palestinian
territory, including East Jerusalem” and to fully respect
all its legal obligations in this regard. No such steps
were taken during the reporting period. I reiterate that
the United Nations considers all settlement activities to
be a violation of international law and a major obstacle
to peace.
Israel advanced 22 plans for some 1,500 housing
units in Area C settlements. Around a dozen units
were approved for construction — significantly lower
than the 1,200 units approved during the previous
three-month period. Ten tenders for some 900
housing units in seven Area C settlements were also
announced. Official figures released last week show
that construction starts in Area C settlements declined
in 2017 to nearly half the number of 2016, which was
the highest in over a decade. The plans include 15
temporary housing units near Gush Etzion, south of
Bethlehem, in an area outside the jurisdiction of nearby
settlements. These units are planned for residents of
the Netiv Ha’avot outpost whose homes are slated for
demolition on 15 June.
In response to the January shooting attack that killed
a rabbi from the Havat Gilad outpost, on 4 February the
Israeli Government approved the establishment of a new
settlement to absorb its residents. Havat Gilad is built
almost entirely on privately owned Palestinian land.
In related potentially significant legislative
developments, in January the Knesset passed an
amendment to the Basic Law on Jerusalem as the capital
of Israel. By requiring a super-majority of 80 votes in
the Knesset, the change will make it more difficult for
Israel to transfer territories that are currently within the
Israeli-defined Jerusalem municipality boundaries to a
future Palestinian State. Conversely, it also makes it
somewhat easier to change those municipal boundaries,
by lowering the previously required Knesset threshold
to a simple majority. On 7 March, the Knesset also
approved an amendment to Israel’s law on entry to
Israel, allowing the revocation of the permanent
18-08337

26/03/2018

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

residency status of Palestinians in East Jerusalem
who are involved in terrorist activities, treason or
espionage, as defined in Israeli law. On 25 February, the
Government endorsed a bill transferring jurisdiction
over certain categories of petitions related to decisions
by Israeli authorities in the West Bank from the High
Court of Justice to the Court for Administrative Affairs
in Jerusalem. The bill’s sponsors have described it as
a step towards equating legal procedures and norms in
the West Bank and Israel.
The Israeli authorities have continued to demolish
Palestinian-owned structures across the occupied West
Bank, including in East Jerusalem, albeit at last year’s
relatively low rate. Ninety-two structures, including 15
that were donor-funded, were demolished, for reasons
that included a lack of building permits, which are
nearly impossible for Palestinians to obtain. As a result,
104 Palestinians, including 42 children, were displaced,
affecting the livelihoods of more than 360 people. The
demolition of two donor-funded classrooms serving 26
children in the Palestinian Bedouin community of Abu
Nuwar was particularly worrying. For at least three
years now, the United Nations has been warning that
Israel has been putting steady pressure on Abu Nuwar
residents to move. The community is in the strategic
E-l area planned for the expansion of Ma’ale Adumim,
which would result in the creation of a continuous builtup area between the settlement and East Jerusalem,
further dividing East Jerusalem from the rest of the
West Bank.
Similarly, on 21 March the Bedouin village of Umm
Al-Hiran also came under renewed threat as Israeli
authorities posted eviction notices on homes indicating
that evictions could take place at any time between
14 and 29 April. In late December, in the Masafer Yatta
area of Hebron, where there are demolition orders
on most structures, the Israel Defense Forces (IDF)
blocked several access routes and issued a military
order requiring Palestinians to obtain permits to cross,
limiting access to services and livelihoods for some
1,400 residents in 12 communities.
Turning to the persistent problem of violence,
the reporting period was characterized by continuing
demonstrations and clashes following the announcement
on 6 December in which the United States recognized
Jerusalem as Israel’s capital, and the growing tensions
in the West Bank, including in East Jerusalem and
along the Gaza fence. Israeli security forces killed
23 Palestinians, including six children, in various

S/PV. 8214

incidents, including reported attacks against Israelis,
demonstrations, clashes and military operations in the
occupied Palestinian territory. Five Israelis — three
civilians and two soldiers — were killed by Palestinians
in separate attacks in the West Bank, including in East
Jerusalem. On 5 February, a resident of the Har Bracha
settlement was stabbed to death at the entrance to the
Ariel settlement. On 9 January, a rabbi from the Havat
Gilad outpost was killed in a drive-by shooting. Two
of the three alleged perpetrators were killed by Israeli
security forces during subsequent search-and-arrest
operations. On 18 March, an Israeli civilian was stabbed
to death in Jerusalem’s Old City. The alleged assailant,
a Palestinian man from the West Bank town of Aqraba,
was shot dead by Israeli security forces. On 10 March, a
Palestinian teenager was shot dead during clashes with
Israeli security forces and settlers in the village of Urif,
after confrontations turned violent between Palestinian
villagers and residents of the nearby Yitzhar settlement.
During the reporting period, there was a worrying
escalation of violence in and around the Gaza Strip.
Improvised explosive devices placed near the Gaza
fence by Palestinian militants exploded on three
occasions, wounding four Israeli soldiers in one
incident on 17 February. On each occasion, Israeli
forces responded with air strikes and shelling against
Hamas targets. The Israeli military also announced that
it had destroyed three tunnels either fully inside Gaza or
leading from Gaza into Israeli territory. On 13 January,
before the escalation, the IDF also destroyed a tunnel
extending from Gaza into Israel and Egypt under the
Kerem Shalom crossing. In addition, 33 rockets were
fired from Gaza towards Israel, of which 11 landed in
Israel itself. The IDF retaliated against Hamas military
sites in Gaza. No injuries were reported on either side.
On 13 March, an improvised explosive device
targeting the convoy of Palestinian Prime Minister
Hamdallah and the Head of Palestinian General
Intelligence exploded in Gaza, with minor injuries to
six people. No one has claimed responsibility for that
so far. On 22 March, Hamas security forces conducted
an operation in the Nuseirat camp in Gaza, reportedly
targeting the chief suspect in the bombing of the Prime
Minister’s convoy. During the operation, the suspect
and an accomplice were critically wounded and later
succumbed to their wounds. Two members of Hamas’s
security forces were also killed during the incident.
Despite the call in Security Council resolution
2334 (2016) for the parties to refrain from acts of

18-083373/11

S/PV.8214

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

provocation, incitement and inflammatory rhetoric,
such statements have continued. Fatah’s official
social-media pages continued to feature posts
glorifying the perpetrators of past violence against
Israeli civilians, including terror attacks that killed
civilians and children. In addition, Palestinian officials
continued to make statements denying the historical
and religious connection of Jews to Jerusalem and its
holy sites. One senior religious leader made the false
claim that Jews had lived in historical Jerusalem for
only 70 or 80 years. Others continue to describe Israel
as a colonial project. I urge the Palestinian leadership
to continue to speak out against violence in general and
to condemn specific attacks against civilians. Senior
Israeli officials also made provocative statements
encouraging annexation of all or parts of the occupied
West Bank and categorically rejecting the notion of a
two-State solution. Some claimed that Palestinians are
an invented people; others referred to Palestinians as
bloodthirsty barbarians; and one political leader called
for more injuries and deaths in Gaza, complaining that
Israeli military strikes responding to rocket fire were
not producing enough casualties among militants. I urge
political leaders to refrain from provocative statements
and actions that fuel an already tense environment.
Resolution 2334 (2016) reiterated the calls by
the Middle East Quartet for affirmative steps to be
taken to reverse negative trends on the ground that
are imperilling a two-State solution. The period
has witnessed both positive and negative actions by
the parties in that regard. In January, after years of
negotiations, Israel approved the operation of local
Palestinian 3G service in the West Bank, allowing
Palestinian telecommunications companies to offer
higher speed data services and somewhat improve
their competitiveness.
There were two high-level meetings, in Paris
on 15 February between the Israeli and Palestinian
Ministers of Economy, and on 19 February in
Ramallah between the Israeli Minister of Finance
and the Palestinian Prime Minister and Minister of
Finance, aimed at discussing a range of economic and
infrastructure issues concerning the West Bank and
Gaza. On 18 February, Israel’s Ministerial Committee
for Legislation endorsed a bill that would allow Israel
to withhold tax revenues that are collected by Israel
on behalf of the Palestinian Authority. The amount
withheld would be equivalent to the money used for
payments to the families of Palestinian perpetrators of
4/11

26/03/2018

attacks on Israelis or for prisoners held in Israeli jails.
On 5 March, the Knesset advanced a more restrictive
version of the same bill.
Meanwhile, implementation of the intra-Palestinian
agreement of 12 October between Fatah and Hamas
has stalled. In February and March, Egypt hosted
delegations from the two parties in an effort to advance
the process of returning Gaza to the control of the
Palestinian Authority. I also held multiple meetings
with senior Palestinian and Egyptian officials in
support of that process.
On 4 March, the Palestinian Government approved
a $5.1 billion budget for 2018, while presenting the
option that if it were empowered in Gaza, it could
amend the budget and absorb up to 20,000 Gaza civil
servants as well.
In Gaza, the electricity supply remains far below
people’s needs, with power cuts of up to 20 hours per
day. Without emergency fuel, 55 sewage pools are at a
significant risk of overflowing and the functioning of
48 water desalination plants has been reduced to around
20 per cent of their working capacity. Water is piped to
households for only a few hours a day, every four or
five days. Basic services continue to function thanks
to United Nations-distributed, donor-funded fuel for
generators, which is expected to last, at best, only until
September. Over 40 per cent of essential medicines
remain at zero stock due to the lack of funding.
After a 10-year delay, the Northern Gaza Emergency
Sewage Treatment project finally began operating on
1 March, albeit at minimum capacity. More sustainable
energy supply and other infrastructure projects need to
be urgently pursued in order to allow it to function at
full capacity.
In addition to a rapidly deteriorating humanitarian
situation, Gaza’s economy remains on the brink of
collapse. Urgent interventions, alongside increased
commitment to short-, medium- and long-term projects,
provided the basis for discussions at the meeting of the
Ad Hoc Liaison Committee for the Coordination of
International Assistance to Palestinians on 20 March in
Brussels. Two preparatory meetings — one in Cairo and
the other in Washington, D.C., respectively — helped
develop a series of priority engagements aimed at
improving the electricity, water and health situations
in Gaza.
18-08337

26/03/2018

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

A European Union (EU)-hosted pledging
conference for the Gaza Central Desalination Plant,
which also took place on 20 March, saw Member States
commit some $565 million — nearly 80 per cent of the
project’s costs — thereby enabling the tendering process
to begin. That is a positive development for the people
and infrastructure of Gaza. Nevertheless, it is only one,
albeit important project required to ensure that Gaza
remains livable beyond the foreseeable future.
In a welcome development, over the past two
months, Israel has approved thousands of pending
residential cases, more than 130 private-sector
projects and over 1,200 requests for the import of
items that Israel considers to be of dual civilian and
military use. On 14 February, at a trilateral meeting
convened by the United Nations, Israel and the
Palestinian Authority agreed to continue with the Gaza
Reconstruction Mechanism and conduct a joint review
in order to improve the functionality, transparency and
predictability of the Mechanism.
Resolution 2334 (2016) calls upon all States to
distinguish in their relevant dealings between the
territory of the State of Israel and the territories occupied
since 1967. There are two developments to report in that
regard. On 23 January, the Danish Parliament passed
a resolution with reference to resolution 2334 (2016),
and in line with European Union policy, urging that
future agreements between Denmark and Israel clearly
state their inapplicability to occupied territory and
encouraging the Government to strengthen its guidance
to private and public investors.
Also in January, the European Commission signed
a financing agreement with Israel, allowing the latter’s
participation in the Joint Operational Programme of
the Mediterranean Sea Basin Programme under the
European Neighbourhood and Partnership Instrument
for 2014-2020. In continuation of an existing EU
practice, the agreement includes a territorial clause
stating that
“[i]n accordance with EU policy, the agreement
shall not apply to the geographic areas that came
under the administration of the State of Israel after
5 June 1967”.
Regrettably, the reporting period saw no progress
towards advancing the goal of a lasting peace, as also
called for in the resolution.

S/PV. 8214

On 31 January, Norway and the European Union
convened an extraordinary meeting of the Ad Hoc
Liaison Committee, in which support for the twoState solution, in line with relevant United Nations
resolutions, was reiterated. The participants stated their
support for ongoing efforts to restore unity between the
West Bank and Gaza under the control of the legitimate
Palestinian Authority, by focusing, inter alia, on urgent
projects that address pressing electricity, water and
humanitarian needs.
Speaking before the Security Council on
20 February (see S/PV.8183), Palestinian President
Abbas called for an international peace conference to
be held by the middle of the year to form a multilateral
mechanism in support of the parties to negotiate all
permanent-status issues within a specific time frame
and secure full United Nations membership for the
State of Palestine and mutual recognition of Palestinian
and Israeli statehood on the 1967 lines. On 23 February,
the United States announced that it would move its
embassy to Jerusalem on 14 May, which will coincide
with the seventieth anniversary of Israel’s declaration
of independence.
In closing, I would like to share some broad
observations concerning the provisions of the resolution
on the reporting period.
First, Israel’s illegal settlement expansion and
related activities continue to further threaten the
viability of the two-State solution and erode the
prospects for peace. The latest decision to establish
a new settlement — for the second time since the
adoption of resolution 2334 (2016), following Amihai
in May 2017 — is particularly troubling. Meanwhile,
Palestinian development remains extremely restricted.
In Area C alone, there are nearly 13,000 outstanding
demolition
orders
against
Palestinian-owned
structures, of which some 500 are ready for execution.
Less than 1 per cent of Area C, comprising over 60 per
cent of the West Bank and critical to the contiguity of
a future Palestinian State, is available for Palestinian
construction under approved plans.
Secondly, violence and incitement continue to fuel
hatred, division, distrust and fear. Continuing terror
attacks on Israelis and the attempt on the life of the
Palestinian Prime Minister illustrate the growing risk
of destabilization and the empowerment of radicals
and extremists. The use of force by Israel must also
be calibrated. Israel must uphold its responsibilities

18-083375/11

S/PV.8214

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

under international human rights and humanitarian
law. Lethal force should be used only as a last resort,
with any resulting fatalities properly investigated by
the authorities. I once again urge the security forces to
exercise maximum restraint in order to avoid casualties.
I note the developing Palestinian plans for a march
on the Gaza fence on 30 March. I call on all sides to
exercise restraint and to take the necessary steps to
avoid a violent escalation. It is imperative that civilians,
in particular children, not be targeted and that all actors
refrain from putting children at risk at any time. I also
take this opportunity to reiterate my call on Hamas to
provide full information on the two Israeli soldiers and
two civilians who are being held in Gaza, as required
by international humanitarian law.
Thirdly, steps taken on the ground in Area C and
Gaza are welcome, but far from transformative. The
relaxation on the import of certain dual-use items and
the increased number of permits issued to business
people in Gaza are nevertheless important developments
that need to be sustained and augmented. Economic
development, critical as it is, is no substitute for
sovereignty and statehood. Efforts aimed at achieving
both must proceed in parallel.
Fourthly, the terrorist attack against the convoy
of Prime Minister Hamdallah in Gaza was a serious
attempt to derail the Cairo process and its perpetrators
must be brought to justice. In that respect, I call on
Palestinian factions to engage earnestly with Egypt
and move forward on the implementation of the Cairo
agreement. That includes the paying of salaries for civil
servants and the full empowerment of the Government
in Gaza. A fully empowered Palestinian Authority in
Gaza remains key to lifting the closures, alleviating
the humanitarian and development crisis in Gaza, and
furthering national aspirations for statehood.
I commend the Prime Minister’s commitment
to continuing his efforts towards reconciliation and
commend Egypt for its tireless efforts in that regard.
The United Nations remains committed to supporting
Egyptian efforts to advance the process and welcomes
the efforts of the international community for a more
coordinated engagement in alleviating the humanitarian
crisis in Gaza.
I note with concern, however, that reports have
emerged today, indicating that Hamas has set up a
checkpoint at the Erez, or Beit Hanoun, crossing, which
controls the entrance of national and international
6/11

26/03/2018

personnel into Gaza and the exit of all Gaza
identification holders. As per the intra-Palestinian
agreement of 12 October, all checkpoints should be
handed over to the Palestinian Authority.
Fifthly, I remain greatly concerned by the state
of our collective efforts to advance peace. Long-held
international consensus positions on final status issues,
including on Jerusalem and refugees, and United
Nations principles must remain the guiding framework
of a negotiated process towards the ultimate goal of a
two-State solution. Any deviation from those principles
would be dangerous. Resolution 2334 (2016) states in
paragraph 3 that the Security Council
“will not recognize any changes to the 4 June 1967
lines, including with regard to Jerusalem, other than
those agreed by the parties through negotiations”.
All final-status issues should be resolved on the
basis of relevant United Nations resolutions, bilateral
agreements and international law.
As the Secretary-General has repeatedly reminded
the Council, the United Nations strongly urges Israelis,
Palestinians and the international community to take
concrete measures that will reverse the current course
of the conflict and advance the goal of a just and
sustainable peace, based on the two-State solution.
Generations of Palestinian and Israeli lives have been
shaped by the conflict. It is time to begin building a
different future, based on mutual respect, dignity
and the belief that even the deepest and most painful
divisions can be resolved if there is a genuine desire
for change.
The President: I thank Mr. Mladenov for
his briefing.
Before giving the floor to Council members, I
should like to highlight the presence in the Chamber
of the new Permanent Representative of the United
Kingdom to the United Nations, Ambassador Karen
Pierce, and, on behalf of all members of the Council, to
extend a warm welcome to her.
I shall now give the floor to those members of the
Council who wish to make statements.
Mr. Ndong Mba (Equatorial Guinea) (spoke
in Spanish): At the outset, I would like to welcome
Ms. Karen Pierce as the new Permanent Representative
of the United Kingdom to the United Nations. We
wish her great success in her post and would like to
18-08337

26/03/2018

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

affirm that she can count on the same full support and
cooperation that we extended to her predecessor. We
welcome her to New York.
I would like to express our gratitude and recognition
to Mr. Nickolay Mladenov, Special Coordinator for the
Middle East Peace Process and Personal Representative
of the Secretary-General to the Palestine Liberation
Organization and the Palestinian Authority, who
provided us with a very complete, clear and detailed
briefing on the current situation in the Middle East,
which focused on the implementation of resolution
2334 (2016), on the Palestinian question.
Aware of the intensity and the extent of the
destruction of the current conflicts in the Middle East,
for which we desire a prompt resolution, the Republic of
Equatorial Guinea would like to point out that, since it
was first put on the agenda of the General Assembly in
April 1947 to the present time, the Palestinian question
has not ceased to be at the heart of the instability of
the region due to its historical complications and
implications, its longevity and, in particular, a lack of
proper implementation of resolutions adopted by the
Security Council in that regard.
Resolution 2334 (2016) reiterates the appeal of the
Quartet for Middle East peace to both parties involved
in the conflict to adopt measures to reverse the negative
trend on the ground, which jeopardizes the solution of
two independent States — one Israeli and the other
Palestinian — called on to live together in mutual
cooperation and compelled to guarantee sustainable
peace and security for the two States and for other
parties in the region. However, some developments
on the ground seek to put that objective far beyond
our reach.
Equatorial Guinea believes the historic claims
of the Palestinians to be just, in line with the various
declarations of the African Union. We also believe that
Israel has the right to live in peace and security. The
Israelis should recognize that just as Israel’s right to
exist cannot be denied, nor can that of Palestine. Violent
behaviour should cease once and for all and each party
should fuflfil its international obligations as set out in
the various United Nations resolutions in general. The
parties should refrain from unilateral actions that could
hinder the return to negotiations.
The reunification of Palestine under a single,
legitimate and democratic Government is also key to
envisaging the aspirations of the Palestinian people as

S/PV. 8214

one, which would in part facilitate the mediation role
of the Security Council. We therefore welcome the
reconciliation agreement between Fatah and Hamas,
signed in Cairo in October of last year, as well as the
return of the Palestinian Authority to the Gaza Strip to
resume its control.
Now more than ever, the Security Council and the
entire international community must remain united in
their desire to see a peaceful solution to all aspects of
the Israeli-Palestinian conflict. Only in that way can we
bring due pressure to bear on the Israeli and Palestinian
authorities to stop the trends that threaten the process
and ask them to be adequately flexible and reasonable
in understanding once and for all that peace is a much
more valuable goal than the violence, hate and injustice
that have characterized the region for more than half
a century.
I would like to conclude my statement by expressing
the strong desire of the Government of the Republic
of Equatorial Guinea to see the current initiatives for
a peace plan of the Government of the United States
result in a tangible peace plan that is acceptable to all
parties involved in the conflict and thereby to bring
about peace among the Israelis and Palentinians, which
is so desired.
Mr. Inchauste Jordán (Plurinational State of
Bolivia) (spoke in Spanish): We join the Permanent
Representative of Equatorial Guinea in welcoming the
new Permanent Representative of the United Kingdom.
We wish her every success in her new post. We would
also like to thank Special Coordinator Nickolay
Mladenov for his briefing.
The Plurinational State of Bolivia attends this
meeting on the first quarterly report of 2018 on the
implementation of resolution 2334 (2016), which
mentions the illegality of Israeli settlements in the
Palestinian territories, including East Jerusalem. As
on previous occasions, the situation on the ground is
discouraging. The evident breach by the occupying
Power, Israel, of the resolution in clear violation of
international law and the more than 700 General
Assembly resolutions adopted since 1948 and the 86
Security Council resolutions is a source of concern.
According to the declaration of the Israeli Prime
Minister, Benjamin Netanyahu, on 4 February, his
Government has decided to build 350 new housing units
in the settlement of Netiv Ha’avot, which is located
south of the city of Bethlehem in the occupied West

18-083377/11

S/PV.8214

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

Bank. Such a decision violates resolution 2334 (2016)
and the purposes and principles of the Charter of the
United Nations, which affirms, among other things, the
inadmissibility of the acquisition of territory by force,
as well as the right of people to self-determination. It
moves us further from the possibility of a two-State
solution.
For that reason, we reiterate our full commitment
to resolution 2334 (2016), on the illegality of the Israeli
settlements in the occupied Palestinian territories. We
once again call for the quarterly report of the SecretaryGeneral on the implementation of the resolution to be
in written format, which would allow us to know about
its implementation in detail, and for the presentation
of updated maps of all settlements in the occupied
Palestinian territories. In that connection, Bolivia
calls on contributors to the United Nations Relief and
Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near
East to continue to provide their invaluable support of
humanitarian assistance to more than 1 million people
in Gaza and, in general, to the approximately 5 million
Palestinian refugees in countries in the region.
Bolivia calls for intra-Palestinian unity and for a
strengthened presence of the Palestinian Authority in
the Gaza Strip. In that regard, we strongly condemn
the attack on the head of the Palestinian Government,
Mr. Rami Hamdallah, on 13 March during his visit
to the region. We condemn all forms of terrorism,
whatever their origin, and we consider all imposition
of ideas through force and violence to be unacceptable.
We express our firm commitment to all
international efforts seeking a peaceful resolution
to the Israeli-Palestinian conflict. In that regard, we
support such initiatives as the Quartet road map, the
Madrid principles, the Arab Peace Initiative and others
that seek to ensure a just, lasting peace that will allow
both peoples to live within recognized and secure
borders. Bolivia is convinced that the only long-term
option for the resolution of the conflict is the two-State
solution, in which we finally see the establishment of
a free, sovereign and independent Palestine with pre1967 international borders and east Jerusalem as its
capital, in accordance with relevant resolutions of the
Security Council and the General Assembly.
Mr. Dah (Côte d’Ivoire) (spoke in French): My
delegation thanks Mr. Nickolay Mladenov, Special
Coordinator for the Middle East Peace Process, for his
quarterly report on the situation in the Middle East,
8/11

26/03/2018

including the Palestinian question. My delegation also
wishes to welcome the new Permanent Representative
of the United Kingdom, and assures her of its support.
Côte d’Ivoire reiterates its concern about the
lack of significant progress in the peace process in
the Middle East. It reaffirms its principled position
that only credible political dialogue and negotiations
between the parties will lead to the viable solution of
two States living side by side in peace and security,
based on the mutual recognition of the legitimate rights
of both parties. It therefore calls for a resumption of
talks between Israelis and Palestinians, in keeping with
the relevant Council resolutions with a view to breaking
the current political impasse.
The socioeconomic, political and humanitarian
situation in the Gaza Strip also remains worrisome and
critical. On the economic front, my delegation remains
concerned about persistent youth unemployment in the
context of an acute economic crisis aggravated by the
lack of water, electricity and medicine.
On the political and humanitarian front, the
resurgent tensions between the Palestinian Authority and
Hamas hamper the return of the Palestinian Authority
to the Gaza Strip and undermine national reconciliation
efforts between the two entities. In that connection, my
delegation condemns the 13 March attack on the convoy
of Prime Minister Rami Hamdallah in the Gaza Strip.
We urge the Palestinian parties to show restraint and to
conduct all necessary investigations to apprehend the
perpetrators of the attack. We encourage the parties to
pursue dialogue to ensure the effective return of the
Palestinian Authority to Gaza, in accordance with the
reconciliation agreement signed in October, in order to
better manage the humanitarian situation.
In the context of ever-decreasing contributions
to the budget of the United Nations Relief and Works
Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East
(UNRWA), my delegation welcomes the significant
financial contribution of $100 million made during
the Extraordinary Ministerial Conference in support
of UNRWA on 15 March in Rome. It thanks Member
States for the show of active solidarity with the
Palestinian people and refugees at a time when UNRWA
is experiencing the most serious financial crisis in its
history. It encourages the international community,
including relevant humanitarian agencies, civil society
and the private sector to contribute in order to bridge
the lack of financing.
18-08337

26/03/2018

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

In conclusion, my delegation unreservedly
commits to the goal of lasting comprehensive peace
in the Middle East and reiterates in readiness to work
alongside Council members to bring about a peaceful
solution to the Israeli-Palestinian crisis.
Mr. Alotaibi (Kuwait) (spoke in Arabic): I would
like to start by joining those who preceded me in
congratulating and welcoming Ambassador Karen
Pierce, the new Permanent Representative of the United
Kingdom, and wishing her every success.
I thank Mr. Mladenov, Special Coordinator for the
Middle East Peace Process, for his valuable briefing
today. We would like to express our full support for
his work with his team and for the work of the United
Nations regarding the monitoring of developments
related to the issue under consideration.
In his briefing, Mr. Mladenov spoke of the
deteriorating situation in the occupied territories
while Israel, the occupying Power, continues to violate
international law and undermine international efforts
to achieve peace based on a two-State solution. The
fact that Israel is not shouldering its responsibilities at
the international level as the occupying Power — based
on the 1949 Fourth Geneva Convention — and that
it does not comply with, and even disregards, United
Nations resolutions demonstrates that Israel does not
heed the decisions of the international community. This
is the main reason behind the humanitarian tragedy
that has befallen the unarmed Palestinian people,
which obviously only fuels tensions in the region. The
Palestinian question is still at the heart of the regional
conflict, so it is essential to focus on this matter rather
than on other issues, regardless of their importance.
We condemn all unilateral Israeli policies, actions
and measures that seek to change the situation on
the ground in order to create a new status quo and
to undermine the two-State solution based on the
1967 borders. Israel, the occupying Power, pursues
its aggressive policies and provocative and unilateral
measures that contravene Security Council resolutions
and international conventions. We remind the Council
of the serious potential consequences of the decision
to transfer of the United States embassy to Jerusalem
on 14 May. That decision is null and void since it is
in explicit contravention of resolutions 242 (1967), 338
(1973), 476 (1980), 478 (1980) and 2334 (2016).
In violating Security Council resolutions,
particularly 2334 (2016), Israel, the occupying Power,

S/PV. 8214

is maintaining its expansionist, illegal and illegitimate
activities, as Mr. Mladenov noted today. In that regard,
we demand to see a written report on the status of the
implementation of resolution 2334 (2016). Here in the
Council, we are dealing with an issue of 50 years of
occupation. It is essential, therefore, that we talk about
putting an end to the occupation as a precondition to
any negotiation between the two parties to achieve a
definitive, comprehensive and just solution. Indeed,
partial solutions have produced no results.
Despite the challenges to reaching a two-State
solution, due to the illegal and illegitimate aggressive
practices and settlement policies of the occupying
Power, we still believe that such a solution — based on
a clear timetable, the relevant resolutions of the United
Nations, the principle of land for peace and the Arab
Peace Initiative, which ensures the establishment of
an independent Palestinian State along the borders of
4 June 1967 and with East Jerusalem as its capital — is
the only way to achieve security and stability.
We would like to express our profound concern
with regard to the ongoing humanitarian crisis in Gaza,
which is a crisis that has lasted for more than a decade
due to the unjust and oppressive blockade imposed by
the occupying forces of Israel. Mr. Mladenov noted
its serious implications today. The blockade enshrines
Israel’s practices and violations of international
humanitarian and human rights law. On this point, I
recall the war that was waged by the occupying Power
against Gaza from 28 December 2008 until 18 January
2009, which destroyed a great deal of infrastructure.
We would also like to mention the financial crisis
facing the United Nations Relief and Works Agency
for Palestine Refugees in the Near East (UNRWA),
which is the worst of its kind since the Agency’s
creation in 1949. The crisis has a had negative impact
on the Agency, which plays a pivotal and important
role by providing assistance to approximately 6 million
Palestinian refugees on its rolls. The Agency has
contributed and continues to contribute to stability in
the Middle East. The State of Kuwait reiterates the
need for donors to provide UNRWA with the necessary
funding so that the Agency can continue to provide its
vital services to refugees and perform its humanitarian
activities without politicization. Reducing funding
for UNRWA will lead to a humanitarian disaster and
undermine all its education, health care, infrastructure
and humanitarian assistance programmes. In this
regard, we welcome the initiative of Sweden, Egypt

18-083379/11

S/PV.8214

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

and Jordan to convene the Extraordinary Ministerial
Conference in Rome on 15 March, at which donor States
pledged some $100 million to mitigate the shortfall in
UNRWA’s budget.
In conclusion, when we discuss the topic of the
Middle East in the Security Council, we always focus
on the Palestinian question. However, it is essential
this morning to mention the serious escalation that we
witnessed last night in the missile attack by the Houthis
from Yemeni territory against several cities in Saudi
Arabia, including Riyadh, Khamis Mushait, Najran and
Jazan. These missiles, which indiscriminately targeted
civilian and inhabited areas, were intercepted by the
Saudi air defence forces. However, shrapnel did reach
some inhabited areas, causing one death, numerous
wounded and property damage.
The State of Kuwait condemns and denounces in the
strongest terms this missile attack against the Kingdom
of Saudi Arabia, which is a violation by the Houthis
of international law and of relevant Security Council
resolutions. It also represents a rejection of peace and
contravenes the determination of the international
community to put an end to the conflict in Yemen, just
as it undermines all opportunities for the international
community to seek peace in the region.
The Security Council must be united in expressing
its clear opposition to these attacks, which threaten
regional peace and security. The State of Kuwait
underscores its full support for the Kingdom of Saudi
Arabia and for all the actions the Kingdom may take to
maintain its peace and security.
Ms. Pierce (United Kingdom): I offer very many
thanks to colleagues for their warm welcome, as this
is the first time I take the floor as the Permanent
Representative of the United Kingdom. It is an
enormous honour to represent the United Kingdom. It
is very nice for me personally to be back in New York.
I see many good friends in the Chamber, including
Ambassador Mansour.
Today’s debate is an important one, and I will save
the bulk of my remarks for the consultations room, but I
just want to make the point that improving the situation
on the ground in the occupied Palestinian territories
remains vital, particularly in Gaza. We endorse what
the Special Coordinator said about the implementation
of the relevant Security Council resolutions and about
the legitimate Palestinian Authority. Of course, I
want to put on record our condemnation of the recent
10/11

26/03/2018

attempted assassination of Prime Minister Hamdallah.
We take this opportunity once again to condemn all
acts of terror.
I also want to put on record that we are going to talk
about improving the situation on the ground, but that
will only take us so far. I agree with previous speakers
who said that a political horizon is needed so as to keep
the prospect of the two-State solution alive. We support
peace efforts being advanced by the United States. We
look forward to seeing a plan presented at the earliest
opportunity. We encourage re-engagement by all sides.
I also want to take the opportunity to follow my
colleague from Kuwait and say something about the
attack on Saudi Arabia by the Houthis this morning.
It is a sad day today because it is the third anniversary
of the conflict in Yemen, which is a conflict that has
gone on too long, but it is also true that missiles fired
into Saudi Arabia against civilians is dangerous and
provocative, and will do nothing to help the conflict
be resolved. It is against international law. We send
our condolences to the Saudi people. We want to see
the efforts of the United Nations on a Yemeni political
process succeed. As the United Kingdom, we will give
our every support to Martin Griffiths and the SecretaryGeneral to that end.
Mr. Miller (United States of America): I will also
deliver the bulk of my remarks in consultations, but I
want to take the floor here to make a couple of points
that it is important to raise in the open Chamber.
First, and above all, I want to extend warm welcome
to the new Permanent Representative of the United
Kingdom, Ambassador Pierce. We really look forward
to working with her.
Secondly, due to the attack in Saudi Arabia from
Yemen last night, I thought it was important to raise
that matter now as well. We strongly condemn the
Houthi missile attack that was aimed at several cities
in Saudi Arabia. This is the kind of action that is
deeply destabilizing for the region and one that we
have warned about previously. Our condolences go out
to the families of any who are killed or injured. We
also support the right of our Saudi partners to defend
their borders against these threats. We continue to
call on all parties, including the Houthis, to return to
political negotiations and move towards ending the war
in the Yemen.
18-08337

26/03/2018

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

Mr. Wu Haitao (China) (spoke in Chinese): First of
all, I would like to thank Special Coordinator Mladenov
for his briefing. I welcome the new Permanent
Representative of the United Kingdom, Ambassador
Pierce, to the Security Council.
The question of Palestine is at the core of the
Middle East issue and fundamental to peace in that
region. Only when the Palestinian question is fully
resolved will the crisis in the Middle East be eased for
good. The situation in Palestine and Israel is tense at
present. Settlement construction continues. Violence is
increasing incrementally. The humanitarian situation
in the Gaza Strip is dire. China is worried about all of
these things.
We call on the Security Council and the international
community to remain united in an effort to advance
the political settlement of the question of Palestine.
We believe that the two-State solution is the right way
to resolve the question of Palestine. The international
community should uphold the relevant United Nations
resolutions, the principle of land for peace and the Arab
Peace Initiative, and on that basis redouble its efforts
to relaunch the negotiations, faithfully implement
resolution 2334 (2016), put an end to settlement activities
in the occupied territories and prevent violence against
civilians. All parties should remain calm, exercise
restraint and meet each other halfway. That will help
foster the conditions necessary for the resumption of
dialogue. Parties with major influence in the Middle
East should also play a constructive role in that regard.
China remains committed to supporting and
facilitating the Middle East peace process. We support
the establishment of a sovereign and independent
Palestinian State on the basis of the pre-1967 borders,
with East Jerusalem as its capital. China will continue
to actively promote the four-point proposal put

S/PV. 8214

forward by Chinese President Xi Jinping to promote
the resolution of the question of Palestine, calling for
the advancement of the political process on the basis
of the two-State solution; adherence to the philosophy
of shared, comprehensive, cooperative and sustainable
security; greater coordination of international efforts
to maximize synergy for peace; and a holistic approach
to achieving peace through development. China will
continue to play a constructive role in the Middle East
peace process. China remains open to any initiative
or effort aimed at achieving a political settlement of
the Palestinian question, easing the tensions between
Palestine and Israel, and facilitating the achievement of
the two-State solution.
The question of Jerusalem is complex and delicate
and must be addressed as a fundamental issue within the
broader Palestinian question. All parties should respect
its multifaceted history, uphold fairness and justice,
implement international consensus, strive for peaceful
coexistence and act in accordance with relevant United
Nations resolutions so as to reach a solution that
accommodates all the interests of all parties through
final-status negotiations. Palestine and Israel should
respect each other’s right to existence and avoid any
action that may aggravate the current situation.
The United Nations Relief and Works Agency for
Palestine Refugees in the Near East (UNRWA) has played
an indispensable role in alleviating the humanitarian
crisis in the occupied territories. China welcomes the
success of the UNRWA Extraordinary Ministerial
Conference on financing, which was recently held in
Rome. We call on all parties to scale up their support
for UNRWA and countries hosting Palestinian refugees
so as to steadily improve the humanitarian conditions
in which the refugees are living.
The meeting rose at 11 a.m.

18-0833711/11
