and. to refrain from giving assistance lo the North Korean
authorities.

1'execution de la presente resolution et a s'abstenir de

Adopted at the 173rd meeting
by 9 votes to none, with 1
abstention ( Yugoslavia) . 10

Adoptee a la 47.3• seance par
.'I voix contre zero, avec une
abstention ( Yougoslavie} •• .

venir en aide aux autorites de la Coree du Nord.

83 (1950). Resolution of 27 June 1950

83 (1950). Resolution du 27 juio 1950

[S/ 1511]

[S/ 15 I l]

Le Conseil de securite,
The Security Council,
Ayant constate que l'attaque dirigee contre la RepuHaving determined that the armed attack upon the
Republic of Korea by forces from North Korea constitutes blique de Coree par des forces armees venues de Corec
du Nord constitue une rupture de la paix,
a breach of the peace,
Ayant demande la cessation immediate des hostilites,
Having called for an immediate cessation of hostilities,
Ayant invite Jes autorites de la Coree du Nord a retirer
Having called upon the authorities in North Korea to i
withdraw forthwith their armed forces to the 38th parallel, imniediatement leurs forces armees sur le 3ge parallele,
Having noted from the report of the United Nations
Arant constate, d 'apres le rapport de la Commission
Commission on Korea 11 that the authorities in North des Nations Unies pour la Coree 11, que Jes autorites de
Korea have neither ceased hostilities nor withdrawn their la Coree du Nord n 'ont ni suspendu Jes hostilites, ni
armed forces to the 38th parallel, and that urgent military retire leurs forces armees sur le 3ge parallele, et qu 'ii faut
measures are required to restore international peace and prendre d'urgence des mesures militaires pour retahlir la
paix et la securite internationales,
security,
Ayant pris acte de l'appel adresse aux Nations Unies
Having noted the appeal from the Republic of Korea
to the United Nations for immediate and effective steps par la Republique de Coree, qui demande que des
mesures efficaces soient pris.::s immediatement pour
to secure peace and security,
garantir la paix et la securite.
Recommends that the Members of the United Nations
Recommande aux Membrc,, de I'Organisation des
furnish such assistance to the Republic of Korea as may Nations Unies d'arporter a la R1~publique de Coree
be necessary to repel the armed attack and to restore toutc !'aide necessaire pour repousser Jes assaillants et
international peace and security in the area.
retablir dans cette region ld paix et la securite internationale~.
1

Adopted at the .J74th meeting

ldoptce ,; la 1;· f•· seance par
voix mntre une ( Yougoslavie) "·

hv 7 votes to 1 (Yugoslavia). 12

,

84 (1950). Resolution of 7 July 1950

84 (1950). Resolution du 7 juillet 1950

[S/1588]

[S/15881

The Security Council,
Le Conseil de securite,
Having determined that the armed attack upon the i
Ayant constate que l'attaque dirigee contre la RepuRepublic of Korea by forces from North Korea constitutes blique de Coree par des forces armees venues de Coree
a breach of the peace,
du Nord constitue une rupture de la paix,
Having recommended that Members of the United '
Al'ant recommande aux Membres de !'Organisation
Nations furnish such assistance to the Republic of des Nations Unies d'apporter a la Republique de Coree
Korea as may be necessary to repel the armed attack toute I 'aide necessaire pour repousser Jes assaillants et
and to restore international peace and security in the retablir dans cette region la paix et la securite interarea,
nationales,
10

Onemember(Union of Soviet Socialist Republics) was absent.

10
•
Un des membres (Union des Republiqucs socialistes sovietiques)
eta1t absent.
11
Proces-verbaux ojjiciels du Conseil de securite, cinquieme anm;e,
11° lo, 474,· seance, p. 2 (document S/ 1507).
1
• Deux des membres (Egypte, Indc) n'ont pas participe au vote;
un des membres (Union des Republiques socialistes sovietiqucs)
etait absent.

11 Or_{icial Records of the Security Council, Fifth Year, No. 16,
474th meeting, p. 2 (document S/1507).
12 Two members (Egypt, India) did not participate in the voting;
one member (Union of Soviet Socialist Republics) was absent.

5

i. Se Jd1clc dP I 'appui rapide et vigoureux quc Jes
gouvernemen·
' !· · peuples des Nations Unies onl
apporte a ses r,. '"' , •n•; R2 (I 950) et 83 (1950) des 25
et 27 juin 1950 en VU:
dcr la Republique de Coree ,i
se defendre contre ladite atlaq ;c armee, et ainsi retablir
la paix et la securite internationales dans la region;
2. Prend acte de ce que des Membrcs de )'Organisation
des Nations Unies ont transmis i1 ..:, iw-ci des offrc~
d 'assistance a la Republique de Corec,
J. Recommande que tous Jes Membres fournlssant en
application des resolutions prccitees du Conseil de
secun lt~ des forces militaires et toute autre assi:-tance
mettent ces forces et cette assistance a la disposition d'un
commandement unifie sous l'autorite des Etats-llni-.
d'Amerique;
4. Prie les Etats-Unis de designer le commandant en
4. Requests the United States to designate the commanchef de ces force;;;
der of such forces;
5. Autorise le commandement unifie a utiliser a sa
5. Authorizes the unified command at its discretion
to use the United Nations flag in the course of operations discretion, au cours des operations contre Ics forces de
la Coree du Nord, le drapeau des Nations Unies en
against North Korean forces concurrently with the flags
meme temps que les drapeaux des diverses nations
of the various nations participating;
, participantes;
6. Prie les Etats-Unis de fournir au Conseil de securitc
6. Requests the United States to provide the Security
Council with reports as appropriate on the course of de:- rapports d'importance et de frcquence appropriccs
, concernant le deroulement de !'action entreprise sou,
action taken under the unified command.
l'autorite du commandement unifie.

I. Welcomes the prompt and vigorous support which
Governments and peoples of the United Nations have
given to its resolutions 82 (l 950) and 83 ( 1950) of 25
and 27 June 1950 to assist the Republic of Korea in
defending itself against armed attack and thus to restore
international peace and security in the area;
2. Notes that Members of the United Nations have
transmitted to the United Nations offers of assistance
for the Republic of Korea;
3. Recommends that all Members providing military
forces and other assistance pursuant to the aforesaid
Security Council resolutions make such forces and other
assistance available to a unified command under the
United States of America;

Adopted at the 476th meeting
by 7 votes to none, with 3
abstentions
(Egypt,
India.
Yugoslavia).'"

Adoptee ii lu -176'' seance pw
7 voix contre zero, avec :i ubs-

tentions ( Egrpte, lnde,
1·/avic) D,

85 (1950). Resolution of 31 July 1950

85 (1950). Resolution du 31 jnillet 1950

[S/ 1657]

[S/1657]

YOl(f,'t>·

Le Con.~eil de securite,

The Security Council,
Recognizing the hardships and privations to which
the people of Korea are being subjected as a result of
the continued prosecution by the North Korean force~
of their unlawful attack,
Appreciating the spontaneous offers of assistance to
the Korean people which have been made by Governments, specialized agencies. and non-governmental
organizations,
I. Requests the Unified Command to exercise responsibility for determining the requirements for the relief and
support of the civilian population of Korea and for establishing in the field the procedures for providing such
relief and support;
2. Requests the Secretary-General to transmit all
offers of assistance for relief and support to the Unified
Command;
3. Requests the Unified Command Lo provide the
Security Council with reports, as appropriate, on its
relief activities;

Conscient des epreuves et des privations qu 'impose
au peuple coreen la poursuite de l 'attaque illegale declenchfr par Jes forces de la C)ree du Nord.
A ccueillant al'ec reconnaissance les offres d 'aide au
peuple coreen faites spontanement par des gouvernements,
des institutions specialisees et des organisations non
gouvernementales,
I. Prie le Commandement unifie de se charger de
determiner Jes secours et l'aide dont la population civile
de la Corce a besoin et d'organiser sur place la repartition de ces secours et de cette aide;
2. Prie le Secretaire general de transmettre au Commandement uni fie toutes Jes offres de secours et d 'aide;
.\. Prie le Commandement unifie d'adresser au Conseil
de securite, toutes les fois qu 'ii le jugera utile, des rapports
sur l'ceuvre qu 'ii aura accomplic dans le domaine des
secours;

,a One member (Union of Soviet Socialist Republics) was absent.

13
Un des membrcs (Union des Republiques socialistes sovictiqucs) ctait absent.

6
