S/PV.8358

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-third year

8358th meeting

Thursday, 20 September 2018, 3 p.m.
New York

President:

Mrs. Haley. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(United States of America)

Members:

Bolivia (Plurinational State of). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Côte d’Ivoire . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Equatorial Guinea. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ethiopia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kazakhstan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kuwait. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Netherlands. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Peru. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Poland . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Sweden . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 

Mr. Llorentty Solíz
Mr. Ma Zhaoxu
Mr. Ipo
Mr. Esono Mbengono
Ms. Guadey
Mr. Delattre
Mr. Umarov
Mr. Alotaibi
Mr. Van Oosterom
Mr. Tenya
Ms. Wronecka
Mr. Nebenzia
Mr. Skoog
Ms. Pierce

Agenda
The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

18-29340 (E)
*1829340*

S/PV.8358

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

The meeting was called to order at 3.05 p.m.

Palestinian territory, including East Jerusalem”, as
required by the resolution. I reiterate that all settlement
activities are a violation of international law and a
major obstacle to peace.

Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in the Middle East, including the
Palestinian question
The President: In accordance with rule 39 of
the Council’s provisional rules of procedure, I invite
Mr. Nickolay Mladenov, Special Coordinator for the
Middle East Peace Process and Personal Representative
of the Secretary-General, to participate in this meeting.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I now welcome and give the floor to Mr. Mladenov.
Mr. Mladenov: On behalf of the SecretaryGeneral, I will devote this briefing to presenting the
seventh report on the implementation of Security
Council resolution 2334 (2016), covering the period
from 13 June to 12 September 2018. I will focus on
developments on the ground in accordance with the
provisions of the resolution, including on regional and
international efforts to advance peace.
Let me reiterate from the very beginning that these
developments cannot be divorced from the broader
context: Israel’s continued military occupation of
Palestinian territory; uncertainties about the future of
the peace process and the two-State solution; Hamas’
continuing hold on Gaza and its militant activity,
including rocket attacks and tunnel construction;
unilateral actions that undermine peace efforts;
reduced donor support for the Palestinian Authority;
and turmoil in the wider region.
I would like to highlight from the outset the very
serious financial situation that the United Nations
Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the
Near East (UNRWA) continues to face. We welcome
the contributions that several Member States recently
announced and urge that additional new funding
be provided for its critical work. On 27 September,
a ministerial meeting in support of UNRWA will be
held on the margins of the General Assembly. I urge
all participants to engage constructively to ensure the
continuity of the Agency’s vital services.
No steps have been taken during the reporting
period to “cease all settlement activities in the occupied
2/21

20/09/2018

Approximately 2,800 housing units in settlements
in Area C of the occupied West Bank were advanced,
approved or tendered by Israel. Approximately one third
of those units are in outlying settlements, deep in the
West Bank. Plans for about 1,100 units were advanced
in the approval process, plans for an additional 600
units reached the final approval stage and tenders were
announced for about 1,100 units. A tender was also
announced for 603 housing units in the Ramat Shlomo
neighbourhood, the first tender in East Jerusalem
since 2016.
On 28 August, the district court in Jerusalem ruled
that the illegal outpost of Mizpe Kramim could be
legalized under Israeli law, despite being built partially
on private Palestinian land. The ruling was the first to
rely on the so-called market regulation principle, which
allows houses to be built in good faith on private land,
without the consent of the owner to be retroactively
legalized and the owner compensated. If the ruling is
upheld in Israel’s High Court of Justice, it could enable
the legalization of additional outposts and housing
units in settlements.
Demolitions and seizures of Palestinian-owned
structures continued across the West Bank and East
Jerusalem. Citing the absence of Israeli-issued building
permits, which are nearly impossible for Palestinians
to obtain, 117 structures were demolished or seized: 61
in Area C and 56 in East Jerusalem. According to the
Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs
(OCHA), that resulted in the displacement of 145
Palestinians, including 82 children, and affected the
livelihoods of approximately 950 people.
In Khan Al-Ahmar/Abu Al-Helu, a Bedouin
community of 181 people, Israeli authorities
requisitioned land, levelled access routes and
temporarily declared the area a closed military zone,
in advance of the expected demolition of its structures.
Following a protracted legal process, on 5 September,
the Israeli High Court of Justice denied several
petitions by residents to prevent the demolition. On
4 July, in Abu Nuwar, a Bedouin community of about
600 residents, 19 structures were demolished. OCHA
reported that 51 people, including 33 children, were
displaced. Later that month a donor-funded caravan
18-29340

20/09/2018

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

in the Bedouin community of Jabal Al-Baba, serving
as a kindergarten for 28 children and as a women’s
centre, was also confiscated and dismantled. Those
communities are located in or next to an area that is
slated for settlement plans in the E-1 area, which, if
constructed, would create a continuous built-up area
between the Ma’ale Adumim and East Jerusalem.
In July, the Israeli Knesset approved a law
transferring the jurisdiction over certain petitions
against decisions by Israeli authorities in the West Bank
from the High Court of Justice to the administrative
affairs court in Jerusalem. That step could make it
more difficult and costly to challenge the demolition or
seizure of Palestinian properties in Area C.
On 11 September, the European Union High
Representative for Foreign Affairs, Federica Mogherini,
called on Israeli authorities to reconsider the decision
to allow the demolition of Khan Al-Ahmar, warning
that “it would have grave humanitarian consequences”
and contravene international humanitarian law. That
call was reiterated by Germany, France, Italy, Spain
and the United Kingdom. I also issued a statement
expressing the same concern over such action. On
13 September, the European Parliament also called for
monetary compensation for financial losses, should
Khan Al-Ahmar be demolished.
Let me turn to the issue of violence, which also
remains an obstacle to peace. The reporting period saw
significant incidents and escalation that brought Israel
and Hamas almost to war on at least three occasions.

S/PV. 8358

were killed, including 5 children, 118 injured, and 37
Israelis were injured in those exchanges. On at least
three occasions the situation escalated dramatically.
Calm was restored only after Egypt and the United
Nations intervened to de-escalate tensions.
Incendiary kites and balloons continued to
be launched from Gaza into neighbouring Israeli
communities. In the West Bank, including East
Jerusalem, 266 Palestinians, including 5 women
and 54 children, were injured in clashes with Israeli
security forces during search-and-arrest operations
and demonstrations.
On 23 July, a 15-year-old Palestinian was killed
during clashes in Bethlehem’s Al-Duheisha refugee
camp. Three days later, in the settlement of Adam, a
17-year-old Palestinian stabbed and killed an Israeli man
and injured two others. On 17 August and 3 September,
Israeli security forces shot dead an Israeli-Arab and
a Palestinian in Jerusalem’s Old City and in Hebron,
respectively, after they reportedly attempted to carry
out stabbing attacks against security forces.
On 27 July, clashes erupted at the Temple Mount/
Haram Al-Sharif compound between Palestinians and
Israeli security forces, where 10 Palestinians and four
Israeli police officers were injured. On 16 September,
in another attack a Palestinian teenager stabbed and
killed an Israeli-American outside a shopping mall in
the occupied West Bank. It is reprehensible that Hamas
and other factions chose to glorify that attack.

Palestinian protests at the Gaza fence continued on
almost a daily basis. While most occasions remained
fairly peaceful, militants placed improvised explosive
devices, attempted to breach the fence and continued
to send incendiary kites and balloons across the
border. The Israel Defence Forces (IDF) responded
with riot dispersal means and live fire. During protests
throughout the reporting period, 29 Palestinians were
killed or died of wounds sustained previously, including
10 children. Approximately 900 people were injured
by live ammunition. One Israeli soldier was killed and
another injured.

Despite the call in resolution 2334 (2016) for the
parties to refrain from acts of provocation, incitement
and inflammatory rhetoric, such statements continued.
Hamas leaders continued to incite violence, with one
senior official speaking of “cleansing Palestine of the
filth of Jews” and threatening to decapitate Israeli
leaders. Fatah’s official social media pages continued
to glorify the perpetrators of previous attacks against
Israelis and failed to condemn terror attacks against
civilians. Some religious leaders and officials made
inflammatory statements, accusing Israel of plotting to
destroy the Al-Aqsa Mosque and denying the Jewish
historic and religious connection to Jerusalem.

In successive rounds of hostilities, Hamas and other
Palestinian militants fired approximately 500 rockets,
Grad missiles and mortars from Gaza towards Israel.
In response, the IDF fired approximately 400 missiles
and tank shells at targets in Gaza. It destroyed three
tunnels leading from Gaza into Israel, 18 Palestinians

Meanwhile, some Israeli officials called for
the targeting of Palestinians launching incendiary
kites and balloons into Israel from Gaza and for the
extrajudicial killings of Hamas officials. One member
of the Knesset called for Israel to reconquer Gaza and
insisted that Palestinians in Gaza either acquiesce to

18-293403/21

S/PV.8358

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

20/09/2018

Israel’s sovereignty or emigrate. Others continued to
provoke by rejecting the Palestinian right to statehood,
supporting settlement growth and the annexation of
parts of the West Bank.

humanitarian response plan, 75 per cent of which is for
projects targeting Palestinians in Gaza. At present, the
appeal is less than 29 per cent funded, one of the most
poorly funded in the world.

Resolution 2334 (2016) reiterated the calls made by
the Middle East Quartet for

Paragraph 5 of resolution 2334 (2016) called on
Member States

“affirmative steps to be taken immediately to
reverse negative trends on the ground that are
imperilling the two-State solution.”

“to distinguish, in their relevant dealings, between
the territory of the State of Israel and the territories
occupied in 1967”.

Some positive steps have been taken, including Israel
releasing approximately $44 million of withheld
Palestinian health stamp revenues, which is the result of
continuing direct engagement of the Finance Ministries
of both sides, as well as continued progress on Gaza
reconstruction. The Rafah crossing between Gaza
and Egypt remained largely open during the reporting
period, with the number of people crossing reaching
over 12,000 in both June and July.

No such steps were taken during the reporting period.
The resolution also called upon all parties to continue to
exert collective efforts to launch credible negotiations.
No progress was achieved in that respect.

The negative developments, however, outweigh
the positive news. Most worrying perhaps is the
continuing deterioration of the humanitarian, security
and political situation in Gaza, as the implementation
of the Egyptian-brokered October agreement remains
stalled and the Palestinian Authority has not been able
to take up its responsibilities in Gaza.
As we meet today, the power crisis in Gaza is coming
to a head. The United Nations has run out of funding
for emergency fuel, putting critical health, water and
sanitation facilities at immediate risk of shutting down,
while essential medicines are at critically low levels.
On 5 September, the United Nations delivered the final
stocks of available emergency fuel to Gaza. Despite
calls for donors to urgently contribute, little additional
funding was forthcoming.
The situation was worsened by the temporary
closures of the Kerem Shalom crossing and reductions
in the fishing zone that were introduced by Israel during
the periods of escalation, as well as the continuing
measures by the Palestinian Authority to reduce
salaries, energy supplies and overall spending in Gaza.
The United Nations Humanitarian Coordinator has
released $1 million from the emergency pooled fund
to cover fuel for hospitals and water and sanitation
facilities to prevent a full collapse of essential services.
To address the chronic crisis in the occupied
Palestinian territory, the humanitarian community
appealed for nearly $550 million this year, through the
4/21

The United States has repeatedly announced that
it is continuing its efforts aimed at a comprehensive
peace plan. In August, the Administration suspended
more than $200 million in its fiscal year 2017 Economic
Support Fund for the West Bank and Gaza, and a further
$25 million for the East Jerusalem hospitals network.
On 10 September, it closed the Palestine Liberation
Organization Office in Washington, D.C., citing its
failure to take steps towards meaningful negotiations
with Israel and concerns with Palestinian attempts to
prompt an investigation of Israel by the International
Criminal Court.
The Palestinian Central Council convened in
August and ratified the continued severance of political
relations with the United States until the latter revisits
its decision regarding Jerusalem, Palestinian refugees
and settlements.
On 5 September, the Government of Paraguay
announced that it would reverse the previous decision
from May to relocate its Embassy in Israel to Jerusalem
and move it back to Tel Aviv.
Since the escalation of hostilities in Gaza in July, the
United Nations has led an unprecedented effort with the
Governments of Egypt, Israel and other international
partners to prevent another outbreak of hostilities,
respond to the most urgent humanitarian needs
and support the return of the legitimate Palestinian
Government to Gaza, a crucial element in any political
effort to resolve the wider conflict.
The United Nations has enhanced its capacity in
Gaza to work with the Palestinian Government and
Israeli counterparts to support donor implementation
on all issues related to the Gaza Reconstruction
18-29340

20/09/2018

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

Mechanism and provide accountable and transparent
reporting to donors.
The World Bank has increased its allocation from
$55 million to $90 million for the West Bank and
Gaza over the next year, part of which will be used to
create approximately 4,400 short-term employment
opportunities. The United Nations Development
Programme has also accelerated its emergency
economic assistance programme, with support from
several donors.
I would now like to share some broad observations
concerning the implementation of the provisions of
resolution 2334 (2016) during the reporting period.
First, the expansion of Israeli settlements remains
illegal under international law and continues to erode
the viability of a two-State solution. Particularly
alarming are legal and administrative steps that could
consolidate and expand settlement activity deep in the
West Bank, further undermining the contiguity of a
future Palestinian State.
The persistent threat of demolitions and
displacement of Palestinians in Area C, including in
Khan Al-Ahmar/Abu Al- Helu, is of great concern. The
5 September decision of the High Court of Justice places
the Bedouin community at imminent risk of demolition.
Demolitions undermine the prospects for a two-State
solution and are also in violation of international law.
Violence, terror and the risk of conflict in Gaza
remain an obstacle to peace. I welcome the calm since
9 August, but I am very concerned by consistent attempts
to undermine it. All sides — and I underline all — must
continue their positive engagement with Egypt and the
United Nations and do their part. Hamas and other
armed militant groups must stop all provocations and
attacks. Israel must improve the movement and access
regime for Gaza. The Palestinian Authority must remain
engaged in Gaza. The international community must
address the urgent humanitarian needs. And, finally,
Fatah and Hamas must engage in earnest with Egypt in
order to bring back the legitimate Government to Gaza.
I once again call for all violent actions, which
continue to endanger the lives of both Israelis and
Palestinians, to stop immediately. Indiscriminate
attacks are prohibited under international humanitarian
law. I urge Hamas and other Palestinian militants to end
the indiscriminate firing of rockets into southern Israel.

S/PV. 8358

I reiterate that Israeli security forces have a
responsibility to exercise maximum restraint in the use
of live fire and must not resort to lethal force unless
in response to an imminent threat of death or serious
injury. The continued use of live fire by the Israeli
Defense Forces is deeply concerning. The killing of
children is absolutely unacceptable.
I call on the international community to join the
United Nations in condemning violence and incitement,
which continue to fuel a climate of mutual fear and
mistrust while hindering efforts to bridge the gaps
between both sides.
As explicitly outlined in the 2016 report of the
Middle East Quartet (S/2016/595, annex), current trends
are imperilling the viability of the two-State solution.
There has been no positive movement by the parties to
take steps to reverse the negative trends on the ground.
By complying with their obligations under previous
agreements and the relevant United Nations resolutions,
the parties can, and must, reverse the current course.
Israel should make progress on the transition
to greater Palestinian civil authority of powers and
responsibilities in Area C, on improving Palestinian
economic prospects, as well as access to housing, water,
energy, communications, agriculture, and natural
resources, and on significantly easing Palestinian
movement restrictions.
The United Nations has been working tirelessly
to address the deepening humanitarian and economic
crisis on the ground. Support for emergency fuel is
urgently needed to avoid a total collapse of critical
services in hospitals and sewage treatment. The Deputy
Special Coordinator and Humanitarian Coordinator,
Jamie McGoldrick, made two emergency appeals to
donors in August for new funding, and I reiterate the
urgency of his calls. It is also critical that UNRWA be
able to continue to deliver its vital services.
In addition, the United Nations is working with
several donors to advance key interventions that will
immediately improve the situation on the ground, both
in Gaza and the West Bank. I urge donors to consider
support for those activities, which play a vital role in
preventing further escalation.
Twenty-five years have now passed since the signing
of the Oslo Accords. It was a historic moment that
captured the world’s attention and filled Palestinians,
Israelis and the region with hope that genuine peace

18-293405/21

S/PV.8358

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

could be realized. Sadly, that courageous vision of
lasting peace now lies in tatters.
We must restore that hope. There is an alternative
to this perpetual cycle of violence. We must overcome
the current impasse and refocus our efforts on
ultimately returning to meaningful negotiations to
end the occupation and bring about a just, lasting and
comprehensive resolution to the Israeli-Palestinian
conflict — a resolution based on two States, Israel and
Palestine, living side by side in peace and security,
with Jerusalem as the capital of both States, based
on the 1967 lines and in line with the relevant United
Nations resolutions and previous agreements. I urge all
sides to continue to engage with each other and with
the international community to preserve and advance
its achievement.
Finally, let underline today that the urgency of
the situation that we face on the ground is really
desperate. Gaza could explode at any minute. We have
a humanitarian responsibility to react. But we must
also understand that it cannot be solved on the basis
of humanitarian action alone. It must be solved with a
political perspective to resolving the Israeli-Palestinian
conflict. We have a responsibility to support the parties
in this prospect.
The President: I thank Mr. Mladenov for
his statement.
I shall now give the floor to those members of the
Council who wish to make statements.
Mr. Delattre (France) (spoke in French): At the
outset, I want to thank Mr. Nickolay Mladenov for his
briefing to the Security Council on resolution 2334
(2016) and for his daily commitment, as well as that of
his team.
In Gaza, the West Bank and Jerusalem, every
passing day increases, bit by bit, the despair by
reflecting a three-pronged reality. First, the false status
quo actually covers up the daily deterioration on the
ground. Secondly, the situation could, at any moment,
degenerate into an full-blown crisis, as has been the
case in Gaza for many long months. Finally, when peace
prospects diminish on the ground, they also diminish in
hearts, minds and words. It is that vicious cycle that is at
play today. Generation after generation of Palestinians
and Israelis are losing hope in a peaceful settlement to
the conflict.
6/21

20/09/2018

A quarter century, nearly to the date, has elapsed
since the Oslo Accords were signed in Washington,
D.C. Twenty-five years after Oslo, nearly three quarters
of Palestinians, according to opinion polls, believe that
their situation has deteriorated. Barely half of them still
believe in a two-State solution.
Nevertheless, the observation that we consistently
make in the Council remains valid. No viable alternative
to the two-State solution has emerged since Oslo. The
unique territorial structure that seems to take form
before our eyes under the effects of the settlement
policies will ultimately lead to the coexistence of
two unequal classes of citizens on one territory. For
Palestinians it would mark the abandonment of their
aspirations to statehood, and for the Israelis the end of
their democratic project. While it is essential to fill the
current political vacuum, a peace plan not based on the
internationally agreed parameters of two States would
be doomed to failure. It is therefore essential that all
negotiations take place within that framework, which
in turn is based on international law and the relevant
resolutions of the Council, including resolution 478
(1980), on Jerusalem, as well as resolution 2334 (2018),
which brings us here today.
With regard to the latter resolution, 10 members
of the Council, including France, requested that, in
accordance with the established practice, written
reports be submitted to the Council. We thank the
Secretariat for the circulation of a written report last
June (S/2018/614), and we encourage the continuation
of that practice.
Today I would like to emphasize two points: the
Israeli settlement policy in Area C and Jerusalem, which
now threatens to irreversibly undermine the two-State
solution — and I would refer to the risk of the imminent
demolition of the village of Khan Al-Ahmar — and the
situation in Gaza, which may at any time lead to an
escalation in violence.
According to the judgement of the Supreme Court
of Israel on 5 September, the decision to demolish the
village of Khan Al-Ahmar is now entirely up to the
Israeli Government. That decision, which has been
in force since 12 September, can be implemented at
any time. France, in conjunction with several of its
European partners, has expressed its deep concern over
that and calls on the Israeli authorities not to proceed
with the demolition. The demolition of that Bedouin
village, which would include the forced displacement
18-29340

20/09/2018

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

of its inhabitants, would contravene international
humanitarian law, in particular the Fourth Geneva
Convention, as well as the resolutions of the Council.
Several structures that have received European funding,
including one school, are being directly targeted. Two
hundred and thirty inhabitants, including nearly 160
children, are being threatened with deportation.
In addition to its humanitarian consequences,
the demolition would be disastrous, and probably
irreversible, to the political landscape. It would pave the
way for the settlement of the so-called E-1 area, which
is of strategic importance for the two-State solution.
It would separate the north and south of the West
Bank and isolate East Jerusalem from the rest of the
Palestinian territories. By destroying the continuity of
the Palestinian territories, it would make it impossible
for the two States to reach a solution, with a strategy
of de facto annexation of the West Bank by Israel in its
place. That would represent a significant responsibility,
historically and for both peoples.
Secondly, the erosion of the two-State solution as
a consequence of settlement activity in East Jerusalem
and the West Bank must not make us forget the
imminent risks facing Gaza. For the past six months,
there has been a succession of violence in Gaza, against
the backdrop of a humanitarian crisis of unprecedented
severity. In the face of the terrible record of successive
demonstrations along the separation barrier, France
condemned the disproportionate and indiscriminate
use of force and called on Israel to respect the right of
Palestinians to demonstrate peacefully. We have also
denounced the instrumentalization of demonstrations by
Hamas and other armed groups. Finally, we condemned
the firing of rockets and the use of incendiary devices
directed at Israeli territory, as well as the construction
of offensive tunnels by Hamas.
On several occasions in recent months, the Gaza
Strip has found itself on the brink of a new armed
conf lict, as it experienced three times in the past
decade. Each time, the worst was avoided, thanks in
particular to the efforts of Egypt, which we especially
welcome, and to the mediation work of Nickolay
Maldenov, for which I am also grateful. But we know
that, if the current situation persists, a large-scale
escalation cannot be avoided indefinitely. It is then
the people of Gaza who will once again pay the price.
We must do everything we can to avoid it. It is up to
the Council to speak with a strong voice to prevent
an escalation. The silence it has observed since the

S/PV. 8358

beginning of the crisis is, every day, more deafening
and, to be honest, incomprehensible.
Beyond an immediate de-escalation and respect for
the 2014 ceasefire, there will be no lasting solution in
Gaza without inter-Palestinian reconciliation within the
framework of the Palestinian Liberation Organization
principles and without restoring the prerogatives of
the Palestinian Authority in Gaza. In that regard, we
welcome the relaunching of the process begun in Cairo
almost a year ago, which must be followed by a genuine
commitment by the Palestinian Authority to improve
the living conditions of the people in Gaza. Above all,
only lifting the blockade, with the necessary security
guarantees for Israel, will make it possible to meet the
needs of the population.
In parallel with those efforts, we must give our
full support to the Special Coordinator’s proposals for
the accelerated implementation of priority projects.
We will have an opportunity to discuss that in more
detail next week at the Ad Hoc Liaison Committee
for the Coordination of International Assistance to
Palestinians meeting in New York. Those projects
must be accompanied by quick-impact humanitarian
measures, necessary to meet the immediate needs of
the population and prevent further escalation.
In the same spirit, unprecedented international
mobilization is needed to enable the United Nations
Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the
Near East to continue its essential activities and keep
its schools open, without interruption, in Gaza and
throughout the region. We will have an opportunity to
call for such collective mobilization during the week
of high-level meetings during the General Assembly.
The stakes are high for the populations concerned,
of course, but no less so for regional stability. In that
context, we call on the United States to maintain its
historic commitment to refugees and the Palestinian
territories, with the necessary engagement of the
international community.
France is a friend to both the Israelis and the
Palestinians. It has no other interest than peace in the
region and the possibility for the populations concerned
to live in safety and dignity. As we all know, the
destinies of Israelis and Palestinians are intertwined:
neither of the two peoples will achieve their national
aspirations in a sustainable way at the expense of the
other. Twenty five years after the Oslo Accords, and
in a context of increasing regional crises, the Israeli-

18-293407/21

S/PV.8358

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

Palestinian conflict has not lost any of its gravity,
centrality and symbolic significance. The international
community cannot turn away from it.
It is in that spirit that the President of the French
Republic, Mr. Emmanuel Macron, will meet tomorrow
in Paris with the President of the Palestinian Authority,
Mr. Mahmoud Abbas. In that same spirit, there
will be an exchange with the Israeli Prime Minister,
Mr. Benjamin Netanyahu, next week on the sidelines
of the General Assembly. France’s conviction is that
our shared compass, more than ever, needs to be
implementation, through negotiation, of a two-State
solution — the only way to achieve just and lasting
peace between Israel and Palestine. France will spare
no effort in that regard.
Ms. Pierce (United Kingdom): I thank the Special
Coordinator once again for his briefing and for the
work that he is doing to improve the situation and bring
it closer to peace, as well as for all the hard work of his
teams on the ground.
The United Kingdom remains committed to
achieving a two-State solution, leading to a safe and
secure Israel, living alongside a viable and sovereign
Palestinian State, with Jerusalem as a shared capital.
We continue to believe that the best way to achieve
that is through negotiations between Israel and the
Palestinians, and for all parties to focus on steps that
are conducive to peace. As the French Ambassador
said, some 25 years ago we concluded the Oslo
Accords. It is doubly concerning, therefore, to see the
recent developments on the ground on key aspects
of resolution 2334 (2016). The level and rhetoric of
hatred in dehumanization on all sides is repellent, and
also dangerous.
The United Kingdom remains deeply concerned
about the Israeli authorities’ planned demolition of
the village of Khan Al-Ahmar, which is located in
an area of strategic importance for the contiguity of
a Palestinian State. Its demolition threatens a major
blow to the prospects for a two-State solution, with
Jerusalem as the shared capital, by paving the way for
settlement building in Area E-1. The United Nations has
said that demolition could amount to forcible transfer in
violation of international humanitarian law. The recent
decision of the Israeli Supreme Court does not mandate
demolition. Demolition remains at the discretion of the
Israeli Government. We therefore call on the Israeli
Government, once again, not to go ahead with its
8/21

20/09/2018

plan to demolish the village, including the school, and
displace the residents.
I share concerns about the situation at the United
Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine
Refugees in the Near East (UNRWA), which is facing
severe financial pressure at a time of increased
demand. We support a just, fair, agreed and realistic
settlement of Palestinian refugees. Until that point we
remain firmly committed to supporting UNRWA and
Palestinian refugees across the Middle East. We are
concerned about the impact the recent United States
decision on funding. We believe UNRWA is a lifeline
for millions of Palestinian refugees across the Middle
East. We have ourselves so far provided approximately
$67 million to UNRWA, $59 million to its core services
and $7.8 million in humanitarian aid in Syria. We
hope that will help meet immediate needs and that
programmes and services can remain uninterrupted.
We call on the international community and other
donors to follow that and step up support to UNRWA to
ensure its vital services are not interrupted. At the same
time, I would like to stress that, for UNRWA to have
a sustainable future, it needs to continue to promote
realistic and technical cost-saving reforms. The United
Kingdom will continue to work closely with UNRWA
and donors on how best to ensure the continuity of
essential services to Palestinian refugees at this time.
Lastly, and as the French Ambassador said, there is
an urgent need to address the awful and deteriorating
humanitarian situation in Gaza. The United Kingdom
recently announced a new $49 million programme to
support economic development in Gaza and in the West
Bank. We have released $2.6 million to UNICEF to help
provide up to 1 million Gazans with access to clean
water and sanitation, and we have given $2 million to
the International Committee of the Red Cross appeal to
support emergency medical needs. We are supportive of
efforts to reduce the conflict in Gaza. It is in everyone’s
interest that peace and stability prevail in Israel and in
the occupied Palestinian territories. We fully support
the efforts of the Special Coordinator to improve the
situation in Gaza, and we urge the relevant parties to
engage fully with his proposals.
We also would like to see progress on humanitarian
and economic proposals at next week’s meeting of the
Ad Hoc Liaison Committee for the Coordination of
the International Assistance to Palestinians, and we
call upon both Israel and the Palestinian Authority to
deliver on their outstanding commitments. We reiterate
18-29340

20/09/2018

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

the need for Israel to reduce its movement and access
restrictions on the people of Gaza, and for Hamas
to commit to non-violence and fully end its attacks
on Israel.
In order to see a long-term improvement in Gaza,
momentum around Fatah-Hamas reconciliation needs
to be maintained. The United Kingdom is supportive
of Egyptian efforts to enable the Palestinian authority
to resume control of Gaza. And we encourage all
parties to engage constructively. The recent deaths
on both sides of the conflict, including the deaths of
three Palestinians in Gaza over the past week and the
stabbing of an Israeli in a settlement on 16 September,
reflect the need for progress to end the cycle of
violence. We strongly urge all the relevant parties to
respect international law, de-escalate tensions, exercise
restraint and prevent occurrences that could jeopardize
the lives of Palestinians and Israelis.
Mr. Nebenzia (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We thank Special representative Mladenov for
his substantive briefing on the Middle East settlement.
Today’s meeting is taking place on a landmark
day for the history of the peace process in the Middle
East. Forty years ago, the Camp David Agreements
were arrived at. Twenty-five years ago, the Oslo
Accords were struck. Those components, alongside
other parameters agreed upon by the international
community, have comprised the bedrock of a political
process that was also enriched by important Security
Council resolutions, the Madrid guiding principles, the
Arab Peace Initiative, and the road map of the Middle
East Quartet of international mediators on the Middle
East settlement.
At the heart of this international legal basis is the
two-State solution for the Palestinian-Israeli conflict,
the implementation of which is contingent upon the
need for agreement to be reached on all final-status
issues, including Jerusalem, refugees, borders and
security, through direct dialogue between Israelis
and the Palestinian people. Unfortunately, those
landmark dates arrived amid troubling developments in
Middle-East policy. Indicators are increasingly pointing
to an aspiration to undermine what has been developed,
including with the participation of the United States,
namely, the platform for a settlement. How else can one
regard and view the recent decision taken by Washington
to close the Palestine Liberation Organization office
in the United States capital? We genuinely fail to

S/PV. 8358

understand the withdrawal of financing for the United
Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees
in the Near East (UNRWA) and the recent refusal to
continue to facilitate the operation of two hospitals in
East Jerusalem. Bilateral commitments have collapsed.
Even important security-related cooperation is under
threat. Such measures do major damage to collective
efforts to arrive at a comprehensive Palestinian-Israeli
settlement in the Middle East.
There is still time to rescind the decisions taken.
We see the response in the revision of the current
approaches, which have grave consequences for the
prospects of the peace process, and a return to the
roots of settlement. There needs to be an emphasis on
rekindling international cooperation in the spirit of
Russian-United States co-sponsorship, as well as of the
Madrid process. That of course led to the establishment
of the Middle East Quartet, which, as we see it, is the
most effective mechanism and which was approved
by the Security Council. It is necessary to revitalize
work to launch direct Palestinian-Israeli dialogue. In
that connection, what remains relevant is our initiative
to organize in Moscow a personal meeting between
the Palestinian and Israeli leaders. It is necessary to
reverse existing trends, which are a consequence of
unilateral decisions. I am referring to the cessation of
settlement activities by Israel in the occupied territory,
inflammatory rhetoric and violence on the part of both
sides. Of course, one cannot overlook humanitarian
assistance to the Palestinian people, above all in the
Gaza strip. At the same time, we proceed from the
premise that robust assistance to Gaza needs to dovetail
with rebuilding unity among the Palestinian ranks.
We would note the important work carried out
by the United Nations, specifically UNRWA, in the
occupied Palestinian territories and in refugee camps.
We welcome and support the inclusion of regional
players in Middle East settlement. We note, and highly
value, the role of Egypt and Jordan in Palestinian
affairs. Russia’s position on a Middle East settlement
was and remains principled and consistent. We firmly
believe that a fair solution to the Palestinian issue is
of key significance to remedy the situation throughout
the region. A pursuit of the conflict between Israel and
Palestine, on the contrary, will constantly poison the
overall international atmosphere, will have a detrimental
effect on efforts to resolve other regional crises and will
fuel terrorism. We would particularly draw attention to
the importance of improving relations within the Arab

18-293409/21

S/PV.8358

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

family. We are interested in a united and potent League
of Arab States where all disputes are resolved on the
basis of mutually respectful dialogue. We advocate the
revival of multilateral efforts on Middle-East issues as a
whole. We propose that colleagues thoroughly consider
our vision to establish confidence-building measures in
the Persian Gulf, which eventually should lead to the
establishment of a pan-regional security architecture.
That is important not only to resolve the crises in Syria,
Yemen and Libya but also to prevent potential conflicts.
Mr. Tenya (Peru) (spoke in Spanish): We appreciate
the convening of this meeting. We are grateful to
Mr. Nickolay Mladenov for his detailed briefing this
afternoon, which draws attention to the tragic situation
in Gaza.
We would like to emphasize three points that we
believe need urgent attention.
First is putting an end to the settlement, demolition
and eviction practices in the occupied Palestinian
territories. Peru regrets and notes with concern the
continuation of such practices, which are contrary to
international law, seriously jeopardize the territorial
integrity of the Palestinian State and undermine the
possibility of reaching a political solution. We are
particularly concerned about the humanitarian impact
that would arise from the demolition of a group of
structures in the village of Khan Al-Ahmar, which,
as Mr. Mladenov mentioned, houses a community of
181 Palestinians, more than half of whom are minors.
Such practices must cease, in strict compliance with
the resolutions adopted by the Security Council, in
particular resolution 2334 (2016).
My second point is that we believe that it is
important to reverse the deteriorating humanitarian
situation. We note with dismay the profound and
ongoing deterioration of the humanitarian situation
in the Gaza Strip, exacerbated by the recent incidents
of violence and the cuts in the funding of assistance
programmes. In order to overcome that reality, we
believe that it is essential to address the lack of basic
goods and services, as well as the blockade to which
millions of Palestinians are subjected and which
provides an ideal setting for those who promote violence
and extremism. In that regard, we welcome the fact that
the Special Envoy and his team have identified specific
infrastructure and development projects in Gaza.
We also believe that it is essential to advance the
process of intra-Palestinian reconciliation and that the
10/21

20/09/2018

agreement reached last October under the auspices
of Egypt be reflected in concrete actions and results.
We believe that that should make it possible for the
legitimate Palestinian Authority to regain effective
control of Gaza and should facilitate the resumption of
direct negotiations with Israel.
We must also reiterate the need to provide the
United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine
Refugees in the Near East with steady and predictable
funding and to mobilize to that end the solidarity of
the international community, in particular the countries
with the greatest resources and those committed to
peace and stability in the region.
Lastly, my third point is that we believe that
it is important to end the violence and to commit to
achieving a political agreement. We regret the fact
that the parties continue their hostile positions. Peru
condemns the indiscriminate violence of Hamas, the
disproportionate Israeli responses and the rhetoric of
confrontation on the part of both sides. We emphasize
the importance and the urgency of having a minimum
level of understanding to assist in the reversal of the
negative trends on the ground and in the resumption
of direct negotiations between the parties, all with a
view to achieving the only viable solution: two States
coexisting with secure and mutually recognized borders.
I would like to conclude by commending the
presentation last June, in written form, of the quarterly
report (S/2018/614) on the implementation of resolution
2334 (2016), which was requested of the SecretaryGeneral by 10 members of the Security Council (see
S/2018/454). We hope to have a new written report in
December in order to lend greater transparency to the
treatment of this delicate issue.
Mr. Ma Zhaoxu (China) (spoke in Chinese): I
would like to thank Special Coordinator Mladenov for
his briefing.
The question of Palestine is at the heart of the
Middle East issue and is fundamental to peace in the
region. The recent developments in Palestine and Israel
are deeply troubling. The prospects for a two-State
solution remain elusive, since the resumption of the
Palestinian-Israeli peace talks faces difficulties and the
settlement activities and the demolition of Palestinian
properties continue unabated.
The situation in the Gaza Strip remains fragile,
marred by the ongoing casualties among Palestinian
18-29340

20/09/2018

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

civilians. As a result of the violent clashes, the risk of
the conflict escalating can hardly be ignored. Given
the current dire situation, the international community
needs to step up its efforts to promote a political solution
to the Palestinian question. The Security Council in
particular should take the lead and set an example.
First, the international community should
uphold the two-State solution, which represents the
right direction to resolve the Palestinian issue. The
international community should increase its political
and diplomatic efforts on the basis of the United
Nations resolutions, the Madrid principles, including
land for peace, the Arab Peace Initiative and the road
map to a permanent two-State solution to the IsraeliPalestinian conflict. It is imperative to effectively
implement the Security Council resolutions, cease all
settlement activities, stop the demolition of Palestinian
properties, including Bedouin villages, immediately
lift the blockade on the Gaza Strip and take steps to
prevent violence against civilians.
Secondly, the international community should
remain united in a concerted effort to promote the early
resumption of the peace talks between Palestine and
Israel. All the parties concerned should narrow their
differences, fully engage in dialogue and consultation
and avoid any unilateral action that may exacerbate
the situation so as to create the necessary environment
for the resumption of dialogue. The international
community should work together to find a viable way
forward to overcome the current stalemate. Those that
have considerable influence on the Middle East in
particular should play a constructive role in that regard.
Thirdly, sensitive issues, such as the status of
Jerusalem, should be properly addressed. The issue
of the status of Jerusalem is complex and delicate. All
parties should prioritize peace and calm in the region
and act with caution to avoid triggering new regional
disputes. All parties should respect the historical
plurality, uphold fairness and justice, implement
international consensus, strive for peaceful coexistence
and act upon the relevant United Nations resolutions
and the international consensus so as to reach a
negotiated settlement that accommodates the interests
of all the parties.
The international community should not forget
the more than 5 million Palestinian refugees. For more
than six decades, the United Nations Relief and Works
Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East has

S/PV. 8358

played an important role in alleviating the suffering
of the Palestinian people and in promoting regional
peace and stability. The Agency currently faces many
challenges, including a lack of funding. We appreciate
the increased contributions of the relevant parties to the
Agency and call on all the parties to provide additional
and steady support to the Agency and to the countries
hosting Palestinian refugees in order to alleviate
the pressure on refugee relief efforts. For the past
30 years and more, China has made annual financial
contributions to the Agency. This year, in the light
of the urgent needs of the Agency, we have increased
our contribution accordingly. China will continue to
provide the best possible support to the Agency for the
discharge of its mandate.
China firmly supports the Palestinian people
in establishing a fully sovereign and independent
Palestinian State on the basis of the 1967 borders, with
East Jerusalem as its capital. We support the greater
integration of Palestine into the community of nations.
China will continue to play a constructive role in
promoting the Middle East peace process in line with
the four-point proposal set out by Chinese President Xi
Jinping to resolve the Palestinian question.
Mr. Skoog (Sweden): I would like to thank Special
Coordinator Mladenov for his clear briefing today. I
also thank him for his reminder about the urgency and
volatility of the situation on the ground and about the
fact that, 25 years after the historic Oslo Accords, we
need to have a serious and frank discussion about the
obstacles to peace and threats to the two-State solution,
which represents international consensus. I would like
to address three elements of resolution 2334 (2016):
settlements, violence and differentiation.
The Israeli settlement policy continues unabated
despite repeated international condemnation. During
the reporting period, the Israeli authorities announced
plans and tenders for thousands of new settlement units
in the West Bank, including East Jerusalem, while
Palestinian homes are being demolished and people are
at risk of being forcibly transferred. We second the calls
from both the United Nations and the European Union
(EU) to the Israeli authorities to reconsider their decision
to demolish the Bedouin village of Khan Al-Ahmar
in area E-l. It would have serious consequences for
its residents, the majority of whom are children, as
well as for the contiguity of the Palestinian State and
Palestinian access to East Jerusalem. Israel’s settlement
policy is illegal under international law, as are actions

18-2934011/21

S/PV.8358

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

taken in that context, including the demolitions of
Palestinian communities and possible forced transfers
of the population. The policy undermines prospects for
peace and the viability of the two-State solution. We
therefore urge the Israeli authorities to reconsider and
reverse those policies.
We call for steps to prevent acts of violence against
civilians, including acts of terrorism, provocation and
destruction. In line with resolution 2334 (2016) and
well-established EU policy, we call for the distinction
between Israel within pre-1967 borders and occupied
territory. As is obvious from the Special Coordinator’s
briefing today, progress on implementing that part of
resolution 2334 (2016) is lacking. We urge all States to
act in that regard.
Since our previous meeting, in August (see
S/PV.8239), we welcome the fact that the situation in
and around Gaza has stabilized somewhat thanks to
international efforts, not least by the Special Coordinator
and Egypt. But, as we heard, the situation remains tense
and fragile and, for the sake of long-term stability,
we underline the importance of all relevant parties,
including the Palestine Liberation Organization, taking
part in such efforts. While another devastating conflict
between Israel and Hamas may have been averted, it is
imperative to alleviate the humanitarian crisis in Gaza.
Interventions with quick, direct and immediate impact
on daily lives are possible and urgently needed for the
population in Gaza living under dire circumstances.
We look forward to discussing that issue in greater
detail at the meeting of the Ad Hoc Liaison Committee
for the Coordination of the International Assistance to
Palestinians next week, but let me underline that it is
crucial to see a lifting of the Israeli closure regime, an
end to acts of violence and acts of provocation, progress
in intra-Palestinian reconciliation and a return of the
Palestinian Authority to Gaza.
We are all aware that the United Nations Relief
and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near
East (UNRWA) plays a critical role on the ground. It
provides education, health and other essential services
to Palestine refugees, but it also constitutes a key factor
for stability in the region, including in neighbouring
countries, until the final-status issue on refugees has
been settled. We therefore regret the decision of the
United States not to provide further funding to UNRWA
after decades of political and financial support. The
United States has traditionally been the largest donor,
and its support has been much appreciated. That decision
12/21

20/09/2018

has contributed to a serious financial crisis at UNRWA,
with a current funding shortfall of $186 million. A
few weeks ago, UNRWA schools for more than half a
million Palestinian children were opened. However, the
Agency’s funding beyond September is not secured.
The remaining financial gap needs to be filled for
schools to remain open.
Sweden is among the top donors to UNRWA. In
August we signed a multiannual partnership agreement
worth over $200 million. We are fully committed to
supporting UNRWA at this critical juncture. Together
with our partners, including Jordan, whose commitment
to UNRWA we commend, we have sought to mobilize
political and financial support over recent months. We
will also use the occasion of the high-level week of the
General Assembly to that end. We call on all countries
to step up support, since the shortfall is unprecedented
and, as mentioned, risks spurring instability and violent
radicalization in both Gaza and the wider region.
Unfortunately, the Oslo Accords did not bring about
the peace that both Israelis and Palestinians deserve. We
reaffirm our support for an end to the occupation and
for the two-State solution, based on international law,
the relevant United Nations resolutions and previous
agreements. There simply is no viable alternative to the
two-State solution, which is the only way the legitimate
aspirations of both peoples can be attained. Yet, as we
have heard today, that goal is becoming increasingly
distant by the day. We therefore need to redouble our
collective efforts to salvage the two-State solution. The
international community and regional stakeholders
have a key role to play in revitalizing meaningful peace
negotiations, which require the full participation of
women. The Council, too, has a role to play, as it did
when resolution 2334 (2016) was adopted.
We often speak in the Chamber about how
important it is that the decisions of the Council be
respected. That is why we are gravely concerned about
the clear lack of implementation of resolution 2334
(2016) and why we were surprised that no report of
the Secretary-General was circulated prior to today’s
meeting. We recall that the provision of written reports
is standard practice in the Council, as stipulated by
presidntial note S/2017/507. A report was circulated in
June (S/2018/614), in line with the request made by 10
members of the Council. We encourage the continuance
of that practice and look forward to receiving a written
report for the next quarterly reporting period.
18-29340

20/09/2018

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

Ms. Wronecka (Poland): At the outset, I would like
to thank Special Coordinator Nickolay Mladenov for
his very comprehensive briefing on the implementation
of resolution 2334 (2016).
Twenty-five years ago, the first Oslo Accord was
signed. Despite its many shortcomings, the agreement
represented a historic compromise. Unfortunately,
since then the conflict has not seen significant positive
moves towards achieving peace. On the contrary, we
have seen that the recent security situation in Israel and
the occupied Palestinian territory has become more
tense. Many times over the past couple of weeks, we
have expressed great concern about the tragic loss of
civilian lives on both sides. We have appealed to Israel
to use proportionate force. We have also called on the
Palestinians to stop indiscriminate and deliberate rocket
firings from Gaza to Israel and to refrain from causing
fires by launching incendiary kites and balloons.
Let me again underline that all sides must fully
comply with their obligations under international
humanitarian law and human rights law. Recent
developments on the ground clearly point to an urgent
need to continue the de-escalation process. We believe
that a negotiated two-State solution and the resolution
of all final-status issues, including Jerusalem,
settlements, Palestinian refugees, borders and security
arrangements, remain a realistic way to fulfil the
legitimate aspirations of both parties and achieve longterm peace.
We should strengthen cooperation with the
countries of the region, especially Egypt and Jordan,
which would have a real impact on the de-escalation of
tensions in Israeli-Palestinian relations. We appeal to
both sides to refrain from unilateral steps that prejudge
the outcome of final-status negotiations and expect
them to demonstrate, through their actions and policies,
their commitment to peace. In more general terms, let
me underline that Poland supports a two-State solution
under which the national aspirations of both parties to
the conflict would be met, including the Palestinian
right to self-determination and independence, as
well as the Israeli right to ensure its security and the
normalization of relations with Arab States.
Unfortunately, so far we have not seen any
significant positive moves towards achieving that goal.
The situation in the Gaza Strip is extremely worrisome.
There is a lack of progress in political, security and
humanitarian processes in Gaza. The prevailing lack

S/PV. 8358

of decisive steps towards the return of the legitimate
Palestinian Government to Gaza, despite Egypt’s
best efforts to revive the process, is detrimental to
Palestinian aspirations to statehood, contributes to
the worsening of the humanitarian crisis and risks
escalation. Undoubtedly, progress in the Palestinian
reconciliation process would contribute to improving
the situation on the ground.
Unfortunately, provocation, incitement and
inflammatory rhetoric continue on both sides. In our
opinion, such acts constitute a significant obstacle to the
reactivation of the peace process. It must also be stated
that, as a result of such incitement and inflammatory
rhetoric, we have observed an increased number of
dangerous incidents, some of which involve children,
who should be particularly protected.
While we are on the subject of youth, we are deeply
concerned by the deteriorating financial situation of the
United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine
Refugees in the Near East. A lack of hope and real
perspectives for young generations — especially in
Gaza — could very easily be exploited by inflammatory
rhetoric. The effects of reducing this support can have
serious security and humanitarian consequences, not
only in the Palestinian territories but also in other
countries hosting refugees. The Agency already faces
a great challenge in upholding its mandate to preserve
its key services like education and health care. In the
absence of a lasting political solution, the international
community cannot abdicate its responsibility and
duty towards the Palestinian refugees to ensure
the continuation of the Agency’s work on a sound
financial basis.
In conclusion, I would like to reiterate the longstanding European Union position that all settlement
activity is illegal under international law and continues
to undermine the practical prospects and hopes for peace.
In this context, I also wish to reiterate the call issued by
the United Nations Coordinator for Humanitarian and
Development Activities in the Occupied Palestinian
Territory for plans to demolish Khan Al-Ahmar/Abu
Al-Helu to be cancelled. Not only is the community at
imminent risk of demolition and displacement, but such
a move would also set a significant precedent that may
affect other Bedouin communities in Area C.
Mr. Llorentty Solíz (Plurinational State of Bolivia)
(spoke in Spanish): My delegation thanks Mr. Nikolay
Mladenov for the information he has provided today.

18-2934013/21

S/PV.8358

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

I would like to begin my statement by expressing
our concern at the fact that a written report on the
implementation of resolution 2334 (2016) was not
circulated, although it had been requested by 10
members of the Council in a letter dated 14 May and
was acted upon in June, when the report was distributed
in good time. I thank the Secretary-General for having
acceded to our request at that time, and we reiterate
that this should be a recurring practice for all reports.
We stress the importance of having written reports
provided to delegations because it allows us to have
first-hand information relating to the complete cessation
of all Israeli settlement activities, which is critical to
safeguarding the two-State solution in accordance with
resolution 2334 (2016).
Unfortunately, the Government of Israel continues
to demonstrate its disdain for the resolutions adopted
by the Security Council. Its administrative and legal
acts continue to dangerously foment negative trends
on the ground and are used as justification by the
security forces to take part in violent action against
the Palestinian people and their property.As we were
informed today by Mr. Mladenov, under the pretext
of an absence of building permits, the Government
of Israel has demolished or confiscated 25 structures
belonging to Palestinian families in Area C and in
East Jerusalem. As a result of this arbitrary action, 47
people — including 23 children — have been displaced
and the livelihoods of 108 civilians seriously affected.
My delegation forcefully rejects the deadly attacks
of the Israeli armed forces on the Palestinian civilian
population, including those reported by the United
Nations Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian
Affairs (OCHA) in its report on the protection of
civilians. In the report, OCHA details the murder by
the Israeli army of three Palestinians, including two
children, with 666 wounded between 28 August and
10 September as a result of the use of live fire. The
report also details a total of 50 Palestinian casualties
during the attempt of 10 boats to set sail from Gaza to
break the Israeli naval blockade as part of the so-called
Great March of Return. These incidents culmminated
in the ships being impounded by the Israeli navy and,
as usual, the use of lethal weapons of war and tear gas.
We are concerned about the dreadful
unemployment among Palestinians in the occupied
territories. The unemployment rate is 27 per cent — the
highest in the world, according to a report of the United
Nations Conference on Trade and Development, which
14/21

20/09/2018

also warns that the impact is higher on women and
young people.
We also categorically reject the politicization of
humanitarian assistance engaged in by some Member
States as they withdraw their economic support for the
United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine
Refugees in the Near East (UNRWA), justifying
their decision by claiming that the school, health
and assistance services provided by the Agency are
wanting. Bolivia offers its warmest commendation to
UNRWA for its humanitarian work in assisting the more
than 5.4 million Palestinian men and women who find
themselves refugees in the West Bank, East Jerusalem,
Gaza, Jordan, Lebanon and Syria. Given this priority
need, we call on the States Members of the Organization
to continue making their valuable economic
contributions to the Agency in the understanding that
the current crisis has the sole effect of worsening of the
quality of life for all Palestinian refugees.
As on other occasions, Bolivia expresses its firm
commitment to all international efforts to find a
peaceful solution to the situation and, in this regard,
endorses such initiatives as the Quartet road map, the
Madrid principles, the Arab Peace Initiative and others
that guarantee just and lasting peace so that both peoples
are able to live within internationally recognized and
secure borders.
Bolivia is convinced that the only long-term option
for resolving this occupation is the two-State solution,
ultimately leading to a free, sovereign and independent
Palestinian State within the pre-1967 international
borders and with East Jerusalem as its capital, in
accordance with the relevant resolutions of the Security
Council and the General Assembly.
Mr. Alotaibi (Kuwait) (spoke in Arabic): At
the outset, we thank Mr. Nickolay Mladenov for his
valuable and comprehensive briefing today, and for
reminding the Security Council and the international
community of the dangerous situation in the occupied
Palestinian territory. We underline once again the State
of Kuwait’s full support for his concerted efforts to
achieve lasting, fair and comprehensive peace for the
Palestinian people. This repercussions of this longstanding problem have been aggravated on a daily basis
and affected the people who have suffered the hardship
of occupation for over five decades.
“If new funds are not received immediately, we
will be facing a potentially catastrophic breakdown
18-29340

20/09/2018

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

in essential service delivery... Services provided at
hospitals, clinics, as well as sewage treatment, water
and sanitation facilities will cease… Hospitals in
the Gaza Strip only have enough fuel to support
service provision just over two weeks, in total, with
some facilities at greater risk… putting the lives
of over 500 vulnerable patients at risk each day.
These include patients being treated in intensive
care; new-born babies in neonatal units; patients
requiring emergency surgery.”
Those are the words of Mr. Jamie McGoldrick,
Humanitarian Coordinator for the Occupied Palestinian
Territory, who appealed to the world and the donor
community to prevent a new catastrophe; this time,
a health catastrophe for the people of Gaza. It is no
exaggeration to warn that just a few weeks separate
Gaza from a catastrophic collapse in basic humanitarian
services, according to Mr. Mladenov. That must cause
us to redouble our efforts to protect civilians and avoid
this dark scenario by compelling Israel to respect and
implement the relevant Security Council resolutions,
while stopping all its illegal and illegitimate practices.
Yesterday, our appeals were aimed at averting the
emergence of a humanitarian crisis due to the closure
of the vital Karam Abu Salem crossing by Israel,
the occupying Power. Today, the Palestinian people
continue to face multiple challenges. Numbers and
statistics do not lie. More than 4,800 patients in the
Gaza Strip are dire daily need of basic health care.
Mr. Mladenov’s briefing tells us once again
that the situation in Gaza is still on the brink of the
abyss, especially after the fall of a number of martyrs
and wounded. Three Palestinian citizens, including a
12-year-old boy, were recently killed in addition to 248
citizens injured, 80 of them were hit by live bullets.
That raises the number to 180 people who have been
killed since the beginning of the peaceful Great March
of Return on 30 March. We strongly condemn these
systematic Israeli crimes against unarmedPalestinian
civilians, which amount to war crimes and crimes
against humanity under international humanitarian law
and international human rights law.
In addition, the occupying authorities have given
orders for bulldozers and demolition machines to begin
moving towards the Al-Khan Al-Ahmar area after the
Israeli Supreme Court rejected the petition filed by the
Bedouin community of that area. This act threatens to
displace 80 Palestinian families, which means about 190

S/PV. 8358

persons, of whom 53 per cent are children. The reason
for that is to implement the so-called Greater Jerusalem
Project, including the settlement project called E-1, to
vacate the area of all Palestinian presence, separate the
southern West Bank from the centre and isolate the
occupied city of Jerusalem from the West Bank. That
constitutes a serious violation of human rights and
international humanitarian law, while undermining the
efforts towards a two-State solution.
In that regard, we reiterate our demand that the
Israeli occupation Power be obliged to respect and
implement resolution 2334 (2016), which underscored
that Israeli settlements constitute a flagrant violation
of international law and an obstacle to peace. We
welcome the first written report of the SecretaryGeneral (S/2018/614), which was issued in June, on the
implementation of that resolution. We regret that no
such report was issued this month, and we look forward
to the issuance of periodic written reports regarding the
implementation of that resolution starting in December
in response to a request by 10 States members of the
Council, and in line with the established practice and
the note by the President S/2017/507.
Unfortunately, the basic services provided by the
United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine
Refugees in the Near East (UNRWA) to more than
5 million registered Palestinian refugees are facing
great pressure as a result of the severe financial crisis
of the Agency. We had believed that its previous
financial crisis could not get any worse, but today we
find that these challenges have doubled and now pose a
direct threat to those refugees as a result of UNRWA’s
fiscal deficit. We urge donor countries to continue to
provide the necessary and sustainable financial support
for the Agency’s programmes and activities. Funding
the Agency is the responsibility of the international
community and its burden cannot be borne by specific
States. However, the total amount provided by the State
of Kuwait has exceeded $70 million in the past four
years alone. We will maintain this support alongside
many other countries.
The special session of the Council of the League
of Arab States, which was held at the ministerial level
on 12 September to discuss the UNRWA crisis, fully
supported the mandate given to the Agency under
General Assembly resolution 302 (IV). It rejected
attempts to end or reduce the role and mandate of the
Agency through systematic campaigns against it. It
called on the international community to commit itself

18-2934015/21

S/PV.8358

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

to the Agency mandate and to ensure resources and
financial contributions to its budget and activities in a
sustainable manner so that it can continue to play its role
in providing basic services to the victims of the Nakba.
That is a right which the international community has
a responsibility to fulfil, in accordance with General
Assembly resolution 194 (III) of 1948.
Unfortunately, there is once again overriding
tension in Jerusalem due to the provocative incursions
launched by extremist settler groups in the courtyard
of the Al-Aqsa Mosque, covered by Israeli occupying
forces, which have released tear gas on civilians and
detained dozens of worshippers and Mosque guards, as
well as removing officials from the Islamic Endowments
Department. We renew our rejection and condemnation
of any Israeli violation of holy sites, especially attempts
to change the historical and legal status of the Al-Aqsa
Mosque or to partition it, and to undermine the freedom
of Muslim prayers therein. In that regard, we commend
the decision of the Government of Paraguay to refrain
from moving its Embassy to Jerusalem, in respect
of international law and the relevant internationally
legitimate resolutions.
In conclusion, what I have outlined is only a glimpse
of the suffering of the unarmed Palestinian people; it is
only a small part of the scourges facing our Palestinian
brothers in the occupied territories. Most importantly,
what I have outlined must stir our consciences and
compel us to put an end to the injustices that the
Palestinian people have suffered for decades. Everyone
in the Council is all too aware that the Palestinian
question is a top priority of every Muslim and Arab.
There can be no lasting peace and security as long as the
occupation continues. The resolutions of international
legitimatcy, the Quartet road map, the principle of
land for peace and the Arab Peace Initiative are the
cornerstones of a comprehensive, just and lasting peace.
Those would provide the Palestinian people with their
legitimate political rights and the establishment of their
independent State with East Jerusalem as its capital.
Ms. Guadey (Ethiopia): We thank the Special
Coordinator for the Middle East Peace Process,
Mr. Nickolay Mladenov, for his briefing on the latest
developments with regard to the situation in the Middle
East, including the Palestinian question.
We remain concerned that negative actions taken
by the parties continue to stoke tensions in the region,
and we are saddened by the deaths of innocent civilians.
16/21

20/09/2018

It is absolutely vital that the parties refrain from actions
that do not contribute to making progress, but instead
increase frustration and mistrust.
The security and humanitarian situation in Gaza
continues to be a source of concern, and making every
possible effort to avoid the worst is still a matter of
priority. We hope that some of the events planned
during the high-level week will help to mobilize the
necessary international assistance to meet the needs of
the Palestinians. We continue to support United Nations
engagement, in close coordination with Egypt and all
concerned parties, to address the situation in Gaza.
Progress in the Egyptian-led reconciliation process is
key, and the parties must be urged to cooperate for the
sake of their own people, who have been suffering for
far too long.
Finally, 25 years after the signing of the Oslo
Accords, peace in the Middle East and Palestine
continues to elude us. The need to reinvigorate efforts
aimed at achieving a comprehensive, lasting and just
solution on the basis of the two-State formula is very
clear. In that regard, facilitating the resumption of direct
negotiations between the parties is vital. It is incumbent
upon the Council to support such efforts for the sake
of peace between the Israelis and the Palestinians and
peace in the broader Middle Eastern region.
Mr. Ipo (Côte d’Ivoire) (spoke in French): Côte
d’Ivoire welcomes the convening of this briefing on the
situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian
question. We thank Mr. Nickolay Mladenov, Special
Coordinator for the Middle East Peace Process and
Personal Representative of the Secretary-General,
whose briefing oriented us on the multiple and complex
challenges to peace and stability in a region deeply
affected by the Israeli-Palestinian crisis.
Among the hotbeds of tension in the Middle East,
the Israeli-Palestinian issue is undoubtedly the most
complex crisis the international community has ever
faced, having been unable to provide a definitive and
universally acceptable response in 70 years. Côte
d’Ivoire, which has always advocated dialogue and the
peaceful settlement of disputes, regrets the lack of a
consensual and viable framework for consultation
since the deadlock in the Oslo Accords, which had
raised hopes for a lasting peace between Israelis and
Palestinians. My country therefore reiterates its call
on the Israeli and Palestinian leaders to move beyond
the current situation and to resume dialogue in order
18-29340

20/09/2018

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

to consolidate past gains and create the conditions
conducive to the achievement of a just and lasting peace.
My country, which attaches as much importance to
the security of the State of Israel as to the inalienable
right of the Palestinian people to self-determination,
reaffirms its strong support for the solution of two
States peacefully coexisting within the 1967 borders.
Côte d’Ivoire therefore encourages all parties to work
for peace in order to put an end to the vicious cycle of
violence. To that end, it calls for the extension of the
current ceasefire and welcomes Israel’s reopening of
the Erez crossing.
In the current context, the resumption of dialogue
between Israelis and Palestinians is not merely a
necessity; it is above all a matter of urgency the
resolution of which could help to contain the seeds of
potential violence. That is why my country supports
France’s 15 January 2017 initiative, which led to the
adoption by 70 States and international organizations
of a joint declaration reaffirming the international
community’s commitment to the two-State solution.
The declaration also calls for a settlement of the crisis
based on the relevant Council resolutions.
On the humanitarian front, Côte d’Ivoire encourages
donors to continue and increase initiatives to assist
Palestinians in distress. In that regard, it welcomes
Jordan’s announcement to organize, on 27 September
in New York, a conference to mobilize the financial
support needed to maintain the activities of the
United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine
Refugees in the Near East, which provides assistance to
3 million Palestinians in need.

S/PV. 8358

as Russian and European Union diplomats, in an attempt
to restore calm and expand the range of humanitarian
assistance provided to that troubled zone.
We echo the warnings of the United Nations that
there is a cycle of conflicts in the Middle East that are
a cause for serious concern. They are raising tensions
at all levels and in numerous contexts, including
the situations in Syria, Yemen and the PalestinianIsraeli conflict.
We have carefully followed the latest news on the
implementation of resolution 2334 (2016). Since we
too signed the letter of 14 May on the reporting on
the implementation of that resolution, we note that no
written report has been circulated for this meeting,
as requested in our joint letter. We all welcomed the
circulation of a written report on 14 June, and we
believe that it is important to continue with the standard
practice. We look forward to receiving a written report
ahead of the next reporting period in December.
Kazakhstan calls on both sides to honour their
respective commitments under all Security Council
resolutions that have been adopted over the 50 years
since 1967. The Council must ensure compliance with
resolution 2334 (2016). We therefore call in particular
for a complete freeze on the construction of settlements.
The deliberate policy of demolishing Palestinian
buildings and expanding settlements in the West Bank
and in East Jerusalem, and the transfer of those lands for
the exclusive use by one party, undermine the viability
of the two-State solution.

Côte d’Ivoire is convinced that peace is possible
when it is supported by the courage and commitment of
those who transcend the deepest divisions and hatred.
We therefore hope that one day very soon, Israelis and
Palestinians will be able to overcome their deep, but
certainly surmountable divisions in order to engage in
a fruitful dialogue with a view to achieving a lasting
settlement based on the two-State solution to a conflict
that has gone on for too long.

In that regard, we are concerned by the intention
of the Israeli authorities to demolish a Bedouin village
that is home to a community of 181 people. Such actions
undermine the establishment of a viable Palestinian
State. At the same time, Kazakhstan is alarmed at the
announcement by the Israeli Civil Administration of
the plan to expand the illegal Israeli settlement of Tina
Omarim in the town of Al-Dahriyeh, in the southern
occupied West Bank district of Hebron. We call on the
Israeli authorities to halt the demolition and stop efforts
to resettle Palestinian communities in the West Bank.

Mr. Umarov (Kazakhstan): I thank Special
Coordinator Mladenov for his very comprehensive and
objective update on the implementation of resolution
2334 (2016). We are closely following his negotiations
with the key countries on this issue. In particular, we
appreciate Mr. Mladenov’s meetings with politicians of
the Israeli, Palestinian and regional leadership, as well

With regard to the United Nations Relief and
Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near
East, Kazakhstan reiterates the critical need of
supporting that important entity in the light of its very
significant work, especially since the situation in Gaza
is desperate. Over a decade of blockade has deprived
the people of their basic rights and left over two-thirds

18-2934017/21

S/PV.8358

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

of the population dependent on humanitarian aid. My
country also underscores the importance of achieving
intra-Palestinian unity. It is absolutely vital to bring all
Palestinian factions together and to unite them under
a legitimate and democratic Palestinian Authority. My
delegation also appreciates the efforts of the Russian
Federation and Egypt to ensure intra-Palestinian
consolidation and urges all Palestinian political
parties and movements to integrate into one national
political structure.
Kazakhstan calls upon the Middle East
Quartet — the United States, Russia, the European
Union and the United Nations — to revive the work
of that international body. We believe that resuming
the Quartet’s indispensable negotiations on the Middle
East settlement will help to consolidate multilateral
efforts for a peaceful settlement of this conflict.
Lastly, we call upon the leaders of Israel, Palestine
and all other involved parties to take concrete steps
to preserve the possibility of peaceful coexistence
and the solution of two States existing side by side. It
should be based, as we always say in the Council, on
the inalienable rights of Palestinians to statehood and
Israel’s right to security.
Mr. Van Oosterom (Netherlands): I would like to
start by thanking Mr. Mladenov for his overview of
recent developments. It is a sobering list that underlines
the urgent need for positive steps. We commend him
and his team for their persistent efforts for peace. We
also thank him for his briefing on the implementation
of resolution 2334 (2016).

20/09/2018

Authority has been set up, a transfer of competences
has taken place and the Palestinian institutions were
judged to be ready to take on the responsibilities of a
State. That is no small feat in such a short period.
However, the process remains incomplete. The
transfer of responsibilities has stopped. The division
between Gaza and the West Bank is entrenching itself
further. Settlements continue to grow unabated. In
1993, it seemed difficult to have to resettle 100,000
settlers. But to resolve the current challenge of 600,000
settlers in the West Bank, including East Jerusalem, is a
task of enormous proportions. In July and August, over
2,000 new housing units were announced by Israel. The
Kingdom of the Netherlands condemns those decisions.
The number of advanced housing units increased
severely in the second quarter of 2018, compared
to the first quarter of the year, and also compared to
the same period in 2017. Settlements are illegal under
international law, and that policy undermines the
prospects for peace, as was also reconfirmed by the
Council in resolution 2334 (2016).
The stalled peace process has led to disillusion and
frustration over the past 25 years. Three-quarters of
the Palestinian people believe that the situation today
is worse than before the Oslo Accords. Among Israelis
and Palestinians, support for the two-State solution
is now below 50 per cent, yet nobody sees a better
alternative. We are deeply worried by those trends and
the lack of positive steps on either side that would help
to reverse them.

I have three points to make: first, the anniversary
of the first Oslo agreement; secondly, the threats to the
two-State solution; and thirdly, the situation in Gaza.

Secondly, I turn my attention to the threats to
the two-State solution. Nothing shows better why the
trends must be reversed than their impact on the lives of
Israelis and Palestinians. As others have said, the entire
village of Khan Al-Ahmar is slated for demolition and
eviction. We reiterate the call of the European Union
on the Israeli Government to reconsider its plan to
demolish the village, including its school, and displace
its residents. Its demolition would have very serious
consequences, both for the residents of that community,
including its children, and for the prospects of the twoState solution.

First, I would like to look back at the 25 years since
Oslo. On 13 September 1993, the first Oslo Accords were
signed. The handshake between Rabin and Arafat was
historic and it heralded a period in which peace could
be achieved, or so we all anticipated or hoped. Much
has been accomplished since then. The Palestinian

The slated demolition does not stand on its own.
For Palestinians, it is nearly impossible to obtain
building permits. According to the United Nations,
in 2016 over 16,000 demolition orders were pending
against Palestinian buildings in Area C alone. At the
same time, the Israeli settlements continue to grow.

Let me refer to the letter that was sent to the
Secretary-General in May, signed by 10 of the current
Security Council members, in which we requested
written reports on the implementation of resolution
2334 (2016). We welcomed the written report we
received in June and look forward to receiving written
reports in the future.

18/21

18-29340

20/09/2018

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

Last weekend, an Israeli civilian was again stabbed
to death. The Kingdom of the Netherlands strongly
condemns such terrorist attacks. There is no excuse
for terrorism.
Thirdly, I will speak on the situation in Gaza.
The humanitarian situation there is getting worse by
the day. We were close to a complete resumption of
hostilities in the summer. We welcome the progress
made towards calm, under the leadership of the United
Nations and Egypt. However, the underlying issues
remain unresolved, as Nickolay Mladenov again made
clear today.
Unemployment has risen to over 50 per cent.
Protests continue at the border, as sadly illustrated
by yesterday’s events, with more victims as a result.
We call on all relevant parties to ensure that protests
remain peaceful. We also urgently repeat our call upon
Israel to ensure that its responses are proportionate and
necessary at all times, in line with its obligations under
international law. The high number of victims raises
serious questions regarding the proportionality of the
Israeli response.
The Kingdom of the Netherlands supports initiatives
to improve living conditions in Gaza. Large-scale
desalination projects in Gaza or connecting Gaza to
natural gas can contribute substantially to improving
the lives of people in Gaza. However, Gaza should not
need to be a recipient of humanitarian aid. All sides
must take steps to revive the economy, through, inter
alia, a predictable opening of the crossings, while
taking into account Israel’s security needs.
The steps called for in resolution 1860 (2009) are
still as relevant today as they were in 2009. In that
regard, let me reiterate our support for the efforts of
Mr. Mladenov. We call upon all sides to constructively
engage in order to find a durable solution for many of
the problems Gaza faces. In the absence of economic
recovery, people are dependent on humanitarian aid.
We remain deeply concerned by the financial
crisis of the United Nations Relief and Works Agency
for Palestine Refugees in the Near East (UNRWA).
We support it in its tremendous work for the most
vulnerable people in Gaza and the other areas of
operation. We welcome the additional funding by new
and old partners of UNRWA. We commend UNRWA
for its cost-saving measures and decision to open its
schools, despite the uncertain situation.

S/PV. 8358

In conclusion, I started by reflecting on the 25
years that have passed since Oslo. Nobody thought
peace would be easy. We take hope from the fact that
many times parties have come close to an agreement.
We encourage the Palestinian and Israeli leaderships
not to turn their backs to each other, but to continue on
the complex road towards peace. Only they can decide
the final status issues, and in our view all final status
issues can be resolved if the political will exists.
We believe that the well-known parameters still
hold the best framework for any resolution. First, there
must be an agreement on the borders of the two States,
based on the 4 June 1967 lines, with equivalent land
swaps as may be agreed between the parties. Secondly,
security arrangements for the Palestinians must respect
their sovereignty and show that the occupation is over;
and for the Israelis, they must protect their security. The
resurgence of terrorism must be prevented and security
threats, including the new and vital threats in the
region, must be addressed. Thirdly, a just, fair, agreed
and realistic solution to the refugee question must be
put in place. Fourthly, the aspirations of both parties
for Jerusalem must be fulfilled. A way must be found
through negotiations to resolve the status of Jerusalem
as the future capital of both States.
Mr. Esono Mbengono (Equatorial Guinea) (spoke
in Spanish): I would like to express our sincere gratitude
to the team led by Mr. Mladenov, Special Coordinator
for the Middle East Peace Process, for his clear and
detailed briefing and, above all, for his unceasing effort
to overcome the political impasse that the conflict has
endured for many years.
We welcome the fact that the Security Council is
meeting again today to address that conflict. Twentyeight years after the Madrid Conference, peace is ever
more distant. The path mapped out by the Madrid
Conference and the Oslo Accords 25 years ago is almost
in danger of becoming obsolete. We are faced with a
very worrying dynamic of the exhaustion of hope in the
negotiating process and of a gradual loss of confidence
in the viability of the two-State solution. Furthermore,
the reports that we have received from the region from
the beginning of the conflict to the present day have
continuously highlighted violence as a predominant
and growing element.
History has demonstrated that the conflict does
not have a military solution. The parties are fated to
seek a solution through negotiations, which is why it is

18-2934019/21

S/PV.8358

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

20/09/2018

important that they abstain from taking action that can
aggravate the already complicated situation.

practice, the next quarterly report will be provided
in writing.

Over the past six months, we have witnessed
violence unleashed on the border between Israel and
the Gaza Strip in clashes between Palestinian marchers
and Israeli forces, including rocket attacks launched by
insurgents from Gaza, which have been answered by
strong attacks by the Israeli army. All those hostilities
have resulted in more than 100 Palestinian deaths, many
injuries and great material damage. Added to that, the
total blockade imposed on Gaza has aggravated the
existing humanitarian crisis. It is important for Israel to
understand that it must end its policy of the demolition
of Palestinian homes and use proportional force. There
is urgent need for sustainable solution to the situation of
the nearly 2 million people in that Palestinian enclave
that guarantees a dignified life and greater protection
for people on both sides.

Finally, Equatorial Guinea agress with the
international community that greater efforts are needed
to resume meaningful negotiations aimed at achieving
a two-State solution, based on the 1967 borders, which
would meet Israeli and Palestinian needs for security
and Palestinian aspirations to enjoy the status of a
sovereign State, put an end to the occupation and
resolve all final-status issues, putting an end to the
conflict. Both parties have the same right to live with
the guarantees of peace and security and must respect
the various Security Council resolutions in that regard.

The insurgency of certain sectors that are
threatening the security of Israel from Gaza is a
direct consequence of the absence of the Palestinian
National Authority in the area. In that regard, my
delegation wishes to express its concern over the
failure to comply with the reconciliation pact signed by
Hamas and Fatah of 12 October 2017 in Egypt, which
provided — among other things — for the return last
December of the Palestinian National Authority and
its total control of that enclave. In that regard, we
recommend more support for the initiative of Egypt
and other actors to actively and definitively promote
intra-Palestinian reconciliation, which is indispensable
for the reorganization and security of Gaza. We wish to
acknowledge the efforts of the Egyptian Government
in that regard.
Of great concern to us is the current financial
situation of the United Nations Relief and Works Agency
for Palestine Refugees in the Middle East (UNRWA),
which must remain able to carry out its role and provide
important services to the millions of Palestinians
who depend on it. In that connection, we commend
the recent pronouncements of the countries that have
increased their support for UNRWA, and we urge the
other members of the international community to join
in that gesture of support for the displaced Palestinians.
Equatorial Guinea acknowledges the submission
of written reports, which has been a practice of the
Council. We hope that in this case, in accordance with
resolution 2334 (2016) and in line with established
20/21

The President: I shall now make a statement in my
national capacity.
I thank Mr. Mladenov for his briefing.
I have listened to my colleagues’ statements this
afternoon with great interest. I have always been open
about my belief that this Middle East debate has been
excessively and unfairly focused on Israel. Today, I will
go one step further. The Palestinian-Israeli conflict
is serious and worthy of the Council’s attention, but
if there is one country that is the source of conflict
and instability in the Middle East — one country that
merits a quarterly debate in the Security Council — that
country is not Israel. It is Iran.
For almost 40 years, the Iranian regime has existed
outside the community of law-abiding nations. It is
difficult to name a conflict in the Middle East that does
not have Iran’s fingerprints on it. The Iranian regime
has backed dictators who gas their own people. It
stokes conflict. It funds foreign fighters and terrorists.
It transfers missiles to militants. It acts against the
interests and policies of the Security Council time and
time again. Across the Middle East, Iran has trampled
on the sovereignty of its neighbours in Lebanon, in
Syria and in Yemen, and the Iranian regime has shown
a total disregard of the sovereignty of a country that is
at a critical stage in its political development — Iraq.
Iran’s leaders pretend that their interference in
the sovereignty of other nations is done in the name of
religious affiliation. They like to claim that they have
been invited into the affairs of other countries. In fact,
the motives of the mullahs are much less elevated. They
are interested in power. In the case of Iraq, their goal
is to exploit uncertainty in order to create an Iranian18-29340

20/09/2018

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

controlled corridor for weapons and fighters from
Tehran to the Mediterranean.
In recent months, Iran’s aggression has escalated.
Iranian proxies in Iraq operate openly, with funding,
training, and weapons supplied by Tehran. The Iranian
regime has reportedly begun over the past few months
to transfer ballistic missiles to those proxies in Iraq.
It is reportedly developing the capability for its proxy
militias to produce their own missiles inside of Iraq.
In a blatant violation of Iraqi sovereignty, the
Iranian regime recently fired a barrage of missiles
from Iran into Iraq. Iran attacked the headquarters
of the Kurdistan Democratic Party of Iran, killing 11
people. This was an act not of Iranian proxies but of the
Tehran regime itself. It was Iran’s first direct military
strike into Iraqi territory in over a decade. That Iranian
interference in the sovereignty of Iraq should be of
great interest to the Security Council for many reasons,
not least of which is because it occurs in clear defiance
of Security Council resolutions.
Iranian General and Head of the Islamic
Revolutionary Guard Corps Quds Force Qasem
Soleimani is leading an effort to influence the
composition of a new Iraqi Government. I remind my
colleagues that Soleimani was banned from travelling
outside of Iran by the Security Council in 2007. That
ban was reaffirmed in 2015 with the adoption of
resolution 2231 (2015). Despite that unambiguous
travel ban, Soleimani has practically taken up residence
in Iraq since the May elections. That fact was noted by
the Secretary-General in his most recent report on the
implementation of resolution 2231 (2015) (S/2018/602).
And let us be clear about what Soleimani is up to in
Iraq. He is not there to help create a Government in
Baghdad that is responsive to the Iraqi people. He is
there to build an Iraqi Government that is under the
control of the Iranian regime.
Iran treats Iraq as if it were not an independent
nation. Iran sees Iraq as merely a transit point for
Iranian weapons and a training ground for Iranian
proxies. Iran seeks to keep Iraq economically weak and
dependent on its exports, even though Iraq has plenty
of its own resources. Why? Because Iran wants to use a
weak Iraq to illicitly fund its terrorist activities.

S/PV. 8358

There is one more recent Iranian escalation that
bears special consequence to Americans. Two weeks
ago, two Iranian proxy groups launched rocket attacks
on the American Embassy in Baghdad and the United
States Consulate in Basra. Using proxy forces in Iraq
does not give the Iranian regime plausible deniability
when attacks like this occur. The Trump Administration
does not and will not buy that. Iran could have stopped
its proxies’ attacks. It chose not to, so the White House
responded by putting Tehran firmly on notice. We hold
the Iranian regime fully accountable for its proxies’
attacks on United States facilities and personnel in
Iraq, and we will not hesitate to vigorously defend
American lives.
The sovereignty of Member States is an issue
that comes up a lot in the Security Council — for
good reason. Every nation has the sovereign right to
govern itself, protect its people and defend its borders.
No less than any nation, Iraq has that right. And yet,
at a critical time in its history, as Iraqis build their
Government, Iran is acting in shameless disregard
of Iraqi sovereignty. It is threatening populations to
promote its own political leaders. It is undermining a
key feature of sovereignty — a State monopoly on the
use of force — by promoting its own militias.
The United States is committed to working with
Iraq to help it create an inclusive and independent
Government. Iraq is working to recover from years of
conflict against the Islamic State in Iraq and the Sham,
and still to overcome the legacy of Saddam Hussein’s
tyranny. Not only is Iranian interference preventing
forward progress for the Iraqi people; it is pulling them
backward to the conflict and division they are striving
to put behind them. That is the very same conflict
and division that Iran promotes in Syria, Yemen and
Lebanon and across the Middle East. All members
of the Security Council that respect the principle of
national sovereignty should be concerned, and all that
respect the right to self-determination of the Iraqi
people should come to their defence.
I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.
There are no further speakers inscribed on my list.
The meeting rose at 5 p.m.

18-2934021/21
