S/2015/862

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
11 November 2015
Original: English

Report of the Secretary-General on the implementation
of Security Council resolutions 2139 (2014), 2165 (2014)
and 2191 (2014)
I. Introduction
1.
The present report is the twenty-first submitted pursuant to paragraph 17 of
Security Council resolution 2139 (2014), paragraph 10 of Council resolution 2165
(2014) and paragraph 5 of Council resolution 2191 (2014), in which the Council
requested me to report, every 30 days, on the implementation of the resolutions by
all parties to the conflict in the Syrian Arab Republic. At the request of the
Presidency of the Security Council, this report is submitted less than 30 days from
the date of the previous report.
2.
The information contained herein is based on the data available to the United
Nations agencies on the ground from the Government of the Syrian Arab Rep ublic
and from open sources. Data from United Nations agencies and partners on their
humanitarian deliveries have been reported for the period from 1 to 31 October 2015 ,
where available.

II. Major developments
A.

Political/military
3.
Widespread conflict and high levels of violence continued throughout the
Syrian Arab Republic in October. Indiscriminate and disproportionate aerial
bombings and ground attacks on places with a large civilian presence by
Government forces, non-State armed opposition groups and designated terrorist
groups 1 continued to kill, injure, and displace civilians. The conduct of hostilities by
all parties continued to be characterized by a widespread disregard for international
humanitarian law and the obligation of all parties to protect civilians. While the
United Nations has no independent means of verification, many sources report a
continuation of the use of barrel bombs. The Syrian Network for Human Rights
reported the use of 1,438 barrel bombs across the country in the month of October.

__________________
1

15-19671 (E)

On 30 May 2013, Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL) and the Nusrah Front were designated
as terrorist groups by the Security Council in accordance with resolution 1267 (1999). The two
groups operate in the Syrian Arab Republic.

121115

*1519671*

S/2015/862

On 9 November, a statement issued by the Syrian Ministry of Foreign Affairs and
Expatriates gave assurances that the Syrian Arab Armed Forces do not and will not
use indiscriminate weapons.
4.
Heavy fighting continued to be reported in Da mascus and Rif Dimashq
governorates. Government forces carried out airstrikes in various areas of eastern
Ghutah in Rif Dimashq. The town of Duma was hit repeatedly during the month,
including on 29 October, when airstrikes hit the main field hospital in D uma, killing
at least 15 civilians and injuring 50 others, many of whom were medical personnel.
On 30 October, several airstrikes hit the al-Hal market in Duma, killing at least
60 civilians and injuring 200 more. Elsewhere, according to reports received b y the
Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights (OHCHR), over
30 civilians were killed and dozens injured in other attacks in eastern Ghutah during
October, including in Ain Tarma, Hammura, Misraba and Harasta. Meanwhile,
shelling in Marj temporarily displaced an estimated 1,400 families across eastern
Ghutah and caused widespread destruction to critical infrastructure. In Darayya,
OHCHR received reports that three people were killed between 25 and 29 October
as a result of barrel bombs.
5.
Non-State armed opposition groups continued to launch mortars and to shell
Damascus city during the reporting period. OHCHR reported that on 1 October, a
five year old child was killed when mortar rounds struck the rooftop of a residential
building in Ish al-Werwer. On 13 October, the Embassy of the Russian Federation in
the Mazra’a neighbourhood was hit, although no injuries were reported. On
14 October, a civilian was injured when a rocket struck an open area in the Mezzeh
neighbourhood. On 17 October, one civilian was killed and seven injured when an
improvised explosive device attached to a bicycle was detonated near a football
pitch in Mezzeh. On 27 October, seven civilians were injured when mortar rounds
hit Bab Tuma in old Damascus. Between 30 and 31 October, mortars struck several
areas in Damascus, killing one civilian and injuring 12 others.
6.
Fighting in Zabadani and Madaya, and in other areas in northwestern Rif
Dimashq, as well as Fu’ah and Kafraya in Idlib governorate, decreased over the
course of the reporting period following the ceasefire agreement reached in Istanbul,
on 22 September 2015, with the facilitation of the Office of the United Nations
Special Envoy for Syria. On 18 October, under the auspices of the agreement, a
joint humanitarian convoy made up of United Nations personnel and other partners
delivered assistance to Zabadani, Madaya and Buqayn, as well as to Fu ’ah and
Kafraya via a United Nations cross border operation through Turkey’s Bab al-Hawa
border crossing. The United Nations and its partners stand ready to immediately
implement the remaining humanitarian elements of the agreement, including the
delivery of additional humanitarian assistance and the evacuation of the wounded.
7.
Intensified fighting between the parties continued in the northern governorates
of the Syrian Arab Republic during the reporting period following ground and air
offensives by the Government, supported by Russian-led airstrikes. In Hama and
Idlib governorates, in October alone, an estimated 80,00 0 people were displaced by
the fighting. Civilians were also killed and injured as a result of the fighting: for
example, on 4 October, one civilian was killed and four wounded when Government
forces dropped barrel bombs on a residential neighbourhood in K han Shaykhun.
OHCHR received reports that, on 26 October, a Government airstrike reportedly hit
Kafr Nabel in Idlib, killing two civilians and injuring 10 others. On 20 October, a

2/14

15-19671

S/2015/862

health clinic in Sarmin that is supported by a non-governmental organization was hit
by an airstrike, killing two people and injuring at least 28 civilians. On 25 October,
a field hospital in Latamnah, Hama, was reportedly hit by an air strike, killing six
people.
8.
In Aleppo governorate, fighting escalated between the parties to the south of
Aleppo city, following an offensive by Government forces in early October. In
response, non-State armed opposition groups staged a number of counter offensives
in late October. Some 50,000 people were displaced as a result of the fighting.
Civilians were also killed and injured as a result of the escalation in fighting around
Aleppo by all parties to the conflict: for example, on 2 October, Government
helicopters dropped a number of barrel bombs on Al-Bab, resulting in tens of
casualties according to information received by OHCHR. On 7 October, at least four
civilians were killed when Government jets struck a residential area in Daret Azza.
On 16 October, Government airstrikes on the town of Kafr Karmin killed at least
nine civilians, including five children.
9.
Fighting also continued in Aleppo city during the reporting period, as
Government forces and non-State armed opposition groups continued to shell the
city, causing casualties among civilians. On 14 October, non-State armed opposition
groups fired canister bombs on the neighbourhoods of Aziza and Maidan. OHCHR
received reports that, on 16 October, non-State armed opposition groups fired
improvised explosive devices at a Government-controlled residential neighbourhood
of Aleppo, killing a woman and her child. On 20 October, mortars landed in two
schools in Government-controlled areas of western Aleppo city, killing an estimated
19 civilians. Meanwhile, on 30 October, airstrikes took place on Al -Kalasah,
Al-Fardous, Salaheddine, Al-Sheikh Maqsoud, Al-Bab and other areas controlled by
non-State armed opposition groups inside and outside the city, reportedly killing
more than 65 and injuring more than 100 people.
10. ISIL continued to launch attacks in various governorates during the reporting
period. On 23 October, ISIL exerted its control over a stretch of the Homs Damascus highway around Khanaser, cutting the main land access route for
humanitarian and commercial actors to Aleppo city from within the Syrian Arab
Republic. This resulted in an increase in commodity prices for the 700,000 people
living in Government-controlled areas of western Aleppo city. The Government
re-secured the highway at the start of November. Meanwhile, in northern Aleppo
governorate, ISIL advanced south of Mare’a in early October, seizing a number of
villages in the Handarat area of the Aleppo countryside, close to Aleppo city, and
the major route between eastern Aleppo city and the Bab al -Salam border crossing
with Turkey. As part of the offensive on 6 October, ISIL d etonated a vehicle-borne
improvised explosive device in Hritan, killing more than 20 people.
11. In Dayr al-Zawr governorate, ISIL continued its attacks on the Dayr al-Zawr
city military airbase, although Government and Russian airstrikes reportedly
blocked ISIL advances towards the military airbase over the last two weeks of
October and also targeted other ISIL positions in Dayr al-Zawr and Raqqah. For
example, on 18 October, two people were reported killed when Government
airstrikes hit Mayadin town. On 19 October, at least three civilians, including one
woman, were killed when Government jets hit the Aridi neighbourhood of Dayr
al-Zawr city.

15-19671

3/14

S/2015/862

12. On 15 October, in Homs governorate, fighting continued in the northern
countryside. OHCHR received reports that, on 15 October, Government forces
reportedly dropped barrel bombs on Talbiseh, killing 15 civilians. Three additional
aerial attacks on Talbiseh were reportedly carried out on 23 October, killing
14 civilians, including six children. Meanwhile, six civilians were killed and
17 injured when Government forces struck Ghanto village on 26 October. On
27 October, Government forces hit the village of Halmoze, killing two civilians and
wounding at least eight others. Separately, ISIL launched a sustained atta ck on central
Homs in late October, which led to the capture of Mahin town by ISIL and the
displacement of approximately 25,000 people.
13. In the Wa’r district of Homs city, multiple shellings and attacks from
pro-Government forces were reported in October. For example, on 24 October,
Government forces fired a mortar into the Wa’r district, damaging several houses.
Since 31 August, pro-Government forces have closed all roads leading to Wa ’r, and
humanitarian supplies have not entered. However, on 31 Octob er, local traders were
allowed to bring in small quantities of food, and the Syrian Arab Red Crescent and
Syrian non-governmental organizations delivered two small trucks full of
medicines. Negotiations between the parties on a local agreement reportedly
continue. On 3 November, the Office of the Special Envoy and the Office of the
Resident and Humanitarian Coordinator conducted a cross-line mission to Wa’r and
a submitted further request for an inter-agency convoy to Wa’r to the Syrian
authorities.
14. Fighting in the southern governorates reported during October resulted in
death and injury to civilians. In Dar ’a governorate, Government airstrikes continued
as did shelling between Government forces and non-State armed opposition groups.
OHCHR received reports of several attacks with barrel bombs during the month,
including an attack on Busra al-Sham on 21 October, which killed four children and
two other civilians, and on Dael on 14 October which killed a pregnant woman and
her one-year-old daughter. A child in the village of Barga was killed on 16 October
by an explosive remnant of war. On 24 October, a vehicle-borne improvised
explosive device was detonated by an unknown perpetrator around 300 meters from
the national hospital in Tafas town in Dar ’a.
15. Both Russian and United States-led coalition forces continued their operations
in the Syrian Arab Republic throughout the month of October. On 8 October, an
airstrike hit the Ferdous neighbourhood in the centre of Raqqah, hitting a vehicle
and killing the driver and five of his family members, including one child. While
Russian authorities and the United States-led coalition have acknowledged carrying
out airstrikes in Raqqah governorate on that day, it is unclear who is responsible for
this particular incident. In addition, OHCHR received a number of reports alleging
that there had been civilian casualties as a result of airstrikes, in which reports the
origin of the strikes could not, however, be adequately ascertained. On 3 October, an
airstrike struck Ihsem in Idlib governorate, killing at least five civilians, including
one woman and four children. A first responder was killed in a subsequent attack
that took place soon after the first one and in the same area. On 9 October, airstrikes
on Mayadin in Dayr al-Zawr governorate hit the area near Mayadin Hospital, killing
one civilian who was in the vicinity. On 12 October, 12 civilians, including a child,
were injured following an airstrike on Hayan, north -west of Aleppo. On 13 October,
at least seven civilians were killed following an airstrike that hit a civilian area in
Hayan. On 15 October, OHCHR received information that an airstrike hit a bakery,

4/14

15-19671

S/2015/862

killing eight civilians and damaging a nearby mosque in Tir Mallah, Homs. On
15 October, a strike allegedly hit a house in Ghanto, Homs, killing over 40 members
of an extended family. On 27 October, multiple airstrikes in Asiya, al -Bawabiya,
and Tel Hadiya in Aleppo governorate reportedly killed at least 22 civilians and
injuring others.
16. Displacement continued throughout the Syrian Arab Republic in October. Over
190,000 people were displaced from various areas in Aleppo, Idlib, Hama, Homs,
Rif Dimashq, Dayr al-Zawr, Raqqah and Dar’a governorates due to ongoing
fighting.
17. Civilian infrastructure continued to be targeted during the reporting period. In
Aleppo, the United Nations Children’s Fund (UNICEF) recorded 10 days of water
cuts during October (water remained cut as of 4 November), as well as persistent
electricity cuts. On 23 October, a major water pipeline at Wadi Barada exploded,
likely due to shelling in the vicinity and a general degradation of the pipes, resulting
in the interruption of water supplies to parts of Damascus and to Qudsaya in Rif
Dimashq.
18. There were developments regarding several local agreements during the
reporting period. In Qudsaya, Rif Dimashq, reconciliation negotiations continued.
According to reports, about 70 per cent of fighters in Qudsaya have surrendered
their weapons and regularized their status through Government security branches;
while the rest of fighters have so far refused to surrender their weapons.
Government forces continued to close the main road to the district, with limited
medical supplies, food or other assistance having reached the area in over two
months. In Madamiyet, a separation wall with Darayya was built as part of an
agreement with the representative of the Syrian Armed Forces in exchange for a
promise to open the road leading to the town. However, restrictions on movement
have reportedly not been lifted yet.
19. Following intense and constructive discussions in Vienna, the participants
issued a joint communiqué encapsulating fundamental principles for a political
solution and tasking the United Nations with the establishment of a negotiating
process, bringing together the Government and the opposition as well as exploring
modalities for a nationwide ceasefire to run in parallel with a renewed political
process. The communiqué also stressed the importance of Syrian ownership of the
political process.

B.

Human rights
20. During the reporting period, OHCHR continued to receive allegations of
arbitrary arrest and detention, sexual and gender-based violence, torture and other
ill-treatment and deaths in custody as a result of torture or lack of medical care
inside Government detention centres. OHCHR also received reports that
Government intelligence personnel carried out house -to-house searches from 2 to
5 October in Damascus, Yabrud and Nubuk, arbitrarily detaining tens of people.
OHCHR received reports that the Air Force Intelligence arrested a political activist
affiliated with the Syrian Community Association on 23 October in Mabuja village
in Homs governorate; his whereabouts is currently unknown.

15-19671

5/14

S/2015/862

21. Victims interviewed by OHCHR reported that they were subjected to torture
and other ill-treatment at Military Intelligence Branches 291 and 215, and at the
Palestine Branch of Military Intelligence in Damascus, the Nayrab Military Airport,
the Mezze Military Airport, Sidnaya prison and at the he adquarters of the
4th Division in Damascus. Witnesses also spoke of other detainees, including
women, being subjected to torture in these facilities.
22. ISIL carried out unlawful detentions of tens of young men in Dayr al -Zawr
governorate during the reporting period, entering local markets and Internet cafes to
determine whether any of those present were “spying”. The detained men were
taken to unknown locations. In Raqqah governorate, ISIL arrested a married couple
in the Mashlab area on 5 October. They were accused of teaching mixed groups of
male and female school children in their home. The whereabouts of the couple
remains unknown.
23. ISIL continued to carry out executions of perceived spies and Government
supporters without due process. On 10 October, three men accused of spying for the
Government were executed in Palmyra. On 13 October, two men were publicly
executed by gunfire, and a third man was executed in an isolated area; the three
were also accused of spying for the Government. On 26 October, ISIL fighters tied
three men to a pillar at one of the historical sites in Palmyra and detonated the
pillars — the charges in their case were unknown. In Aleppo governorate, on
24 October, ISIL stoned two men to death in al-Bab town, north-east of Aleppo city,
allegedly due to their sexual orientation. The execution took place after a summary
“trial” in an ISIL-established court.
24. On 27 October, fighters with the Kurdish People’s Protection Units detained
four young men in Smehen village in al-Hasakah for the purpose of forcibly
recruiting them into the group. The whereabouts of the men remains unknown.
25. On 3 October, fighters from Jaish al-Islam raided the detention centre in the
Jabhat al-Nusra-established courthouse in Yalda in Rif Dimashq governorate and
captured five “convicted” detainees, publicly executing them in Kishik Square.
Jaish al-Islam stated that they were retaliating for the use of an improvised
explosive device which targeted five of their members in Yalda earlier the same day,
although no group had claimed responsibility for the incident.
26. Several media outlets reported in early November that, amid continued
airstrikes by the Government, Jaish al-Islam used dozens of prisoners, both men and
women, as human shields in Duma and eastern Ghuta. Reports indicate that the
prisoners, many of whom may have been religious minorities, were placed in cages
around heavily populated areas to deter further airstrikes in civilian areas. Some of
the prisoners have allegedly been in captivity since 2013, when they were
kidnapped from Government-held areas in eastern Ghouta.

C.

Humanitarian response
27. United Nations humanitarian agencies and partners continued to reach millions
of people in need in October through all modalities from within the Syrian Arab
Republic and across borders pursuant to resolutions 2165 (2014) and 2191 (2014).
The World Food Programme (WFP) delivered food assistance for over four million
people in 12 governorates. The World Health Organization (WHO) distributed

6/14

15-19671

S/2015/862

medicines and supplies for 717,000 treatments in 10 governorates. UNICEF reached
over 5.3 million people with multi-sector support, including 3.5 million with water,
sanitation and hygiene support, over 2.4 million with health support and almost
180,000 with education support. The Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR) reached around 272,000 people with core
relief items and protection services in 12 governorates. The United Nation
Population Fund (UNFPA) delivered 330,000 reproductive health and gender -based
violence services through implementing partners. The Food and Agriculture
Organization of the United Nations (FAO) reached almost 20,000 people with food
and agricultural assistance. The International Organization for Migration (IOM)
delivered basic relief items for over 32,500 people. The United Nations Relief and
Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East (UNRWA) provided support
to more than 330,000 Palestine refugees. The Government of the Syrian Arab
Republic continued to provide basic services to areas under its control as well as in
many areas beyond its control.
28. Cross-border deliveries continued during the reporting period. As of 31 October,
the United Nations and its implementing partners had sent 207 shipments — 140 from
Turkey and 67 from Jordan — to the Syrian Arab Republic under the terms of
resolutions 2165 (2014) and 2191 (2014), including food assistance for over
2.4 million people; non-food items for 1.6 million people; medical supplies for
almost four million treatments, as well as a number of surgical supply kits; and
water and sanitation supplies for over one million people in Aleppo, Dar ’a, Hama,
Idlib, Ladhiqiyah and Qunaytirah governorates. In line with resolutions 2165 (2014)
and 2191 (2014), the United Nations notified the Government of the Syrian Arab
Republic in advance of each shipment, including the details of content, destination
and number of beneficiaries.
29. The United Nations Monitoring Mechanism continued its operations in Jordan
and Turkey. Since the start of operations, the Mechanism has monitored 207 United
Nations humanitarian shipments consisting of 4,505 trucks, confirming the
humanitarian nature of each and notifying the Syrian authorities after each
shipment. The Mechanism continued to benefit from excellent cooperation with the
Governments of Jordan and Turkey.
30. Three inter-agency convoys were completed during the month of October. On
8 October, the final phase of a three-part convoy to Hula in Homs was completed.
A total of 60,000 people in hard-to-reach areas benefited from the convoy.
Government authorities prohibited water, sanitation and hygiene items and some
medical items from being loaded. On 18 October, humanitar ian convoys of United
Nations and other partners reached 10,000 people in Fu’ah and Kafraya, as well as
some 20,000 people in Zabadani, Madaya and Buqayn with multi-sectoral assistance,
including medical and surgical items.
31. United Nations agencies also undertook cross-line deliveries during the
reporting period. For example, WFP reached over 12,000 people in non -State armed
opposition group-controlled parts of Hama and Rif Dimashq governorates. FAO
reached 3,000 people and distributed poultry packages in a cross-line delivery to
Madimayet Elsham in Rif Dimashq. WHO provided 81,722 medical treatments
through a local non-governmental organization partner across conflict lines in
Aleppo governorate, including the use of a haemodialysis machine and 100 dialy sis
sessions in Nubul subdistrict. On 28 October, UNICEF completed its second

15-19671

7/14

S/2015/862

delivery of sodium hypochlorite to Raqqah; it is estimated that the supply will cover
the water treatment needs for two million people for five months. Meanwhile,
winter and education supplies for up to 12,000 people procured by UNICEF were
delivered cross-line by the Syrian Arab Red Crescent to hard-to-reach locations in
eastern Aleppo city during the last week of October. UNHCR undertook missions to
Al Tall, Rif Dimashq, on 8 and 14 October, reaching some 5,000 people with basic
relief items.
32. Both international and Syrian non-governmental organizations continued to
deliver multi-sector assistance in the Syrian Arab Republic in October, including the
provision of services, in line with previous months.
Humanitarian access
33. The delivery of humanitarian assistance to many of the 13.5 million people in
need of assistance in the Syria Arab Republic remained extremely challenging in
many areas due to active conflict and insecurity and deliberate obstruction by the
parties, including continuing burdensome administrative procedures.
34. Access to the 4.5 million people living in hard-to-reach areas remained of
critical concern. In October, United Nations agencies and partners reached 46 of the
147 hard-to-reach locations (31 per cent) overall. They reached 14 locations with
food assistance for around 225,000 people, 18 locations with health support for over
130,000 medical treatments, 11 locations with water, sanitation and hygiene
assistance for more than 50,000 people and 10 locations with relief items for almost
20,000 people. Nearly half of the people in hard-to-reach areas are in ISILcontrolled areas, to which the United Nations did not deliver assistance in October
aside from water treatment materials provided by UNICEF.
35. Active conflict in several governorates hindered the effective delivery of
humanitarian assistance, as well as people’s access to essential services. For
example, fighting and insecurity continued to prevent the delivery of life -saving
food assistance to over 1.2 million people in parts of Rif Dimashq, rural Homs and
rural Hama governorates in September. In Aleppo governorate, the western parts of
Aleppo city remained inaccessible during the last week of October owing to the fact
that ISIL had control over a stretch of the main Homs-Aleppo highway. As a result,
in October, WFP was unable to deliver assistance for over 220,000 people in
Aleppo. In response to the water crisis in Aleppo, UNICEF had been trucking clean
drinking water to cover the needs of more than 700,000 people on a daily basis.
However, reduced access to Aleppo as a result of ongoing fighting along access
points to the south of the city forced UNICEF to temporarily downscale its water
trucking operation to meet the needs of 200,000 people.
36. Deliberate interference and obstruction by the parties also continued to prevent
aid delivery. For example, WFP continues to be unable to reach population in need
in ISIL-controlled areas of the country, as all plans to deliver assistance to these
areas have been suspended due to the inability to work independently and to
monitor activities. This is preventing WFP assistance to an estimated 720,000
people in need of food assistance in almost all of Dayr al -Zawr and Raqqah
governorates, parts of northern rural Aleppo and east rural Homs, as well as pockets
in southern rural Hasakah and rural northwestern Hama governorates.

8/14

15-19671

S/2015/862

37. A limited number of humanitarian supplies went through the Nusaybin/Qamishli
crossing in October. On 9 October, Turkish authorities gave approval for WFP to
resume shipments via the crossing, while UNICEF was also approved to use the
crossing to import $2.5 million in life-saving supplies. Syrian authorities had
approved these shipments to cross the border in September. On 16 October, the
Government of Turkey informed humanitarian operations that all such operations
through the crossing would remain temporarily on hold due to persistent insecurity in
the areas surrounding the border crossing. On an exceptional basis, since the trucks
had already left the warehouse, 10 UNICEF trucks loaded with 4,800 family hygiene
kits were allowed through on 19 October. UNICEF is waiting to move approximately
80 trucks full of life-saving supplies through the crossing.
38. As of 31 October, 27 out of the 88 inter-agency requests made in 2015 by the
United Nations have been approved, in principle, by the Syrian Ministry of Foreign
Affairs; 45 requests are pending approval; and three requests have been put on hold
by the United Nations due to insecurity. The remaining 13 requests were submitted
previously, but they are been subsumed by newer requests. Nine of the original
request were put on hold by the United Nations due to insecurity and the other four
requests, which went unanswered by the Government within a three-month time
period, were resubmitted.
39. Of the 27 requests approved in principle by the Syrian Ministry of Foreign
Affairs, 13 convoys have been completed. Of the remaining 14 requests approved in
principle, seven have been unable to proceed due to the lack of approval from the
Syrian Government security forces; two are held up due to a lack of agreement
between the United Nations, the Syrian Arab Red Crescent and the Government on
the access route; two are stalled by the lack of approval by non-State armed
opposition groups for safe passage; and one remains pending the security situation.
The remaining two requests approved in principle are under preparation. More than
282,000 beneficiaries in hard-to-reach and besieged locations could be reached if
these convoys were able to proceed.
40. In addition to inter-agency convoys, a number of requests from United Nations
agencies for single agency convoys remain pending, owing to insecurity, until
approval is received from the Syrian authorities. WFP had 21 unapproved requests
by the Syrian Government in several locations in Dar ’a and Rif Dimashq
governorates during the reporting period, preventing the delivery of assistance to
109,000 people. UNHCR had nine requests rejected on account of insecuri ty. Out of
69 individual requests made by UNICEF in 2015 to gain access to hard -to-reach
areas, only six have been approved by the Syrian authorities.
41. All UNRWA operations in Yarmouk remained suspended during the reporting
period. The most recent UNRWA mission inside Yarmouk was conducted on
28 March. On 31 October, the Al Marhama International Campaign, in cooperation
with the charitable association for the relief of Palestinian people, completed the
distribution of 448 food parcels and baby formula to civilians inside Yarmouk. The
distribution followed the delivery of 3,000 bags of bread to Yarmouk and Yalda on
21 and 25 October by the national commission for the relief of Palestinians in the
Syrian Arab Republic. The passageway between Yarmouk and Yalda remains a
volatile area. UNRWA was not permitted to conduct any missions to Yalda, Babila
and Bayt Saham in October. Other humanitarian organizations have reportedly been
allowed to continue their operations and to deliver assistance in these areas. The

15-19671

9/14

S/2015/862

Syrian Arab Red Crescent mobile clinics continue to provide services in the three
areas, visiting each location every third week. Meanwhile, in response to increasing
prevalence of typhoid, UNICEF, in collaboration with the rural Damascus health
directorate, distributed aqua tabs to Yalda, Babila and Bayt Saham and to the
Yarmouk camp in October. The authorities have also continued to authorize a
limited range of commercial goods to enter these areas on a daily basis.
42. No major changes in the administrative procedures required by the Syrian
Government for the delivery of humanitarian assistance were reported in September.
The current administrative procedures continued to delay or limit the delivery of
assistance by United Nations agencies and United Nations partners. UNICEF
reported that while the lead time for obtaining approvals from the Syrian authorities
regarding the importation of regular humanitarian goods had improved, UNICEF
still has two outstanding exemptions for health and nutrition supplies for 117,000
children that have been pending for more than two months. UNICEF also reported
significant delays in the length of time taken to obtain approvals for the importation
of information technology and telecommunications equipment (7 exemptions are
pending between 3 and 10 months).
43. Progress continued to be made with regard to visas for United Nations staff
members. In October, the Syrian Government approved 69 visas for United Nations
staff, of which 38 were new visas and 31 were renewals. Over 9 5 per cent of the
approved visas in October were granted within the agreed 15 working day review
period. As of 31 October, 47 United Nations visa requests (either new visas or
renewals) remained pending, 11 of which were beyond the agreed 15 working day
review period. One visa application was rejected in October. The total number of
visas rejected in 2015 is 40, exclusive of the four United Nations staff who were
declared personae non grata in February 2015.
44. One international non-governmental organization was authorized to operate in
October, bringing the total number of international non -governmental organizations
authorized to operate in the Syrian Arab Republic to 16. International
non-governmental organizations continued to face a series of administrative hurdles
and restrictions that impact on their ability to operate. They remain restricted in
their ability to partner with national humanitarian organizations, open sub -offices,
conduct missions, join inter-agency convoys and undertake independent needs
assessments. Fifteen visas for staff of international non-governmental organizations
remain pending as of 31 October, 11 of which were submitted in September or
October. Six visas were approved in October, including four that were submitted
during the same month. The United Nations Resident and Humanitarian Coordinator
continues to lead discussions with the Government regarding visas and the operating
framework for international non-governmental organizations.
45. In October, two additional national non-governmental organizations, both in
Damascus governorate, were authorized by the Government of the Syrian Arab
Republic to partner with United Nations organizations. Overall, the number of
national non-governmental organizations authorized to partner with United Nations
organizations stands at 137. The organizations operate through 220 branches.
Authorized national non-governmental organizations continue to operate under
complex procedures in partnering with United Nations agencies.

10/14

15-19671

S/2015/862

Besieged areas
46. Of the 4.5 million people living in hard-to-reach areas, some 393,700 remained
besieged in the Syrian Arab Republic. This includes some 200,000 people in Dary
al-Zawr city who are besieged by ISIL; some 181,200 people who are besieged by
the Syrian Government in various locations in eastern Ghutah, as well as Darayya
and Zabadani in rural Damascus; and some 12,500 people who are besieged by
non-State armed opposition groups and the Nusrah Front in Fu’ah and Kafraya in
Idlib. The 26,500 people in Nubul and Zahra’, in Aleppo governorate, are no longer
considered to be besieged following consistent and credible reports that access to
and from the enclave for people and commercial goods has significantly improved
over the last three months, although access and protection concerns remain acute.
47. The parties to the conflict continued to entirely or heavily restrict access to
besieged areas during the reporting period. During October, some 10,500 besieged
people (2.7 per cent) were provided with food, health and basic relief assistance and
some 16,700 besieged people (4.2 per cent) were provided with water, sanitation
and hygiene assistance. The flow of commercial supplies through official routes
remained largely blocked, leading to high prices for those commodities reaching
besieged areas through unofficial and irregular supply lines. Freedom of movement
remained heavily restricted, although certain groups, such as students and members
of reconciliation councils, were occasionally allowed to leave from a nd return to
some besieged areas.
48. In eastern Ghutah, Rif Dimashq, some 176,500 people are besieged in the
following locations: Duma, Harasta, Arbin, Zamalka, Ain Tarma, Hammura, Jisrein,
Kafr Batna, Saqba and Zabadini. No United Nations humanitarian as sistance agency
reached the besieged areas in eastern Ghutah during October, with the exception of
UNICEF, which provided some 1,045 children with remedial education support in
Duma.
49. In Zabadani, Rif Dimashq, some 500 people remain besieged by Government
forces. On 18 October, the joint humanitarian convoy of United Nations personnel
and other partners reached the city with food, basic relief items, water, sanitation
and hygiene support and medicines.
50. In Darayya, Rif Dimashq, about 4,000 people remain besieged by Government
forces. No United Nations assistance reached the areas during the reporting period.
People in Darayya have not been assisted by the United Nations since October 2012.
51. In Fu’ah and Kafraya, Idlib governorate, some 12,500 people remain besieged
by non-State armed opposition groups and the Nusra Front. On 18 October, the joint
humanitarian convoy of United Nations personnel and other partners reached Fu’ah
and Kafraya with food, basic relief items, water, sanitation and hygiene support, and
medicines for 10,000 people.
52. In the Government-controlled western neighbourhoods of Dayr al-Zawr city,
some 200,000 people are besieged by ISIL. The number of people under siege has
been reduced, however, as some people have managed to flee from the area. In
partnership with the Syrian Arab Red Crescent, UNICEF provided water, sanitation
and hygiene support to 6,195 people and psychosocial support to 720 children
during the month of October. With approvals secured, plans remain for an
emergency inter-agency United Nations airlift to deliver life-saving humanitarian
assistance to the area, but thus far clashes in the vicinity of the military airport have
prevented the operation from proceeding.

15-19671

11/14

S/2015/862

Free passage of medical supplies, personnel and equipment
53. While health-care facilities have special protected status under international
humanitarian law, attacks on medical facilities continue unabated in the Syrian Arab
Republic. During the reporting period, United Nations and health par tners received
reports — in the process of being verified by the United Nations and partner
organizations — of 13 attacks on medical facilities and transport; eight on hospitals,
two on other types of health facilities; and three on ambulances. Seven of th e
attacks took place in Hama governorate, three in Aleppo, two in Homs and one in
Idlib governorate. All of the attacks were by airstrikes. As a result of the attacks,
11 people were reportedly killed, two of which were health staff, and approximately
40 people were injured.
54. Access to medical care continued to be restricted by insecurity and restrictions
imposed by parties to the conflict, resulting in increased prices for medicines, a
shortage of medical supplies in local markets, a reduction in pharmaceutical
production and a shortage of qualified medical workers. The shortage of qualified
medical staff and the degradation of essential services have further impacted access
to adequate medical care. The availability of life-saving health services are of
critical concern, in parts of Hasakah, Raqqah, Dayr al-Zawr, Dar’a, Idlib, Hama and
Aleppo governorates, as well as the hard-to-reach and besieged areas of Rif
Dimashq governorate.
55. In collaboration with the Ministry of Health, UNICEF and WHO supporte d the
sixteenth national polio vaccination campaign, held from 18 to 22 October, during
which 2.3 million children were vaccinated. All governorates were covered with the
exception of Raqqah, Dayr al-Zawr and some parts of Idlib due to a combination of
insecurity and restricted access imposed by the parties to the conflict. For example,
because of the refusal of ISIL to allow the campaign to take place in the parts of
Raqqah and Dayr al-Zawr governorates under their control, only 1.6 per cent of
children under five were vaccinated in Raqqah and only 4.5 per cent of children in
Dayr al-Zawr under five years of age were treated for the disease. Overall, some
500,000 children could not be vaccinated across the country due to access
constraints.
56. In October, five new requests from WHO and one reminder were submitted to
the Syrian authorities for approval to deliver supplies to 13 hard -to-reach parts of
Rif Dimashq, Hama, Dar ’a, Aleppo, Dayr al-Zawr and Qunaytirah governorates. All
requests have gone unanswered. In the meantime, United Nations and health sector
partners continue to face extreme challenges in the delivery of medical supplies and
the provision of preventative and curative services in ISIL-controlled areas.
Safety and security of staff and premises
57. A total of 30 United Nations staff members, 28 of whom are UNRWA staff,
one from the United Nations Development Programme (UNDP), and one from
UNICEF, continue to be detained or missing. The total number of humanitarian
workers killed in the conflict since March 2011 is 81. This includes 17 staff
members of the United Nations, 48 staff members and volunteers of the Syrian Arab
Red Crescent, eight volunteers and staff members of the Palestinian Red Crescent
Society and eight staff members of international non-governmental organizations.
Of the 81, 15 have been killed since 1 January 2015.

12/14

15-19671

S/2015/862

III. Observations
58. Throughout the Syrian Arab Republic, the fundamental rules of international
humanitarian and human rights law are being violated with little or no
accountability. I repeat my call that the situation in the Syrian Arab Republic be
referred to the International Criminal Court. Tragically, hundreds of civilians have
been killed or injured in direct or indiscriminate attacks this month alone due to the
continued use of explosive weapons in populated areas, including barrel bombs,
shelling and car bombs. The use of explosive weapons in populated areas will have
a severe long-term impact on the Syrian Arab Republic, resulting from the
destruction of housing, essential infrastructure and services on which civilians
depend. Furthermore, the use of these weapons is leaving deadly explosive remnants
of war across the country. These will continue to pose a serious threat to Syrian
civilians, particularly children, long after the hostilities have ended. I have taken
note of the commitment by the Government of the Syrian Arab Republic to refrain
from using indiscriminate weapons and expect this commitment to be translated into
action.
59. Continued attacks against health-care facilities, transports and personnel and
the denial of care to the wounded and sick continue to be of grave concern. Attacks
on facilities, transports and personnel have a devastating multiplier effect, not only
killing and injuring, but also leaving many people unable to get the treatment that
they desperately need. Many Syrians are now unable to obtain even the most basic
levels of care. Meanwhile, it is inhumane and unlawful that medicines and medical
supplies continue to be prevented from reaching their intended beneficiaries. The
protection and provision of medical care to the wounded and sick under all
circumstances is clearly enshrined in international humanitarian law.
60. While the security situation is deteriorating, humanitarian access to those most
in need is not improving. The level of access for humanitarian agencies to the
4.5 million people in hard-to-reach areas and their inability to obtain essential
humanitarian supplies and services remains unacceptable. I must again urge the
parties, and in particular the Government of the Syrian Arab Republic, to honour
their obligations under international humanitarian law and to act now. Security
Council resolution 2139 (2014) leaves no room for interpretation or further
negotiation. The parties must comply and facilitate the delivery of aid to civilians in
need wherever they may be found in the Syrian Arab Republic.
61. In its resolution 2139 (2014), the Security Council also called upon the parties
to lift the sieges of populated areas. This call has not been heard. It is shameful that
nearly 400,000 people are being deliberately forced to live under siege conditions,
largely without access to essential goods and services.
62. The scale of the devastation for the Syrian people has reached staggering
proportions. There are now some 13.5 million people in need of some form of
humanitarian or protection assistance, including some six million children. More
than half of the people in the Syrian Arab Republic have been forced to leave their
homes, and some 6.5 million people are internally displaced. Three out of every
four Syrians is estimated to live in poverty. Health facilities, schools, markets and
other essential services across the country are operating at reduced capacity, or are
closed down. Living conditions for Syrians will only deteriorate further unless there
is an end to the fighting.

15-19671

13/14

S/2015/862

63. I am encouraged that on 30 October, in Vienna, the international community
finally re-engaged in the process of finding a political solution to the Syrian
conflict. There is no military solution to this crisis. The Geneva communiqué
remains the internationally agreed framework for a political settlement to the
conflict, as reiterated by the Vienna communiqué. The latter is a first st ep in
providing the opportunity for an expanded group of international stakeholders to
further develop and elaborate this framework along the lines of the key principles of
the Geneva communiqué. We need this type of renewed momentum, prompted by
international re-engagement, in seeking a political settlement to the Syrian conflict.
It is in this spirit that we should look at the Vienna communiqué as a promising
development. I urge all parties to the conflict and the Member States with influence
on those parties to further their engagement and spare no effort towards a political
solution. As this report clearly highlights, Syrian civilians, including women and
children, continue to bear the brunt of this conflict. The international community
must come together to help Syrians find common ground and stop the violence.

14/14

15-19671
