182

General Assembly-Thirty-third Session.

Having heard the statements made on the subject
of East Timar, including the statement by the representative of the Frente Revolucionaria de Timar Leste
Independente, 52
Deeply concerned at the continuing critical situation
in the Territory, resulting from the persistent refusal
on the part of the Government of Indonesia to comply
with the provisions of the relevant resolutions of the
General Assembly and the Security Council,
Bearing in mind the part of the Declaration of the
Conference of Ministers for Foreign Affairs of NonAligned Countries, held at Belgrade from 25 to 30 July
1978, relating to East Timor, 53
Mindful that all States should, in conformity with
Article 2, paragraph 4, of the Charter, refrain in their
international relations from the threat or use of force
against the territorial integrity or national independence
of any State, or in any other manner inconsistent with
the purposes of the United Nations,
1. Reaffirms the inalienable right of the people of
East Timor to self-determination and independence,
and the legitimacy of their struggle to achieve that
right;
2. Reaffirms its resolutions 3485 (XXX), 31/53
and 32/34 and Security Council resolutions 384 (1975)
and 389 (1976);
3. Requests the Special Committee on the Situation with regard to the Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial
Countries and Peoples to keep the situation in the
Territory under active consideration, to follow the
implementation of the present resolution, to dispatch
to the Territory as soon as possible a visiting mission
with a view to the full and speedy implementation of
the Declaration and to report thereon to the General
Assembly at its thirty-fourth session;
4. Draws the attention of the Security Council, in
conformity with Article 11, paragraph 3, of the Charter
of the United Nations, to the critical situation in the
Territory of East Timar and recommends that it take
all effective steps for the implementation of its resolutions 384 (1975) and 389 (1976) with a view to
securing the full exercise by the people of East Timar
of their right to self-determination and independence;
5. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of
its thirty-fourth session the item entitled "Question of
East Timor".
81 st plenary meeting
13 December 1978
33/40.

Activities of foreign economic and other
interests which are impeding the implementation of the Declaration on the
Granting of Independence to Colonial
Countries and Peoples in Southern Rhodesia and Namibia and in all other Territories under colonial domination and
efforts to eliminate colonialism, apartheid
and racial discrimination in southern
Africa

The General Assembly,
Having considered the item entitled "Activities of
foreign economic and other interests which are imped52 fbid., Thirty-third Session, Fourth Committee, 21st meeting, paras. 10-27.
53 A/33/206, annex I, para. 133.

ing the implementation of the Declaration on the
Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and
Peoples in Southern Rhodesia and Namibia and in all
other Territories under colonial domination and efforts
to eliminate colonialism, apartheid and racial discrimination in southern Africa",
Having examined the chapter of the report of the
Special Committee on the Situation with regard to the
Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting
of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples
relating to this question, 54
Taking into consideration the parts of the report of
the United Nations Council for Namibia relating to the
question, 55
Recalling its resolution 1514 (XV) of 14 December 1960, containing the Declaration on the Granting
of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples,
and its resolution 2621 (XXV) of 12 October 1970,
containing the programme of action for the full implementation of the Declaration, as well as all other
resolutions of the United Nations relating to the item,
Taking into account the Maputo Declaration in Support of the Peoples of Zimbabwe and Namibia and the
Programme of Action for the Liberation of Zimbabwe
and Namibia," 6 adopted by the International Conference in Support of the Peoples of Zimbabwe and Namibia, held at Maputo from 16 to 21 May 1977, as
well as the Lagos Declaration for Action against
Apartheid, 57 adopted by the World Conference for
Action against Apartheid,
Recalling the Declaration on Namibia and the Programme of Action in Support of Self-Determination
and National Independence for Namibia, contained in
resolution S/9-2 of 3 May 1978, adopted by the General Assembly at its ninth special session,
Bearing in mind the relevant resolutions adopted by
the Assembly of Heads of State and Government of
the Organization of African Unity at its fifteenth ordinary session, held at Khartoum from 18 to 22 July
1978, 58
Bearing in mind also the Declaration of the Conference of Ministers for Foreign Affairs of NonAligned Countries, held at Belgrade from 25 to
30 July 1978,59
Reaffirming the solemn obligation of the administering Powers under the Charter of the United Nations
to promote the political, economic, social and educational advancement of the inhabitants of the Territories
under their administration and to protect the human
and natural resources of those Territories against
abuses,
Reaffirming that any economic or other activity
which impedes the implementation of the Declaration
on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries
54 Official Records of the General Assembly, Thirty-third
Session, Supplement No. 23 (A/33/23/Rev.1), vol. I, chap. IV.
55 fbid., Supplement No. 24 (A/33/24), vol. I.
56 A/32/109/Rev.1-S/12344/Rev.l,
annex V. For the
printed text, see Official Records of the Security Council,
Thirty-second Year, Supplement for July, August and September 1977.
57 Report of the World Conference for Action against Apartheid, Lagos, 22-26 August 1977 (United Nations publication,
Sales No. E.77.XIV.2 and corrigendum), sect. X.
58 A/33/235 and Corr.I, annex II, resolutions AHG/Res.86
(XV) and AHG/Res.89 (XV).
59 See A/33/206, annex I.

VII.

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fourth Committee

and Peoples and obstructs efforts aimed at the elimination of colonialism, apartheid and racial discrimination
in southern Africa and other colonial Territories violates the political, economic and social rights and interests of the peoples of the Territories and is therefore
incompatible with the purposes and principles of the
Charter,
Reaffirming that the natural resources of all Territories under colonial and racist domination are the
heritage of the peoples of those Territories and that
the exploitation and depletion of those resources by
foreign economic interests, in particular of southern
Africa, in association with the illegal racist minority
regimes constitutes a direct violation of the rights of
the peoples and of the principles stated in the Charter
and all relevant resolutions of the United Nations,
Noting with profound concern that the colonial
Powers and certain States, through their activities in
the colonial Territories, have continued to disregard
United Nations decisions relating to the item and that
they have failed to implement in particular the relevant
provisions of General Assembly resolutions 2621
(XXV) of 12 October 1970 and 32/35 of 28 November 1977, by which the Assembly called upon the
colonial Powers and those Governments which had
not yet done so to take legislative, administrative or
other measures in order to put an end to enterprises
in colonial Territories, particularly in Africa, which
are owned by their nationals or bodies corporate under
their jurisdiction, whenever such enterprises are detrimental to the interests of the inhabitants of those
Territories, and to prevent new investments which run
counter to such interests,
Condemning the intensified activities of those foreign
economic, financial and other interests which continue
to exploit the natural and human resources of the colonial Territories and to accumulate and repatriate
huge profits to the detriment of the interests of the
inhabitants, particularly in southern Africa, thereby
impeding the realization by the peoples of the Territories of their legitimate aspirations for self-determination and independence,

Strongly condemning the support which the racist
minority regime of South Africa and the illegal racist
minority regime in Southern Rhodesia continue to receive from those foreign economic, financial and other
interests which are collaborating with them in their
exploitation of the natural and human resources of,
and in the further entrenchment of their illegal and
racialist domination over, the international Territory of
Namibia and the Non-Self-Governing Territory of
Southern Rhodesia (Zimbabwe), respectively,
Strongly condemning the investment of foreign capital in the illegal production of uranium and the collaboration by certain Western countries and other States
with the racist minority regime of South Africa in the
nuclear field which, by providing that regime with
nuclear equipment and technology, enables the latter
to develop nuclear and military capabilities, thereby
promoting South Africa's continued illegal occupation
of Namibia and enabling it to become a nuclear Power,
Deeply concerned at the fact that foreign economic,
financial and other interests continue to deprive the indigenous populations of other colonial Territories, including those in the Caribbean and Pacific Ocean
regions, of their rights over the wealth of their coun-

183

tries, and at the continued loss of ownership of land
by the inhabitants of those Territories as a result of
the failure of the administering Powers to take effective
steps to safeguard such ownership,
Conscious of the continuing need to mobilize world
public opinion against the involvement of foreign economic, financial and other interests in the exploitation
of natural and human resources, which impedes the
independence of colonial Territories and the elimination of racism, particularly in Africa,
l. Reaffirms the inalienable right of the peoples
of dependent Territories to self-determination and independence and to the enjoyment of the natural resources of their Territories, as well as their right to
dispose of those resources in their best interests;
2. Reaffirms the relevant provisions of the Maputo
Declaration in Support of the Peoples of Zimbabwe
and Namibia and the Programme of Action for the
Liberation of Zimbabwe and Namibia, adopted by the
International Conference in Support of the Peoples of
Zimbabwe and Namibia, as well as the Lagos Declaration for Action against Apartheid, adopted by the
World Conference for Action against Apartheid;
3. Reiterates that any administering or occupying
Power which deprives the colonial peoples of the exercise of their legitimate rights over their natural resources or subordinates the rights and interests of
those peoples to foreign economic and financial interests violates the solemn obligations it has assumed
under the Charter of the United Nations;
4. Reaffirms that, by their depletive exploitation
of natural resources, the continued accumulation and
repatriation of huge profits and the use of those profits
for the enrichment of foreign settlers and the entrenchment of colonial domination over the Territories, the
activities of foreign economic, financial and other interests operating at present in the colonial Territories
of southern Africa constitute a major obstacle to political independence and to the enjoyment of the natural resources of those Territories by the indigenous
inhabitants;
5. Condemns the activities of foreign economic
and other interests in the colonial Territories that
impede the implementation of the Declaration on the
Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and
Peoples and the efforts to eliminate colonialism, apartheid and racial discrimination;
6. Strongly condemns the collusion of all States
which collaborate politically, diplomatically, economically and militarily with South Africa in flagrant violation of the relevant United Nations resolutions, particularly that of Belgium, France, Germany, Federal
Republic of, Israel, Italy, Japan, the United Kingdom
of Great Britain and Northern Ireland and the United
States of America;
7. Strongly condemns the collusion of France,
Germany, Federal Republic of, Israel and the United
States with South Africa in the nuclear field, and calls
upon all other Governments to continue to refrain
from supplying the racist minority regime of South
Africa, directly or indirectly, with installations that
might enable it to produce uranium, plutonium and
other nuclear materials, reactors or military equipment;
8. Calls once again upon all Governments which
have not yet done so to take legislative, administrative

184

General As11emhly-Thirty-third Session

or other measures in respect of their nationals and the
bodies corporate under their jurisdiction who own and
operate enterprises in colonial Territories, particularly
in Africa, which are detrimental to the interests of
the inhabitants of those Territories, in order to put
an end to such enterprises and to prevent new investments that run counter to the interests of the inhabitants of those Territories;
9. Requests all States to refrain from making any
investments in, or extending loans to, the minority
racist regimes in southern Africa and to refrain from
any agreements or measures to promote trade or other
economic relations with them;
10. Expresses its conviction that the scope of the
sanctions adopted against the illegal regime in Southern
Rhodesia should be expanded to cover all the measures contemplated in Article 41 of the Charter and
calls upon the Security Council to consider adopting
appropriate measures to this end;
11. Condemns all violations of the mandatory
sanctions imposed by the Security Council against the
illegal racist minority regime in Southern Rhodesia,
as well as the continued failure of certain Member
States to enforce those sanctions, as being contrary to
the obligations assumed by them under Article 25 of
the Charter;
12. Strongly condemns the supply of petroleum
and petroleum products to Southern Rhodesia by
United Kingdom oil companies which, by that deliberate act, are circumventing United Nations sanctions
and strengthening the illegal regime of Ian Smith;
13. Deplores the complicity of successive Governments of the United Kingdom in the violation of United
Nations sanctions by United Kingdom oil companies,
as exposed in the Bingham report 60 on the supply of
petroleum and petroleum products to the illegal regime
of Ian Smith;
14. Condemns those oil-producing or oil-exporting
countries which supply crude oil and petroleum products to the racist regime of South Africa and demands
that they cease forthwith all exports of crude oil and
petroleum products to the racist regimes in southern
Africa and take the necessary measures against oil
companies which, in violation of United Nations resolutions on sanctions, continue to deliver oil to those
regimes;
15. Requests all States to take effective measures
to end the supply of funds and other forms of assistance, including military supplies and equipment, to
the regimes which use such assistance to repress the
peoples of the colonial Territories and their national
liberation movements;
16. Reiterates that the exploitation and plundering
of the natural resources of Namibia by South African
and other foreign economic interests, in violation of
the relevant resolutions of the General Assembly and
the Security Council and of Decree No. 1 for the
Protection of the Natural Resources of Namibia, enacted by the United Nations Council for Namibia on
27 September 1974 61 is illegal and contributes to the
maintenance of the illegal occupation regime;
60 T. H. Bingham and S. M. Gray, Report on the Supply
of Petroleum and Petroleum Products to Rhodesia (London,
Her Majesty's Stationery Office for the Foreign and Commonwealth Office, 1978).
61 Official Records of the General Assembly, Twenty-ninth
Session, Supplement No. 24A (A/9624/ Add.1 ), para. 84. The
Decree has been issued in final form in Namibia Gazette No. 1.

17. Strongly condemns South Africa for its continued exploitation and plundering of the natural resources of Namibia in complete disregard of the legitimate interests of the Namibian people;
18. Calls once again upon all States to discontinue
all economic, financial or trade relations with South
Africa concerning Namibia and to refrain from entering into economic, financial or other relations with
South Africa, acting on behalf of or concerning Namibia, which may lend support to its continued illegal
occupation of that Territory;
19. Strongly condemns the racist minority regime
of South Africa which, in violation of the relevant
resolutions of the United Nations and in open contravention of its specific obligations under Article 25 of
the Charter, continues to collaborate with the illegal
racist minority regime in Southern Rhodesia, and calls
upon the Security Council to implement the decisions
contained in the present resolution by imposing economic sanctions against South Africa, including an oil
embargo and the withdrawal of investments from that
country;
20. Invites all Governments and organizations
within the United Nations system, having regard to
the relevant provisions of the Declaration on the
Establishment of a New International Economic Order,
contained in General Assembly resolution 3201 (S-VI)
of 1 May 197 4, and of the Charter of Economic
Rights and Duties of States, contained in Assembly
resolution 3281 (XXIX) of 12 December 1974, to
ensure in particular that the permanent sovereignty of
the colonial Territories over their natural resources is
fully respected and safeguarded;
21. Calls upon the administering Powers to abolish
every discriminatory and unjust wage system which
prevails in the Territories under their administration
and to apply in each Territory a uniform system of
wages to all the inhabitants without any discrimination;
22. Requests the Secretary-General to undertake,
through the Department of Public Information of the
Secretariat, a sustained and broad campaign with a view
to informing world public opinion of the facts concerning the pillaging of natural resources in colonial
Territories and the exploitation of their indigenous
populations by foreign monopolies and the support
they render to the colonialist and racist regimes;
23. Requests the Special Committee on the Situation with regard to the Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial
Countries and Peoples to continue to examine this
question and to report thereon to the General Assembly at its thirty-fourth session.
82nd plenary meeting
13 December 1978
33/41.

Implementation of the Declaration on the
Granting of Independence to Colonial
Countries and Peoples by the specialized
agencies and the international institutions
associated with the United Nations

The General Assembly,
Having considered the item entitled "Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples by the spe-
