S/PV.7605

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-first year

7605th meeting

Friday, 15 January 2016, 3 p.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Rosselli. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Uruguay)

Members:

Angola. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China   . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Egypt. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Japan. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Malaysia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
New Zealand . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Senegal . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Spain . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ukraine. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Gaspar Martins
Mr. Liu Jieyi
Mr. Aboulatta
Mr. Delattre
Mr. Yoshikawa
Mr. Ibrahim
Mr. Van Bohemen
Mr. Safronkov
Mr. Seck
Mr. Oyarzun Marchesi
Mr. Yelchenko
Mr. Wilson
Ms. Sison
Mr. Ramírez Carreño

Agenda
The situation in the Middle East

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

16-00863 (E)
*1600863*

S/PV.7605

The situation in the Middle East

The meeting was called to order at 3.10 p.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in the Middle East
The President (spoke in Spanish): In accordance
with rule 37 of the Council’s provisional rules of
procedure, I invite the representative of the Syrian
Arab Republic to participate in this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite Ms. Kyung-wha
Kang, Assistant Secretary-General for Humanitarian
Affairs and Deputy Emergency Relief Coordinator, to
participate in this meeting.
The Security Council will now begin its consideration
of the item on its agenda.
I give the floor to Ms. Kang.
Ms. Kang: On behalf of the Emergency Relief
Coordinator, Mr. Stephen O’Brien, I have the honour
to deliver the following briefing on the humanitarian
situation in Syria.
For more than four years, the humanitarian
community, including United Nations agencies and
non-governmental organization (NGO) partners,
sounded the alarm about the impact of Syria’s conflict
on ordinary men, women and children. We have
written scores of reports, given numerous briefings
and made countless statements describing the brutality,
desperation and destitution facing Syria’s people.
We have requested, called for, insisted — even
demanded — that the conflict be brought to an end,
that civilians be protected from the relentless violence
and that access be granted for life-saving humanitarian
assistance. Our requests have mostly gone unanswered,
and the people of Syria continue to live in a nightmarish
reality dictated by a conflict that respects few rules and
obeys no laws.
In recent days, harrowing images of malnutrition
and hunger from the Syrian town of Madaya have
shocked the world’s conscience. Regrettably, the use of
siege and starvation as a weapon of war has become
routine and systematic in Syria, with devastating
consequences for civilians. The barbarity of this tactic
cannot be overstated. By besieging civilian towns and
villages, the parties to the conflict have launched a
vicious war on ordinary men, women and children,
2/19

15/01/2016

with callous indifference for their lives, health and
well-being. A siege that denies people access to the
basic necessities of life is unlawful, unacceptable and
unconscionable. There can be no reason or rationale, no
explanation or excuse, for preventing aid from reaching
people in need. It is a grave violation of international
law, and it must stop immediately.
The primary responsibility for this suffering lies
with the party maintaining a siege. It is, however, shared
by those that conduct military activities in or from
populated areas, thereby using civilians as shields and
placing them in harm’s way. As the Secretary-General
pointed out in his statement to the General Assembly
yesterday, all sides, including the Syrian Government,
which has the primary responsibility to protect the
Syrian people, are committing atrocious acts prohibited
under international humanitarian law.
Tragically, the situation in Madaya is not unique.
Around 400,000 people in Syria are trapped in areas
besieged by the various parties to the conflict. That
includes towns and villages besieged by the Islamic
State in Iraq and the Levant, Government and allied
forces, and non-State armed groups and the Al-Nusra
Front. More broadly, the United Nations estimates that
4.5 million people reside in areas in Syria that are hardto-reach, subject to various forms of restrictions on the
movement of people and goods that severely limit their
access to services and assistance. In addition to conflict
and insecurity, that includes the deliberate obstruction
of, or delays in, the delivery of aid, as well as the denial
or removal of certain relief items, such as medical and
surgical supplies, from aid convoys.
The United Nations and its partners, including the
International Committee of the Red Cross, the Syrian
Arab Red Crescent and NGOs, have worked tirelessly
for over four years to bring life-saving assistance to
people to need across Syria. In 2015, that included,
for example, food assistance for over 6 million people
on average each month, safe drinking water for over
8 million people, non-food items for over 4.8 million
people, and nutrition interventions for over 1.6 million
people, many of them children. This week, on 11 and
14 January, inter-agency convoys made up of 130 trucks
reached the town of Madaya and the nearby Bqine, as
well as Fu’ah and Kafraya, with urgent assistance for
over 60,000 people, including food and nutritional
support, medicines and medical equipment, and
non-food items. Separately, the third part of a series
of convoys brought assistance to over 37,000 people

16-00863

15/01/2016

The situation in the Middle East

in Al-Waer, Homs governorate. Further assistance is
scheduled to reach the areas later this week. Those
and other aid deliveries have saved thousands of lives,
often at great cost. More than 80 humanitarian workers
have been killed since the conflict began. Many others
remain missing.
In some cases, simply bringing assistance to
people in need is not enough. In Madaya, the siege has
resulted in conditions so severe that people have lost
their lives, and many others currently suffer severe
acute malnutrition, which, if left untreated, may result
in death. Teams on the ground are working on multiple
tracks to provide urgent treatment on site, conduct
screening to identify critical cases and, where required,
negotiate for the timely medical evacuation of patients.
At present, almost 390 patients have been screened,
9 have been evacuated together with their family
members and at least 19 others are in need of urgent
evacuation. The United Nations has requested approval
for their immediate and unconditional transfer to a safe
place for treatment and for sustained access to the area
for medical and humanitarian partners.
While those developments are positive, they are but
a trickle. In 2015, the United Nations was able to reach
less than 3 per cent of the population of besieged areas
on average, with assistance in any given sector; in 2014,
the figure was less than 5 per cent. Throughout the
year, 80 requests for inter-agency cross-line convoys
to besieged and hard-to-reach areas, out of a total of
113, went unanswered. This week, the United Nations
submitted requests for further inter-agency convoys to
bring life-saving assistance to besieged and hard-toreach communities across the country. Those requests
and other outstanding requests must be approved as a
matter of urgency and without further delay. Similarly,
the slow and bureaucratic procedures that have been
imposed on humanitarian operations in Syria must be
simplified and streamlined. Food, water and medicine
are not bargaining chips or favours that the parties
to a conflict can grant or deny at will; they are basic
necessities that lie at the very essence of survival and
the right to life, which the Security Council and its
members have a responsibility to protect. The Council
cannot let more people die on its watch.
As highlighted by the Emergency Relief
Coordinator to the Security Council last Monday, there
is no alternative to a political, negotiated solution to
this desperate conflict. The Council and all the relevant
stakeholders, in particular those that support the

S/PV.7605

warring parties, must put their differences aside and
place Syria on a firm path to peace.
In the meantime, I would reiterate the Emergency
Relief Coordinator’s call — on behalf of the
humanitarian community and all people in need — that
the parties to the conflict immediately end the practice
of siege and starvation and fully adhere to international
humanitarian law. That will require, first, facilitating
full, unhindered, unconditional and sustained access
to all people in need, including in besieged and hardto-reach areas, for all types of assistance, including
medical and surgical supplies. Secondly, it will
require allowing freedom of movement for civilians,
of all ages, to enter and exit besieged and hard-toreach areas in safety and dignity, and permitting the
immediate medical evacuation of sick and wounded
patients to a safe place for treatment. Thirdly, this will
require protecting civilians from any form of violence,
including targeted or indiscriminate attacks, as well
as from the use of explosive weapons or landmines in
populated areas, at all times.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I thank Ms. Kang
for her briefing.
I now give the floor to the members of the Security
Council.
Mr. Delattre (France) (spoke in French): I should
like to convey my gratitude to Ms. Kang for her briefing.
The situation that she has just described illustrates, if
there were need for it, the scale of the disaster that we
have been witnessing for nearly five years now in Syria.
This is the greatest tragedy of the century.
France asked the Security Council for an emergency
meeting today with three complementary objectives: to
ensure that everyone faces up to their responsibilities
in connection with the human tragedy that is unfolding
before our eyes in Madaya and other besieged cities
in Syria; to maximize the pressure that the Council
can exert to bring about the immediate lifting of the
sieges and the provision of emergency humanitarian
assistance to all concerned areas; and, finally, to create
the conditions necessary for the launch in a few days
of the intra-Syrian dialogue, because there can be no
credible political process without serious and tangible
progress on the humanitarian track.
Close to 400,000 individuals are trapped in besieged
cities in Syria, without any means of subsistence or any
access by humanitarian workers. In addition to the cities
of Madaya, Fu’ah and Kafraya, tens of thousands of

16-008633/19

S/PV.7605

The situation in the Middle East

individuals are besieged on the outskirts of Damascus,
in eastern Ghutah, in Mouadamiya, in the rural area of
Damascus, near Madaya, in Darayya, in Zabadani and
in other localities.
Four and a half million people are living in hard-toreach locations: 147 such cities and villages have been
identified by the United Nations, of which only 32 per
cent received aid in late 2015, according to the most recent
report of the Secretary-General (S/2015/962). The most
vulnerable individuals, namely, women and children,
are by definition the first victims. Humanitarian actors
have these past few days described horrendous scenes:
women and children dying of hunger in Madaya and
other locations, because starvation is being used, just
as it was in the Middle Ages, as a weapon of war and
terror, and no one can say that they did not know.
Over and beyond the immediate lifting of all sieges,
permanent, immediate and unrestricted access must
be granted to humanitarian workers so as to ensure
that they can assist all those in need. France wishes
once again to underscore the primary responsibility
borne by the regime. The most recent report of the
Secretary-General states that although there were
91 requests for inter-agency convoys, only 13 were
completed. Following long months of negotiations, the
United Nations and its partners were able to distribute
emergency assistance only twice to the people of
Madaya, Fu’ah and Kafraya, on 11 and 15 January. This
is completely insufficient.
Access of emergency assistance to the civilian
population is not, as Ms. Kang stated so eloquently, a
favour or a concession granted by the Syrian regime. It
is an absolute obligation under the Geneva Conventions.
The Council has repeatedly and in multiple resolutions
asked the regime and the other parties to the conflict
to put an end to their use of starvation as a weapon
of war, which is clearly prohibited under international
humanitarian law. The Secretary-General underscored
yesterday that this constituted a war crime. The
Council has also asked that attacks that directly or
indiscriminately target the civilian population in Syria
come to an immediate end.
In extension of France’s ongoing initiatives, we
renew our calls for an immediate end to attacks against
the civilian population, including through the use
of barrel bombs and against civilian infrastructure,
especially hospitals and schools. We call upon Syria to
stop bombing the civilian population and call on Russia
to act responsibly in the context of its military operations
4/19

15/01/2016

in Syria and to target only Council-designated terrorist
groups. Humanitarian workers also fall victim to such
attacks; 81 have died in Syria since the beginning of the
conflict, and 27 have either disappeared or are being
detained.
Finally, at a time when intra-Syrian negotiations,
which are necessary to achieve peace in Syria, are
about to be launched, I wish to reiterate that there will
be no credible political process without an immediate
improvement in the situation on the ground for the
Syrian people.
In order to be able to believe in a genuine relaunching
of the political process and the implementation of a
ceasefire, the Syrians must no longer be the victims of
deadly, indiscriminate attacks or subjected to arbitrary
detention, and they must receive the humanitarian
assistance and treatment that they urgently require.
France will be very careful with respect to the options
proposed by the Secretary-General in his report on the
implementation of confidence-building and ceasefire
measures, in conformity with resolution 2254 (2015),
which clearly shows that when the Council wants to
present a united front, it can.
A few days before the launch of a decisive cycle of
intra-Syrian discussions, the Council must shoulder its
responsibilities both to put an end to the humanitarian
tragedy that we see reflected in the unbearable images
of the concerned locations, and thus contribute to the
creation of a credible political process that could finally
lead to the peace to which we all aspire.
Mr. Wilson (United Kingdom): I wish to thank you,
Mr. President, for having convened this urgent meeting,
and I thank Ms. Kang for her sobering analysis of life in
besieged and hard-to-reach areas in Syria.
In recent days, the world has seen this horror for
itself. Images of emaciated men and women living
under siege in Madaya, of children starving to death,
evokes some of the darkest moments of our history.
As a visiting United Nations official said earlier this
week, there are people in Madaya, but no life. What
we saw should not happen in this century. In the face
of such horrors, we welcome the fact that the United
Nations, the International Committee of the Red
Cross and the Syrian Arab Red Crescent have reached
Madaya this week. We should all applaud their efforts
to negotiate a way in. But, sadly, it is long overdue. and
for some it is too late. And as we learn more about the
desperate situation facing those in Madaya, it becomes

16-00863

15/01/2016

The situation in the Middle East

ever clearer that ad hoc deliveries will not be enough.
Sustained access is now needed.
Madaya is just the tip of the iceberg. This tragic
town represents just 10 per cent of the besieged areas
and only 1 percent of hard-to-reach areas in Syria.
Many of these other areas have not been visited by
the United Nations since October. If the status quo
continues, the images that we have seen from Madaya
could be repeated many, many times over.
We cannot allow this to happen with the eyes of
the world on us today. Let us send a clear message to
the warring parties: starving civilians as a method of
warfare is inhuman, unacceptable and prohibited under
international humanitarian law. As the SecretaryGeneral said in his statement yesterday, in a conflict
that has already reached shocking depths of inhumanity,
the suffering in Madaya is another low. We agree with
him that the Council should call on all the parties,
and especially the regime, which has the primary
responsibility to protect Syrians, to allow unimpeded
and sustained humanitarian access. And let Council
members with ties to the regime use their influence,
not their air force, to address this horrific situation.
We all know that the solution is a political process
that ends the war, and that to achieve that we must all
work together. But, as we do that, it is only right that
we also draw international attention to the desperate
situation in Madaya — a situation that is only worsening.
It is about putting pressure on all the parties to allow
access so that the United Nations can reach the over
400,000 people in need in besieged areas, and the over
4 million people in hard-to-reach areas. The sheer scale
of the humanitarian crisis should serve as a reminder to
us all of the urgent need to support the United Nations
relief effort. That is why the United Kingdom will host
the London Conference on Supporting Syria and the
Region, on 4 February — alongside the United Nations,
Norway, Kuwait and Germany. The participation of
my Prime Minister, the Emir of Kuwait, the German
Chancellor, the Norwegian Prime Minister, as well
as Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon, in London next
month gives a sense of the scale of our ambition.
The London Conference is about donor pledges. But
it is also about much more than that. It is the moment to
address the longer-term needs of those affected by the
crisis by supporting job creation, by providing education
and, crucially, by putting even more pressure on the
parties to protect civilians and respect international
humanitarian law. At the Conference, leaders from

S/PV.7605

70 countries and from international organizations, civil
society, non-governmental organizations and the private
sector will confront and condemn violence against
civilians. We will rally support to mitigate the human
impact of the worse violations and abuses. We will
commit essential support to deliver safer communities,
safer health care and safer access to education in Syria.
In doing that, we hope to drive improvements in daily
life and to deliver important confidence-building
measures to underpin the political process.
We should all be clear that the ultimate solution to
Madaya’s woes, and to those facing all Syrians, rests
on a political agreement, one that brings an end to the
fighting. We must continue the unity the Council showed
in December and build on the agreement reached by the
International Syria Support Group. We look forward
to talks beginning later this month. To make a success
of those talks, and for the long-term future of Syria,
we also need to work now to ensure that communities
are protected so that ultimately they can rebuild. To do
that, we must emphasize that even wars have rules. It
will be through those talks, through sustained access to
besieged areas and through the London Conference that
we can make this the year that suffering finally ends.
Mr. Oyarzun Marchesi (Spain) (spoke in Spanish):
I would like to begin by expressing our gratitude for the
briefing made today by Ms. Kang. The team coordinated
by Stephen O’Brien is carrying out excellent work in
Syria under very difficult circumstances. I would also
like to thank France and the United Kingdom for their
initiative, to which Spain subscribes.
While we thought that we had seen it all — or
almost — in Syria, appalling images have now reached
us through the media. Over the past month, six children
under the age of 1 died in Madaya. The use of hunger as
a tactic is a war crime according to the most elementary
standards of international humanitarian law. Spain
categorically condemns the deliberate obstruction of
assistance to besieged populations in various areas
in Syria. We are already too late, not only for those
who have suffered from that latest episode of the war
in Syria, but for the quarter of a million persons who
lost their lives over the last five years. Our obligation
therefore is to look ahead and to attempt to answer the
following two questions: what can we do to improve the
humanitarian situation and what can we do to help put
an end to the conflict?
First of all, we must continue to closely follow
the developments in Madaya, Fu’ah and Kafraya. As

16-008635/19

S/PV.7605

The situation in the Middle East

co-penholder on the humanitarian situation in Syria,
we have been in daily contact with the Office for
the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs (OCHA)
throughout the entire assistance distribution effort,
both here in New York and through the Amman
regional office of the Spanish Agency for International
Development Cooperation. Our obligation — and here
I am no longer referring to my country, but to the
Security Council — is to ensure full compliance with
resolution 2258 (2015), which we adopted unanimously
on 22 December 2015. That was an initiative from
Spain, Jordan and New Zealand. The first paragraph 1
of the resolution demands that all parties — I emphasize
“all parties” — in particular the Syrian authorities,
immediately comply with their obligations under
international humanitarian law. In the event that the
delivery of assistance is interrupted in coming weeks,
we will work with all Council members to adopt
measures that will seek, first and foremost, to make
that resolution more effective.
Secondly, we must address the growing number
of unsuccessful requests for access in 2015. There is
something amiss when OCHA can reach only 4 per
cent of the population in besieged areas in Syria, as
Mr. O’Brian informed us last Monday. Of the 133
requests submitted by the United Nations, almost
80 remain unanswered. We are not demanding that
Syrian authorities accept just any request submitted
by the United Nations. We are aware that there may be
legitimate reasons to refuse a request. However, we do
ask that they provide an affirmative reply in due time
and form and without delay so that OCHA can react
and take the measures that are appropriate in each case.
Such a simple step can have a very positive impact on
the ground.
Thirdly, Madaya accounts for only 10 per cent of
the Syrian population under siege. To give just one
example, approximately 200,000 people are still under
siege by Daesh in Dayr al-Zawr. For that reason, we
have asked OCHA to identify other at-risk areas
and to deliver its analysis to the Security Council on
27 January. We would also suggest that the World Food
Programme, together with OCHA, provide the Council
with an oral briefing. Our main objective is to avoid a
reoccurrence of what we have seen in Madaya, Fu’ah
and Kafraya over the past few days.
Lastly, with regard to the political situation in
Syria, we are at a critical juncture, with the prospect
of a negotiation process within reach. Over the next

6/19

15/01/2016

few days there will be a series of steps that could be
decisive. First of all, once again, the parties to the
conflict, starting with the Syrian authorities, must
fulfil their obligations in accordance with international
humanitarian law. In that regard, I am referring to
putting an end to the indiscriminate attacks against
the civilian population, in particular the use of barrel
bombs, and ensuring sustained and unconditional
humanitarian access. Within the next three days, the
Special Envoy of the Secretary-General for Syria will
present confidence-building options to the Security
Council with the ultimate aim of reaching a ceasefire.
Although I do not wish to prejudge the response,
there are a wide array of measures, such as prisoner
exchanges, that can bring some rapprochement on the
ground with a view to the next round of negotiations in
Geneva.
Resolution 2254 (2015) affords us a genuine
opportunity to begin a new stage of dialogue between
the regime and the opposition. The international
community is prepared to support a political process in
Syria. We trust that the parties to the conflict in Syria
will not fail to take advantage of this opportunity. I
conclude by once again expressing Spain’s confidence
in, and support to, the Special Envoy of the SecretaryGeneral for Syria, Mr. Staffan de Mistura.
Mr. Van Bohemen (New Zealand): I, too, thank
Assistant Secretary-General Kang for her briefing.
New Zealand is pleased that, since the Council met
on Monday, a second series of aid convoys were able to
enter Madaya, Fu’ah and Kafraya yesterday and that a
third series of convoys is planned in the next few days.
However, as others have said, that is just scratching the
surface: that gets aid through to about 62,000 people.
Humanitarian workers need safe, unimpeded and
sustained access to the nearly 400,000 people trapped
in besieged areas throughout Syria. It has now been
confirmed that many of those people are suffering
through conditions as horrific as we have seen recently
in Madaya and elsewhere.
The Syrian Government is responsible for besieging
some areas, but others, such as various opposition
groups and the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant
(ISIL), are also using siege tactics. We demand that
all those using siege tactics immediately meet their
international legal obligation to allow humanitarian
access. Tit-for-tat granting of humanitarian access is
unacceptable. Civilians should not be used as pawns,
as has been happening in Madaya, Fu’ah and Kafraya.
16-00863

15/01/2016

The situation in the Middle East

Only 25 kilometres outside of Damascus, people in
Madaya have been waiting since Monday to be evacuated
so they can receive the medical care they urgently need.
It is a complex situation and the facts are still becoming
clear. What is clear enough is that the need is urgent.
While we are pleased that humanitarian agencies
have received approval for the entry of mobile clinics
and medical teams to support treatment, we cannot
understand the Syrian Government’s unwillingness to
grant permission for people to be evacuated. We call on
the Syrian authorities to immediately grant requests for
medical evacuations of the sick.
New Zealand and many others, including the
Secretary-General, have emphasized numerous times
that the Syrian Government must approve, without
delay, requests for inter-agency convoys. As my
colleague from Spain has just said, in resolution 2258
(2015), adopted only last month, the Council expressed
its concern at the decline in convoy approvals by the
Syrian authorities and requested that they respond
expeditiously and positively to all requests for crossline deliveries. We cannot accept that administrative
delays continue to block humanitarian assistance from
reaching those in need. As Ms. Kang said, the approval
procedures must be simplified and carried out more
quickly. Delivering aid in Syria is extremely complex
and dangerous for the people delivering the aid. It would
be unsafe to try to deliver aid without Government
consent and risk attacks. Over 80 humanitarian workers
have lost their lives since the conflict began. We do not
want to see that number rise.
Intentionally starving civilians as a method of
warfare has happened repeatedly during the Syrian
conflict. What we are seeing today in Madaya is an
alarming echo of the siege and starvation of civilians
in Homs in 2014. The deliberate starving of civilians
is not a natural, collateral effect of conflict. It is a
conscious decision made by the besieging parties. It
violates international humanitarian law. It violates
Council resolutions. It may constitute a war crime.
New Zealand and Spain intend to invite the World
Food Programme to brief on access to food in besieged
areas at the next humanitarian consultations on Syria,
on 27 January. In the meantime, New Zealand demands
that the Syrian Government and other parties to the
conflict immediately lift all sieges in Syria and allow
the free movement of civilians and lifesaving goods. We
also call on countries with influence with responsible

S/PV.7605

parties to use that influence to lift the sieges. If they
stand by and do nothing, they too are complicit.
The situation is so desperate that all forms of
aid delivery should be considered. In that respect,
we would be interested in the view of the Office for
the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs on the
feasibility of delivering assistance via airdrops. Lifting
the sieges and parties abiding by their obligations
under international humanitarian law would help build
trust and momentum ahead of the upcoming talks in
Geneva. We look forward to discussing such matters in
more depth with Special Envoy Staffan de Mistura on
Monday. We all know that only a political solution will
end the suffering of the Syrian people.
Let me conclude by commending the bravery and
tireless work of the humanitarian workers working
on the ground, including the United Nations, led
by Humanitarian Coordinator Yacoub El Hillo, the
International Committee of the Red Cross and the
Syrian Red Crescent.
Mr. Seck (Senegal) (spoke in French): At the
outset, as it is the first time that Senegal takes the floor
in a public meeting of the Security Council since we
received the trust of the General Assembly and became
a non-permanent member of the Council, I would like
to reaffirm that the Government of Senegal is wedded
to the ideals of peace, security and justice throughout
the world.
It is in that spirit that my delegation would like
to welcome the joint initiative taken by the United
Kingdom and France to put this briefing on the agenda
of the Security Council in the form of an emergency
meeting given the very difficult situation experienced
by millions of Syrians, especially in besieged areas. The
fact that the Security Council decided to address the
issue for a second time in less than a week clearly shows
that the international community is greatly concerned
about the indescribable suffering experienced by the
Syrian people. The situation tugs at our collective
conscience. We must act promptly as a result of the
special responsibility borne by the Council to maintain
international peace and security.
I would like to commend Ms. Kyung-wha Kang,
Assistant Secretary-General for Humanitarian Affairs
and Deputy Emergency Relief Coordinator, for the
clarity of her briefing. That clarity has enabled us to
better understand the realities on the ground. I would

16-008637/19

S/PV.7605

The situation in the Middle East

also like to take this opportunity to pay tribute to the
outstanding work carried out by all of the humanitarian
personnel active in this very difficult region and
working for such a noble cause, sometimes placing
their very lives at risk.
While recognizing the progress that was achieved
in providing humanitarian assistance to the city of
Madaya, where over 40,000 individuals face the threat
of starvation, as well as in Fu’ah and Kafraya, Senegal
remains deeply concerned regarding the fate of 400,000
other individuals in other besieged areas and in places
that are difficult to access. It is for that reason that we
call for the implementation of resolution 2258 (2015),
adopted on 22 December 2015, which urges all parties to
immediately implement the international humanitarian
law and human rights law obligations incumbent upon
them, especially by taking the necessary steps to
facilitate humanitarian aid access to the population,
especially the many people in need of emergency
assistance.
To achieve that, all players must take all the
necessary measures to lift restrictions on the provision
of humanitarian assistance, while remaining mindful
of the fact that certain practices, such as the use of
hunger as a weapon of war, can be interpreted as being
war crimes and crimes against humanity. The situation
is so dire that, in a joint statement on 12 January,
three United Nations agencies — the Office for the
Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs, the International
Committee of the Red Cross and the United Nations
Development Programme — launched an urgent appeal
to raise $8 billion over this year to assist 22.5 million
people in Syria and the wider region. The World Health
Organization is concerned that there is a serious health
risk in Syria, where 57 per cent of health facilities
and 51 per cent of medical centres have been partially
or completely destroyed. In that regard, the appeal
launched by the agency, which already faces a very
serious shortage of funding, for the mobilization of
$45 million to provide assistance to 11 million Syrians
in the country in 2016 is worthy of our full attention.
Finally, our common challenge is to ensure that
tackling the humanitarian situation of refugees and
displaced Syrians takes place in complement to the
political process — perhaps even before it. Substantial
progress was achieved in 2015, including the unanimous
adoption by the Security Council, on 18 December
2015, of resolution 2254 (2015), within the context of
the ministerial session, with a crucial agreement on the

8/19

15/01/2016

terms of the negotiations of the political process of a
future ceasefire and the fight against terrorism.
It would be remiss of me to conclude without
paying tribute to the initiative of the United Kingdom
to convene, in London on 4 Februry, a donor conference
on the provision of assistance to the civilian population
of Syria, a population affected by a war in its sixth
year. The results are ghastly: 250,000 dead, 4.5 million
refugees and 13 million displaced persons.
Mr. Liu Jieyi (China) (spoke in Chinese): China
pays tribute to you, Mr. President, for holding today’s
public meeting, and thanks the Assistant SecretaryGeneral for Humanitarian Affairs and Deputy
Emergency Coordinator, Ms. Kyung-wha Kang, for her
briefing.
The Syrian conflict, which has gone on for five
years, has caused a huge number of civilian casualties
and triggered a serious humanitarian crisis and refugee
crisis. In particular, the population in some besieged
faces a severe shortage of food and medicine, and their
living conditions are truly appalling. China is deeply
saddened by the humanitarian situation in Syria and
sympathizes with the Syrian people in their suffering.
We urge all the parties in Syria to effectively implement
the relevant resolutions of the Security Council and
to go all out to work with the United Nations and
other humanitarian agencies to carry out full-fledged
relief activities in all besieged areas and alleviate the
burning needs of the population. China hopes that the
international humanitarian pledging conference on
Syria, to be held early next month, will achieve positive
results. We call on international donors to show
generosity so as to ease the suffering of the Syrian
people.
China has been actively supporting efforts to ease
the humanitarian situation in Syria. So far, through
various channels, China has provided, on nine different
occasions, humanitarian assistance to Syria totalling
RMB/ ¥ 685 million. At the Group of 20 Summit held
last year, President Xi Jinping announced an additional
$100 million of humanitarian assistance to the relevant
countries and international organizations. We are
ready, together with the international community, to
play our part in easing the humanitarian crisis in Syria
and improving the livelihoods of the Syrian people.
Achieving a political solution to the question of
Syria is the best way to resolve the relevant questions
on Syria, including on its humanitarian dimension. The

16-00863

15/01/2016

The situation in the Middle East

international community should remain steadfast in
its search for a political solution. As the humanitarian
situation worsens, there is a greater need to push for
a political solution. The International Syria Support
Group has held three ministerial-level meetings so
far. Last month, the Council unanimously adopted
resolution 2254 (2015). That was the first resolution
ever adopted by the Council on the political process in
Syria. It consolidated the common understanding of the
international community for a political solution. It has
injected vitality into the search for a political solution.
It is truly a hard-won result.
The priority facing the international community
is to keep alive the current positive momentum for a
political solution and to make sure that the relevant
process will stay the course and produce results. At the
same time, it is necessary to make sure that the United
Nations continues to be the main channel for mediation.
China calls upon the parties in Syria to seize this
historic opportunity, swiftly restart negotiations and
approach the political process in Syria in such a way
that real results can be achieved soon. China is ready,
together with the parties concerned, to continue to play
a positive and constructive role in finding a political
solution to the Syrian question.
Mr. Aboulatta (Egypt) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, I would like to express our deep regret at the
deteriorating humanitarian situation being borne by
the Syrian people, inside and outside the country. I also
express our thanks and gratitude to all United Nations
humanitarian workers and those of other organizations
for the assistance provided to the Syrian people.
The continuation of the Syrian crisis over the past
few years and the escalation of its militarization have
led to acute deterioration in many areas. I express our
condemnation of all targeting of civilians in conflict
areas and all explotiation of civilians as a war tactic
by means of starvation, laying siege or using civilians
as humanitarian shields. Since the outbreak of this
humanitarian crisis, particularly in Madaya, Kafraya,
Fu’ah and Muadamiyet al-Sham, Egypt has established
close contacts with many United Nations officials,
Syrian businessmen, members of the opposition and
members of the Syrian Government, with a view to
finding speedy solutions that meet the humanitarian
needs of the Syrian people, particuarly in besieged areas,
regardless of their affiliations. We remain confident
that humanitarian work should rise above political

S/PV.7605

differences. In that regard, Egypt welcomes the arrival
of some assistance to those areas and encourages all
parties to continue their cooperation with the United
Nations and other emergency relief organizations in
order to avoid the recurrence of such tragedies.
The Security Council is tackling the many different
aspects of the crisis in Syria, in spite of the differences
of opinion over certain issues. Egypt believes that,
when it comes to humanitarian issues, the international
community and the members of the Security Council
should remain united, particularly since we see that
certain countries attempt at times to take advantage of
political situations. We appeal to all parties to refrain
from politicizing the crisis of the Syrian people or using
it as a means of bringing pressure to bear, since that
would lead only to further suffering for the civilians
in this conflict and would increase division among the
different parties.
We reiterate that putting an end to the suffering
of the Syrian people requires a political solution that
puts an end to armed conflict and lays the basis for
a democratic State. We appeal to all members of the
Security Council and to the International Syria Support
Group to do their utmost to preserve the political path
and the plan of action agreed within the Vienna process,
endorsed by the Security Council in its resolution 2254
(2015). We also appeal to all parties to work towards
that purpose, after so many years of stalemate. We warn
that any attempts to derail the current political efforts
would lead only to further escalation of the armed
conflict and to a vicious circle that would perpetuate
the crisis.
Mr. Ramírez Carreño (Bolivarian Republic of
Venezuela) (spoke in Spanish): We are grateful for the
briefing on the work of the Office for the Coordination
of Humanitarian Affairs (OCHA) and for the work
carried out by Ms. Kyung-wha Kang, together with
Mr. Stephen O’Brien, in leading that office.
The Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela rejects the
siege tactics carried out by any of the parties to the
conflict against civilians, which violate international
law and international human rights law and constitute
a war crime. In Syria, there is a complex war with a
high level of violence and a diversity of actors in the
armed conflict. In addressing such a sensitive issue,
therefore, we must do so in a balanced way and refrain
from politicizing human rights and ensure that such
siege practices are put to an end.

16-008639/19

S/PV.7605

The situation in the Middle East

The Syrian Government is responsible for
protecting its citizens, and it has done so in areas
that are under its control and even areas beyond its
control. That is a fact that has been reflected in United
Nations reports. It is our hope that cooperation between
OCHA and the Syrian authorities will continue and be
strengthened beyond what we are now seeing. However,
we are concerned by the fact that whatever is done in
this tragic situation is never enough and that there are
hundreds of thousands of Syrians under siege by various
non-State armed groups and terrorist groups, with
whom one cannot even negotiate to make them respect
international law and international humanitarian law.
We therefore regret that the Syrian humanitarian
issue has been politicized since the conflict began. We
believe that humanitarian assistance must be focused
on meeting all the needs of those on the ground and
those who have crossed the border to other countries
in search of security. It is therefore vital to have the
support and consent of the Government of Syria, as
established in United Nations resolutions.
The main enemy of Syria and the region is the
self-proclaimed Islamic State and the other terrorist
organizations operating in that brotherly country.
The world witnessed the atrocities perpetrated by the
Islamic State in Iraq and the Sham (ISIS) when Palmyra
fell and ISIS went in and destroyed the heritage of
humankind, slaughtering people in its path, including
the world-renowned archaeologist Khaled Mohamad
al-Asaad, while the world watched in astonishment and
the Security Council stood by in silence.
On many occasions our country has expressed
its dismay about the dire humanitarian situation in
Syria. When the Council met to renew the mandate of
resolution 2191 (2014) last December (see S/PV.7595),
we expressed our interest in seeing the humanitarian
assistance mechanism reach the ares most in need.
Based on the most recent report of the SecretaryGeneral, dated 11 December 2015 (S/2015/962), more
than 212,000 people remain under siege by ISIS, the
Al-Nusra Front and associated groups. We await
a strategy by OCHA for tackling that problem. In
that context, we are concerned by the statement by
Mr. Yacoub El Hillo, OCHA Resident Coordinator, on
the delicate situation of more than 42,000 people in the
vicinity of Madaya, who are at risk of starvation, as well
as the more than 20,000 people in Kafraya and Fu’ah,
who unfortunately do not seem to have aroused the
same interest. We welcome the positive response of the

10/19

15/01/2016

Syrian Government, as indicated in the joint statement,
to facilitating access to humanitarian convoys. In that
regard, we have heard reports of a second delivery of
assistance to Madaya, Kafraya and Fu’ah in the last few
hours. We hope that this coordination and cooperation
will be extended to the entire Syrian territory.
We would like to express our appreciation for the
work carried out by the Syrian Arab Red Crescent and
OCHA, which, in coordination with the Government,
has enabled humanitarian assistance to reach the
populations of Madaya, Kafraya and Fu’ah. In less than
two days, 200 volunteers and aid workers dispatched
45 convoys to Madaya to reach 40,000 people, and
another 18 convoys to Kafraya and Fu’ah intended
for approximately 20,000 people. In that context, it is
important to draw attention to the safety guarantees
that must be upheld by non-State actors to ensure that
the assistance reaches the civilians in need, and not
the fighters. Similarly, the parties must guarantee the
safety and security of humanitarian workers in such
difficult conditions.
We recognize the noble efforts of the humanitarian
agencies in Syria, whose work takes place under
difficult conditions owing to the same conflict in
which the country and its people have been plunged in
extremely poor conditions. For that reason, we condemn
the attacks against personnel and the facilities in which
they carry out their noble work. It is unacceptable that
humanitarian personnel be military targets by any of
the parties.
Over the past five years, we have seen how the
country and its population have suffered the ravages
of terrorist groups, making Syria a place where they
try out and promote their savagery in order to impose
their totalitarian vision. Unfortunately, it seems that
the international community has not yet acknowledged
the danger that the extremist ideas represent for the
future of humankind, given the way some media have
portrayed certain leaders of some of those groups as
moderates, concealing their long record of intolerance
and hatred, in order to advance the particular political
agendas of a few stakeholders. We stress that the areas
controlled by ISIS, the Al-Nusra Front and their allies
are a genuine challenge for humanitarian organizations
and for the international community. All efforts made
to reduce the operational capacity of those groups will
benefit the civilian population and help bring about a
negotiated political solution to the conflict.

16-00863

15/01/2016

The situation in the Middle East

In December 2015, we held a ministerial meeting
with the aim of promoting the paths towards peace and
political dialogue. We must seize the opportunity that
has arisen and decisively strengthen the peace process.
The resolution of the humanitarian crisis in Syria is tied
to the ceasefire set forth in resolution 2254 (2015) and
the initiation of peace talks among the warring parties
and among Syrians themselves. Furthermore, the
Council must fulfil its role of overcoming the obstacles
to restoring the peace that was snatched from the people
of Syria. We call on all parties negotiating in Geneva to
reach a political solution to this terrible armed conflict
to act in good faith and without preconditions. We
must coordinate our efforts and move together in the
same direction. It is important that we maintain the
momentum that was reached last December and that
nothing stands in our way from continuing on the road
towards peace.
Finally, we reiterate our support for the efforts
of the Special Envoy for the Syrian Arab Republic,
Mr. Staffan de Mistura, to bring about a peaceful
political solution to this conflict and we await his
report due next Monday. We must remain united in the
Security Council in support of a political solution to the
conflict as the only effective way to resolve the terrible
humanitarian tragedy being experienced by the people
of Syria.
Mr. Yoshikawa (Japan) (spoke in Spanish): As this
is my first opportunity to address the Security Council
in an open meeting, I would like to underscore that
Japan is prepared to work with you, Mr. President, and
all the members of the Council to achieve international
peace and security. I would also like to congratulate
you, Sir, on your assumption of the important office of
President of the Security Council in the first month of
its work this year. We thank you for convening today’s
emergency meeting.
(spoke in English)
My sincere gratitude goes to Ms. Kyung-wha Kang
for shedding light on the grave situation in Syria.
The Syrian crisis, now entering its sixth year,
represents one of the worst humanitarian crises of our
generation. The numbers speak for themselves. Out of
a population of approximately 17 million, 12 million
Syrians — half of them children — require assistance.
However, for the 4.5 million who live in so-called
“hard-to-reach areas, assistance reaches them only
sporadically. Indeed, 400,000 individuals live under

S/PV.7605

siege and lack access to humanitarian aid. That is more
than 10 per cent of the population of your country,
Mr. President.
The town of Madaya is but one example of the plight
faced by countless Syrians on a daily basis. Recent
images of United Nations convoys entering the town
provided momentary relief. I would like to reiterate
our utmost appreciation to the humanitarian aid staff,
whose courageous and invaluable efforts continue to
save lives. But how much longer must Syrians live at
the peril of aid-delivery approvals? The case of Madaya
and today’s briefing by the Assistant Secretary-General
for Humanitarian Affairs remind us that the situation is
far from resolved.
In resolution 2254 (2015), adopted in December,
the Council expressed its strong support for a political
solution to the crisis. We look forward to the convening
of the first intra-Syrian dialogue on 25 January. Japan
will continue to support the efforts of Special Envoy
Staffan de Mistura and the United Nations-facilitated
political process towards a political transition based
on the Geneva communiqué (S/2012/522, annex) in its
entirety.
The dire humanitarian situation must be addressed
regardless of the political process. Why must Syrians
endure the same suffering only weeks after the adoption
of resolution 2254 (2015), which demanded that all
parties immediately comply with their obligations
under international law? Secretary-General Ban
Ki-moon made it very clear yesterday at the General
Assembly that the use of food as a weapon of war is a
war crime and that all sides are committing atrocious
acts prohibited under international humanitarian law.
Let us not forget that the success of the political
process is contingent on the support of the Syrian
people. Let us not lose sight of the fact that the goal
of the political process and efforts undertaken in the
Council are to end the suffering of the Syrian people
on the ground.
The indiscriminate attacks against civilians and the
impediments against humanitarian access undermine
the mutual confidence necessary for a political
solution. While all actors are accountable for the
protection of civilians, the Government of Syria has the
primary responsibility of protecting its own citizens.
The protection of civilians is an obligation under
international humanitarian law. We call on all parties
to provide rapid, safe and unhindered humanitarian

16-0086311/19

S/PV.7605

The situation in the Middle East

access, as called for in Council resolutions. In that
regard, we particularly call on States that constitute
the International Syria Support Group to use their
influence to that end.
The humanitarian situation in Syria also requires
the solidarity of the international community by way of
increased assistance. Since 2011, Japan has disbursed
more than $1.1 billion in humanitarian aid, including
food, sanitation and other assistance to Syrians and
neighbouring host countries. We are nonetheless
concerned that only 43 per cent of funding needs
were met in 2015. With our eyes set on the eventual
resolution of the crisis and the return of Syrians to
their homes, our assistance should not be limited to
immediate life-saving assistance, such as food and
medical supplies, but should also cover assistance such
as vocational training and educational aid to assist
Syrians on their paths towards self-reliance.
The coming London conference in February will
be a critical opportunity to demonstrate the resolve
and solidarity of the international community with
those suffering on the ground. We look forward to
participating at the conference, where Japan will
announce, pending approval of our Diet, a substantial
new assistance package. The package will include
immediate relief such as food and assistance in the
form of vocational training for Syrians. Our assistance
will also go to surrounding countries, such as Lebanon,
Jordan, Turkey, Iraq and Egypt.
When United Nations convoys entered the besieged
town of Madaya this week, the Office for the
Coordination of Humanitarian Affaris reported having
witnessed people who seemed to have lost hope that the
world cared about them. Madaya is a wake-up call about
the continued suffering of millions of people in Syria.
I would like to thank France and the United Kingdom
for requesting today’s emergency meeting, as well as
Spain and New Zealand for having been instrumental
in promoting critical Security Council resolutions on
this issue. We, the Council, must remain vigilant and
not condone the humanitarian violations forced upon
millions of Syrians.
Mr. Yelchenko (Ukraine): I thank the Assistant
Secretary-General and Deputy Emergency Relief
Coordinator, Ms. Kyung-wha Kang, who provided us
with a clear picture of the latest developments in the
situation in the besieged areas in Syria.

12/19

15/01/2016

It has been roughly a week since the world has come
to know the horrifying truth surrounding the siege of
Madaya, located just 25 kilometres from the capital city
of Damascus. Everybody was shocked by the graphic
images of death and starvation coming out of the town,
something that is virtually impossible to imagine
nowadays. The level of savagery that the people of
Madaya have been subjected to can only be compared
to the Nazi atrocities during the Second World War. We
extend our deepest sympathies to the innocent Syrian
people who are suffering indiscriminately as a result of
the terrible ongoing conflict in their country.
We welcome the delivery of the second batch of
humanitarian aid to Madaya and call on all sides of
the Syrian conflict, including the Syrian Government,
to show consistency in providing the United Nations
with unhindered access to the town and other besieged
areas, as required under international law and pursuant
to resolutions 2139 (2014), 2165 (2014) and 2191 (2014).
We support the statement of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Human Rights, who said yesterday
that those responsible for this atrocity must be
prosecuted. We want to remind everyone in Syria that
anyone deliberately using starvation as a weapon is
committing a war crime and will be held accountable
sooner or later.
I would like to ask a specific question. At a
meeting a few days ago, we were informed that nearly
400 residents of the town required immediate medical
care and evacuation. What happened to them? If they
were not evacuated, we would like to know precisely
who prevented the Office for the Coordination of
Humanitarian Affairs from taking care of them. We
believe that it is an obligation of the Security Council,
without delay, to come up with a document establishing
stronger responsibility and accountability for those who
target civilians in Syria. As a country that experienced
an artificial famine in the early 1930s, Ukraine calls on
the Council to make its voice heard when it says that
using starvation as a method of warfare by either side
cannot and will not be tolerated.
Finally, some of us in the Security Council may have
different opinions on the political situation in Syria, but
we should stand united when it comes to addressing the
humanitarian crisis in the country, which has already
suffered so much in the course of the past five years.
Mr. Safronkov (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We are concerned by the very complex

16-00863

15/01/2016

The situation in the Middle East

humanitarian situation in Syria, which has arisen
as a result of the continuing internal armed conflict.
We note the efforts that have been undertaken by the
humanitarian agencies of the United Nations and by the
Syrian Arab Red Crescent. It is of critical importance
that all sides to the conflict — as well as the States
enjoying influence over them — make every possible
effort to provide all the basic necessities to the
inhabitants of the besieged cities. We are undertaking
the relevant contacts with the relevant Syrian authorities,
prompting them towards constructive cooperation with
the humanitarian structures of the United Nations.
Of particular concern, however, is the situation
of the inhabitants of the cities besieged by fighters of
the terrorist groups Jabhat Al-Nusra, the Islamic State,
Ahrar Al-Sham and Jaysh Al-Islam, which hide behind
civilians and use them as human shields, kidnap them
for ransom and loot humanitarian assistance convoys.
Even groups acting under the banner of the Free Syrian
Army are guilty of these violations.
The kinds of issues that we are discussing today
require an objective, comprehensive and professional
approach that takes account of the realities of the
region. Reference has been made to Madaya, but not a
word has been said about other areas such as Nubul and
Al-Zahraa, in the province of Aleppo, and here we are
speaking of the fates of tens of thousands of individuals.
United Nations humanitarian agencies are fully
aware of the efforts that were undertaken to lift the
sieges on the Yarmouk Palestinian refugee camp and in
the area of Al-Waer, where there has been very strong
compliance with the agreements reached by all the
sides. If we look at the situation practically, however,
humanitarian shipments to the problem areas that were
referred to today, including Madaya, take place with
the active assistance of the authorities of the Syrian
Arab Republic. This has been confirmed by the staff
of United Nations humanitarian agencies, who are
monitoring the delivery of aid to the city. A second
convoy is heading for Madaya, Fu’ah and Kafraya, and
a third is being prepared for 17 January.
The United Nations Resident Coordinator, Yacoub
El Hillo, has taken note of the satisfactory situation
concerning the continuing direct contacts between
the World Health Organization and the Government of
Syria regarding the issue of organizing an emergency
medical evacuation of civilians in need thereof.

S/PV.7605

Humanitarian operations have also been launched
by the Russian armed forces active in Syria, upon the
request of that Government. Assistance has been sent to
the city of Dayr al-Zawr, which is currently under siege
by terrorists. We have not heard a word about this in our
meeting today. Russian parachute pallets have made it
possible to deliver 22 tons of cargo. Work on this track
will, of course, continue.
The Security Council is paying close attention to
the humanitarian situation in Syria. This is already the
second meeting this week on this issue. Today we are
meeting in an open format, and we would note that even
from the perspective of the Council’s standing practice,
this is somewhat unusual. Very soon, on 27 January,
we will be discussing the humanitarian aspects of the
Syrian crisis, following the issuance of the monthly
report of the Secretary-General.
It is almost as if, under the pretext of the
deteriorating situation in besieged cities and regions,
attempts were being made to derail the launch of the
intra-Syrian talks planned for 25 January. All of this
runs counter to resolution 2254 (2015), pursuant to
which there must be no preconditions to the launch of
the talks. Humanitarian issues must form an integral
component of the intra-Syrian negotiations, and yet
experience has shown that when no one interferes with
the sides, they can quickly reach a lasting agreement.
As the launch of the inter-Syrian talks grows
closer, there is a great deal of unnecessary noise and an
increased use of the dishonest tactic, previously used
on many occasions, of politicizing humanitarian issues,
and the issue is being raised in international forums
with, unfortunately, double standards prevailing once
again. It is clear that those behind this do not like the
Vienna agreement and will not abandon their doomed
plan for a forceful solution in Syria. We have not
forgotten the level of opposition we had to overcome
to ensure that resolution 2254 (2015) included mention
of the Vienna Statements. Even those States that played
a positive role in elaborating the Vienna decisions
and Security Council resolution 2254 (2015) could
be more consistent and focused when it comes to its
implementation.
However, one cannot avoid resolving the
fundamental issues, namely, those of promoting
dialogue on resolving the Syrian issue. This most
important thing now is to compile a representative list

16-0086313/19

S/PV.7605

The situation in the Middle East

of Syrian opposition delegations and to consolidate the
list of terrorist organizations active in Syria.
But there is one other, no less important issue:
the fact that there is no alternative to forging a broad,
intergovernmental form of cooperation among States,
including on the military presence in Syria, so as to
enhance the effectiveness of the fight against terrorist
organizations. The proposals made by the Russian
Federation in this respect remain on the table.
Mr. Gaspar Martins (Angola): Let me start by
thanking you, Mr. President, for having organized
this afternoon’s meeting. Let me also thank Assistant
Secretary-General Kyung-wha Kang for her briefing.
It is absolutely unacceptable by any standards to
allow as many as 400,000 people or more to continue
living and dying in besieged areas in Syria. For this
reason, we support all initiatives aimed at denouncing
such situations in the strongest possible terms and
applying the necessary political pressure to decisively
end this tragic situation and state of affairs.
We warmly welcome the access of humanitarian
convoys to the town of Madaya and to other places
under siege by rebels in the north-west part of Syria. We
commend the outstanding efforts by the humanitarian
community, which, against all odds, keeps on working
to save lives and provide the minimum necessary
comfort to the Syrian people, who are in absolute
distress.
Our praise goes also to the Humanitarian
Coordinator for Syria, Mr. Yacoub El Hillo, and to
the personnel of the International Committee of the
Red Cross and the Syrian Arab Red Crescent, who in
the past few days were able to deliver much-needed
provisions and medical supplies, including blankets
and clothing. We sincerely hope that increased pressure
will force the Government and the opposition forces
to continue allowing regular and unimpeded access of
humanitarian aid to all besieged areas in Syria.
The eloquent statement made by the SecretaryGeneral yesterday described the situation in Madaya as
having reached a shocking depth of inhumanity owing
to the suffering to which women and men, including
children and the elderly, are subjected. Reports of
people dying from starvation or being killed by
snipers or landmines while trying to flee amount to
war crimes, as the Secretary-General has pointed out.
Those responsible for such despicable actions must be
held accountable.
14/19

15/01/2016

In the political process, in particular if that
process is to succeed, the warring parties must show a
genuine commitment to respecting the basic tenets of
international humanitarian law and human rights law.
They must put an end to the suffering of the civilian
population, in particular those trapped in besieged and
hard-to-reach areas. We hope that the preparations of
the Special Envoy of the Secretary-General for Syria,
Mr. Steffan de Mistura, for the political talks between
the Syrian Government and the Syrian opposition
in Geneva, due to start on 25 January, will continue
unhindered, and that a political solution to this
humanitarian catastrophe can be achieved as soon as
possible.
With the adoption of resolution 2254 (2015),
a commitment was made to accelerate efforts to
achieve a ceasefire that would run in parallel to the
political process, pursuant to the Geneva communiqué
(S/2012/522, annex), and move the political process
ahead expeditiously. As such, the modalities and
requirements for a ceasefire must be determined, and
the necessary pressure applied on all the parties, in
order to enable the lifting of all sieges on civilianpopulated areas, thereby facilitating the political
settlement to the Syrian conflict. That remains the only
way to stop the tragedy now afflicting the people of
Syria. In that connection, we look forward to hearing
the briefing that will be delivered to the Council next
Monday by Mr. De Mistura.
The people of Syria need adequate responses from
the Security Council. It is our duty to respond in order
to give peace a chance.
Mr. Ibrahim (Malaysia): I join earlier speakers
in thanking Assistant Secretary-General Kang for her
briefing, which provided a vital update on ongoing
efforts to respond to the critical health needs of civilians
in the hard-to-reach and besieged areas in Syria.
We deplore the unacceptable human cost of the
ongoing conflict. It is simply staggering that more
than 400,000 Syrians live under siege conditions, a
tool of warfare that hearkens back to the Middle Ages
and which civilized nations and people have since
rejected. It is unimaginable that, in the twenty-first
century, parties to the Syrian conflict would resort to
the deplorable tactic of besieging cities and starving
whole populations, including women and children, as a
strategy of war. The employment of that strategy adds
another inhumane and horrifying dimension to the
Syrian conflict.
16-00863

15/01/2016

The situation in the Middle East

Earlier this week, we were heartened by the
breakthrough made by the United Nations and its
partners in securing safe passage for and conducting
humanitarian relief missions in the besieged towns of
Madaya, Fu’ah and Kafraya. We call on all parties to
ensure that such access continues to be provided to
those towns. We expect that access for humanitarian
relief and supplies will be granted to other hard-toreach areas, including those under siege by various
parties to the conflict.
Malaysia shares the concerns about the plight
of the 400 people in immediate need of medical
evacuation from Madaya, as highlighted by the
Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs.
We urge the relevant authorities to expedite their
immediate evacuation. For those whose condition
makes evacuation impossible, we would demand that
the necessary providers of medical assistance be given
unimpeded and expedited access to Madaya. While my
delegation welcomes the lifting of the blockade against
Madaya, Fu’ah and Kafraya, we stress that all parties
to the conflict have an unequivocal responsibility to
protect civilians at all times. The besiege-and-starve
strategy, which callously devalues human life and
violates international law, should cease.
In addition to the daily struggle to survive the
hail of bullets and bombs, the situation of ordinary
Syrians, including those under siege, is increasingly
precarious, in particular with the onset of winter.
We wish to underscore that a political solution to the
conflict requires no further amplification. For that,
the enablers must be put in place. Malaysia affirms its
support for the initiative led by the Special Envoy of
the Secretary-General for a political resolution to the
Syrian conflict as outlined in resolution 2254 (2015).
In that connection, we call on all the relevant parties
to participate in the talks facilitated by the United
Nations, which are scheduled to take place 25 January,
without preconditions. Syria and ordinary Syrians have
bled long enough.
In conclusion, while we are hopeful that the
upcoming talks can pave the way for a sustained truce
or a cessation of hostilities among the various parties,
particularly between the Government and the opposition
forces, the dire humanitarian crisis faced by ordinary
Syrians necessitates urgent action by the international
community to ensure the safe passage and conduct of
humanitarian assistance, aid and relief to those most
in need, especially those in hard-to-reach and besieged

S/PV.7605

areas. We call on States with influence on the parties to
the conflict to do their utmost to ensure that the sieges
end and that humanitarian aid be made accessible to all.
Ms. Sison (United States of America): I would like
to thank Assistant Secretary-General Kang for the very
sobering briefing. I would also like to thank my fellow
Security Council members for organizing the meeting
on short notice.
At the outset, I want to commend the brave
United Nations and humanitarian workers who are
carrying out lifesaving work in Syria under the deeply
challenging circumstances of a conflict zone. Their
work is courageous and deeply valued. Millions depend
on them.
We have come to the Chamber today because the
world has been profoundly shaken by the display of
the sheer brutality of the Al-Assad regime in Syria.
The reports of starvation coming out of Madaya
have truly shocked our conscience and our sense of
humanity. Most disturbing is the fact that this is not
just a single instance of horror and cruelty. Rather, this
is part of a deliberate and systematic siege-and-starve
tactic employed by the regime against civilians across
Syria — another barbaric act in a conflict full of such
acts. The Council has adopted one resolution after
another on humanitarian access. And yet, over the past
year, we have only seen the suffering of Syrians deepen
to outrageous levels. This cannot go on.
We welcome the two United Nations shipments
made to Madaya, Fu’ah and Kafraya this week. It is
lifesaving assistance, but it is not nearly enough and
it is coming far too late. Before Monday, the 40,000
people in Madaya trapped by the Syrian regime and
its allies, including Hizbollah, had received almost no
humanitarian aid since October. Therefore, although
the shipments made this week are necessary, the need
is much greater. At least 32 people, including infants,
have died from starvation in the past 30 days, according
to the latest updates from humanitarian workers. The
United Nations has reported that more than 400 people
are near death due to starvation — those are just the
cases that we know about, there could well be more.
The only two doctors in the town — two doctors for
all 40,000 people — have very limited ability to treat
this sick and weakened community. Madaya’s hospital
has been destroyed, and the one remaining medical
facility faces severe shortages of medicines, supplies
and health personnel. The facility consists of one
large room where, earlier this week, humanitarian

16-0086315/19

S/PV.7605

The situation in the Middle East

workers saw 20 weakened people suffering from severe
malnutrition, sleeping on the cold, hard floor without
mattresses.
When United Nations and International Committee
of the Red Cross workers arrived in Madaya on Monday,
the grateful local distribution committee insisted on
providing a meal, trying their best to offer hospitality,
truly generous of spirit, yet all they had to offer was
hot salted water with very few grains of floating rice.
Madaya has had no bread for nearly five months, and
what food is available is sold at exorbitant prices: 1
kilogram of sugar costs $150 and 1 kilogram of rice
costs $200. Madaya has simply been cut off from the
world. Civilians who have tried to escape or to find food
have been killed or injured by anti-personnel mines
and sniper fire by pro-regime forces. Since the Syrian
regime has cut off power and fuel for generators, the
residents of this mountain town — where temperatures
are now dropping often below freezing — must simply
risk their lives to collect firewood to keep their children
warm at night. That must change.
We reiterate calls on the Syrian regime to allow
immediate, regular, unconditional and unimpeded
access. The United Nations formally made a request to
the Syrian regime three days ago to bring in mobile
medical units and medical teams to Madaya to conduct
nutrition assessments and to treat the most critical cases.
That request was just approved today, but the units and
teams must arrive immediately, with no further delays.
The exhausted medical personnel in Madaya
urgently need this support to stabilize and treat
those who are severely malnourished. The most dire
cases — the 400 people the United Nations identified
as near death due to starvation — must be treated or
evacuated to a safe location immediately. The stories of
horror coming out of Syria have become so chillingly
commonplace. but they simply cannot make us numb:
families trying to survive on what cannot even be
called soup, just hot water and boiled spices, young
babies unable to feed because their mothers suffer from
such serious malnutrition and frail elders wasting away
to nothingness. We cannot just become immune to the
stories of their plight.
We, as a Council, must demand rapid, safe and
unhindered humanitarian access to the residents of
Madaya and all civilians in Syria, not merely as a
matter of implementing Security Council resolutions,
but as a moral imperative. As we all know, the hunger,
suffering, and obstruction of humanitarian access
16/19

15/01/2016

should never have happened in the first place and it is
by no means limited to Madaya.
The Damascus suburbs towns of Mouadamiya and
Daraya are also worth highlighting. since they also
continue to be strangled by the Syrian regime. Madaya
is just one of 12 areas in Syria besieged by the regime,
while armed opposition groups have surrounded
civilians in Fu’ah and Kafraya and the Islamic State
in Iraq and the Levant has surrounded Dayr al-Zawr.
In addition to the 400,000 in those besieged areas,
4 million more Syrians are in hard-to-reach areas
where it is increasingly difficult for the United Nations
to send assistance.
Denying humanitarian access to anyone, anywhere,
must stop. While we welcome the United Nations
progress towards meeting the needs of those in
Madaya, Fu’ah, and Kafraya, one-off deliveries are
not a solution to the humanitarian catastrophe caused
by the besiegement of communities. All communities
should be guaranteed access to food, medicine and
basic goods. That has to be our goal. And since we
only saw access deteriorate and malnutrition and
starvation increase in 2015, we all have to re-examine
the strategies to do better.
In the past year, we saw the number of Syrians
who need humanitarian relief increase to 13.5 million,
which is another 1.3 million in need. The number of
Syrians receiving aid in hard-to-reach areas continues
to dramatically decline, from 1.1 million in 2014 to
625,000 in 2015. In besieged areas, on average only 3 per
cent received humanitarian assistance, as Assistant
Secretary-General Kang just noted. We must stop
acting as though such suffering is simply inevitable. In
the past year, the Syrian regime did not even respond
to more than half of requests from the United Nations
to deliver assistance across conflict lines. According
to the United Nations, if the regime approved such
outstanding requests, 1.4 million people would receive
assistance. As a United Nations partner, the United
States intends to help in developing strategies to reverse
the trends of the past year.
The Syrian regime must minimize administrative
procedures. We, as a Council, must effectively press the
parties to implement the resolutions we have adopted.
In that regard, we request that the United Nations
immediately bring to the attention of the Council any
obstacles to humanitarian access so that we may take
action.

16-00863

15/01/2016

The situation in the Middle East

The International Syria Support Group (ISSG)
discussed the need to take steps to ensure expeditious
humanitarian access throughout Syria, according to
resolution 2165 (2014). And the ISSG called for United
Nations pending requests for humanitarian deliveries to
be granted. In resolution 2254 (2015), the Council called
on ISSG States to use their influence immediately to
those ends.
As we have said before, the only way to stop the
violence and end Syria’s conflict is through advancing
a negotiated political transition as outlined in resolution
2254 (2015). But while we work toward that goal, Syrians
literally cannot wait — whether for food, medicine or
clean water. It is critical that the Syrian regime and all
parties allow immediate, unconditional and unfettered
humanitarian assistance to reach all of those in need.
All States Members of the United Nations must unite
in pressuring the Syrian Government, or any actor over
which it has leverage, to grant access to Madaya and to
all communities across Syria.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I shall now
make a statement in my capacity as the representative
of Uruguay.
First, I thank Assistant Secretary-General Kang
for her briefing. The content of her statement was
profoundly moving.
The Government of Uruguay is deeply concerned
about the humanitarian situation in Syria. Above and
beyond the many efforts being made to find a solution
to this protracted conflict, the humanitarian situation
for the Syrian people continues to be a devastating
one and has been exacerbated by the practices of their
own Government, rebel armed groups and terrorist
organizations. Uruguay demands that all parties to the
conflict allow humanitarian aid convoys to have access
to the entire country, without delay — and particularly
those areas that are under siege by any one of those
parties.
Widespread hunger and malnutrition in areas such
as Madaya, Fu’ah, Kafraya, Dayr al-Zawr, Daraya,
areas in eastern Ghouta and the environs of the capital
of Damascus is utterly unacceptable. The arrival,
yesterday and Monday, of humanitarian aid convoys
in Madaya, Fu’ah and Kafraya is a positive sign, but
it must be followed by immediate and unconditional
access of humanitarian aid convoys in response to
requests by United Nations agencies and its partners on
the ground in Syria. We demand that the Government of

S/PV.7605

the Syrian Arab Republic, a State Member of the United
Nations, comply with its obligations under international
humanitarian law and cease to impede aid that would
ease the tremendous suffering of its people. That same
obligation is also incumbent upon other non-State
actors in the conflict, who are also responsible for
such an affront to the most basic norms of civilization.
Keeping the people of those areas close to starvation as
a weapon is a war crime, which is exacerbated by the
fact that they are unable to escape or flee for their lives.
This is a clear breach of international humanitarian law.
Sooner or later, all those responsible for these
atrocities must account for their actions. The
Government of Uruguay hopes that resolution 2258
(2015), adopted in December, and the intensive efforts
of the Special Envoy of the Secretary-General, Staffan
de Mistura, will enable humanitarian access without
obstacles or delays. Uruguay is confident that, in the
next few days, the bases set out by resolution 2254
(2015) for the start of the transition and the ceasefire
in Syria will be established. That is a sine qua none
for preventing the ongoing deterioration of the living
conditions of the population. They must recover, as soon
as possible, their right to live in peace and enjoy the
most basic human rights, which have been continously
violated by all the warring parties since the beginning
of the conflict.
In the midst of all this, we pay tribute to all persons
on the ground who are risking their own lives to provide
humanitarian assistance to the innocent victims of
these atrocities.
I now resume my functions as President of the
Council.
I give the floor to the representative of the Syrian
Arab Republic.
Mr. Mounzer (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in
Arabic): I wish to start by congratulating your country,
Sir, on its election as non-permament member of
the Security Council and on your assumption of the
presidency of the Council for the month of January.
This morning we addressed two identical letters
to the Secretary-General and to the President of
the General Assembly concerning the emergency
humanitarian work undertaken by the Government of
the Syrian Arab Republic.
It is well known that one of the essential principles
of humanitarian assistance is the avoidance of all

16-0086317/19

S/PV.7605

The situation in the Middle East

politicization and double standards. This has been
clearly established in the United Nations guidelines on
the provision of humanitarian emergency assistance,
as provided in General Assembly resolution 46/182.
Unfortunately, some use humanitarian issues to further
their political agendas. The problem is that this runs
counter to the guiding principles of United Nations
humanitarian action, and does not serve humanitarian
action as a whole. Therefore, such action is immoral,
and the objective is not to assist those in need, but
rather to exploit their suffering to achieve specific
political goals. Those who wish to help the people in
Syria must first tackle the deeply rooted causes of the
problem — for example, terrorism fuelled from abroad.
The humanitarian disaster emerged in several parts of
Syria only after terrorist groups entered the country.
Before that, individuals enjoyed a safe, secure and
dignified life.
Humanitarian assistance requires full transparency,
coordination and cooperation with the Syrian
Government, rather than unnecessary criticism. I
wish to remind members that the Syrian Government
has deployed all its efforts and resources to provide
assistance to all those suffering, without discrminiation.
The Syrian Government has cooperated with the
United Nations, and we have done so in fact, not just
words. We need help in bearing this burden. The
Syrian Government and the United Nations thus far
have implemented six humanitarian assistance plans,
by which assistance has been provided to millions of
Syrians. It must be recalled that the Syrian Government
continues to bear the major burden of this emergency
assistance because of the insufficient financing for the
humanitarian assistance plans.
Some attempt to say that access of humanitarian
assistance to troubled areas can be achieved by
accepting all demands of the United Nations and
that aid would then be delivered, and that the Syrian
Government should simply agree as if were nothing
more than an administrative procedure. This is a
simplistic way of seeing things and is not in keeping
with the facts on the ground. There are a number of
considerations that cannot be ignored. We are referring
to providing assistance to dangerous areas, where armed
terrorist organizations are active, including terrorist
organizations that have been listed by the Security
Council, and in areas neighbouring those areas. These
terrorist groups carry out terrorist acts, and military
actions are being undertaken to combat them. All

18/19

15/01/2016

precautions need to be taken to ensure the safety and
the security of those active in the humanitarian field
and that the routes they use are safe.
Furthermore, humanitarian assistance must be
delivered to individuals, and should not fall into the
hands of terrorists, as has happened in the past. For
example, terrorists seized humanitarian assistance sent
to the inhabitants of Madaya; they looted their houses,
seized the aid and then exploited the inhabitants by
selling the food they had looted at exhorbitant prices,
creating a source of financing of terrorism. That
was what the whole world heard yesterday from the
inhabitants of Madaya in their testimony given to
representatives of international organizations.
The Syrian Government is the Government that is
most mindful of its people. No one can claim to care
more about our people than we do, no other country,
particularly when it comes to providing assistance to
dangerous areas under the control of armed terrorist
groups. The Syrian Government is making real, concrete
efforts in this context. These are not just empty words. I
recall by way of example, and the list is not exhaustive,
a single case regarding the city of Madaya, this city
that some have used to try to manipulate international
public opinion. The reality is that a great many
people are not aware that the Government of Syria, in
cooperation with the United Nations and international
organizations, enabled the provision of three shipments
of humanitarian aid to Madaya, starting on 18 October
2015. The last shipment arrived yesterday, 14 January
2016.
The Syrian Government addressed a note to the
Resident Coordinator dated 27 December 2015 to ensure
that humanitarian aid would be delivered to Madaya, to
which we have not had a reponse. I quote here the note
of the Minister for Foreign Affairs for Syrians Abroad:
“It is our honour to request your august office to do
everything possible as rapidly as possible to ensure,
in parallel with the evacuation of those injured in
these areas, that medical, food and fuel supplies are
deliverd on 29 December 2015 as a priority, and
that food assistance be delivered three days later in
cities such as Madaya, Kafraya and Fu’ah, where
living conditions are very difficult”.
The Syrian Government still has not received a response
to its request. The assistance provided during the last
shipment consisted of 89 truckloads.

16-00863

15/01/2016

The situation in the Middle East

The Government of the Syrian Arab Republic
would like once again to reiterate its commitment to
cooperate with the Organization and the Office of
United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights
to provide humanitarian assistance to affected civilians
in all parts of Syria, without discrimination, including

S/PV.7605

areas identified by the United Nations as hard-to-reach
or under siege.
The President (spoke in Spanish): There are no
more names inscribed on the list of speakers.
The meeting rose at 5 p.m.

16-0086319/19
