A

UNITED
NATIONS

General Assembly
Distr.
GENERAL
A/RES/48/24
3 December 1993

Forty-eighth session
Agenda item 29
RESOLUTION ADOPTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY
[without reference to a Main Committee (A/48/L.27)]
48/24.

Cooperation between the United Nations and
the Organization of the Islamic Conference

The General Assembly,
Having considered the report of the Secretary-General on cooperation
between the United Nations and the Organization of the Islamic Conference, 1/
Taking into account the desire of both organizations to cooperate more
closely in their common search for solutions to global problems, such as
questions relating to international peace and security, disarmament, selfdetermination, decolonization, fundamental human rights and economic and
technical development,
Recalling the Articles of the Charter of the United Nations that
encourage activities through regional cooperation for the promotion of the
purposes and principles of the United Nations,
Noting the strengthening of cooperation between the specialized agencies
and other organizations of the United Nations system and the Organization of
the Islamic Conference and its specialized institutions,
Noting also the encouraging progress made in the seven priority areas of
cooperation as well as in the identification of other areas of cooperation,
Convinced that the strengthening of cooperation between the United
Nations and other organizations of the United Nations system and the
Organization of the Islamic Conference contributes to the promotion of the
purposes and principles of the United Nations,
____________
1/

A/48/422 and Add.1.
/...

A/RES/48/24
Page 2

Noting with appreciation the determination of both organizations to
strengthen further the existing cooperation by developing specific proposals
in the designated priority areas of cooperation,
Recognizing the ongoing need for closer cooperation between the
specialized agencies and other organizations of the United Nations system and
the Organization of the Islamic Conference and its specialized institutions in
the implementation of the proposals adopted at the coordination meeting of the
focal points of the lead agencies of the two organizations,
Taking into account the sectoral meeting between the organizations and
agencies of the United Nations system and the Organization of the Islamic
Conference and its specialized institutions on science and technology with
special emphasis on environment, held at Dhaka from 19 to 22 December 1992,
Recalling its resolutions 37/4 of 22 October 1982, 38/4 of
28 October 1983, 39/7 of 8 November 1984, 40/4 of 25 October 1985, 41/3 of
16 October 1986, 42/4 of 15 October 1987, 43/2 of 17 October 1988, 44/8 of
18 October 1989, 45/9 of 25 October 1990, 46/13 of 28 October 1991 and 47/18
of 23 November 1992,
1.
Takes note with satisfaction of the report of the SecretaryGeneral; 1/
2.
Recalls the conclusions and recommendations of the sectoral
meetings, especially the sectoral meeting on science and technology with
special emphasis on environment; 2/
3.
Notes with satisfaction the active participation of the
Organization of the Islamic Conference in the work of the United Nations
towards the realization of the purposes and principles of the Charter of the
United Nations;
4.
Requests the United Nations and the Organization of the Islamic
Conference to continue cooperation in their common search for solutions to
global problems, such as questions relating to international peace and
security, disarmament, self-determination, decolonization, fundamental human
rights and economic and technical development;
5.
Encourages the specialized agencies and other organizations of the
United Nations system to continue to expand their cooperation with the
Organization of the Islamic Conference, particularly by negotiating
cooperation agreements, and invites them to multiply the contacts and meetings
of the focal points for cooperation in priority areas of interest to the
United Nations and the Organization of the Islamic Conference;
6.
Recommends that a general meeting between representatives of the
secretariats of the United Nations system and the Organization of the Islamic
Conference and its specialized institutions be organized at Geneva in
May 1994;

____________
2/

A/48/422/Add.1, sect. IV.
/...

A/RES/48/24
Page 3

7.
Urges the organizations of the United Nations system, especially
the lead agencies, to provide increased technical and other forms of
assistance to the Organization of the Islamic Conference and its specialized
institutions in order to enhance cooperation;
8.
Expresses its appreciation to the Secretary-General for his
continued efforts to strengthen cooperation and coordination between the
United Nations and other organizations of the United Nations system and the
Organization of the Islamic Conference to serve the mutual interests of the
two organizations in the political, economic, social and cultural fields;
9.
Requests the United Nations and the Organization of the Islamic
Conference to hold consultations on a regular basis between representatives of
the Secretariat of the United Nations and the General Secretariat of the
Organization of the Islamic Conference focusing on the implementation of
programmes, projects and follow-up action;
10.
Requests the Secretary-General of the United Nations, in
cooperation with the Secretary-General of the Organization of the Islamic
Conference, to continue encouraging the convening of sectoral meetings in the
priority areas of cooperation, as recommended by the previous meetings between
the two organizations, including follow-up to the sectoral meetings;
11.
Also expresses its appreciation for the efforts of the SecretaryGeneral in the promotion of cooperation between the United Nations and the
Organization of the Islamic Conference, and expresses the hope that he will
continue to strengthen the mechanisms of coordination between the two
organizations;
12.
Also requests the Secretary-General to report to the General
Assembly at its forty-ninth session on the state of cooperation between the
United Nations and the Organization of the Islamic Conference;
13.
Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its forty-ninth
session the item entitled "Cooperation between the United Nations and the
Organization of the Islamic Conference".
63rd plenary meeting
24 November 1993
