United Nations

S/PV.6702 (Resumption 1)

Security Council

Provisional

Sixty-seventh year

6702nd meeting
Thursday, 12 January 2012, 3.30 p.m.
New York

President:

Ms. Nkoana-Mashabane . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(South Africa)

Members:

Azerbaijan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Colombia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Germany . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Guatemala . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
India . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Morocco . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Pakistan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Portugal . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Togo . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . .
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Mr. Mammadyarov
Mr. Liu Guijin
Mr. Osorio
Mr. Bonne
Mr. Eick
Mr. Rodas Melgar
Mr. Hardeep Singh Puri
Mr. Loulichki
Mr. Haroon
Mr. Moraes Cabral
Mr. Zhukov
Mr. Esaw
Mr. Parham
Mrs. DiCarlo

Agenda
Cooperation between the United Nations and regional and subregional organizations
in maintaining international peace and security
Strengthening the relationship between the United Nations and regional
organizations, in particular the African Union, in the maintenance of
international peace and security
Report of the Secretary-General on United Nations-African Union cooperation
in peace and security (S/2011/805)
Letter dated 4 January 2012 from the Permanent Representative of South
Africa to the United Nations addressed to the Secretary-General (S/2012/13)
Letter dated 9 January 2012 from the Permanent Representative of South
Africa to the United Nations addressed to the President of the Security Council
(S/2012/20)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the
delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-506.

12-20579 (E)

*1220579*

S/PV.6702 (Resumption 1)

The meeting resumed at 3.45 p.m.
Mr. Haroon (Pakistan): Pakistan’s delegation
warmly welcomes you, Madam President, to the
Security Council. As we wish you and your delegation
a productive visit, we warmly congratulate South
Africa and the African National Congress on its onehundredth anniversary. In that light, it is befitting that
President Zuma’s statement compels attention as a
veritable tour de force in Africa. His role in the African
Union
should
be
viewed
as
historically
groundbreaking. We also thank Secretary-General Ban
Ki-moon for his rightfully vast report (S/2011/805) and
for his briefing on Africa. We also thank the Foreign
Ministers of Azerbaijan, Colombia, Guatemala and
Kenya, as well as the African Union Commissioner, for
their participation and for their important statements.
We also welcome the representatives who have come
from China, France, Germany, Portugal and Togo to
take part in today’s debate.
Africa continuously defies its detractors, not only
by progressing but by committing itself to the
challenges of peace and security, including the building
of bridges with the international and regional comity of
nations. We commend the timely epoch-building
initiative of South Africa to hold a debate on the
African Union (AU)-United Nations relationship. The
high-level participation is a necessary reflection of the
close attention being paid to those linkages by the
leadership of Africa. After all, this is the nation that
gave the world the concept of transitional law, and that
then peacefully upheld the rule of law in a manner that
humankind can learn from.
This forum’s venture today would not be
complete without invoking the great example of
President Nelson Mandela and Archbishop Desmond
Tutu. That is world-class leadership.
Asia and Africa are bound by strong interlinkages
of history and friendship. The early twentieth century
witnessed mutually inspiring independence movements
in the South Asian subcontinent and the freedom
struggle in Africa. Pakistan’s strong support for
Africa’s decolonization struggle is well known. Today
the two continents are partners in their respective peace
and development and in the prosperity of their people.
With 70 per cent of world trade binding our shores in
the future, the world shall have to take note.

2

I salute African wisdom and sagacity, because
while most regional organizations are based solely on
trade and economic considerations, Africa has made
significant strides to conceive the challenge of peace
and security as a collective responsibility. The African
Union is an embodiment of that pioneering spirit.
Within a decade of its foundation, the African
Union has created a solid edifice for peace in Africa, in
the form of African Peace and Security Architecture.
The Architecture stands on institutions like the AU
Peace and Security Council, the Panel of the Wise, the
African Standby Force and the Post-Conflict
Reconstruction and Development Framework. A set of
subregional organizations further strengthens the
Architecture.
The AU has evolved tangible remedial measures
for the entire spectrum of a conflict cycle. From
preventive diplomacy and mediation efforts to active
peacekeeping, peacebuilding and catalysing political
processes, the continent is using a wide range of
instruments in the international toolkit for peace and
security. The world can learn from that. The Africa of
today has sagaciously resorted to the vast spectrum of
modalities for peaceful settlement of disputes, as
envisaged in Chapter VI of the United Nations
Charter — a practice that merits emulation by the
Council.
The cooperation between the AU and the United
Nations in peace and security adds value to the work of
both organizations, particularly in matters of peace and
security. The AU Peace and Security Council and the
United Nations Security Council define the AU-United
Nations relationship at a strategic level. The AU
Commission and the United Nations Secretariat
provide the administrative foundation for that
partnership. It is worthwhile noting that Africa’s
consensual and united position for enhanced
representation at the Security Council, which is a
legitimate demand, will also eventually strengthen the
cooperation between the two bodies.
Contacts between the AU and the United Nations,
particularly between their two Councils, are too slowly
evolving into a common strategic vision in areas of
prevention and management, and manifest themselves
in a lack of resolution of conflicts. That vision should
forge enhanced political coherence to address the
challenges of peace and security. While coordinating
the evolution of a common strategic vision will be

12-20579

S/PV.6702 (Resumption 1)

incremental, we believe that an expressly targeted
focus on three key areas will further enhance
cooperation between the two bodies.
First, efforts should be made to ensure that the
annual consultative mechanism between the Security
Council and the AU Peace and Security Council
translates into formulating cohesive positions and
strategies. The two Councils can do so by holding more
frequent and informal exchanges, especially among
their respective presidencies. Such exchanges need to
be replicated between the AU Commission and the
Secretariat, as well as among other relevant bodies in
the AU and United Nations systems, namely, the
Peacebuilding Commission and its five country
configurations, which are all related to Africa.
Secondly, regular interaction with subregional
organizations in Africa will be critical to developing
commonalities in respective decisions relating to peace
and security, thereby ensuring their smooth
implementation. In this regard, the Security Council
has already expressed clear intentions in its
presidential
statement
of 13
January
2010
(S/PRST/2010/1). The challenge is to translate the
intent into action.
Finally, AU-United Nations cooperation — as
noted by President Zuma as well — can be optimized
by strict prioritization in areas of building local
capacities. Considering that most of the AU’s work on
peace and security is based on Chapter VI provisions
related to the pacific settlement of disputes, the two
organizations can identify relevant areas for capacitybuilding cooperation in mediation, arbitration and other
measures relating to preventive diplomacy.
Another avenue of cooperation could be security
sector reform (SSR). The AU has developed an
elaborate SSR policy framework for implementation,
which must be supported by the United Nations. It
would also be important to widen the discourse of
AU-United Nations cooperation beyond the work of
the Security Council to include issues such as fair trade
practices, food and environmental security, and
investment in governance institutions.
Let me conclude by stating that Pakistan, as an
observer State of the AU and a country in search of
peace and stability in its own neighbourhood, identifies
closely with the theme of today’s debate. Out of nearly
10,000 Pakistani peacekeepers in the United Nations
missions around the world, 9,000 are performing duties

12-20579

in Africa. In the peace and stability of Africa, we see
their safety and eventual safe return home. In the
economic progress of Africa, we see opportunities for
the whole global South, including Pakistan.
We hope that today’s debate and high-level
participation, together with the draft resolution to be
adopted later (S/2012/25) will further concretize the
modalities of AU-United Nations cooperation and pave
the way of constructive collaboration. Pakistan is today
a proud co-sponsor of the important draft resolution
before the Council.
The President: I
representative of India.

give

the

floor

to

the

Mr. Hardeep Singh Puri (India): At the outset, I
would like to thank the South African delegation for
organizing today’s debate. I also want to put on record
my sincere personal thanks to you, Madam President,
and to President Jacob Zuma for presiding over this
meeting. I would also like to thank the SecretaryGeneral and the representatives of the African Union
(AU) and the subregional organizations for their
valuable statements. The presence of so many highlevel dignitaries from the capitals testifies to the
importance of today’s discussion.
We appreciate the initiative of the South African
delegation to organize a workshop of the interested
stakeholders in preparation for today’s meeting. It put
in clear terms the steps that are required for enhanced
cooperation between the United Nations and the
African Union. These are also reflected in the draft
resolution that is before the Council for adoption today
(S/2012/25), which we have the privilege of
co-sponsoring.
A much as two-thirds of the active items on the
Council’s agenda concern Africa. About three-fourths
of the Council’s time is spent on African issues. It
would therefore be no exaggeration to say that the
success of the efforts of this Council in Africa will
determine in significant measure its overall
effectiveness in the implementation of its Chartermandated role as the principal organ of the United
Nations for the maintenance of international peace and
security.
In this connection, it is important for us to listen
to Africa and its organizations so that the Council’s
activities will not only be based on Africa’s needs, but
will also complement those of African countries and

3

S/PV.6702 (Resumption 1)

organizations. Cooperation with Africa will also enable
the Council to act with better understanding of the
situation on the ground, which would establish Africa’s
ownership of the solutions and promote lasting peace
and security on the African continent.
Indeed, Chapter VIII of the United Nations
Charter recognizes the importance of regional
organizations and their role in matters relating to
international peace and security. The Charter also
provides a broad framework for the Council’s
cooperation with regional organizations. We therefore
support the strengthening of partnership between the
United Nations and the African Union.
We think that this partnership should be based on
long-term strategic and operational perspectives, taking
into consideration the complementarity of the strengths
that the two organizations possess. Focus should be on
capacity-building of the African Peace and Security
Architecture so that the AU becomes a more effective
and capable partner of the United Nations system. In
this connection, we welcome the establishment of the
United Nations Office to the African Union, which
should
facilitate
systematic
and
broad-based
cooperation between the two organizations. We expect
the Office to expeditiously establish formalized
structures of interaction with different AU bodies and
subregional organizations. Other steps, such as the
annual dialogue between the Council and the AU Peace
and Security Council, the Secretary-General’s 10-year
capacity-building programme for the AU, linkages
between the United Nations and AU Secretariats, inter
alia, are also welcome and should facilitate regular
consultation.
The African Union has already proven beyond
any doubt its ability to address African problems. The
AU High-level Implementation Panel for the Sudan has
facilitated dialogue between the parties to the
Comprehensive Peace Agreement. We continue to
support its efforts for peace and security in Darfur
through the Darfur political process. Similarly, the
African Union Mission in Somalia (AMISOM) is the
mainstay of international efforts to stabilize the
situation in Somalia. The African Union-United
Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur has greatly helped
in the improvement of the situation there, including
through community welfare programmes.
If these missions are to succeed and other joint
missions undertaken in the future, it is necessary that

4

there be better understanding between the United
Nations and the AU at the strategic and operational
levels. The Council should be more forthcoming in
extending support to the AU in the critical areas of
financial resources, force multipliers and force
enablers, as may be required by the missions.
If cooperation between the United Nations and
the AU is to be effective and enduring, it is necessary
that the Council not adopt a selective approach to this
cooperation. Partnership should not be restricted only
to the areas of the Council’s convenience, but also
extended to areas where there may be differences, and
be based on mutual respect. This requires a mindset
change in approach and demands the expansion of the
permanent membership to make the Council reflective
of contemporary realities and increased representation
of developing countries, including those of Africa. This
will not only make the Council more representative,
but also enhance its ability to successfully address the
challenges that the international community faces
today.
Conscious of the AU’s role in handling African
issues, not only those concerning peace and security
but also those related to social and development
matters, India has institutionalized its cooperation with
the African Union. I would like to recall here the
historic visit of Prime Minister Manmohan Singh to
Addis Ababa in May 2011 to participate in the second
Africa-India Forum Summit, signifying the importance
of our relations with African States. Given the
similarity of our objectives with those of the African
Union, the Summit further deepened the India-AU
development partnership, as well as peace and security
cooperation.
India has contributed $2 million for AMISOM
operations — $1.5 million through the AU — without
any caveats. India is also providing credit lines of
$5 billion for the next three years to help Africa
achieve its development goals. India will provide an
additional $700 million for the establishment of new
institutions and training programmes, in consultation
with the African Union and its institutions. India is also
offering 22,000 scholarships in various areas of
capacity-building to African nationals during the three
year period from 2011 to 2014.
All those activities will enhance the AU’s
institutional capacity, and help the Council as well in

12-20579

S/PV.6702 (Resumption 1)

dealing with African issues, in partnership with the
AU.

stability and prosperity of the five States that comprise
it.

Mr. Loulichki (Morocco) (spoke in Arabic): At
the outset, I would like to express our gratitude to you,
Madam President, for convening this meeting. Let me
also thank His Excellency Secretary-General Ban
Ki-moon for his presence and effective participation
during this morning’s deliberations.

Based on our belief in the need to develop and
promote forums for cooperation and coordination
among African States, Morocco, in cooperation with
other brotherly African States, has established the
22-member Ministerial Conference on Fisheries
Cooperation among African States Bordering the
Atlantic Ocean. The goal of the Conference is to work
together to share expertise in various areas, including
human and sustainable development and combating
organized crime.

Morocco, a founding member of the Organization
of African Unity, has placed stability and development
on the African continent at the heart of its foreign
policy priorities, while adopting an approach of
cooperation and solidarity in addressing the economic,
social, political and security challenges that hamper
comprehensive development in Africa. Since acceding
to membership of the United Nations, Morocco has
also been committed to contributing to the achievement
of the purposes and principles of the United Nations,
both in the area of the maintenance of international
peace and security and in cooperating to achieve
sustainable development and ensure the advancement
of, and respect for, human rights.
In line with that long and ongoing commitment at
the continental and international levels, Morocco has
made serious contributions to every genuine effort
aimed at heightening cooperation between the United
Nations and the African continent, in full respect for
the jurisdiction and specificities of both partners. In
that context, Morocco has made a positive contribution
to international and regional efforts to resolve
numerous conflicts. Morocco has always contributed to
United Nations peacekeeping operations, especially in
Africa. Based on the same conviction, the Kingdom of
Morocco has supported democratic transformation in
many African States. And we have contributed to
consolidating stability in those countries through
effective cooperation in crucial areas related to
sustainable development. Given the interdependence
between economic development and achieving peace
and security, Morocco has supported development in
Africa by strengthening trade relations and economic
investment and efforts at creating promising projects.
No one doubts the crucial role of subregional
organizations and groupings in achieving continental
and regional aspirations, in particular in Africa. That is
the reason for our commitment to the greater Maghreb
project and our ongoing readiness to operationalize it
as soon as possible in order to contribute to the

12-20579

Achieving the shared objectives of the United
Nations and regional organizations, in particular in the
area of international peace and security, must take into
consideration the following aspects.
First, there must be a clear understanding and
vision and respect for the provisions of the Charter of
the United Nations and the charters of regional
organizations.
Secondly, with regard to the primary
responsibility of the Security Council for the
maintenance of international peace and security, the
Charter of the United Nations calls on the Council to
encourage the peaceful resolution of local conflicts
through regional organizations, on the basis of requests
by the States concerned or through a referral by the
Council, in full respect with other provisions of the
Charter.
Thirdly, there should be joint assessments and
consultations between parties in order to avoid any
competition likely to hamper or delay the ending of a
conflict and the resolution of a dispute.
Fourthly, the United Nations and regional
organizations must pre-empt conflicts and disputes and
prevent them from escalating.
Fifthly, the root causes of conflict should be
addressed, in particular on the economic, political and
security levels. In addition, any trends towards
cessation, instability and terrorism must be combated.
The United Nations, including its entire membership
and all its agencies, should strengthen its support for
efforts to achieve comprehensive development, as well
as to contribute to encouraging reform, democratic
transformation and good governance.

5

S/PV.6702 (Resumption 1)

Sixthly, in cases that concern more than one
regional organization, experience has demonstrated the
need for consultation among such organizations, as
well as with the United Nations. That would help to
avoid the duplication of effort and potential
competition, as well as to identify the most qualified
organization to address a given situation.
The African Maghreb, proud of its strong historic
relations with its brothers on the continent, is fully
prepared to support every United Nations effort to
strengthen the security and stability of African States,
in full respect for their sovereignty, independence,
national unity and territorial integrity. We are also
prepared to participate effectively in any effort to
combat terrorism, piracy and the scourge of drugs,
which threaten the safety and security of our brothers
in the Sahel and the Horn of Africa.
Finally, I would like to draw the attention of the
Council and the Secretariat to the Arabic text of the
draft resolution before the Council. It has many
shortcomings; including misspellings and parts that
appear to be truncated. I would like that to be
addressed.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Ethiopia in her capacity as the Chair
of the Intergovernmental Authority on Development.
Ms. Sinegiorgis (Ethiopia): At the outset, I wish
to express our appreciation to the Republic of South
Africa for organizing this open debate on the strategic
partnership between the United Nations and the
African Union (AU), as well as for providing the
concept note (S/2012/20) and for making it possible for
the Intergovernmental Authority on Development
(IGAD) to participate in this very important debate.
In the same vein, I would like to commend the
Secretariat for the report of the Secretary-General on
United Nations-African Union cooperation in peace
and security (S/2011/805).
I also wish to seize this opportunity to commend
the African Union Peace and Security Council for
organizing a debate on the same subject at the
beginning of the week in Addis Ababa, and the African
Union Commission for issuing a comprehensive report
concerning this critical partnership. The meeting in
Addis Ababa was indeed a very important event, which
gave us the opportunity to redouble our resolve to
strengthen the African Union’s partnership with the

6

United Nations, based on the principles enshrined in
the United Nations Charter, as well as the principles of
complementarity,
subsidiarity,
burden-sharing,
comparative advantages and flexibility.
I also wish to associate myself and, indeed, fully
subscribe to the statements delivered by Commissioner
Lamamra and Mr. Moses Wetangula.
In our view, this debate has come at the right
time — a time when Africa is making tremendous
efforts to address the peace and security deficit, at the
continental and subregional levels, through the African
Peace and Security Architecture.
IGAD is encouraged by the level of cooperation
that exists between the United Nations, on the one
hand, and the African Union and African subregional
organizations, such as IGAD, on the other. We also
welcome the intention to consider further steps to
promote closer cooperation. We note with appreciation
that, in the past few years, significant strides have been
made in conflict resolution, peacekeeping and
post-conflict peacebuilding and reconstruction. That is
indeed in consonance with the overriding objective of
the African Union’s peace and security agenda, which
is to create an enabling momentum for a more
integrated, peaceful and prosperous Africa.
In this regard, the signing and implementation of
the Comprehensive Peace Agreement in the Sudan, the
African Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in
Darfur and the African Union Mission in Somalia are
illustrative examples of cooperation based on
flexibility and making best use of the comparative
advantages of the African Union, subregional
organizations such as IGAD and the United Nations in
the areas of effective mediation, peacekeeping and
peacebuilding strategies.
In IGAD, we always emphasize the overriding
role of the African Union in matters of continental
peace and security. It is because of this unwavering
commitment that we make every effort to coordinate
subregional efforts with our continental organization. It
must be underlined that no meeting of IGAD, at any
level whatsoever and no matter how sensitive the issue
on the agenda, takes place without the presence of the
African Union. We have no doubt that, by acting
together, we have the potential to produce results
beyond the sum of the constituent parts.

12-20579

S/PV.6702 (Resumption 1)

Despite many positive developments, the
challenges of clarity of mandate, capacity deficit and
predictable, flexible and timely financing remain issues
of concern. Therefore, it is vital that all parties
concerned continue their engagements in activities
aimed at reaching innovative and feasible solutions to
those important elements of a comprehensive and
effective implementation of this strategic partnership.
While emphasizing the need to consolidate these
gains, we believe that the African Union, and through it
subregional organizations like IGAD, should be
supported by the Security Council, based on the
principles of complementarity and subsidiarity, as
enunciated in Chapter VIII of United Nations Charter.
We are of the view that those continental and
subregional organizations are better placed in terms of
geographical proximity, political and cultural
familiarity with local conditions, and shared
experiences with regard to regional peace and security
initiatives. Hence, without prejudice to the global
mandate of the Security Council for the maintenance of
international peace and security, the international
community will benefit by lending the requisite
support to those institutions for the maintenance of
regional peace and security.
In this regard, greater efforts are required to
ensure that the cooperation between the United Nations
and the African Union is more effective, including
through joint planning and joint assessments for peace
operations on the continent. Those efforts must be
guided by respect for each organization’s mandate and
responsibilities, seeking the best division of labour
among them.
The mandate of the Security Council is clear. It is
the body that has the primary responsibility for the
maintenance of international peace and security, but it
should not be too difficult to apply Chapter VIII with
flexibility and wisdom, the goal being to address a
common challenge. Indeed, the results IGAD has
achieved, in partnership with the AU, in the Sudan,
Somalia and other areas of regional security concern
are illustrative of what can be achieved in this regard.
Thus, we would like to emphasize the need for the
United Nations to intensify such regional initiatives
and to accelerate its efforts to implement the United
Nations 10-year capacity-building programme for the
African Union. More strident efforts are also required
to fully operationalize the African Union’s African
Peace and Security Architecture, including the African

12-20579

Standby Force and the continental early warning
system.
Furthermore, the enhancement of cooperation
between the Security Council and the African Union
Peace and Security Council, including the annual
consultations, is vital for reaching those objectives. It
is our considered view that those meetings should
result in concrete action on the modalities and means
for the development of strategic partnerships when
addressing specific issues of mutual interest and
concern. In this regard, concrete steps should also be
taken to strengthen the policy-level coordination
between those two important entities to avoid not only
conflicting positions but also duplication of efforts.
At the operational level, the Secretariat and the
African Union Commission need to ensure the
complementarities of their efforts, as well as realistic
benchmarks and timelines. Strengthening the efforts of
the African Union and its institutional capacity to
effectively plan, deploy and manage peacekeeping
operations is a key prerequisite for their success. It is
also of high importance that the African Union ensure
leadership and ownership of the process. That will
require greater partnerships, inclusiveness and
purposeful leadership. We believe that there is scope in
the cooperation between the United Nations and the
African Union to incorporate those vital elements.
Our best intentions, however, will amount to
nothing if we fail to provide adequate, flexible and
predictable funding for peacekeeping operations in
Africa. It is also necessary to coordinate efforts
between the United Nations and regional organizations.
IGAD strongly supports closer collaboration between
the United Nations and the African Union and
subregional organizations. To stimulate a more
comprehensive engagement of regional organizations,
we must replace old habits and institutional
protectionism with an open and flexible approach,
adapted to the particular situation at hand.
Allow me to conclude by expressing our
congratulations to the new members of the Council and
our immense gratitude to Gabon and Nigeria for having
represented Africa in such an excellent manner.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Nigeria in her capacity as Chair of the
Economic Community of West African States.

7

S/PV.6702 (Resumption 1)

Mrs. Ogwu (Nigeria): Allow me to convey
Nigeria’s profound appreciation to the Republic of
South Africa for having convened this high-level
meeting in continuation of the dialogue on
strengthening the partnership between the United
Nations and the African Union (AU). Let me affirm
Nigeria’s unalloyed support for that laudable initiative.
President Goodluck Jonathan, in his capacity as Chair
of the Economic Community of West African States
(ECOWAS), greatly appreciates the invitation extended
to him to participate in today’s debate.
I would also like to express my appreciation to
Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon for his leadership and
commitment to peace and security in Africa. His
comprehensive
report
(S/2011/805),
which
appropriately sets the tone for today’s debate, is
pertinent for its concrete proposals for improving the
partnership between the United Nations and the
African Union. We owe a great debt to the Kenyan
Foreign Minister, Chair of the Peace and Security
Council (PSC) of the African Union, and
Commissioner Lamamra for their illuminating
perspectives and important insights.
In Africa’s increasingly dynamic and complex
security environment, the need to strengthen the
partnership between the United Nations and the AU,
two organizations whose efforts have proven critical in
addressing peace and security challenges, cannot be
overemphasized. We therefore welcome the important
milestones that have been achieved in the relationship
between the two bodies over the past two decades. We
appreciate, in particular, the increasingly horizontal
and vertical cooperation between the two organizations
and their key organs and institutions.
The launching of the United Nations-AU Joint
Task Force on Peace and Security on 25 September
2010, the establishment of the United Nations Office to
the African Union in Addis Ababa and the regular
desk-to-desk meetings have all borne fruit and
significantly
enhanced
the
cooperation
and
coordination between the United Nations Secretariat
and the AU Commission. It is encouraging that the
meetings of the Task Force have provided valuable
opportunities for both organs to seek lasting solutions
to the conflict situations in Somalia, Côte d’Ivoire, the
Sudan and Libya.
For the partnership to be viable, sustainable and
strategic, it must be underpinned by clarity of

8

guidance. Indeed, we share the Secretary-General’s
view that the partnership should be based on
comparative advantages, the complementarity of
mandates and optimal use of resources and capacities.
It must be stated that cooperation between the
Security Council and the AU Peace and Security
Council is of singular importance to the growing
partnership between the United Nations as a whole and
the AU. As a current member of the AU Peace and
Security Council, having just concluded our tenure in
the Security Council, we are fully cognizant of the
central role that both organs play in the maintenance of
international peace and security. Regular consultative
meetings between them are, therefore, not only
desirable but imperative.
In July 2010, under Nigeria’s presidency of the
Security Council, both organs, meeting in New York,
agreed to a specific format and modalities for their
annual consultative meetings. That is a good step
forward. We expect qualitative progress on that
understanding and more vigorous discussion of
substantive, not just procedural, issues at future
consultative meetings.
Peacekeeping in Africa is an integral and vital
part of the maintenance of international peace and
security, for which the Council has primary
responsibility. Undoubtedly, it is the core area of
cooperation between the United Nations and the AU
and, conversely, the area bearing the greatest and most
significant challenge.
When the AU undertakes a United Nationsmandated peacekeeping operation, it faces multiple
financing, equipping and mission support challenges.
Those demands often outweigh its resources and
capacities to effectively respond. The lessons learned
from the workshop of November 2010 between the
United Nations and the AU reinforces our view that a
great deal still needs to be done on mission planning,
the development of doctrines and policies and the
operationalization of the African Standby Force.
On Somalia, while we welcome the United
Nations effort to augment its footprint with the
establishment of the United Nations office in
Mogadishu, we also believe that the full provision of
both light and heavy support packages for the African
Union Mission in Somalia will be a realistic way to
underpin recent security gains. Ultimately, a full and
robust United Nations peacekeeping operation will be

12-20579

S/PV.6702 (Resumption 1)

the panacea to the relentless insecurity, piracy and
humanitarian challenges in the country.

and electoral support missions and early warning
systems.

With respect to Darfur, the signing of the Doha
agreement provides the impetus for the Security
Council to give its consent to the convening of the
Darfur political process, as called for by the African
Union.

Even more significant, both organizations have
developed robust peacekeeping mechanisms. Such
seminal work at the regional and subregional levels
must be supported by decisions taken within the United
Nations. That is why Nigeria welcomes the effort by
both the United Nations and the AU secretariat to
develop common guidelines that are delineated in the
framework for mediation in Africa from lessons
learned in Kenya, Darfur, Somalia and Guinea-Bissau.

In their statements this morning, several
delegations aptly acknowledged that the success of any
peacekeeping operation is largely dependent on
adequate and timely financial and logistical resources.
Yet, financing AU peacekeeping operations remains a
daunting challenge. Indeed, as the Prodi panel report
notes, “financing options are not difficult to identify”
(S/2008/813, paragraph 7).
The problem persists because we, the
stakeholders, have failed to adopt the far-reaching and
creative alternatives required. Existing frameworks
have so far not been found conducive to building
sustainable strategies for peacekeeping partnership.
The Council must consider endorsing a financing
option that guarantees the predictability, sustainability
and flexibility of funding for AU peacekeeping
operations. In that regard, Nigeria welcomes the
establishment of the AU High-Level Panel on
Alternative Sources of Funding, set up in July 2011
under the chairmanship of former President Olusegun
Obasanjo of Nigeria, and hopes that the Panel would be
supported in achieving its critical mandate. Greater
progress is also required in the implementation of the
Ten-Year Capacity-Building Programme.
Looking ahead to a more strategic partnership,
both organizations must intensify their investment in
conflict prevention, mediation and peacebuilding.
Nigeria believes that preventive diplomacy strategies,
such as early warning systems and mediation, are
pivotal to the attainment of peace and security on the
continent. Indeed, for that reason we sought to address
the issue of conflict prevention during our presidency
of the Security Council in July 2010 (see S/PV.6360).
The AU has worked assiduously over the past
decade to build a viable framework for prevention and
response, not least through the Panel of the Wise and
the AU Peace and Security Council. ECOWAS has also
made great strides in that area, primarily through the
steady implementation of its conflict prevention
framework, including its council of elders, fact-finding

12-20579

We take this opportunity to call for increased
collaboration between the United Nations and the
African Union in the drafting of resolutions that would
not only address our inherent challenges, but also
propel us towards meeting our shared aspirations for a
more peaceful world. That is, indeed, an achievable
objective if it is underpinned by a closer partnership
between the United Nations and regional organizations,
particularly the African Union and ECOWAS.
The President: It is my understanding that the
Council is ready to proceed to the vote on the draft
resolution before it, contained in document S/2012/25.
I shall put the draft resolution to the vote now.
A vote was taken by show of hands.
In favour:
Azerbaijan, China, Colombia, France, Germany,
Guatemala, India, Morocco, Pakistan, Portugal,
Russian Federation, South Africa, Togo, United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland,
United States of America
The President: There were 15 votes in favour.
The draft resolution has been adopted unanimously as
resolution 2033 (2012).
I now give the floor to those members of the
Council who wish to make statements after the voting.
Mr. Parham (United Kingdom): The United
Kingdom has just voted in favour of resolution 2033
(2012) because we are convinced of the important role
that regional organizations can play in the pursuit of
peace and security in Africa and elsewhere. The United
Kingdom recognizes in particular the contribution that
the African Union is making to preventing and
managing conflict in Africa, and commends the
cooperation between the United Nations and the
African Union in that regard.

9

S/PV.6702 (Resumption 1)

However, we do not believe that that cooperation,
however welcome in principle, should come at the
expense either of the Security Council’s primacy in
respect of the maintenance of international peace and
security or of its practical capacity to respond speedily
and effectively to any threat to international peace and
security.
We regret that the hurried manner in which the
text of the resolution was negotiated has left in place
some potential ambiguities on those issues. I would
like therefore to clarify the United Kingdom’s position.
In particular, the text refers in paragraph 6 to
coordination between the Security Council and the
African Union Peace and Security Council. In those
instances where we consider coordination to be
appropriate, it can occur only in the context of the
primacy of the Security Council regarding the
maintenance of international peace and security.
Effective cooperation between the United Nations and
regional organizations calls for an emphasis on timely

10

communication and consultation and the avoidance of
prescribed procedures that are inflexible in the face of
varied and urgent challenges.
The United Kingdom supports efforts further to
enhance relations between the Council and regional
and subregional organizations in accordance with the
Charter of the United Nations.
The President: There are no further names
inscribed on the list of speakers. The Security Council
has thus concluded the present stage of its
consideration of the item on its agenda.
The meeting rose at 4.35 p.m.

12-20579
