ll8

General Aaaembly-Twenty-aeventh Seaaion

substantial progress is achieved on fundamental issues
which are as yet unresolved,
Expressing its appreciation to the lnternational Committee of the Red Cross for undertaking a series of
consultations to ensure the complete preparation for
the conference,
1. Urges aU Governments and invites the lnternational Committee of the Red Cross to continue to
seek through consultations to achieve a rapprochement
in the positions of Governments to ensure that the
diplomatic conference envisaged will adopt rules which
wm mark substantial progress on fundamental legal
issues connected with modern armed conflicts and
which will contribute significantly to the alleviation of
the suffering brought about by such conflicts;
2. Calls upon all parties to armed conflicts to
observe the intemational humanitarian rules which are
applicable, in particular the Hague Conventions of
1899 and 1907,17 the Geneva Protocol of 1925 18 and
the Geneva Conventions of 1949, and, to this end, to
provide instruction concerning these rules to itheir armed
forces and information concerning the same rules to
the civilian population;
3. Requests the Secretary-General to encourage
the study and teaching of principles of respect for
international humanitarian rules applicable in armed
confliots;
4. Requests the Secretary-General to report to the
General Assembly at its twenty-eighth session on
relevant developments concerning human rights in armed
conflicts and to prepare, as soon as possible, a survey
of existing rules of international law concerning the
prohibition or restriction of use of specific weapons;
5. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of
its twenty-eighth session the item entitled "Human
rights in armed conflicts: respect for human rights in
armed confliots".
2114th plenary meeting
18 December 1972
3033 (XXVII). Report of the Committee on
Relations with the Host Country

The General Assembly,
Having considered the report of the Committee on
Relations with the Host Country, 19
Drawing attention to its resolutions 2747 (XXV) of
17 December 1970 and 2819 (XXVI) of 15 December 1971, in which it urged the Government of the
host country to make certain that the measures taken
to ensure the protection and security of permanent
missions to the United Nations and their personnel
were adequate to enable those missions to perform
properly the functions entrusted to them by their Governments,
Recalling the responsibilities of the Govemment of
the host country with respect to the United Nations
and the missions accredited to it, their personnel and
their correspondence under the Agreement between
the United Nations and the United States of America
17 Carnegie Endowment for International Peace, The Hague
Conventions and Dec/arations o/ 1899 and 1907 (New York,
Oxford University Press, 1915).
18 League of Nations, Treaty Series, vol. XCIV, No. 2138,
p. 65.
19 Official Records of the General Assembly, Twenty-seventh
Session, Supp/ement No. 26 (A/8726).

regarding the Headquarters of the United Nations, 20
the Convention on the Privileges and lmmunities of the
United Nations 21 and general international law,
Recalling the duty of missions accredited to the
United Nations to respect the laws and regulations of
the host country,
Considering that the problems related to the privileges and immunities of the United Nations and to the
status of the missions accredited to it are of mutual
concern to Member States, including the host country,
as well as to the Secretary-General,
Noting with satisfaction the ratification by the host
country of the Vienna Convention on Diplomatic Relations of 1961/2
Taking note of the report of the Committee on Relations with the Host Country and of the recommendations contained therein,
1. Condemns ali acts of violence, terrorist attacks
and harassment directed against the premises of missions accredited to the United Nations or against their
personnel as fundamentally incompatible with the status
of such missions and personnel under international
law and calls upon the host country to take ali appropriate preventive measures;
2. W elcomes the adoption, on 24 October 1972, of
the Act for the Protection of Foreign Officials and
Official Guests of the United States 2ª and hopes that
this Act will form a basis for the application of effective
measures against acts of violence, terrorist attacks and
harassment directed at the premises of missions accredited to the United Nations or their personnel,
including the application of effective measures against
the organization of demonstrations and picketing where
there is reason to believe that they may be accompanied by acts of violence or may prevent the conduct
of the normal business of missions accredited to the
United Nations;
3. Considers it necessary that active measures
should be taken on the part of the authorities of the
host country, the United Nations Secretariat and ali
others concerned to enhance the relations between the
diplomatic community and the local community, in
order to ensure the existence of conditions conducive to
the effective functioning of the United Nations and the
missions accredited to it;
4. Decides that the Committee on Relations with
the Host Country should continue its work in 1973 in
conformity with General Assembly resolution 2819
(XXVI) with the purpose of examining ali matters
falling within its terms of reference;
5. Requests the Secretary-General to furnish ali
appropriate assistance to the Committee on Relations
with the Host Country and to bring to its attention
issues of mutual concern relating to the implementation
of the Agreement between the United Nations and the
United States of America regarding the Headquarters
of the United Nations and the Convention on the Privileges and Immunities of the United Nations;
6. Requests the Committee on Relations with the
Host Country to submit to the General Assembly at
its twenty-eighth session a report on the progress of
its work and to make, if it deems necessary, appropriate
recommendations;
20 See resolution 169 (11).
21 See resolution 22 A (1).
22 United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 500, No. 7310, p. 95.
2SSee A/8871/Rev.l.

ll9

Resolutions adopte,! on thc reports of the Sixth Cornmittee

7. Decides to include in thc provisional agenda of
its twenty-eighth session the item entitlcd "Report of
the Committee on Relations with the Host Country".
2114th plenary meeting
18 December 1972
3034 (XXVII). Measures to prevent international
terrorism which endangers or takes innocent
human lives or jeopardizes fundamental
freedoms, and study of the underlying causes of those forros of terrorism and acts of
violence which lie in misery, frustration,
grievance and despair and which cause sorne
people to sacrifice human lives, including
their own, in an attempt to effect radical
ch.anges

The General Assembly,
Deeply perturbed over acts of international terrorism which are occurring with increasing frequency and
which take a toll of innocent human lives,
Recognizing the importance of international cooperation in devising measures effectively to prevent
their occurrence and of studying their underlying causes
with a view to finding just and peaceful solutions as
quickly as possible,
Recalling the Declaration on Principies of International Law concerning Friendly Relations and Cooperation among States in accordance with the Charter
of the United Nations, 24
1. Expresses deep concern over increasing acts of
violence which endanger or take innocent human lives
or jeopardize fundamental freedoms;
2. Urges States to devote their immediate attention
to finding just and peaceful solutions to the underlying
causes which give rise to such acts of violence;
3. Reaffirms the inalienable right to self-determination and independence of all peoples under colonial
and racist régiroes and other forms of alien domination
and upholds the legitimacy of their struggle, in particular the struggle of national liberation movements, in
accordance with the purposes and principies of the
Charter and the relevant resolutions of the organs of
the United Nations;
4. Condemns the continuation of repressive and
terrorist acts by colonial, racist and alíen régimes in
denying peoples their legitimate right to selfdetermination and independence and other human
rights and fundamental freedoms;
24 See resolution 2625

(XXV), annex.

5. Invites States to become parties to the existing
international conventions which relate to various aspects
of thc problem of international terrorism;
6. Invites States to take all appropriate measures at
the national level with a view to the speedy and final
elimination of the problem, bearing in mind the provisions of paragraph 3 above;
7. Invites States to consider the subject-matter
urgently and submit observations to the SecretaryGeneral by 1O April 1973, including concrete proposals
for finding an effective solution to the problem;
8. Requests the Secretary-General to transmit an
analytical study of the observations of States submitted
under paragraph 7 above to the ad hoc committee to
be established under paragraph 9;
9. Decides to establish an Ad Hoc Committee on
International Terrorism consisting of thirty-five
members to be appointed by the President of the General Assembly bearing in mind the principie of equitable
geographical representation;
10. Requests the Ad Hoc Committee to consider
the observations of States under paragraph 7 above and
submit its report with recommendations for possible
co-operation for the speedy elimination of the problem,
bearing in mind the provisions of paragraph 3, to the
General Assembly at its twenty-eighth session;
11. Requests the Secretary-General to provide the
Ad Hoc Committee with the nccessary facilities and
serviccs;
l 2. Decides to include the itero in the provisional
agenda of its twenty-eighth session.
2114th plenary meeting
18 December 1972

•

•

•

The President of the General Assemb/y subsequently informed the Secretary-Genera/2 5 that, 'in pursuance of paragraph 9 of the above resolution, he had appointed the members
of the Ad Hoc Committee on lnternational Terrorism.
As a result, the Ad Hoc Committee will be composed of the
following Member States: ALGERfA, AUSTRIA, BARBADOS,
CANADA,
CONGO,
CZECHOSLOVAKIA,
DEMOCRATIC YEMEN,
FRANCE, ÜREECE, GUINEA, HAITI, HUNGARY, INDIA, IRAN, ITALY,
JAPAN, MAURITANIA, NICARAGUA, NIGERIA, PANAMA, SWBDEN,
SYRIAN ARAB REPUBLIC, TuNISIA, TuRKEY, UXRAINIAN SoVIET
SOCIALIST REPUBLIC, UNION OF SOVIET SOCIALIST R1!PUBLICS,
UNITED KINGDOM OF ÜREAT BRITAIN AND NORTHERN IRELAND,
UNITED REPUBLIC OF TANZANIA, UNITBD STATES OF AMEIUCA,
URUGUAY, VENEZUELA, YEMEN,
YUGOSLAVIA, ZAIRE and
ZAMBIA.
25 A/8993.

Other decisions
Review of the role of the lnternational Court of Justice
(Item 90)

A t its 21 14th plenary meeting, on 18 December 1972, the General Assembly, on the recommendation of the Sixth Committee, 26 decided to include in the
provisional agenda of its twcnty-eighth session the item entitled "Review of the
role of the International Court of Justice".
26 Official Records o/ the General Assembly, Twenty-seventh Session, Annexes, agenda
itero 90, document A/8967, para. 14.
