UNITEDNATIONS

SECURITY COUNCIL

2636”

MEETING:

12 DECEMB.ER

1985

NEW YORK

CONTENTS
Page

Provisional agenda (S/Agendaf2636)

....... ... ... ..... ... ..... ... ... .... .

1

Adoption of the agenda . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . ..*.......................e........

1

Letter dated 6 December 1985 from the ChargQl’affalks
a.i. of the Permanent
Mission of Nicara a to the United Nations addressed to the President of the
Security Council r S/17671) . . . . . . . . . ..*..............................

1

SjPV.2636

__.

NOTE
Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined
with figures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United Nations
document.
Documents of the Security Council (symbol S/. . .) are normally published in
quarterly Suppkments of the Ojjickrl Record3 of the Securiry Ckxurcil. The date of the
document indicates the supplement in which it appears or in which information about
it is given.
The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a system.
adopted jn 1964, are published in yearly volumes of Re.ro&&ion.r and Decisbns of the
Senuiry CIxuzcil. The new system, which has been applied retroactively to resolutions
adopted before 1 January 1965, became fully operative on that date.

1
..,

2636th MEETING
Held in New York on Thursday, 12 December 1985, at 3.30 p.m.
President: Mr. L&r&e

cussionof the item on the Council’s agenda. In conformity
with the usual practice, I propose, with the consent of the
Council, to invite him to participate in the debate, without
the right to vote, in accordance with the relevant provisions of the Charter and rule 37 of the provisional rules of
procedure.

BASSOLE (Burkina Faso).

Present: The representatives of the following States:
Australia, Burkina Faso,China, Denmark, Egypt, France,
India, Madagascar,Peru, Thailand, Trinidad and Tobago,
Ukrainian Soviet Socialist Republic, Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland, United Statesof America.
Provisional

At the invitation
of the Presi&nt,
(Zimbabwe) took thepkzce reservedforhim
Council Chamber.

agenda (SMgendaI2636)

MI: Muienge
at the side of the

3. The PRESIDENT (interpretation from French): The

1. Adoption of the agenda.

Security council will now resume consideration of the
item on its agenda.

2. Letter dated 6 December 1985 from the Charge
d’affaires a.i. of the Permanent Mission of Nicaragua
to the United Nations addressed to the President of
the Security Council (S/17671).

4. Mr. RABETAFlKA (Madagascar) (interpretation
from French): You already know, Sir, my deep feelings of

friendship and fraternity for you, and I might have refrained from congratulating you on your assumption of
the presidency of the Council for this month if I were not
persuaded that your outstanding qualities of dedication,
wisdom, perseverance and objectivity are the very qualities that the Council may well need for the guidance of its
work this month. We wish you successand take the opportunity to pay a tribute to the im rtant contribution that
both you personally and your dep”egation have made to the
Council during the period in which you have represented
Africa and your country, Burkina Faso, whose special
relationship with the Democratic Republic of Madagascar
I am pleased to emphasize.

The meeting was called to or&r at 4p.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.

Letter dated 6 December 1985 from the Charge d’affaires
a.i. of the Permanent Mission of Nicaragua to the
United Nations addressedto the President of the Security Council (S/17671)

1. The PRESIDENT (inteqwation from Fznch): In
accordance with decisions taken at earlier meetings
[2633rd and 2634th meetings],I invite the representative
of Nicaragua to take a place at the Council table. I invite
the representatives of Costa Rica, Cuba, Honduras, the
Ishnnic Republic of Iran, the Libyan Arab Jamahiriya,
Mexico, the Syrian Arab Republic and Viet Nam to take
the places reserved for them at the side of the Council
Chamber.

5. I alsowish to associatemy delegation with the thanks
that you have expressed,on behalf of the Council, to Mr.
Richard Woolcott, representative of Australia, our neighbour from acrossthe seas,for the remarkable way in which
he conducted our proceedings last month. We particularly
appreciated his vigilance, his persistenceand his spirit of
initiative whenever the issuewas to restore to the Council
its roper role in the maintenance of international peace
anB security, and I am sure that the Foreign Minister of
the Democratic Republic of Madagascar will have the
opportunity to discussthis with the authorities concerned
during his present official visit to Australia.

At the invitation of the P&dent,
MI: Chamono Mora
(Nicaragua) took a place at the Council table; ME Bermcal
Soto (Costa Rica), ME Ommas Oliva (Cuba), Mr Henwa
Cdceres (Honduras), M,: Rajaie-Khorassani (Islamic Republic of Iran), Mr Auamuk (Libyan Amb Jamahiriya), ME
Maya Palencia (M&o),
MI El-Fattal (Syrian Arab &public) and Mx Bui Xuan Nhat (Kit Nam) took the places
reserved for them at the side of the Cbuncil Chamber.

6. When we consider the situation in Central America
and the bilateral disputes whose persistence makes the
search for a comprehensive solution even more diicuh,
we alwaysfind ourselves referring to the Contadora spirit,
not to escaperesponstbility,but becausethe purposes and
principles set out in the Contadora Act on Peace and
Cooperation in Central America are basically the same
as those of the Charter of the United Nations. Without
losing sight of the fact that we are seeking a comprehen-

2. The PRESIDENT

(interpteation from French): I
should lie to inform members of the Council that I have
received a letter from the representative of Zimbabwe in
which he requests to be invited to participate in the dis-

1

sive agreement, we would point out that in the political
and security matters, which fall within the Council’s competence, implementmg the Contadora Act should make it
possible to establish harmonious relations between the
countries of the region, guaranteed, and even strengthened, by a system of regional security.

dice and bias have not been removed; and dialogue is
drowning in r ecrimination and pre-conditions which are
known beforehand to be unacceptable. In point of fact, we
have allowed ourselves to be enclosed within a special
kind of logic according to which bilateral disputes should
be settled within the framework of any future Contadora
agreement while the very deepening of these disputes
makes the conclusion of an agreement ever more unlikely,
particularly in a context of increasingly tense ideological
confrontation.

7. There is nothing original in that analysis, but it enabled the Council to adopt unanimously resolutions 530
(1983) and 562 (1985). The Council’s position is therefore
quite clear with respect to the right of Nicaragua and all
the other countries of the region to live in peace and
security, free from all outside interference; their right
freely to determine their own form of government and to
choose their own economic, political and social systems,
without foreign interference or constraints or restrictions
of any kind; the duty of the States concerned, inside and
outside the region, to resolve their differences by means
of frank and constructive dialogue; non-recourse to economic, political or any other measures to force another
State to accept any limitations on the exercise of its sovereign rights, and the obligation of all States to refrain in
their dealings with the States of the region from taking,
supporting or encouraging political, economic or military
measures of any kind likely to be prejudicial to the Contadora Group’s peace objectives.

11. Far be it from us to discourage or disavow the Contadora Group. But the Council must bear in mind its
responsibilities under Chapter VI of the Charter. It is my
impression that Nicaragua, in requesting an urgent convening of the Council, was invoking Article 35 of the
Charter. If this impression is correct, the Council can act
under Article 34, on the understanding that my delegation
is interpreting paragraph 2 of Article 36, which lays down
that “The Security Council should take into consideration
any procedures for the settlement of the dispute which
have already been adopted by the parties”, as susceptible
to application to procedures which might be advocated by
the Contadora Group. Article 38 gives the Council another means of intervention. My delegation feels that
recourse to the various provisions of Chapter VI of the
Charter is not incompatible with Chapter VII& which
relates to regional arrangements, particularly if we refer
to paragraph 4 of Article 52, which reads: ‘This Article in
no way impairs the application of Articles 34 and 35.”

8. In confirmation of what I have just said, I wish to
emphasize the following five elements among the political
and security objectives of the Contadora Act: first, control
and reduction of armaments and troop numbers; secondly, elimination of intimidation; thirdly, elimination of
all forms of foreign military presence; fourthly, an end to
all support for irregular forces; and fifthly, elimination of
terrorism, subversion and sabotage.

12. My delegation realizes, however, that texts, whatever
authority they may possess, will have no effect if the
parties to whom they are addressed do not agree to show
a minimum of political will, which presupposes the acceptance of a policy that would lead to normalization. We may
have different views as to procedure, but the important
thing is our wish to give the Council a leading role, and
not just a supporting role, in promoting a political and
negotiated solution in Central America. Our confidence
in the Contadora Group is intact, because its initiative has
served and continues to serve as a test of the good faith of
the various parties and of their willingness to honour their
obligations under the Charter and to work towards the
establishment in the region of a system of political relations based on mutual respect and the sovereign equality
of States. But if the deadlock is not broken, if there is an
increase in armed clashes and the situation in Central
America continues to deteriorate, the Council will have
to take all the necessary steps to shoulder its responsibilities.

9. Agreements cannot be arrived at by accident, and
since the United Nations-+md
the Security Council in
particular-has
undertaken to support the Contadora
Group, it is our duty individually and collectively to ensure
that the rights of States in the region are respected, that
the obligations of States inside and outside the region are
scrupulously honoured and that the objectives of the Contadora Act are achieved. This is not an easy task, because
we must be able to bank on the sincere co-operation of
interested States, and until that is forthcoming we shall
unfortunately have to resign ourselves to a recrudescence
and an escalation of tension the effects of which are only
too foreseeable, that is to say, generalized insecurity and
the failure of the Contadora efforts with all that that
entails for international peace and security.
10. We might be charged with unnecessary pessimism;
But I have read once again the statement made by my
delegation in the Council on 31 March 1982 [2343rd meet&], shortly after the former President of Mexico, Mr. Jose
L6pez Portillo, had launched his initiative, and I noted
with regret that, in spite of the continuing negotiations, in
spite of international support for the Contadora Group,
in spite of the definite results achieved by the Groupmost recently in Cartagena on 13 September last-in spite
of the setting up of the Lima Support Group, the situation
in the region, in particular in Nicaragua, remains unchanged. Charges and countercharges continue; preju-

13. It is in that spirit that we have analysed the information the Acting Minister for External Relations of Nicaragua, Mr. Victor Hugo Tinoco, provided us with last
Tuesday afternoon [2633rd meering], and we should like to
take thrs opportunity to repeat to the delegation of Nicaragua our full and wholehearted solidarity with the Nicaraguan cause in international
bodies and within the
Movement of Non-Aligned Countries.
14. The PRESIDENT
(inferprerationfrom French): The
next speaker is the representative of Honduras. I invite
2

him to take a place at the Council table and to make his
statement.

issues, that would truly promote a climate of dCtente in
Central America as a whole.

15. Mr. HERRERA
CACEW
(Honduras) (inrerprerarkmfiom Spanish): First of aII, I wish to take this opportunity to congratulate the representative of Australia, who
presided over the work of the Council very successfully,
objectively and wisely in the course of the previous month
and to extend to you, Sir, our appreciation of your diplomatic ski& which, we hope, will lead to a beneficial development in the work of the Council this month. We also
wish to thank the Security Council for its decision to allow
us to take part in the discussion of the question on its
agenda, given that statements and concepts of the Acting
Minister for External Relations of Nicaragua in his intervention the day before yesterday have had a particular
impact on the interests of Honduras as a State Member
of the Organization.

21. But the Sandinist Government has shown, by deeds,
its opposition to such an agreement, because it is not
interested in an early end to the conflict in Central America. The Sandinists seem to believe that their ideological
and party interests are more important than the needs of
the other peoples of Central America. That is why they
have blocked the final, fundamental part of the peace
negotiations. That is why they are trymg to involve this
Organ&&on
in matters that have been recognized as
bemg within regional, Latin American jurisdiction. That
is also why they have made the Contadora Group suspend
the negotiating process for five months. In other words, it
appears that the Government of Nicaragua has been trying for almost half a yearto bury Contadora alive, and the
other Central Americans can only hope that there is
enough oxygen left so that they can disinter it before it is
too late.

16. Prior to these meetings, the Security Council had the
sagacity, through you, Mr. President, to convene the countries of the subregion in order to hear information on the
situation in Central America and the peace negotiating
process. As you have so well expressed it in mentioning
the reasons for convening us, the Council is aware of the
fact that in this case we are dealing with an internal
Nicaraguan problem which; however, cannot be divorced
from the regional context approach.

22. That action by the Nicaraguan Government goes
hand in hand with the link it is trying to establish between
a comprehensive regional solution in Central America
and a bilateral agreement between Nicaragua and the
United States.
23. Let us be well aware that, while in other regions
there is emphasis on and condemnation of actions aimed
at thwarting the conclusion of negotiated agreements in
southern Africa, Nicaragua is frustrating those efforts to
achieve understanding in Central America; while in regard to Africa there is condemnation of the liiage of the
solution to African problems with the presence of foreign
military forces, Nicaragua is asking for support for its
thesis that the conflict in Central America should be
linked with the support given by a country from outside
the region to the Nicaraguan opposition. It is obviousand it wiII be so construed-that
when the same universal
principles are at stake, a difference in treatment cannot
be accepted.

17. Indeed, we concur in that assessment by the Security
Council. That is also why the Council, in its formal meetings, must hear first al) the parties directly concerned in a
regional conflict, in order not to be used for the exclusive
purposes of the policy of a given Government, and also in
order to take its decisions on the basis of the greatest
awareness of the cause and the object&e.
.I
18. We all seem to agree that the time has come to stop
using euphemisms. That is why we must clearly identify,
once and for all, the purposes of the Sandiist Govemment in halting the Contadora negotiating process and
continuing to disregard the internal Central American
causes of the conflict, trying to make them out to be
foreign factors.
19. The most recent examples of regress in the Contadora negotiating process are the R al draft of the Contadora Act on Peace and Co-operation
in Central
America of September 1985 and the results of the last
meeting of plenipotentiaries, held at Panama City from 19
to 21 November.

24. Honduras is ready to conclude negotiations onpending questions, but it wiII never be prepared to subordinate
a regional agreement in Central America to a bilateral
agreement which Nicaragua, basing itself on its military
supremacy in Central America, is trying to conclude with
the United States. Honduras leaves it to the concerned
parties to make the sovereign decision about when circumstances will make possible the conclusion of such
bilateral agreements.

20. Thus, we have a specific definition of the two issues
on the settlement of which the achievement of a peaceful,
comprehensive and regional solution to the Central
American problem depends. These issues are, on the one
hand, the arms race in Nicaragua, the excessive number
of weapons in Nicaragua’s arsenal and the excessive number of its armed forces and, on the other hand, the fiequent deterrent international military manoeuvres which
Honduras has had to undertake as a counterineasure.
Since commitments already exist on the political or democratic subjects and on national reconciliation in each
country, if agreement were to be reached on these two last

25. It is not possible, however, to disregard the state- ’
ment made on Tuesday by the Nicaraguan representative
that the United States Government also opposes an
agreement among the CentraI Americans. For the sole
purpose of bringing out the truth, as confirmed in documents, we have once again looked at the verbatim record
of the General Assembly meeting of 22 November 1985
on the situation in Central America, when the representative of the United States said, uMy Government has
made clear repeatedly, in pubIic and in private, that we
will abide by any agreement the Central Americans
reach”.l Since that is the United States position, and if the
3

other countries with ideological interests and links with
Nicaragua show the sametendency, this argument cannot
be used .to justify opposition to the idea that Central
America alone should make its own decisions.

“The Statesmembers of the European Community,
Spain and Portugal reiterate their willingness to sup
port, to the extent that they are able and if sorequested,
the action of the States with responstbitity for implementing the terms of the Contadora Act and, in
articular, to contriiute to the implementing and folPow-up mechanisms.”

26. The Nicaraguan Government spoke, through the
voice of its Acting Minister for External Relations, about
the use of Honduran territory for activities by Nicaraguan
insurgents. Apart from the fact that the civil war in Nicaragua is being fought on its own territory, one may well
ask whether it is not perhaps a contradiction .to hold
Honduras responsible for an alleged lack of control over
regions that are practically inaccessibleto the Honduran
army when Nicaragua, for its part, with an army and
armaments that are more than five times greater than
those of Honduras, is unable to control within its own
territory either the alleged raids from Honduras or the
actual raids that are prepared and carried out in Nicaragua itself.

Thus, if mechanismshave been envisaged and if there are
responsrble,’impartial States willing to’ articipate, why
does Nicaragua insist on frustrating the & al negotiation
of that Act? XI those reasonsIbave already mentioned,
we must add that the Nicaraguan Government does not
acceptthe mechanismsof verification and control because
they would not merely hear Nicaragua’s claims and ahegations against neighbouring States but would have to
hear, on an equal footing, the claims or allegations any
other Central American Statemight bring against Nicaragua. Furthermore, the Nicaraguan Government attempts
to disregard commitments on political matters, as contamed in the Act, and consequently it does not want any
implementation or follow-up of such commitments since
that would also entail an ad hoc committee for the evaluation and follow-up of commitments in the areas of national reconciliation, human rights and electoral
processes.

27. These allegations against my country show the absolute absurdity of implying that Honduras is also responsible for the existenceof the Marxist-Leninist euerrillas in
El Salvador, because they, too, are mobihzG along our
borders and receive through Honduran territory the
weaponsthat are sentthem clandestinelyby the Sandinist
Government.

32. Now, we want to believe that there is no veiled threat
in what the Nicaragauan representative stated in the
Council the day before yesterday with regard to that
@ime’s greater support for subversion in neighbouring
countries, and particularly with regard to Honduras, when
hespoke of “any sort of insurgencysituation that may arise
inside Honduras” [see2633rd meeting para 36J.

28. It is said, with all the “force and responsibility”
inherent in what the Acting Minister of Nicaragua himself
has described as “confidential sources,” that the insurgents are being trained in Honduras in the handling of
SAM-7 rockets. What a categorical manner, and what
objective sourceshave been produced to substantiatethat
charge?

We do not fear such threats becausewe are experiencing a processof true democracy in Honduras, and that
is and will be our best bulwark against subversion. We do
wish to recall, however, that the Charter of the United
Nations prohibits not only the use of force but also the
threat of use of force, and that the statement made the day
before yesterday, as well as other ‘and more direct statements made on previous occasionsby the representative
of the Nicaraguan Government, show the extent of its
respectfor international law and for the norms of peaceful
coexistence.Such threats are a flagrant violation of the
provisions of the Charter, the Declaration on Principles
of International Law concerning Friendly Relations and
Co-o rationamong Statesin accordancewith the Charter op”the United Nations, and otherrelevant instruments.
33.

29. But what has not been said, and what is contained
not only in excerptsfrom newspapers but also in official
documents, is that Honduras has
lled leaders of the
Miskito uprising becauseof theirwar
YE. estatementsmade
from our territory, and that on 17 October of this year an
aircraft carrying 40 tons of humanitarian aid to the Nica-.
raguan insurgents was stopped by our authorities and
returned to its country of origin with a clear statement
with regard to the respect the rule of law receives in
Honduras.
30. The alleged truth of the Nicaraguan allegations that
have been made and may be made in the future deserves
examination, and for that purpose the final version of the
Contadora Act provides, among its mechanismsfor execution and follow-up, for a Verification and Control Commission for Security Matters, one of whose functions is to
undertake such examination.

34. In spite of the unbelievable contradictions of the
attitudes to which we have referred, we do not quite
understand why the Nicaraguan Government does not
endeavour to undertake a more seriousanalysisfor peace,
one that is lessideologically committed to expansionism.

31. In that connection the joint political communiqu6 on
political dialogue and economicco-operation betweenthe
Statesmembers of the European Community, Spain and
Portugal and the States of Central America and of the
Contadora Group [sII7681, anner II], issued at the ministerial conference held in Luxembourg on 11 and 12
November, stated:
I
-a

35. All the facts mentioned are obvious and easilyverifiable. Thus, it would be very difficult to explain a failure
by the members of the Council, and eventually the General Assembly,to consider them.
36. We believe that the General Assembly,aswell asthis
body that bears primary responsibility for the mainte4

.

Council’s deliberations to the best possibleconclusion. In
this regard my delegation would like to pay a tribute to the
excellent relations that bind our two peoples and our two
countries. I also wish to expressour thanks to your predecessor, the President of the Security Council for last
month, on the exem lary manner in which he conducted
the businessof the & until.

nance of international peace,and security, cannot overlook the implications of decisionstaken here on the precarious situation in Central America or ignore the waysin
which those decisions may contribute to the regional negotiating processof Comadora, which has been ==lY
supported by the heads of State or Government ?o nearly
all Statesand which all Statesmembers of the Organization of American States(OAS), with the sole exception of
Nicaragua, have supported and encouraged in a virtuahy
unanimous vote in order to promote that processunconditionally and without restrictions. Nor can we fail to
consider the harm we would be doing the morale of the
Central American subregion if we were to replace the
expected consideration of the question in a regional context with an approach favouring only one of the parties to
the conflict.

43. We all listened very attentively to the statement
made by the Acting Minister for External Relations of
Nicaragua to the Council the day before yesterday[2633rd
meetig], in which he referred to the escalation by the
mercenary bands of their aggressiveacts against Nicaraguawith the support of the United StatesAdministration.
That escalation was manifested in the downing of a Nicaraguan air force helicopter, an incident that took the lives
of many innocent people who fen victims to an infamous
act of terrorism.

37. But, more than addressing each representative of
each State in particular, asMembers of this Organization
we wish to recall the collective responsibility we bear when
we act as a United Nations body and recall that this
institution is a body in which ideologies can confront each
other within the broad framework of our fundamental
unity for peace. Therefore, it is not to be expected that
bodies merely reflect the ideological confrontation among
their members and thus lose sight of the broader framework of our fundamental unity for peace, in this case
peace in Central America.

44. The fact that those mercenary bands were provided
with such sophisticated weapons constitutes a threat to
peace and securityin theCentral American region and an
act of aggression against the sovereignty of a Member
State of the United Nations. Undoubtedly it also leaves
civilian aircraft in the region open to the danger of bein&
easytargets for aggressiveacts by those terrorist bands.
Furthermore it constitutes a grave precedent which, if
condoned by the world, would be repeated in many regions, in particular against the small nations that refuse
imperialist hegemony and domination.

38. We could probably speak today of a Central American formula by analogy with the one that was once known
as the Peking formula, which stated the role expected of
organs when the late Secretary-General of the United
Nations, Dag Hammars ‘aid, explained that in fuhilhng
.his mission to try to rii! uce international tension anywhere in the world the Secretary-General does not work
for any nation, nor even for a majority of nations, as
expressedin a vote of the General Assembly,but rather
in accordancewith his constitutional responsibility in relation to the general purposes established in the Charter.

45. It is to be regretted that that terrorist act of aggression supported by the imperialist Powers comesat a time
when the General Assembly has at its current session
condemned all forms of terrorism, whatever the origin. It
also comes at a time when the General Assembly is considering the situation in Central America, as part of an
attempt by the international community to support the
efforts made by the Contadora Group and the other
countries concerned to reach just and peacefully negotiated ,solutions of the problems of the region. That act of
aggression, supported by foreign Powers, comes as yet
another proof of the lack of desire on the part of those’
Powersto reach ajust and negotiated peaceful solution of
the problems of the region. It constitutesanother obstacle
to the efforts made by the Contadora Group and the
international community to contribute to the just solution
of the problems of Central America.

39. Mr. Hammarskjiild also said that the United Nations
is “an organization created not to lead us to heaven but
rather to save us from hell”. Let us trust that we will not
be induced to move in the opposite direction.
40. Honduras trusts that wisdom and common sensewill
prevail and that the present Nicaraguan Government will
reconsider and finally share the legitimate expectation of
the majority of Central Americans that they will decide
for themselves the best paths to peace and co-o~ration
for the greater nation, the Central American nation.
41. The PRESIDENT (infep~~a?ionj%m Mnch): The
next speaker is the representative of the Libyan Arab
Jamahiriya. I invite him to take a place at the Council table
and to make his statement.

46. We have all heard the Acting Foreign Minister of
Nicaragua speakingof his country’s responseto the efforts
of the Contadora Group to reach a just, negotiated solution for the problems of Central America and his country’s
readinessto resume dialogue with the United StatesAdministration, which unilaterally suspended it. We believe
Nicaragua is sincere in its efforts to solve the problems of
the region. It has put forward many a proof and many an
initiative in this regard; we need not list them.

42. Mr. AZZAROUIQLiiyan
Arab Jamahiriya) (interpretation from Arabic): It gives me pleasure on behalf of
my delegation to convey to you, Sir, our congratulations
on your assumption of the presidency of the Council for
this month. We are confident that your wisdom and wellknown personal qualities will ensure that you will lead the

47. The flagrant intervention by the United StatesAdministration in Central America,‘ which has been manifested in the incidents to which Nicaragua has been
subjected sincethe eruption of the war of the mercenaries
against the revolution in 1981, is deplorable and is condemned by all international laws and norms. It falls within
5

.

the category of attempts to impose hegemony and domination on small nations struggling for their freedom and
dignity against the colonialist Powers. Those Powers persist in their lack of respect for the right of those peoples
to choose their own political, social and economic systems.

United States would bankroll
parts of the third world.“*

Israeli activities in other

53. I believe these quotations are sufficient to clarify
some of the aspects of the foreign involvement aimed at
the elimination of the revolutionary system of Nicaragua
and the destabilization
of Central America and Latin
America. It is a classic example of the various forms of
interference and aggression against peoples and r@imes
struggling against racist and colonialist domination in all
parts of the world.

48. The portrayal of the mercenary bands fight.mg
against the legitimate revolution in Nicaragua as fighters
for democracy is undoubtedly an attempt to find pretexts
for the provision of support and assistance to those bands.
Such support violates the principles and purposes of the
Charter of the United Nations. It is also yet another
attempt to undermine the provisions of international law,
and as such it must be vigorously condemned. The necessity of respect for the sovereignty of States and the right
and freedom of peoples to choose their own &gimes, as
well as for their right to self-determination,
must be emphasized.

54. The PRESIDENT

(inteqvvfurionjbm French): The

next speaker on my list is the representative of Costa Rica.
I invite him to take a place at the Council table and to
make his statement.

55. Mr. BERROCAL
SOT0 (Costa Rica) (infeqxetationfrom Spanish):The delegation of Costa Rica congratulates you, Sir, on your assumption of the presidency of
the Security Council for the month of December. I would
like to thank you publicly for having been so kind as to
invite me to your office so that you could hear ‘the views
of Costa Rica on the critical situation in Central America
and on the best way of arriving at a single consensus
solution in the General Assembly. As you know, we came
to your office with words of peace and openness to dialogue. I would also like to express my delegation’s appreciation to last month’s President, the representative of
Australia, for his valuable contribution to the work of the
Security Council in November.

49. What is referred to as the Cuban presence in Nicaragua and the use of it as a pretext to justify intervention
in the affairs of Central America and against Nicaragua
in particular is a legitimate presence in accordance with
an agreement between the two parties concerned, which
are both sovereign States. It amounts to no more than
using the help of some experts and advisers, as is the
sovereign right of any State. It is no surprise to us that the
very same pretext is used by the racist r6gime of South
Africa to escalate its acts of aggression against Angola.
50. We believe that the foreign involvement and interference, in total. disregard of the provisions of intemational law and the principles of the Charter, in an attempt
to undermine the revolutionary system in Nicaragua is
quite clear and does not have to be proved.

56.. I should like first of all to reaffirm before the Council
the attitude that we manifested in our working meeting
with the President. For historical reasons Costa Rica, in
the context of the crisis in Central America, is a factor for
peace. Our position could not be otherwise as a country
that has made dialogue and tolerance the basicand essential principle of its national conduct and in its relations
with other peoples and nations of the world.

51. Suffice it, in this regard, to refer to a study in the
publication Z’?ze
Link in November 1985 under the headmg “U.S.-Israeli-Central
American Connection”, written
by Benjamin Beit-Hallahmi,
a professor of psychology at
Haifa University, in occupied Palestine. He has written a
book on Israel’s relations with States of the third world, in
which he pointed out Israel’s involvement and lnterference as an agent of the United States in the affairs of
Central America by providing military assistance, funds
and training for the contra bands. fighting against the
Sandinist revolution in Nicaragua.

57. I have been compelled to appear before the Security
Council because of a false assertion by the Acting Minister
for External Relations of Nicaragua. The delegation of
Costa Rica set forth with clarity its views on the critical
situation in Central America in the statement we made in
the General Assembly on 25 November. At that timewe
made it crystal-clear that Costa Rica is in favour of peace
in Central America. This is our sole national position, and
I repeat it emphatically in this supreme organ of the
United Nations.

52. The study points out that since Shimon Peres became Prime Minister, in the autumn of 1984, Israeli exports of arms to the contras have increased tenfold. It
states, “When the CIA was setting up the contra organization in 1981, the Mossad was also there, carrying out the
training and support for the first units.“* The study also
points out that when the United States was not able to
support the contras officially and directly it was replaced
by other States, among which was Israel. It says:

58. The representative of Nicaragua has made a false
assertion about Costa Rica. I take it that his words are part
of a new international political strategy, the clearest sign
of which is the recent hardening of political and military
positions in Managua. In this context, the Sandinist authorities repeat the false assertion that “anti-Sandinist
counter-revolutionary
bands” are operating on the territory of Costa Rica. I‘ should like to quote from the statement made by Mr. Tmoco. He said:

“According to one account the United States demanded overt and covert Israeli support for U.S. activities against the Sandinist Government. In return, the

“In May the United States Congress, in yet another
act of defiance of the most fundamental norms govem-

*Quoted in English by the speaker.

6

ing international relations, approved the appropriation
of $27 million to finance activities aimed at overthrowing the legitimate Government of my country. That
humanitarian aid, as it was euphemistically described in
order to conceal the real purpose of this act, was in fact
intended to continue uninterru ted the flow of military
supplies to the counter-rev0 Putionary bands which,
under the control and leadership of the pntral Intelligence Agency of the United States, are operating from
the territory of the neighbouring countries of Honduras
and Costa Rica.” [2633rd Meetin& pm.
7.1

armed neutrality. That is the fundamental, essential rule
of our international policy. Costa Rica again confirms and
stresses this before the Security Council, the highest organ
of the United Nations.
62. My country has always been open for verification
that there are no counter-revolutionary
camps on the
territory of Costa Rica. We have never prevented missions
or commissions from the countries of the Contadora
Group-Colombia,
Mexico, Panama and Venexuelafrom visiting and moving freely throughout our national
territory, without any restrictions. Moreover, on not a few
occasions Costa Rica has requested suchverification. Nor
do we oppose further efforts by the Contadora Group to
that end, if that is the wish of the international community.
Furthermore, we invite the Contadora Group to verify
that there are no counter-revolutionary
camps in Costa
Rica and that anti-Sandinist bands do not operate there.
My country has absolutely nothing to. hide from anyone.
The international community knows too that there are no
military bases in Costa Rica, either our own or those of
other countries, for the simple reason that since 1949
Costa Rica has had no army and no armed forces.

59. I categorically repudiate that assertion by the Government of Nicaragua and here in the Security Council,
as far as Costa Rica is concerned, I denounce the falsehood uttered by the Nicaraguan representative. I regret
also that the Sandinist authorities are so obsessive about
discovering their enemies, or at least some of them, in
Costa Rica. This distortion of the facts prompted them in
the past to finance and develop a crude campaign to
discredit the international
prestige of my country. We
thought that that dark stage of our bilateral relations was
a thing of the past, and we were at pains to point out, with
a certain satisfaction, that in San Jose the authorities of
my country thought that the Government of Nicaragua
had finally accepted the undeniable reality and value of
our national policy of strict neutrality concerning the civil
war in that brother country. We were mistaken. The statements of ,Mr. Tmoco in the Security Council, those made
a few days ago in Caracas b Vice-President Sergio
Ramfrez and the clear signs o l renewed intransigence,
internally and externally, from Managua indicate to us
that we are witnessing a new qualitative change in the
relations between Nicaragua and Costa Rica.

63. An army is prohibited under our political Constitution. My country is the only one in the world which, 37
years ago, proceeded to disarm voluntarily and unilaterally. We have no army and we in Costa Rica do not want
to have an army. ‘Ihus, we do not hold joint or bilateral
military manoeuvres with any other country. If we have no
army, how could we possibly hold military manoeuvres or
agree to the establishment of military bases? Costa Rica
has no air force and no navy. There is not a single piece of
heavy artillery in Costa Rica. The only cannon we
sess
lie rusting and unusable in the National Museum, p”or they
are 40 years old. We possess no armed helicopters. There
is not a single tank in Costa Rica, not a single one made
in the United States or in the Soviet Union or in any other
country. Costa Rica is unarmed; it is as simple as that; it
is as genuine and true as that.

60. Our peasants have a saying: “The evening foreshadows the day”. Thus, we are sincerely concerned to see
whence comes this unfortunate new day in our relations
with Nicaragua. We are ready. Yet we can only deplore the
fact that the Sandinist authorities are once again turning
to the treacherous weapon of trying to sully the name and
the moral and ethical standing of Costa Rica. That we
shall not accept either from Mr. Timoco or from Mr.
Ramfrez or from the commanders or from any other
Sandinist authority. The Nicaraguans will find us here,
before the Security Council, and in any other international
or regional body or forum. Costa Rica will not take the
initiative in a political attack against Nicaragua. My country does not seek and never has sought confrontation with
Nicaragua; that is not in any way in keeping with our
national interests. We want to live in peace with our
neighbours in Central America. We want to establish
peaceful and stable standards of coexistence with all the
countries of Central America regardless of the ideology
of their political or economic system. What we cannotshall not-accept are false, gratuitous attacks from Nicaragua or from any other country.

64. I assume that is why when Mr. Iimoco referred in his
statement to the 1985-1986 edition of TheMiItary Balance
published by the International Institute for Strategic Studies, in London, he made no reference to Costa Rica.
Fortunately, my country does not appear in sophisticated
publications on the military balance. For the past 37 years
my wuntry has devoted its national budget to education,
public health, social security and public welfare.
65. That is why Costa Rica-and
here I speak with
legitimate pride, with great national pride, with more
satisfaction than a commander or a general feels at the
kind of military parade of which other countries are so
fond and which makes the Sandinist leaders dizzy with
delight-has
the highest rates in all of Latin America for
medical care and social security; that is why there is
practically no illiteracy in my country; that is why education is free and compulsory; that is why we in Costa Rica
have a standard of hving similar to that of the citizens of
Western developed countries. In every comer of my wuntry, even the most remote, there is a school and a hospital.
What we do not have are barracks, political prisons, islands or other places of confinement for opposition leaders. There is not a single Costa Rican-not
a single

61. Costa Ricans live in’peace and practise pluralism in
our internal relations. We wish also to live in peace in our
external relations with the world, at the apex of human
development, where luraliim and interdependence are
the watchwords of tl! e times. That is the fundamental
thrust of our proclamation on permanent, active and un7

one-who hashad to go into exile becauseof his political
and amilitia 100,000strong, both men and women. The
or religious views. No one is persecuted in my country.
Nicaraguan Army has no fewer than 100 Soviet T-54
Opposition of any ideology is legitimate and enjoys full
and T-55 medium tanks,20 PT-76amphibious tanks and
unrestricted guarantees; there is free accessto the com120 other armoured vehicles. It also possesses120 antimunications media; freedom of assembly; freedom to
aircraft guns, 700 SAM-7 rocket launchers, 10 MI-8
organize and undertake propaganda activities; free access
helicopters and 6 AN-2 armed transport aircraft. Milito public places; free accessto the organs of political
tary semiceis compulsory for all men over 17 years of
power, which in Costa Rica are authentic, legitimate and
age.“.
freely elected by the citizens,not fraudulently imposed or
the result of a military coup.
72. Even though recent reports speak of 359 tanks and
30 sophisticatedcombat helicopters, my delegation hasno
66. * We in Costa Rica are legitimately proud of all these objection to Mr. Tmoco’s increasing or reducing those
f@res. I imagine that he has readily to hand the latest
facts,which explain why the representauve of the Govemment of Nicaragua-when it comesto proving his caseor
data on Nicaragua from the International Institute for
citing irrefutable facts to substantiate or document his Strategic Studies,in London, which it would be important
false charges--must yield to the evidence that he cannot for him or any other Sandinist representative to inform
provide the international community with information on the Council about. The objective fact is that the gla&g
and spectacular disproportion of military forces is a po
the number of tanks, armed helicopters, combat aimraft,
guns, heavy artillery or military umts possessedby Costa tential danger to Costa Rica’s national security, integrity
Rica. He cannot do this.Thegroundlessness of his charges and sovereignty. There are different angles to all probis thus fully proven. That is my country’s honest rebuttal
lems, and for us in Costa Rica the arms race in Central
America, in all its manifestations, is a matter of extreme
before the Security Council and before the United Nations. That is the final, conclusive and absolute argument gravity and concern. The very fact that the SecurityCounof Costa Rica. That is our response to Nicaragua. That
cil is meeting is clear evidence of that reality as well as of
the degree of violence and sophistication of the civil war
constitutes our moral and ethical strength within the in:
now going on in Nicaragua.
temational community.
67. On 17 November this year, my country’s Legislative
Assembly,two years after the proclamation by President
Luis Albert0 Monge of Costa Rica’s permanent, active
and unarmed neutrality, began work on a bill which would
transform that aspiration of the Costa Rican people into
the law of the land. In that way, an essentialpart of our
history and national tradition will become the law forever.
That sovereign decision by Costa Rica is an act of faith in
international law, in the Charter of the United Nations
and in the collective securityarrangements adopted by the
OAS.
68. In the same spirit, Costa Rica has firmly supported
the peace negotiations of the Contadora Group. We have
said, and we repeat here in the Security Council, that my
country is ready to sign,without any reservations, the tinal
Contadora Act.
69. However, Costa Rica’s neutrality should not be understood to mean that we are unwilling to stand up for
ourselves. My country is fully aware of the grave responsibilities it has assumedwith its policy of peace and disarmament in the context of a srtuation such as that in
Central America, which is becoming more critical and
polarized with every passing day, both ideologically and
militarily. We understand and regard as reasonable and
justified the concerns of the other countries of Central
.
America.
70. I wish to set forth cahnly and with complete realism
some of our objective concerns.

73.. Of course, the struggle in Central‘America is for
peace,but it is fundamentally and essentiallya struggle for
democracyand economic and socialdevelopment, in freedom.
74.. In the Contadora Act, the chapters dealing with the
necessarycommitments in matters of security,armaments
and military strength are asimportant asthose concerning
political matters. Without freedom and democracy,there
will never be peace in Central America. Without national
reconciliation in the countries in a state of civil war there
will be no peace in our region. The people of Central
America wish to expressthemselves freely and to choose
their leaders by electoral processesthat are honest and
authentic. For Costa Rica it is a matter of fundamental
importance that disarmament be carried out and that
military manoeuvres cease. Equally important to my
country is the establishment of independent electoral
bodies and the guaranteeing of free accessby all currents
of public opinion and all ideological persuasions to honest, regular electoral recesses,based on the full observance of civil rights. 8 emocracy is a regime of political
parties. Democracy is freedom of the press.Democracy is
trade union freedom. Democracy is absolute respect for
human rights. We Costa Ricans will never tire of saying
that the thousands and thousands of Central Americans
who have died in the ast few decadeshave not done so
simply to exchange ?ascist, totalitarian dictatorships of
the right for communist, totalitarian dictatorships of the
left. Nor can militarism be the destiny of Central America.

75. The immense peace effort and its clear orientation,
which leaves no room for false interpretations, towards
the principles of representative democracy and political
freedom must be complemented by a realistic, coherent,
“The National Guard of Somoza numbered 7,SOO pragmatic.and effective programme of economicdevelop
men. Today, in its place, there is an army of 50,000men ment and a change in social structures in our region.

71. An official document circulated during the Contadora negotiations said:

the Council to executeits taskswith great efficacy. I also
wish to congratulate your predecessor,the representative
of Australia, for the able manner in which he discharged
his responsibilities during the month of November.

76. While they desire peace, the peoples of Central
America also want to overcome poverty and underdevelopment. The banner of sodal justice is therefore a legitimate banner in Central America-social justice, but with
freedom; revolution and achange of structures,but within
democracy.

82. Barely two weeks ago I had occasion to addressthe
General Assembly, at the 91st meeting of the fortieth
session,on the views of my Government regarding the
situation in Central America. I -had no idea then that I
would also be addressingthis body on the samesubject so
soon.Not that I thought the subject unimportant; my very
participation in the Assembly debate is evidence enough
to the contrary. Nor was it that I foresaw quick fixes to the
roblems of Central America. It was, rather, that I be
ii‘eved in the worth of the Organization, that it counted for
something, that its moral authority was universally recognized,and that, therefore, its pronouncements, an expression of the conscienceof mankind in general, would not
for long go unheeded.
.

77. Therefore, C&ta Rica attachesthe greatest importance to chapter IV-of the Contadora Act, which refers to
commitments regarding economic and social matters.
They include an undertaking to reactivate, perfect and
restructure the processof regional economic integration
and give new life to the Central American Common Market, thus transforming it into one of the central objectives
of the present day in Central America. That is undoubtedly an economic objective, but it will at the sametime fall
directly and in a positive manner within the process of
peace-making and the reduction of political tensionsbetween the five countries.

83. True, words are the tools of our trade ‘asdiplomats.
It has,however, alwaysbeen my belief that we use words
to influence the situation on the ground. What a great pity
if these tools of our trade should also become the sole
result of our business.

78. That iswhy in CostaRica’s statement in the General
Assembly we pointed out the value of the international
community’s asking the Secretary-General to formulate
and carry out as soon as possrblein co-operation with
bodies within the United Nations system,and particularly
the Economic Commission for Latin America and the
Caribbean and the United Nations Development Programme-a plan for economic and.socialco-operation, in
Central America. In Costa Rica’sview, sucha programme
would be welcomed by all the Governments of the region.
It would mean moving from rhetoric to action; it would
mean putting into practice the essentialprinciples of the
Charter. Therefore, we reiterate this initiative of Costa
Rica here in the Security Council.

84. The Council has been convened to discussthe qualitative escalation of the conflict in Central America. For
the first time in.the history of the Western hemisphere,
murderous weaponry-+pitomized in this instance by
SAM-7 surface-to-air missileswhich were used by Contras
to down a Nicaraguan helicopter and kill 14 government
soldiers on 3 December this year-has been supplied to
irregular forces. It has been emphasizedthat the United
States Government alone has both the motive and the
opportunity to make these missilesavailable, there being
no other country in the hemisphere with similar motives
possessingthem.

79. There is still time to avert a catastrophe in Central
America. Costa Rica is fully aware that we are going
through difficult and delicate times. Nevertheless, m
country is calm. We unreservedly support the peace erforts of the Contadora Group. Similarly, we have welcomed with great satisfaction and encouraged thesupport
efforts now being made by a group of friendly, brother
countries; Argentina, Peru, Uruguay and Brazil. Therefore, convinced of the value of our caseand secure in the
justice and rationality of the historical path that our people haschosen&thout an army,unarmed, neutral in the
military conflict, wishing to live in peace with all ‘our
neighbours-my country and its leaders will continue to
work diligently for peace and a negotiated political solution of the crisisin Central America. We shall not yield in
that endeavour. It is our duty. Costa Rica is in favour of
peace,and we shall continue to fight for peace in Central
America.

85. ,While this is not the fir& time that evidence of
United States aggression against Nicaragua has been
brought before the Council, we still hold this charge to be
extremely serious. It shows the lengths-or is it the
depths?-to which the United StatesGovernment is prepared to go in its war of aggression against the small
country of Nicaragua. Nor do we need to read between
the lines to.decipher the real purpose of United States
activity in Central America. Thus on 2 December 1985the
United StatesSecretary of State,George Shultz,said that
the United States Government would continue “indefinitely” to support the contra forces, which it created and
armed and which it finances and directs, even if the Central American countries were to conclude a peace treaty.
86. We are enjoined to ask What are the United States
Government’s war aims in Central America?

80. The PRESIDENT (inter~xu&ztirz@n French): The
next speaker is the representative of Zimbabwe. I invite
him to take a place at the Council table and to make his
statement.

87. Surely, as the foremost military power in the world
today the United Statescannot believe that its security is
jeopardized by small, struggling Nicaragua, which would,
if conditions permitted, ideally allocate all its budgetary
resourcesto economic reconstruction and to other breadand-butter issuesrather than gtms and other implements
of death. Is it then the security of Nicaragua’s neighbours

81. Mr. MUDENGE (Zimbabwe): Allow me first of all
to extend my congratulations to you, Sir, on your assumption of the presidency of the Security Council for the
month of December. My delegation is confident that your
wide diplomatic experience and testedwisdom will enable
9

that the United Statesfights to preserve? If this were so,
how can it then be that Mr. Shultzsaysthat the war would
continue even if all the Central American Stateswere to
conclude a peace treaty with Nicaragua?
88. From its very inception the Government of Nicaragua endeavoured to pursue democracy at home and
friendly relations abroad. Responding to one of
Washington’searliest demands and also to its own wish to
baseits rule on a democratic foundation, the Government
of Nicaragua held electionson 4 November 1984,to which
international observe& including my own predecessor,
were invited. The elections were regarded as free and
fair-in the ciramstances-b all who came to observe
them, exce t, of course,by the b nited States.It seemsfor
the Unit et Statesthat the only free and fair elections in
Nicaragua would be those in which the Sandinists lost.
And the very conditions the United States cited as the
reasonswhy it regarded the elections as unfree and unfair
were of its own making: the Contrasand their destabilization of Nicaragua.89. Arming itself now with this view and clothing itself
in the mantle of champion of democracy, the United
Statespoured money and mat&id into the coffers of the
contras, trained them and directed them with one objeo
tive in mind: the overthrow of the Government of Nicaragua. A propaganda war was unleashed against Nicaragua,
pamphlets on dirty tricks were drawn up by the CIA for
use by the bandits, Nicaragua’s harbours were mined and,
ultimately, an economic embargo was imposed.
90. That imposition of sanctions against Nicaragua led
us in southern Africa to question what was meant by the
word “truth”. What shall we say to this same American
Republic which in the same sentence refuses to impose
sanctionson South Africa becausethey do not work but
imposes them on Nicaragua because they do, defends
both actions in the name of democracy and arrogates to
itself the role of keeper of universal truths? Or is truth
merely to be equated with power? In other words, truth is
like a piece of red-hot metal: he who wields the heaviest
hammer forges the truest truth.

eral Manzanillo talks.That the United Stateswaslessthan
fully committed to a peaceful settlement of the Central
American crisiswas shown by the way it handled the talks
in all these forums. When it realized how far Nicaragua
was willing to go in the pursuit of peace, it walked out of
the Manzanillo talks last January on the grounds that the
Managua Government should talk to the Contras. How
can the legs stop walking without having the head tell
them to do so? Is it not that if you want the legs to stop
walking you must address the head that instructs them?
Even if the Contrasand the Nicaraguans were to agree on
something, who in this Chamber,today believes that hostilities would end if Washington took a dim view of that
agreement?
93. No, we all know that hostilitieswould not end. Washington is the creator, the quartermaster and the director
of the Contras.They are nothing short of a mercenary army
for which it has appropriated at least $27 million for what
it terms “humanitarian” aid. How “humanitarian” that aid
is can be seen from the fact that even United States
journalists, compelled by common courtesy towards the
proper use of language, have always used the word in
inverted commas.It is this humanitarian aid-which an
official of the United States Department of State, as
quoted by the LmAngeles Tunesof 5 December 1985,said
“would now include trucks,helicopters and even airplanes
and shift away from suchthings asmedicine, clothing and
food”-which has been used to down a Nicaraguan helicopter and kill 14 Nicaraguan soldiers, and about which
United StatesAssistantSecretaryof Statefor Inter-American Affairs, Mr. Elliot Abrams, proudly proclaimed the
following in The New York Times of 25 November 1985:
“the purpose of our aid is to permit people who are
fighting on our side to use more violence”. Indeed the
“humanitarian” commitment to the Contrashas resulted,
asintended, in the use of violence againstthe peace-loving
people of Nicaragua.
94. We seem to have entered the world of “newspeak”,
the world of terrorized terrorists, aggressed aggressors,
humanitarian guns and ammunition and “big brother”or is it “big uncle”. Nicaragua the aggressed,Nicaragua
the desperate, fighting a last-ditch battle to maintain its
independence and sovereignty, is labelled an expansionist
aggressor that threatens not only its immediate neighbours but the mighty United States itself. Yes, he who
wields the heaviest hammer forges the truest truth.

91. Although mandatory sanctionsagainst South Africa
would be imrx~ed legally, with the full moral authority of
the international c&&n%ity and in keeping with nieasures provided for in Chapter VII of the Charter, the
United States is opposed to these lawful sanctions; but
againstNicaragua, in which casethey are illegal, unilateral
and condemned by the entire international community,
including the United States’own allies, the United States
hasno qualms.What, then, hashappened to the oft-stated
sition that sanctionsdo not work? Or is it, again, that
I?e who wields the heaviest hammer forges the truest
truth?

95. We understand what it means to be weak As we see
yet another small country cornered in this way, our hearts
go out to it. We do not presume to arrogate to ourselves
the mantle of conscienceof mankind. Nor do we deign to
foist that role on anybody else.Yet, as we thus fall victim
to great-Power aggression one after the other, we small
countries may do well to harken to the words of the
English poet John Donne:

92. The Charter proscribes the use of force in intemational relations and exhorts all nations to settle their
dis utes through peaceful means. This the Government
of Ricaragua has endeavoured to do. On the multilateral
front they have sought to use the forums provided by the
United Nations, the OAS and the Contadora process.
These multilateral talks were complemented by the bilat-

“No man is an island, entire of itself; every man is a
piece of the continent, a part of the main;. . . any man’s
death diminishes me, because I am involved in mankind; and therefore never send to know for whom the
bell tolls; it tolls for thee”.
10

101. The Security council once again has before it a
complaint by Nicaragua, by which it is asked to consider
the extremely serious situation in that country. The situation in Central America, of which Nicaragua is a part, has
been described here so often that there is nothing inherently new in regard to it, but the Council must give all the
necessary attention to the recent developments placed
before the Council by the representative of that country,
the Acting Minister for External Relations. Nicaragua’s
request is fully justified by those developments, which
testify to an escalation of tension in the region.

96. How can Nicarap
feel safe when even now the
United States plans to howl joint military manoeuvres with
Honduras on the Nimn-Honduras
border between
January and June next par? We understand that at the
end of those manoeuvres 25,000 troops would have participated in them. Quite apart from the inherently Provo
ative nature of such manoeuvres, they pose the real
danger of constituting acrnal material preparation for an
eventual invasion of Nicaragua. These manoeuvres will
entail the construction of roads, encampments, communication and supply links that will outlast the duration of the
exercise itself. For those who may later wish to invade
Nicaragua--voilh-the
necessary infrastructure for invasion is already in place, put there with cunning simplicity
under the very noses of the international community.

102. The Council has been informed of the use of
ground-to-air SAM-7 missiles against a Nicaragmmhelicopter. Above and beyond the heavy losses Nicaragua has
suffered in human lives and property, my delegation is
gravely concerned at that use. Indeed, in addition to the
dangerous precedent it constitutes and the confusion it
tends to sow, my delegation sees in this new turn of events
a real threat to security in the subregion. The situation is
therefore serious and calls for an appropriate stand to be
taken by the Security Council. In order for it to do so, it
must consider the situation in its global context, which is
that of the crisis in which Central America finds itself
embroiled.

97. It is a pity that the original Contadora provision that
proscribed all foreign military manoeuvres in Central
America is to be flouted in this way. We also regard it as
a matter of regret that that provision, which seemed so
sound, so constructive, and aimed at increasing regional
mutual confidence, should now be altered to mean not
proscription but regulation of such manoeuvres. It is to be
hoped that a sense of balance will be restored to all
proposals for the settlement of the Central American
crisis, especially in view of the fact that the original Contadora proposals, which Nicaragua, despite grave misgivings, had already accepted in toto, have again been
brought to the table with yet some more amendments
from the other party. We do not regard as unreasonable
the Nicaraguan requirement that any future Contadora
proposals should contain a demand that the United States
stop its aggression against Nicaragua.

103. My country’s continuous and continually held position with regard to the crisis situation in Latin America in
general is well known. The peoples of Latin America, who
have always fought resolutely for the consolidation of
their national independence and for full exercise of their
sovereignty, are and must remain free to choose their own
political, economic and so&l systems. The fact that they
are being denied that inalienable right, interahiz, obviously
contributes to the fact that the tension that prevails in
Central America is now one of the major wncems at the
international level.

98. The position of my Government regarding the crisis
in Central America has been remarkable for its consistency and is well known. We have always supported a
negotiated settlement to the crisis, and we view with great
alarm the recent escalation of the conflict in the region.
We urge the parties concerned to resume the stalled
Manzanillo bilateral talks, and we commend the Contadora Group for its tireless efforts to find a just and
peaceful settlement which addresses the legitimate security interests of all parties concerned.

104. Faced with that wntinually mounting tension, the
international wmmunity has untiringly endeavoured to
work out a negotiated political solution. Those efforts
would certainly have borne fruit by now had it not been
for external interference in the internal affairs of the
countries of the subregion.
105. Deeply committed as it is to respect for the principles of the Charter of the United Natrons, Burkina Faso
is and will always be against foreign interference in any
form. It repudiates and firmly condemns the use or threat
of force in relations among States.

99. As a confidence-building
measure we ask that all the
parties adhere to the original Contadora provision that
proscribes foreign military manoeuvres in this sensitive
region. Finally, we would warn those whom an over-abundance of power has made arrogant-in
the face of world
opinion and the world’s highest court--of the dangers of
a decline in multilateralism.
It is our belief that no nation
on earth is so powerful that it can advocate the advent of
an anarchical international regime in which there is a
free-for-all. Power and affluence are best enjoyed in conditions of order, and it seems to us short-sighted that those
very beneficiaries of the current world order should be the
ones so enthusiastic about assailing some of its most
fundamental underpinnings, such as the world court.

106. The economic and political
pressures being
brought to bear against Nicaragua are unacceptable and
have therefore been widely condemned by the intemational wmmunity. In addition to having contributed to a
very great extent to the risk of a regional war, they have
also undermined the necessary dialogue established by
the Contadora Group to arrive at a negotiated political
settlement of the region’s problems. Furthermore, they
are very clearly aimed at destabiig
Nicaragua and at
overthrowing the revolutionary r@ime democratically
chosen by that small State, which is a Member of the
United Nations and of the Movement of Non-Aligned
Countries. In this connection I wish once again to reaffirm

100. The PRESIDENT
(interpretation jhxn French): I
shall now make a statement as the representative of
BURKINA
FASO.
11

my country’s active solidarity with Nicaragua in its struggle against such pressuresand oppression.

113. IA us alse not forget ,&at it is not just Nicaragua
which has security concerns in Central America. Costa
Rica, Honduras, Guatemala and El Salvador all have
legitimate concerns which must be taken into consideration in a comprehensive regional accord,concernswhich
revolve around Nicaragua’s aggression against its neighbours and its destabilizing military buildup. Sifting
through this obfuscation, it seems that we were called
together to consider the issue of a missile fired on 2
December by elements of the Nicaraguan democratic
opposition against a helicopter of Managua’s armed
forces.

107. It is time that threats againstNicaragua cease;it is
time to halt the hostile actsand the financing of groups of
mercenaries. Let us reaffirm together here the sovereignty of Nicaragua and the other Statesof the region. Let
ustogether unequivocallyreaffirm the inalienable right of
each and every one freely to choose a political, economic
and social systemand to pursue international relations in
light of the clear interests of their people-without outside interference, without subversion or coercion, direct
or indirect, and without threats of any kind whatsoever.

114. The Nicaraguan re resentative attempted on 10
December [2633td nreeringP to spread the false statement
that the United Stateshad provided SAM-7 missilesto the
Nicaraguan resistance forces. For the Nicaraguan
delegation’s peace of mind, let me repeat what Mr. Walters stated in that meeting: the Umted States has not
provided these weapons to the Nicaraguan resistance.

108. In so speaking I am sure that I am expressing
Nicaragua’swishesand that I amexpressingthe legitimate
hopes that country places in the Security Council. I am
convinced that in making such a commitment everymember will be serving not only Nicaragua but, beyond that
State,also the causeof the other Statesin the region and,
above all, the causeof international peace and security.

115. This was not the first time that we made our position clear. The Nicaraguan charge d’affaires in Washington was told by a representative of the Department of
State on 6 December that the United States adamantly
rejected the Nicaraguan charge that the United Stateswas
somehowresponsrble for the missile attack,

109. I now resume my functions as PRESIDENT of the
Council. The representativeof the United StatesofAmerica has askedto make a statement in exerciseof the right.
of reply, and I now call upon him.
110. Mr. OKUN (United Statesof America): Some of
the statements made in this body in the past few days,
particularly those of Nicaragua, Cuba and Zimbabwe,
made me try to recall what it was that brought us here in
the first place. It is interesting to note that the most
vociferous defenders of the Managua r&ime, in particular
Viet Nam, Cuba and Iran, are charter members of the
newest and, I regret to say,worst international orgatition, that of the organization of refugee-exporting countries-not OPEC, but OREC. Those countries, like
Nicaragua, seekto crush all forms of domesticopposition
and to deny their people the most basic of democratic
electoral freedoms many of us take for anted. It is no
wonder, therefore, that people vote wi tf their feet and
flee’those lands, as they flee from Nicaragua.

116. As we emphasizedin our statement of 10 December, there is a war going on in Nicaragua. This war is being
conducted by the current regime against its own people.
ThiswarisunlikelytoenduntiltherulersinManaguastop
trying to blame outside forces for the domestic opposition
to their rule and, instead, come to terms with their own
people. No amount of tortured rhetoric from the Nicaraguan delegation, or from any other delegation, can distract the international community from seeing that the
refusal of Managua to embark on a dialogue with its own
ople remains at the heart of the Nicaraguan tragedy.
K epeaceful solution to this struggle lies in the Managua
@ime’s acceptance of the March 1985 proposal of the
Nicaraguan democratic resistancefor a church-mediated
dialogue, acease-fire and suspensionof the stateof cmergency.The sooner the comun&ntes realize this,the better
off their people and their neighbours will be.

111. The origins of these proceedings have become
somewhat lost in the manoeuvres of the. Government of
Nicaragua. It seeksonce again to use whatever pretext it
can to divert attention from its obligation to negotiate
seriously in the Contadora process.One of the cardinal
tenets of that process is to take meaningful measures
towards national reconciliation in Nicaragua. National
reconciliation through’dialogue is a fundamental prhxiple of the Contadora process,which has, from the start,
promoted a regional peace settlement. The principle was
acceptedby all five Central American nations.

117. The PRESIDENT (interptelation ji-om Rrench):
The representative of the Islamic Republic of Iran wishes
to speak in exercise of the right of reply. I invite hhn to
take a place at the Council table and to make his statement.
118. Mr. RAJAIE-KHORASSANI (Islamic Republicof
Iran): I think this is the right context in which to reiterate
the famous verse ‘We all take refuge in God from Satan
the accursed*.

112. The Contadora Act, which Nicaragua said it ao
cepted without change, contains a section entitled “Commitments with regard to national reconciliation”. Those
commitments include, among others, the obligation of
nations experiencing insurgencies to create mechanisms
for dialogue with opposition groups. The agreementsalso
provide that the commitments of the parties “are of a legal
nature and are therefore binding” [seeS/l 7’549,(~tufer V
part III, para I].

119. I just cannot understand how the representative of
the United Statescan seek to justify the criminal action
his Government has been taking against Nicaragua by
reference to what is happening in my country. What we do
to our
pie may be rrght or wrong-that is, of course,
not his I?usmess-but his reference to my country remains
irrelevant when he ought to answer the many questions
12

put forward here regarding the actions and attitudes of
the United Statesregarding Nicaragua.

causing trouble for the Government of Nicaragua, we
have to appreciate the significance of the role of the
United States.If the Somoza elements are being paid
highly-probably more highly than the regular officers of
the Nicaraguan Government-then again we have to
thank the Government of the United States.

120. What I said in my statement [263&r meetig] was
very simple. I just reminded this very important international body of the fact that the United States did not
recognize the jurisdiction of the International Court of
Justice and the explanation for that. My explanation was
that even if it did go to the Court it would know beforehand that its arguments would not sell for a penny. That
is a fact. If it could convince the authorities of the International Court of Justice, does anyone think it would
stand idle and be beaten because of that? Of course it
. would have done something.

125. We believe that the Government of the United
Statesmust look to the United Statesand prepare a clean
record. When its own record is clean, let it come to the
Islamic Republic of Iran.
126. The PRESIDENT (interpretation fbm Finch): I
call on the representative of Nicaragua who wishes to
speakin exercrseof the right of reply.

121. Secondly,I think that the particular Ianguage used
to comment on the internal affairs of the Islamic Republic
of Iran is too big for some mouths. I mention this particularly because we are not exporting refugees, we are
hosting refugees. I am proud to saythat we have at least
2 million Afghan refugees, we have more than half a
million Iraqi refugees and we have been taking care of 25
million war-stricken people of our own country, who must
be treated asrefugees becausetheir homesand properties
have all been destroyed. To accuseus of the exportation
of refugeesis, I believe, too much of a claim; more thought
is required before making such an accusation.

127. Mr. CHAMORRO MORA (Nicaragua) (interpreSpanish): Once again I should like to saythat
my delegation has on various occasions,when it has felt
compelled to come to the Security Council to denounce
United Statesaggression,stated that there.is a tendency,
which has become a practice, for the United Statesdelegation to try to distort the specific, genuine points made
by my delegation with regard to our motives for coming
to the Council, using for this purpose references to other
countries and other regions or matters that relate to the
domesticpolicy of my Government. Therefore, aswe have
already said, we shall not refer to the assertionshe made
either today or two daysago. However, we must saybriefly
that we are quite convinced that very few refugees leave
the United Statesfor other countries, becausehistory has
shownwhat United StatesGovernments do to theiropponents; they either murder them or put them in reservations, like the Indians, or in ghettos, like the blacks at
present. There are no such practices in Nicaragua.

tationjiom

122. Furthermore, we know the United Statesof America is hosting many of the dissidents-not necessarily
refugees-from the Islamic Republic of Iran who have
stolen a great amount of our property. Those people have
the support of the Government of the United States.
Many representatives might have seen that fabulous,
glamorous picture shown on television of the hrxurious
residence and the security measures the wife of the exShah is enjoying in the United States.The wife of the
ex-Shahisverywell known in Iran, and we know how much
property sheinherited from her father. We also know that
what she is enjoying here in the United Statesis the stolen
property of the people of the Islamic Republic of Iran, for
which the representative of the United Statessheds his
crocodile tears.

128. We should also like to state that a refrain is constantly repeated by representatives of the United Statesin
this im rtant organ, which should be respected because
of the p”unctions entrusted to it by the international community, to the effect that their Government has no intention of doing and is not doing anything to overthrow the
legally constituted Government of Nicaragua; that it isnot
providing arms to the counter-revolution and the CIA
mercenaries; and that it is not using the territory of Cen~~ral.~e~
Statesto bring about the overthrow of my
.

123. We believe that Hodjabr Yazdani, who has stolen
$400~million-worth of our property-we have the bank
record-is a refugee in this country and has the support
of .theGovernment of the United States.And he is not the
only one. We do not think it is in the interestsof the United
Statesto criticize us. It should keep on with its talk about
Nicaragua if it wants tobesafe, for there areso many other
things that couId be revealed.

129. I would recall that, on a certain occasion,I said to
Mrs. Kirkpatrick that her assertionson that occasionwere
products of ignorance of the policies and terroristic practices of her own Government. Unfortunately, since these
were sooften repeated, I can only saythat there is no such
ignorance; what we have is terroristic attempts to overthrow legitimately constituted Governments such as that
of Nicaragua,‘and in that senseI do not need to say any
more because the international community knows very
well the different ways in which these attempts are daily
being manifested and how these funds are being approved
in the United StatesCongress.

124. As a matter of fact, going back to the substanceof
what we saidabout Nicaragua, I do not know anybodywho
is not aware of the facts I mentioned. We believe that if
the Contadora Group comesto a standstill, we shall have
to thank the Government of the United States. If the
people of Nicaragua are suffering from all kinds of blockades,economic restrictions and military threats, again we
have to thank the Government of the United States.If
missiles are downing helicopters that Nicaragua has
bought for defensive purposes,again we have to thank the
United States. If counter-revolutionary elements are

130. We believe that it is of the highest importance for
the Council to have diised the complaint of Nicaragua
on this occasion.We think this is the responsrbility which
13

--

you all bear, namely, to ensure the maintenance of international eace and security and, in a preventive fashion,
to consiBer situations which may arise in the future. We
would like to sayto the Council that it can remain absolutely assuredthat, inasmuch asUnited Statesaggression
continues againstour country, we shall continue to call on
the patience of the members of the Council and ask it to
convene to consider the gradual escalation of tension and
aggressionagainst my country.
131. For Nicaragua, unlike many countries, including
the United States,the death of a Nicaraguan citizen or a
murder by CIA terrorists is of great importance and,
within the context of the current situation in the area, it
raisessome aspectswhich could provoke situationspotentially dangerous to international peace and security.This
is one of these occasions.
132. We shall desist from convening the Council only
when the United Statesceasesits aggression.If there were
no United Statesaggression,we would not have felt compelled at any time to have recourse to this organ, calling
it into sessionto explain the violations of the sovereignty,
independence and territorial integrity of our country,
which the United StatesAdministration and the CIA are
constantlycommitting.
133. I should like, at the same time, to thank all the
delegations which have spoken in this debate, expressing
their firm defence of the rule of law, their respect for
international juridical order and the defence of the purosesand principles of the-Charter of the United Nations.
R this sense,we reiterate our profoundest thanks to all
those,who werethevast majority-with the logical exception of the United Statesand one or two others-who so
firmly and categorically expressedtheir concern about the
situation in the area and about the constant aggression
from which Nicaragua is suffering and who have expressed
their solidarity with my country.
134. We are profoundly concerned at the escalation of
tension in Central America. Our complaint in this important body is that the supply of SAM-7 or red-eye missiles
to the mercenary troops of the CIA may constitute a
situation which imperils not only civil aviation in the area
but is also liable to aggravate an already serious situation
and increase the possibility of an escalation and a conflagration of a regional nature in Central America.
135. We would expressthe hope that this concern of ours
will be dispelled and in the future peace will become a
reality. Unfortunately, the statementsof the United States
representative give us a glimpse into the future of the
region-an uncertain future wrth regard to the possibility
of a negotiated future in Central America.
136. We believe that it is of the highest importance for
the United States,essentially,and also the CentraMmerican countries to turn from rhetoric and try to prevent any
further aggressionor a continuation of attempts on the
part of the United States to overthrow my Government
and that we should thus take sefious concrete stepsfor a
possible solution, a politically negotiated solution, to the
JAho in United Nations, New York

current conflict in Central America and the aggression
which is constantly going on against my country.
137. We would like to state that my country is a peaceloving country; we love peace,.we want peace, we need
peace.But we will never accept a peace imposed byforce
of arms. We will never, as is claimed by the President of
the United States,give way, and he can be assuredof that.
138. As we have said on previous occasions,and I should
like to repeat this once again, our Government and our
people want Central America to become in the future a
zone of peace, a neutral zone, a zone free from any
interference from outside and free of any foreign military
presence.We are ready for and we are committed to the
disappearanceof military basesand training centres from
any Central American country in which they may existincluding Nicaragua, if they existed there, and we are
ready to say they do not; we are ready to see the disappearanceof foreign milita manoeuvres, or any transit or
passageof foreign troops 3:
t ough Central American waters or lands, and we are ready to see the disappearance
of any military advisers who may-possiblyexist in any of
our countries. We are convinced that this is the only way
of achieving ace in Central America. When Central
America, as r said, becomes a zone of peace, a neutral
zone, free from any kind of foreign mrlitary presence,
Nicaragua repeats in this body its commitment to make
this a reality in the future.
139. Also, I should like to repeat once again in the
Council that we will never agree to disarm ourselves until
there is a cessation of United States aggression.We are
ready to defend ourselves to the bitter end, to the-lastdrop
of blood of our people, and we shall secure the necessary
means to do this, When United States aggressionceases,
we are ready to do this.
140. We think that the Central American countries will
be in a position, becauseof our historic brotherhood, to
understand us. We think the only obstacle to this understanding is the United States-that is all I can call itwhich does not want our Central American peoples to
express their political will. When it stops its aggression,
when it endsits terroristicpractices, at that time,.there will
be true peace in Central America. At that time Central
America will become aneutral zone and.all CentralAmerican countries--since the security, not just of Nicaragua,
but of all the countries of Central America will be ensured-will be able fully to disarm ourselves, but not
before then.
141. The PRESIDENT (interpretarion from Eiench):
The Security Council has thus reached the end of the
present stageof its consideration of the item on its agenda.
Themeetingrvsear6.IOp.m.
NOTE
1 See Oficial Reccds qfthe GetumlAssenrbly, Fortieth Session,Pkwy
Meetigss, voL III, 89th meeting, para. 213.

cm3olJ

!w61439-August

ml-2,050
