192

General Assembly-Forty-second Session

ernmental organizations, national committees on the
Fund and individuals, all of which have vital roles to play
in maintaining and increasing the financia! viability of the
Fund and the effectiveness of its work;
4. Invites States to continue and, where possible, to increase their contributions to the Fund, and calls upan
Governments that have not yet done so to consider contributing to the Fund in the future, in arder to enable it to
give greater support to deserving project requests for technical assistance;
5. Requests the Administrator of the United Nations
Development Programme to submit to the General Assembly at its forty-third session, through the SecretaryGeneral, a report on the activities of the Fund and on the
implementation of the present resolution.
85th plenary meeting
30 November 1987

42/64.

The role of women in society

The General Assembly,
Reaffirming the validity of the objectives of the United
Nations Decade for Women: Equality, Development and
Peace,
Noting the importance of the documents adopted by the
world conferences held during the Decade,
Stressing that just and lasting peace requires the active
participation of women in promoting international peace
and co-operation,
Stressing also that sustained economic and social progress, including the establishment of a new international
economic arder, requires the integration of women in the
development process,
Bearing in mind that economic inequality, colonialism,
racism, racial discrimination, apartheid, foreign intervention, occupation, alien domination, terrorism in ali its
forms, acts of aggression and interference in the interna!
affairs of others and violations ofhuman rights and fundamental freedoms constitute impediments to the achievement of real and genuine equality and to the active integration of women in ali spheres of life,
Convinced ofthe necessity of securing for ali women full
realization of the rights embodied in the Charter of the
United Nations, the Universal Declaration of Human
Rights, 2 the Convention on the Elimination of All Forms
of Discrimination against Wornen, 52 the International
Covenants on Human Rights 13 and other relevant instruments in this field,
Emphasizing that the achievement of equal and full participation of women in all spheres of activity constitutes an
integral part of the political, economic, social and cultural
development of all countries,
Aware that efforts to promote the status of women in ali
its aspects and their complete integration in society go
beyond the problem of legal equality and that deeper
structural transformations of society and changes in present-day economic relations, as well as elimination oftraditional prejudices through education and the dissemination
of information, are required to create conditions for
women to develop fully their intellectual and physical
capacities and to participate actively in the decisionmaking processes in political, economic, social and cultural development,
52 Resolution 34/180, annex.

Mindful, according to respective national legislation, of
the need to increase possibilities for both men and women
of combining parental duties and household work with
paid employment and social activities, and to ensure that
the role of women in childbearing should not be the cause
of inequality and discrimination and that child rearing demands shared responsibilities among women, men and society as a whole,
Commending and encouraging the increasing participation of women in political, economic, social and cultural
life and in the promotion of international peace and cooperation,
Taking note of the meetings, including those of nongovernmental organizations, at the World Congress of
Women held in Moscow from 23 to 27 June 1987,
Bearing in mind the resolution on equal opportunities
and equal treatment for men and women in employment,
adopted on 27 June 1985 by the International Labour Organisation, 53
Reiterating that the implementation ofthe Nairobi Forward-looking Strategies for the Advancement ofWomen40
should be among the developmental and policy priorities
of Governments, United Nations organizations, including
the specialized agencies, and intergovernmental and nongovernmen tal organizations,
1. Appeals to ali Governments, international organizations and intergovernmental and non-governmental organizations to pay due attention in their activities to the importance of the role of women in society in ali its
interrelated aspects-as mothers, as participants in political, economic, social and cultural development andas participants in public life;
2. Reaffirms that the implementation of the Nairobi
Forward-looking Strategies for the Advancement of
Wornen should con tribute to the achievement of the objectives ofthe United Nations Decade for Women: Equality,
Development and Peace, leading to the elimination of ali
forms of discrimination against women, to genuine equality ofwomen and men and to the full integration ofwomen
in the development process;
3. Invites all Governments to encourage such social
and economic development as will ensure the equal participation of women in all spheres of work, equal pay for
work of equal value and equal opportunities for education
and vocational training, taking into consideration the
necessity of combining all aspects of the role of women in
society as well as the challenges faced by women in all
countries when seeking to combine parental duties and
family responsibilities with their full involvement in political, social, economic and cultural development;
4. Appeals to all Governments to promote conditions
that will enable women to participate as equal partners
with men in public and political life, in the decisionmaking process at all levels and in the management of different spheres of life in society;
5. Urges all Governments to recognize the special
status and social importance of childbearing and child
rearing and to take all necessary measures to encourage
the support ofparenthood, including paid maternity, parental and child-care leave, and to provide women with
security for their jobs as long as necessary with a view to
allowing them, if they so wish, to fulfil their role as mothers without prejudice to their professional and public activities;
53 lnternational Labour Office, Official Bulletin, vol. LXVIII, 1985,
Series A, No. 2, p. 85.

VI.

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

6. Appeals to Governments to promote the establishment of appropriate facilities far the care and education of
children as a means of combining parenthood with economic, political, social, cultural and other activities, and
thus to assist women towards full integration in society;
7. Calls upon Member States to adopt the necessary effective measures with a view to implementing the Nairobi
Forward-looking Strategies as a matter ofpriority, including the establishment or strengthening of appropriate
mechanisms far the advancement of women, in order to
ensure the full participation of women in all spheres of life
in their countries;
8. Requests the Secretary-General, when preparing
surveys on the role ofwomen in development as well as reports on the world social situation and other relevant surveys, to pay due attention to all the interrelated aspects of
the role of women in society;
9. Invites the Commission on the Status ofWomen to
pay due attention to the provisions of the present resolution during the consideration at its next sessions ofthe priority themes under the heading "Equality", with a view to
farmulating recommendations far appropriate action by
concerned United Nations organs and bodies.
85th plenary meeting
30 November 1987

42/65.

lnternational Research and Training Institute
for the Advancement of Women

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 40/38 of 29 November 1985 as
well as Economic and Social Council resolution 1987 /25
of 26 May 1987,
Taking note with satisfaction ofthe report ofthe International Research and Training Institute far the Advancement of Women on its activities, 54
Recognizing that the Institute's mode of operation,
through the use of networks, in carrying out its functions
at the international, regional and national levels has enabled it to strengthen the scope and impact ofits activities,
Convinced of the important role of research, training
and infarmation far the implementation of the Nairobi
Forward-looking Strategies far the Advancement of
Women 40 and far monitoring new trends and issues related to women and developmental policy design,
1. Expresses its satisfaction at the significance and
scope of the activities of the International Research and
Training Institute far the Advancement of Women, particularly as they relate to statistics and indicators on
women and training far the farmulation of policy analysis,
planning and programming relevant to an increased participation and the integration of women in development;
2. Requests the Institute to continue and strengthen its
research, training, infarmation and communication activities, particularly the developing of innovative training
methodologies on women and socio-economic issues related to development, networking as far as possible with
other relevant research and training activities;
3. Also requests the Institute to promote general
awareness of and training in the pragmatic approach to
the integration of women in policy designs, including the
elaboration of special methodologies for monitoring and
evaluation purposes, with particular reference to the im-

54 A/42/444, annex.

193

plementation of the Nairobi Forward-looking Strategies
for the Advancement of Wornen and the feedback of results into the operational system;
4. Calls upan institutions and organizations within and
outside the United Nations system, particularly the
United Nations regional commissions, to continue their
collaboration with the lnstitute, on the basis of equitable
cost-sharing, by strengthening the network of co-operative
arrangements related to research, training, information
and communication programmes conceming women and
development;
5. Invites States and intergovernmental and nongovernmental organizations to contribute to the United
Nations Trust Fund for the International Research and
Training Institute for the Advancement ofWomen so as to
ensure that the Institute has the necessary resources to implement its long-term policies and programmes;
6. Requests the Secretary-General to submit to the
General Assembly at its farty-fourth session a report on
the activities of the Institute;
7. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its
farty-faurth session the item entitled "lnternational Research and Training Institute far the Advancement of
Women".
85th plenary meeting
30 November 1987

42/94.

Universal realization of the right of peoples to
self-determination

The General Assembly,
Reaffirming the importance, far the effective guarantee
and observance of human rights, of the universal realization of the right of peoples to self-determination enshrined
in the Charter of the United Nations and embodied in the
Intemational Covenants on Human Rights, 13 as well as in
the Declaration on the Granting of lndependence to
Colonial Countries and Peoples contained in General Assembly resolution 1514 (XV) of 14 December 1960,
Welcoming the progressive exercise of the right to selfdetermination by peoples under colonial, fareign or alien
occupation and their emergence into sovereign statehood
and independence,
Deeply concerned at the continuation of acts or threats of
fareign military intervention and occupation that are
threatening to suppress, or have already suppressed, the
right to self-determination of an increasing number of sovereign peoples and nations,
Expressing grave concern that, as a consequence of the
persistence of such actions, millions of people have been
and are being uprooted from their homes as refugees and
displaced persons, and emphasizing the urgent need far
concerted international action to alleviate their condition,
Recalling the relevant resolutions regarding the violation ofthe right ofpeoples to self-determination and other
human rights as a result of fareign military intervention,
aggression and occupation, adopted by the Commission
on Human Rights at its thirty-sixth/5 thirty-seventh, 56

55 See Official Records of the Economic and Social Council, 1980,
Suf[1ement No. 3 (E/1980/13 and Corr.l), chap. XXVI, sect. A.
/bid .. 1981, Supplement No. 5 (E/1981/25 and Corr.1),
chap. XXVIII. sect. A.
