S/PV.7183

United Nations

asdf

Security Council

Provisional

Sixty-ninth year

7183rd meeting

Tuesday, 27 May 2014, 3 p.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Oh Joon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

(Republic of Korea)

Members:

Argentina . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Australia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Chad . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Chile . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Jordan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Lithuania. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Luxembourg . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Nigeria . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Rwanda . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . . 
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mrs. Perceval
Ms. King
Mr. Cherif
Mr. Barros Melet
Mr. Wang Min
Mr. Lamek
Prince Zeid Ra’ad Zeid Al-Hussein
Ms. Murmokaitė
Ms. Lucas
Mr. Laro
Mr. Churkin
Mr. Nduhungirehe
Mr. Tatham
Mrs. DiCarlo

Agenda
Security Council resolutions 1160 (1998), 1199 (1998), 1203 (1998), 1239 (1999) and
1244 (1999)
Report of the Secretary-General on the United Nations Interim Administration
Mission in Kosovo (S/2014/305)

14-40918 (E)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the
delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-506.

*1440918*

S/PV.7183

United Nations Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo

The meeting was called to order at 3.05 p.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Security Council resolutions 1160 (1998), 1199
(1998), 1203 (1998), 1239 (1999) and 1244 (1999)
Report of the Secretary-General on the
United Nations Interim Administration Mission
in Kosovo (S/2014/305)
The President: In accordance with rule 37 of the
Council’s provisional rules of procedure, I invite the
representative of Serbia to participate in this meeting.
I request the Protocol Officer to escort His
Excellency Mr. Tomislav Nikolić, President of the
Republic of Serbia, to a seat at the Council table.
Mr. Tomislav Nikolić, President of the Republic
of Serbia, was escorted to his seat at the Council
table.
The President: On behalf of the Council, I welcome
His Excellency President Nikolić.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite Mr. Farid Zarif,
Special Representative of the Secretary-General and
Head of the United Nations Interim Administration
Mission in Kosovo, to participate in this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite Ms. Atifete
Jahjaga to participate in this meeting.
The Security Council will now begin its
consideration of the item on its agenda. I wish to
draw the attention of Council members to document
S/2014/305, which contains the report of the SecretaryGeneral on the United Nations Interim Administration
Mission in Kosovo.
I now give the floor to Mr. Farid Zarif.
Mr. Zarif: At the outset, I would like to express
my solidarity with the people and authorities of Serbia,
Bosnia and Herzegovina and Croatia, who are facing an
unprecedented natural disaster caused by widespread
flooding. I also extend my heartfelt condolences to
those who have lost their beloved family members,
friends and colleagues as a result of that tragedy. I
hope that the current rescue operations and assistance,

2/30

27/05/2014

including the efforts undertaken by the United Nations,
will help alleviate their plight.
Let me now turn to recent developments in Kosovo
and relations between Belgrade and Pristina. I should
like to note the continuing commitment demonstrated by
both sides to the European Union-led political dialogue.
During the reporting period, the pace of implementation
of last year’s historic agreements was somewhat
affected by the holding of early parliamentary elections
in Serbia and the preparations for the forthcoming early
legislative elections in Kosovo. I congratulate Serbia on
the successful conduct of the elections, on 16 March,
and the formation of a new Government, on 27 April,
led by Prime Minister Aleksandar Vučić.
The Assembly of Kosovo, in an extraordinary
session held on 7 May, decided to dissolve itself with a
vote of more than two-thirds of its members, including
a majority of the representatives from the Kosovo
Serb and other non-majority communities. The new
elections for the Kosovo Assembly are scheduled to
be held on 8 June, less than two weeks from now. The
election campaign will start tomorrow, 28 May. The
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe
will provide technical assistance in the preparation
and conduct of the elections. The European Union
will deploy an election observation mission. I take this
opportunity to call on all Kosovo residents, particularly
members of the Kosovo Serb community, to take part in
the forthcoming elections and exercise their democratic
franchise.
Despite a slower pace of implementation of the First
Agreement of Principles Governing the Normalization
of Relations of 19 April 2013, the parties have narrowed
their remaining differences, including on the structure
and staffing of the judiciary in northern Kosovo. An
additional indicator of progress is the operational
capability of the Kosovo Police in northern Kosovo.
The total number of former Serbian Interior Ministry
personnel integrated into the Kosovo Police under the
terms of the 19 April Agreement has now reached 284.
Other elements are continuing to be discussed between
technical representatives and experts from each side. It
is hoped that, once the forthcoming electoral process in
Kosovo is complete and the new Government is in place,
the dialogue will resume without delay and a crucial
pending matter — the establishment of the association/
community of Serb municipalities — will be tackled
expeditiously, along with other issues of mutual interest
and concern.

14-40918

27/05/2014

United Nations Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo

The Kosovo institutions have taken some important
decisions since my last briefing. On 22 April, the
Assembly of Kosovo ratified the exchange of letters
between the Kosovo authorities and the European
Union on the extension of the mandate of the European
Union Rule of Law Mission in Kosovo (EULEX) until
15 June 2016 and on the creation of a special court in
relation to the allegations contained in the 2010 Council
of Europe report on inhumane treatment and illicit
trafficking of organs. The establishment of such a court
should help strengthen the rule of law in Kosovo and
ensure accountability.
On 6 March, the Kosovo authorities approved
recommendations resulting from the strategic security
sector review, including on the transformation of the
Kosovo Security Force into the Kosovo armed forces.
However, the Assembly of Kosovo has not taken a
conclusive decision in this regard. Discussions on the key
issues of electoral reform and extension of the provision
of reserved seats for ethnic minority communities in
the Kosovo Assembly have been deferred to the next
Assembly.
Over recent months, a great deal of efforts was
made to overcome challenges related to the finalization
of municipal assembly statutes of the four Serbianmajority municipalities of northern Kosovo. On
15 May, the municipal assemblies in northern Kosovo
approved amendments to their statutes, bringing them
into compliance with relevant Kosovo legislation,
as required by the Ministry of Local Government
Administration. This is an important step forward in
the implementation of the 19 April 2013 Agreement
and the process of establishing the future association/
community of Serb-majority municipalities.
There were a series of violent incidents in northern
Kosovo, including an ambush on Kosovo police in
Zubin Potok on 31 March, which resulted in injuries to
three police officers, and an assault against EULEX in
the same municipality on 25 April, in which EULEX
vehicles were hit by bullets but fortunately no one was
injured. The fatal attack on EULEX on 19 September
of last year remains under investigation. We have
condemned such criminal attacks and have urged all
sides to strengthen their efforts to uphold law and order
and bring the perpetrators to justice.
In Pristina, on 20 May, three defendants charged
with war crimes in the case known as the Drenica
group escaped custody in a medical clinic where they
were receiving treatment. The individuals were among

S/PV.7183

the group of former members of the Kosovo Liberation
Army, whose trial began on 23 May in the Basic Court
of Mitrovica. Subsequently, a court order was issued for
their detention, and the individuals were apprehended
and sent to a high security prison.
We have persistently encouraged the various
communities in Kosovo to continue working towards
greater reconciliation and integration. Progress has
been noted on some important issues, such as missing
persons and the recognition of the survivors of sexual
violence during the conflict. We commend Ms. Atifete
Jahjaga for her leadership at the helm of Kosovo’s
efforts to raise public awareness of such issues. In this
regard, we welcome the official launch, on 7 March,
of the national council for the survivors of sexual
violence related to the war, which we trust will focus
on the plight of all affected persons, regardless of their
ethnicity, religion or language.
With respect to missing persons, we welcome the
continued efforts of both the Pristina and Belgrade
delegations alike in the Working Group on Missing
Persons. Exhumation work at the mass grave site in
Raška, in south-central Serbia, has resumed under
the auspices of the Serbian Government, with the
involvement of international observers and Kosovo
representatives. We encourage all efforts to ensure
the transparency and professionalism of this work
and particularly welcome the inclusion of visits by the
family associations of missing persons to the site.
A common appreciation of the benefits of cultural
heritage for all communities in Kosovo will also be
an important step forward towards coexistence and
reconciliation among the communities. Despite the
efforts of the Kosovo authorities, regrettably, such
awareness has yet to reach adequate levels. Similarly,
efforts to promote inter-community reconciliation
should be significantly strengthened. This will also
contribute to further reducing ethnic-related incidents
and to accelerating the return of internally displaced
persons.
In the run-up to the elections, the issue of the
unfinished Serbian Orthodox Church structure on the
campus of the University of Pristina became a political
issue. Some Kosovo Albanian officials have referred to
this church as a “Milosevic-era monument”, asserting
that it should be demolished for having allegedly
erected without the requisite building permits. An
unfortunate exchange of statements involving political
and religious leaders followed. We strongly encourage

14-409183/30

S/PV.7183

United Nations Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo

the leaders in Kosovo communities, as well as the
leaders in Belgrade and Pristina, to take a constructive,
prudent and forward-looking approach in addressing
such a sensitive public issue.
Despite strong condemnation against participation
of Kosovo residents in foreign conflicts, including by
the Islamic Community of Kosovo, the matter remains a
concern. On 9 April, international attention was drawn
to reports of suicide bombing by a 22-year-old Kosovo
Albanian in Fallujah, Iraq. Several other young Kosovo
Albanians have been reported killed while fighting
in Syria and Iraq in recent months. We encourage
the Kosovo authorities to build on the measures they
have already taken in cooperation with international
stakeholders in order to ensure that such events cease
once and for all.
On 2 May, Kosovo concluded negotiations with
the European Commission on its Stabilization and
Association Agreement.The negotiations began last
October, and the Agreement should help Kosovo
advance its European integration agenda further. On
6 May, the European Commissioner for Enlargement
and European Neighbourhood Policy, Mr. Štefan Füle,
visited Pristina, where he discussed with Kosovo
leaders key issues on the European Union-Kosovo
agenda, including the normalization process with
Belgrade, the rule of law and other areas that have
been identified for reform. A day before his visit to
Kosovo, Commissioner Füle was in Belgrade, just after
a visit by the European Union High Representative,
Ms. Catherine Ashton, to meet with Serbia’s President
Tomislav Nikolić and Prime Minister Vučić. Given that
dynamic, and the current dialogue process between
Belgrade and Pristina, it is apparent that the European
perspective will continue to be a key determinant
and incentive for Kosovo’s political, institutional and
socioeconomic progress.
It is essential that Belgrade and Pristina stay on
track to achieve full implementation of the agreement
of 19 April 2013. Equally important are coordinated
efforts to make the best use of European and other
multilateral and bilateral assistance to local programmes
and projects in Kosovo, so that the people of Kosovo
can fully benefit and build a better life. In that regard,
the United Nations Interim Administration in Kosovo
(UNMIK) will continue to engage fully in Kosovo, in
cooperation and coordination with other international,
regional and local partners, within its status-neutral

4/30

27/05/2014

framework, with the aim of making the best use of its
resources and relations with all communities.
I would like to conclude by thanking you,
Mr. President, and all the members of the Council for
their valuable engagement with both parties and their
continuing support for the work of UNMIK.
The President: I thank Mr. Zarif for his briefing.
I now give the floor to His Excellency Mr. Tomislav
Nikolić, President of the Republic of Serbia.
President Nikolić (spoke in Serbian; English
interpretation provided by the delegation): I would
first like to greet you, Mr. President, and thank you
for convening this meeting of the Security Council on
the work of the United Nations Interim Administration
Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK) from 21 January
through 15 April, in accordance with resolution
1244 (1999). Serbia has full confidence in the United
Nations and greatly appreciates the contribution it has
made to resolving numerous open issues in Kosovo
and Metohija. The Council’s quarterly meetings on
UNMIK, such as this one, convened under resolution
1244 (1999) — the sole valid legal framework for the
international presence in this part of the territory of the
Republic of Serbia — also contribute to this.
Since I am taking the floor in the Security Council
for the first time, I would like to present an overview,
in some detail, of the events underlying the problems
under consideration today so as to be able to decide
which of them we can work out together.
I am very pleased to be addressing the Council
as the Head of a State which, through its concrete
actions and reasonable and patient policies and by its
continuing to engage in thoughtful dialogue with the
provisional institutions in Pristina during this period,
has affirmed the sincere and willing compromise
solutions aimed at ensuring the peaceful coexistence
of the inhabitants of Kosovo and Metohija. The work
of the State authorities has been extremely difficult
due to the unfavourable circumstances in which the
negotiations have been conducted — that is, intensive
promotion of Kosovo’s independence, which presents
a unilateral act of secession to Belgrade. The Council
will agree that for a small country like Serbia there
can be no greater challenge than the violation of its
sovereignty and territorial integrity.
The dialogue with Pristina took place in an
atmosphere inherited from the sponsorship of Kosovo’s

14-40918

27/05/2014

United Nations Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo

independence, which is unfortunately advocated by
some influential States. However, the dialogue with
representatives of the provisional institutions of selfgovernment in Pristina, held under the auspices of the
European Union (EU), has yielded remarkable results.
I would like to take this opportunity to thank, in
particular, Baroness Catherine Ashton, who on behalf
of the European Union mediated the dialogue between
Belgrade and Pristina with wisdom and patience. April
marked the anniversary of the First Agreement of
Principles Governing the Normalization of Relations, a
true watershed and a new chapter in relations between
Belgrade and Pristina, progress that was welcomed by
the entire world. Serbia has unequivocally demonstrated
that it is a constructive partner and that it is ready to
compromise in order to stabilize the situation and take
the whole region forward.
UNMIK’s continuing 15-year, status-neutral
presence under resolution 1244 (1999), which is as
binding today as it has ever been, is the last bulwark
against the policy of promoting the unilaterally
declared independence for Kosovo. As we have warned
on a number of occasions, the precedent set by the
declaration of Kosovo’s independence has resulted in
porous State borders and potential new focal points for
crisis that have also affected the continent of Europe
more generally. All this testifies to the importance
of abiding by the fundamental principles on which
the United Nations was founded and to which many
United Nations Member States, including Serbia, are
committed to respecting and defending.
International law is based on sources derived from
international conventions, customary law and generally
accepted rules. Any decision, just or unjust, must follow
particular rules or regulations. The very existence of
international law is a guarantee of legal certainty that
precludes voluntarism and arbitrariness as well as
ensuring legality. Without it. civilization today would
be no different from that of medieval times, and we
would have learned nothing from the past.
International relations, however, also depend on
precedents imposed by some countries, possibly even
by force. Such a precedent was created by Kosovo
and Metohija’s unilateral secession from Serbia.
Paradoxically, in this case, a precedent was established
that, it was claimed, was in fact not a precedent. And
then came Crimea, where the people and authorities
of that peninsula, in declaring their independence,
referred to the famous precedent of Kosovo, which

S/PV.7183

, they said, Western countries themselves helped to
create. Western officials immediately responded that
the Kosovo precedent was sui generis, thus de facto and
de jure denying the essence of a precedent, which is a
decision creating a new rule that can apply to similar
or analogous cases in the future. To sum up, we will
have to coin a new way to define a precedent that is
not a precedent. In my opinion, such a phenomenon is
contrary to logic. It negates scientific achievements,
respect for international law and the fact that all
countries of the world, big or small, are equal.
Serbia’s territorial integrity is defined in article 8
of its Constitution, which states that the territory of
the Republic of Serbia is integral and indivisible and
its borders inviolable, and that the Province of Kosovo
and Metohija, as an autonomous entity, is an integral
part of the territory of the sovereign State of Serbia.
That would still be the case had it not been for the
creation of the Kosovo precedent, which launched an
era of consistency in the inconsistent application of
international law.
A great many countries have recognized Kosovo’s
unilaterally declared independence, which split off part
of a sovereign territory that had no right to secede.
And yet other nations’ identical decisions, in identical
situations, have been declared null and void. Is this
justice and equity, or an exhibition of might-is-right?
We who represent small nations seek justice. Serbia
has always respected, without exception, the territorial
integrity of United Nations Member States. Might,
where there is no right, is reprehensible. It should thus
go hand in hand with justice — in other words, what is
mighty should be just, and what is just will be mighty.
Serbia expects that justice and equity should be equally
applied in its case, no more and no less than for other
countries.
Serbia does not recognize the unilaterally declared
independence of Kosovo and Metohija, but it is engaged
in negotiations with it and will continue to do so,
with a view to ensuring peace and prosperity for all
the inhabitants of Kosovo and Metohija. That is the
unwavering position of the current Government and
will be the position of any future Governments.
Let me clarify — Serbia will not be forced to
recognize the unilaterally declared independence of
Kosovo and Metohija by attrition. No one will win an
election in Serbia if he or she makes such a commitment
or accepts Kosovo and Metohija’s independence as a fait

14-409185/30

S/PV.7183

United Nations Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo

accompli. Such an attitude is not evidence of rigidity;
rather, it is the result of an aspiration to survive. No
one should expect us to willingly and passively submit
to our own destruction. Serbia is resolutely against
the promotion of Kosovo’s independence. If that were
not the case, the survival of the Kosovo Serbs would
be at the mercy of the so-called altered situation on
the ground. No one would be spared assimilation or
final exodus, which would result in all traces of their
existence being wiped out.
Serbia’s wealth and strength lie in its unity in
diversity and in the respect and understanding it has
for others. With more than 27 nations, cultures and
languages, it is both unique and diverse, and under
Serbia’s Constitution minorities have even more rights
than do citizens of Serbian nationality. That wealth is
the result of Serbia’s geography. Because we are at the
crossroads between East and West, we have always been
the setting for confrontation between interests from the
outside. Whether orchestrated or organic, incidents
from those confrontations have become triggers for
war, suffering and loss of life.
In the recent past, circumstances have become
extremely complicated, with ethnic cleansing and
pogroms against Serbians and the destruction of their
holy places and of cultural heritage sites inscribed on
the UNESCO World Heritage List. At the same time, we
have been identified as the sole party responsible. Does
the greatest responsibility lie in defending people, even
members of the Albanian community who were not
ready to commit crimes and hate others, and in trying
to protect territories? Can foreign policy missteps
and misunderstanding of international relations and
geostrategic interests be considered responsibility?
Serbian forces withdrew from the country’s own
territory of Kosovo and Metohija pursuant to resolution
1244 (1999) after 78 days of a NATO bombing
campaign that took place without the Security Council’s
authorization. During the air strikes, 2,300 missiles
were dropped, with the use of prohibited depleted
uranium ordnance, cluster bombs and electromagnetic
fibre weapons against thermal power plants and other
power transmission systems. The bombing of oil
refineries provoked black and acid rain, while oil and oil
derivatives and toxic chemicals contaminated the water
supply systems in the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia
and other Balkan countries. More than 5 million people
lived without electricity and water.

6/30

27/05/2014

Some 200 industrial plants, eight power stations
and infrastructure facilities, including 82 bridges, seven
railway stations, six airports and a multitude of roads,
were destroyed or seriously damaged. More than 40,000
buildings, 422 educational institutions — schools,
universities and dormitories — 48 medical centres,
including hospitals and clinics, the building housing
the national television broadcasting company and
74 television relays were demolished. Also destroyed
or demolished were around 90 cultural, historical and
architectural places of interest, including 16 Christian
Orthodox and Roman Catholic monasteries.
During the bombing, nearly 2,000 civilians were
killed and 7,000 wounded; 30 per cent of these were
children. More than 750,000 inhabitants of the Federal
Republic of Yugoslavia left their homes in search of a
normal life beyond the borders of their own country.
One in every four inhabitants was deprived of his or
her livelihood. The final figures of the damage done
are still not known; according to various estimates, the
damage amounts to dozens of billions of United States
dollars.
I am not complaining today about the pain and
suffering inflicted upon us. I do not deny individual
responsibility for the crimes committed against the
Albanian population and I insist that those responsible
be held accountable. But I disagree that in a conflict
between a State and separatists, there could be only
one responsible party, namely, the sovereign State. I am
not complaining and I am not asking for the payment
of war reparations in the classic sense, but as long as
I am President of Serbia I will remind the Council
of its obligation to compensate us for the enormous,
irreparable damage caused to our civilian facilities
and to the economy as a whole. The international
community can redress that historical wrong only if it
helps Serbia alleviate the consequences of bombing by
repairing and rebuilding the damaged infrastructure,
economy and public and cultural institutions. Every day
an ever greater number of officials of the countries that
took part in the bombing of Serbia also demand justice
for Serbia. The damage is too high to be remedied by
Serbia alone.
By engaging in negotiations with Pristina at the
highest level, by acting responsibly and patiently, and
by signing the Brussels Agreement, we have made it
possible for the first time since the bombings for Serbs,
Albanians and other nations in Kosovo and Metohija to
live together. It is more now important than ever that

14-40918

27/05/2014

United Nations Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo

both parties be truly committed to dialogue; otherwise,
the idea of a tranquil life together will become a dead
letter.
I am sure that the European Union will provide
valuable assistance to us in building confidence, in
particular in the further course of Brussels negotiations
and in the framework of European integration. We
also see the start of the accession talks with the EU
as an impetus to further work on improving living
conditions for Serbs in Kosovo and Metohija, as we are
convinced at present that a constructive approach to
fostering European values will be fully embraced by
Serbian society. The fact that accession negotiations
were opened on 21 January 2014 and that a screening
for Chapter 35 negotiations was held shows that
Serbia has fulfilled its obligations resulting from the
Brussels Agreement in a timely manner and that it has
approached the dialogue itself in a constructive spirit.
However, the report of the Secretary-General
(S/2014/305) states that Kosovo is conducting
negotiations on the Stabilization and Association
Agreement with the EU. Serbia has no mechanisms
at its disposal to prevent that, but it may ask certain
questions. Is the European Union a union of States or
a union of States with a para-State? Will it once again
set a precedent without a precedent? According to that
precedent, provinces of all Member States will also be
eligible to become Member States. Serbia considers
that, in accordance with resolution 1244 (1999), only
UNMIK may, on behalf of the Provisional Institutions of
Self-Government, conduct negotiations on stabilization
and association.
The European Union must see to it that international
law is respected and observe the rules on the basis
of which it came into existence; otherwise, its very
foundations will be at risk. If a decision is made to the
effect that Kosovo and Metohija may negotiate with
the European Union independently, it would lead the
European family to lawlessness and chaos, with each
party acting in its own individual interest.
In order to be able to ensure the best possible results
in the implementation of the Brussels Agreement we
must establish much clearer rules and build much greater
confidence. In parallel with negotiations, the Albanian
side has worked to strengthen their independent State
through so-called low-intensity terror against the Serb
population, which is totally unacceptable to Serbia.
Low intensity ethnic crimes may suffice to impose

S/PV.7183

serious constraints on the freedom of movement of
Serbs and other non-Albanians whose life is defined by
a complex number of minor restrictions — prohibitions
on travel alone or by night, choice of time and place
to do errands, restrictive use of Serbian language in
public, safe attendance of schools, and so on. Public
condemnation of ethnically motivated incidents could
definitely contribute to inter-ethnic dialogue and
tolerance, including the raising of awareness that the
future lies with multi-ethnicity and acceptance of
returnees from other ethnic groups.
The introduction of procedures and administrative
obstacles has prevented the return of Serbs. Since 1999,
less than 5 per cent of the expelled Serbs have returned
to Kosovo and Metohija. The demographic picture
is far from the much vaunted multi-ethnicity of our
southern province, which is best illustrated by the fact
that there have been only 50 voluntary returns to the
province. That is far below any acceptable minimum.
The international community has not discharged one
of the main tasks entrusted to it under resolution 1244
(1999) — the free and unimpeded sustainable return of
all refugees and displaced persons to their homes.
Serbs and other minority communities in the region
of Kosovo and Metohija still face problems. Their
freedom of movement continues to be restricted and
impeded. Their security and the free use of their own
language has not been respected, nor have their access
to institutions and the right to participate in elections
and their right to vote. There are no appropriate
mechanisms for the restitution of dispossessed property
or mechanisms for preventing property from being
repossessed following eviction of occupants. Entry into
possession is also prevented. Returnees are not given
free choice of place of return nor are there conditions
for the sustainable return of internally displaced
persons. Even if they somehow decide to return, local
communities go out of their way to make them feel
unaccepted and unacceptable.
Eighteen incidents and attacks on temples and
property of the Serbian Orthodox Church have been
recorded, including the latest wave of threats against
Orthodox places of worship ranging from the graffiti
scribbled on the monastery of Visoki Dečani to the
announcement that the Church of Christ the Saviour in
Pristina will be razed. At the same time, we welcome
UNMIK’s resolute response to declare null and void the
decision of the municipal authorities of Pristina to deny
the Serbian Orthodox Church the right to use land on

14-409187/30

S/PV.7183

United Nations Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo

which the Church of Christ the Saviour had been built
in the centre of the city.
Lastly, constant attempts at renaming and
obliterating the existence of Serbian cultural and
religious heritage, coupled with unlawful sales of the
property owned by the Republic of Serbia, continue
unabated.
The current discriminatory treatment of minority
communities makes it impossible for their members
to lead normal lives, especially with respect to
the enjoyment of all rights legally provided for in
instruments in force in Kosovo and Metohija. The
non-discrimination law promulgated by the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General himself
provides special protection to minority communities,
bans all forms of discrimination and protects
individuals not only against discriminatory acts of
public authorities, but also against discriminatory acts
of legal and natural persons. Regrettably, UNMIK and
the Pristina institutions have not followed up on the high
quality of that legal text with concrete and appropriate
measures to implement it, which has allowed gross
violations of the law and everyday instances of dramatic
discrimination.
We highly appreciate the constructive approach
taken by the United Nations and the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, Mr. Farid
Zarif, as well as by the organizations working under
the United Nations umbrella, including the European
Union Rule of Law Mission in Kosovo (EULEX). They
have created conditions for all sides to work together
on improving the living conditions and respect for the
human rights of all inhabitants of Kosovo and Metohija,
regardless of their ethnicity. I believe that the Council
will agree that disagreements with regard to the question
of the status of Kosovo and Metohija should not stand
in the way of efforts aimed at working together towards
finding practical solutions to issues that Pristina
has been sweeping under the carpet for many years.
Therefore, I believe that a decision to downsize UNMIK
and reduce the number of international personnel would
have an outright negative effect on the Serbs in Kosovo
and Metohija and affect the execution of the functions
entrusted to the Mission.
Consequently, I call on the Council, under the roof
of the United Nations, to resist attempts to marginalize
the United Nations Mission in Kosovo and Metohija and
to attach relative importance to its role within the overall
international and security presence in the province. I
8/30

27/05/2014

ask the Council to make itself both more visible and
more effective in the discharge of its mission, as it
works together with other international players, such
as EULEX, the Kosovo Force (KFOR) and UNMIK,
which are also active under United Nations auspices. In
the light of the intended modification of the mandates
of those missions under the pretext of a changed actual
situation on the ground, allegedly as a result of the
reaching of the Brussels Agreement, I draw attention to
the argument that this cannot alter the binding nature of
resolution 1244 (1999).
In that context, I am opposed to the resort to such
excuses as being overburdened and focused on other,
more urgent matters instead of convening Security
Council meetings devoted to considering the situation
in Kosovo and Metohija more frequently. Great
expectations and the increasing requests of Belgrade
and Pristina concerning the implementation of the
Brussels Agreement require the Council’s meetings be
held with undiminished momentum so as to ensure that
its members are regularly provided with insight into
the situation on the ground. The coming period will
be crucial for the implementation of the arrangements
made and for the further normalization of relations
between Belgrade and Pristina. That process must take
place in full sight of the United Nations Mission in
Kosovo and Metohija and the Security Council.
We support the initiative to set up a special court and
an office of the prosecutor based outside the territory
of Kosovo and Metohija to try all cases resulting from
the investigations carried out by the EULEX Special
Investigative Task Force. Serbia will lend its full
support to the efforts to bring all those responsible to
justice, as it has done in the past.
However, stability has not been promoted by the
arrest of Oliver Ivanović, a mayoral candidate for North
Mitrovica. We expect the problem of secret indictments,
which we have warned about for years, to be resolved.
With witness accounts as the only evidence, witnesses
must testify in an orchestrated manner 15 years after
the crimes were allegedly committed. Mr. Ivanović,
who is being detained in a prison in Mitrovica, was
arrested on the basis of such testimony. In addition, the
appellate court failed to provide an explanation as to
why the legal deadline to act upon his arrest appeal was
allowed to lapse. The Republic of Serbia once again
most vigorously protests the arrest of Oliver Ivanović
and demands his release from prison along with an
explanation as to why he was arrested in the run-up to

14-40918

27/05/2014

United Nations Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo

the mayoral elections in northern Mitrovica, where he
stood as one of the candidates.
Although the overall situation, as indicated in the
report for the period from 21 January to 15 April, has
been described as relatively stable, I believe that this
limited period of time does not reflect the general
situation in Kosovo and Metohija. The circumstances
are characterized by the substantial gap between the
professed benchmarks and respect for human rights
and the actual situation. In considering the generally
made assessments presented as fact for a limited period
of time, it seems to me that we forget that it only takes
a spark like the one in the pogrom of March 2004 to
escalate dormant tensions.
Despite the continued international presence,
impunity, relative importance and depersonalization of
the crimes committed from 1999 onwards send a bad
message, that of fear to the Serbs and other peoples in
Kosovo and Metohija. This means that crimes are not
punished, while further attacks are encouraged because
they remain outside the reach of justice. We note that the
Pristina institutions and the international community
have done next to nothing to protect Kosovo Serbs and
other non-Albanians, particularly the most vulnerable
people like internally displaced persons.
Serbia has encouraged its compatriots in Kosovo to
go to the polls in the local elections. It encouraged them
to do so in order to strengthen their legitimacy, under
the roof of the community of Serbian municipalities,
the establishment of which is envisaged in the Brussels
Agreement, therefore guaranteeing their survival and
the realization of their rights. Despite having lived in
fear and uncertainty for years, they are still ready for
reconciliation and have faith that their coexistence with
Albanians is possible after all.
However, in preparing themselves for the elections,
the Provisional Institutions of Self-Government in
Pristina, preparing themselves for the elections, have
done all they could to challenge the voting right of Serbs.
Calling the internally displaced persons to mark their
vote on the forms with the symbol of an independent
State, which has gained its independence by driving
them out of their ancestral homes — a quarter of a
million of them — is an example of the utter hypocrisy
and provocation.
By manipulating the voting registries, Pristina
attempted to put in place a new, forcibly changed ethnic
structure and therefore directly influence the result of

S/PV.7183

the vote. For all the pledges made and emphasizing the
commitment to multi-ethnicity as democratic values
and human rights, Pristina in practice consistently
applied measures discouraging and dissuading Kosovo
Serbs to participate in the public life of Kosovo.
Unilateral actions by Pristina announcing the
revision of electoral rules at the expense of Serbs and
displaced persons are unacceptable and undermine
the legitimacy of the forthcoming general election
scheduled for 8 June. This time, Belgrade will, after
careful consideration, decide whether to call on Kosovo
Serbs to go to the polls or not. We demand that Pristina
fulfil the basic precondition of enabling the equal
right to vote without discrimination to Kosovo Serbs
and other minorities in Kosovo and Metohija, as also
indicated in the report on the work of UNMIK that is
under consideration today. The actions of Pristina, as
observed by UNMIK, is in direct contravention of its
declared readiness and openness to increase mutual
trust among all communities in Kosovo and Metohija.
That is the purpose of the ongoing dialogue in which
Serbia has invested considerably.
Therefore, we call on our partners and friends at the
United Nations to support wholeheartedly and use their
influence and authority to create conditions conducive
to the equitable representation of numerous minority
communities in all institutions without being overruled
by the majority, as required also in the Declaration
on the Rights of Persons Belonging to National or
Ethnic, Religious and Linguistic Minorities, where
it is recognized that the promotion and protection of
the rights of persons belonging to national, ethnic,
religious or linguistic minorities “contribute to the
political and social stability of States in which they
live. Cases involving forged sales agreements have
remained unsolved. Serb claims for compensation for
the damage caused to their property have been refused
on a massive scale. All this indicates a discriminatory
implementation of regulations and rules.
The issue of minority rights also implies the
restitution of property belonging to non-Albanian
communities in Kosovo and Metohija, among which
Serbs constitute a majority. Moreover, there is the open
question of the property owned by the State of Serbia and
the Serbian Orthodox Church. The legal mechanisms
established by UNMIK and EULEX to address property
issues, assistance to courts to reduce the backlog of
cases and provide adequate protection to individuals
in cases of human rights violations have, regrettably,

14-409189/30

S/PV.7183

United Nations Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo

not produced results. Such litigation accounts for 40 per
cent of the unresolved cases before the courts in Kosovo
and Metohija. Furthermore, the large number of forged
ownership documents also impedes the upholding
of property rights. The Kosovo Property Agency has
iniated approximately 40,000 proceedings for the
restitution of usurped land, while almost 700,000 plots
of land have been occupied, according to unofficial
data. One of the problems affecting property restitution
is the lack of appropriate protection against eviction
owing to unlawful repossession.
Also of interest is the observation with regard to
the expropriation of Serbian property in Kosovo and
Metohija based on the decision of the so-called Kosovo
authorities for the purposes of highway construction. In
the Gračanica municipality, for example, about 170 out
of 213 expropriated properties belong to Serbs.
We have recently been informed that the Provisional
Institutions of Self-Government intend to alter the legal
status of the Trepča industrial complex, the majority
owner of which is the Republic of Serbia. The complex
employs many Serbs living in Kosovo and Metohija.
The adoption of a new law designed to amend the
ownership structure and the legal status of the Trepča
complex would undoubtedly be another unilateral act
that could result in altering the rights and the status of
Trepča employees and members of the Serbian and other
non-Albanian communities in Kosovo and Metohija.
That is yet another attempt at illegal disposition of the
property owned by the Republic of Serbia and a violation
of fundamental property principles. Amendments to
legal regulations would waive the rights of creditors.
At this time, it is unclear how their claims will be
dealt with, bearing in mind that only those creditors
who have filed claims against Trepča company via the
management team in charge of the establishment of the
Community of Serbian Municipalities have claimed to
be owed more than €268 million.
Furthermore, we also note that amendments have
also been proposed in other areas. Such actions by
Pristina show their inconsistency and disregard for the
agreements reached. That is not the only area where
laws are being amended before they have even been
negotiated in Brussels. On the other hand, in areas in
which there is agreement on amendments of the legal
framework to help establish the Community of Serbian
Municipalities, which is binding on Pristina, to date, no
political will has been demonstrated to embark upon

10/30

27/05/2014

this process as an initial step towards implementing the
agreements.
With the excuse of preserving peace, the Pristina
side has been sabre-rattling. I am referring to the
announced establishment of the so-called armed forces
of Kosovo, which is not only in violation of the dialogue
in which we have patiently invested, but also a gross
violation of the provisions of resolution 1244 (1999).
That resolution states that the international forces bear
the responsibility for maintaining a secure environment
for all inhabitants of the province, and therefore the
possibility of creating the so-called armed forces is
ruled out. Such an announcement poses a threat not only
to stability in Serbia and the region, but also seriously
undermines the authority and role of the United Nations
in safeguarding international peace and security. In
that context, Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon pointed
out that resolution 1244 (1999) remains the sole legal
framework for the continued international security
presence in Kosovo and Metohija, the mandate of which
has been clearly defined.
I recall that the Kosovo security force has been
based on the Kosovo Liberation Army (KLA), a
paramilitary formation that during the war in Kosovo
and Metohija spearheaded terrorist actions and took
part in organized crime. Even though the international
community intended to calm the situation on the
ground, to demilitarize the KLA and to transform
it into security structures, it made a breach. Instead
of punishing, it supported separatism and spurred
continued political violence and ethnic hatred.
I ask the Council whether the security forces
whose members belong to criminal structures and
international terrorists could be relied on in regional and
collective security frameworks. Will the international
community give the green light to that act, particularly
taking into account the announced establishment of
the special criminal tribunal to hear cases involving
crimes committed by the KLA in organ trafficking, as
reported by the Special Rapporteur of the Council of
Europe, Mr. Dick Marty?
The support of Council of Europe’s Parliamentary
Assembly for the Marty report, with a vast majority
of votes of member States, should have served as a
strong warning to the international community and to
all institutions that the inhabitants of Kosovo cannot
see protection in such structures, but see only a threat.
There is no legal basis for the creation and operation of

14-40918

27/05/2014

United Nations Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo

Kosovo’s armed forces. On the other hand, I recall that
in resolution 1244 (1999), the international community
agreed to the return of our forces to Kosovo and
Metohija.
In the light of the intended reconfiguration of
EULEX, I would like to remind the Council that under
resolution 1244 (1999), UNMIK is vested with the
sole executive and legislative powers in Kosovo and
Metohija. Consequently, the consent of the United
Nations was needed to engage EULEX. EULEX
received legitimacy in accordance with the Security
Council presidential statement (S/PRST/2008/44), dated
26 November 2008, provided that it acted in accordance
with resolution 1244 (1999), within the status-neutral
framework of the United Nations. Although the powers
and responsibilities of UNMIK relating to police,
customs and the judiciary have almost entirely been
transferred thereby to EULEX, it cannot be said that
UNMIK has been replaced by the European Union
Rule of Law Mission in Kosovo. Therefore, the EULEX
reconfiguration must be carried out in cooperation with
UNMIK and the United Nations, upon their approval
and consent.
Regarding the transfer of powers to the Provisional
Institutions in Pristina, I am confident that all those
present in the Council will agree that powers reserved
for the Special Representative of the Secretary-General
can be transferred to the Provisional Institutions only
with his authorization. The fact that those powers were
entrusted to EULEX in no way diminishes the powers
and responsibilities of the Special Representative. The
transfer of EULEX powers to the Provisional Institutions
in Pristina is harmful and unfair because, on the one
hand, it is unreasonable that Serbia would have no say
in it, and, on the other hand, it is considered responsible
for implementation of the Brussels Agreement,
We must not lose sight of the fact that behind all
our speeches, behind all reports and statements made,
there are people whose sole wish is to have normal
living conditions for their families, who wish to work
to educate their children and ensure their safe future
and a happy childhood and who want to enjoy all the
rights available to them. Therefore, the reports on the
situation in Kosovo should not become mere statistics.
People are not mere numbers. Whenever we review
the situation in the province, we should ask ourselves
how much we have helped the local population to live
better. I am not certain that the conditions are ripe for
the Council to remain less actively seized of the matter.

S/PV.7183

Although significant progress has been made, the final
goal still eludes us.
While appreciating the legitimate interests of the
Albanian, Serb and other populations of Kosovo, and
fully respecting the mandate of the United Nations,
Serbia will resume dialogue, pending a mutually
agreed and sustainable solution. I expect UNMIK and
all international players to continue to work within an
undiminished scope and with the same intensity, and
I urge the Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral to adopt a more engaging approach. That is the
only way to contribute to the creation of conditions for
lasting reconciliation and find a final solution for the
issue of Kosovo and Metohija.
According to the report of the Council of Europe
entitled “Inhuman treatment of people and illicit
trafficking in human organs in Kosovo”, hundreds
of Serbs were kidnapped in Kosovo before, during
and immediately after the 1999 conflict, and they
were all sent to clandestine camps in the Republic of
Albania. Many of them were forcibly operated on to
harvest their organs, often in vivo, and later killed.
Their organs were then sold on the international black
market. The chief investigator into the allegations made
in Dick Marty’s report, international Prosecutor Clint
Williamson, is in possession of a voluminous dossier on
the crimes committed by former KLA members, and he
is expected to hand it over to the judges of the special
tribunal. The Prosecutor’s dossier contains the names
of 120 KLA commanders expected to be charged with
the enforced disappearance of 320 Serbs in the regions
of Orahovac, Drenica and Metohija.
Given that Serbia has done all it could to elucidate
and prosecute all those who committed crimes against
the Albanian population in Kosovo, we rightfully
expect that the full truth will be known and that all
those responsible for those heinous war crimes against
Serbs in Kosovo will be punished. The families of Serb
victims have an equal right, like other victims of crimes
committed in the territory of the former Yugoslavia in
the 1990s, to see that justice is done.
For the historical reconciliation of the two nations
and a comprehensive solution for the problem of Kosovo,
it is necessary that both sides make compromises.
We have done our bit and will continue the dialogue
with the same intensity and greatest constructiveness.
However, Pristina must be made aware that there can
be no durable and comprehensive solution without an
agreement with Serbia and a Security Council decision.

14-4091811/30

S/PV.7183

United Nations Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo

Fifteen years have elapsed since the armed conflict
in Kosovo and Metohija. Instead of living in the past
and making mutual recriminations, it is time to reach
a sustainable solution for the future of the two nations.
We reach out a hand to touch the other side. Our hand is
extended for the sake of our children and their children.
Last week, Serbia was hit by catastrophic floods,
among the largest that have affected Europe in the
last 100 years. The natural disaster claimed dozens of
human lives, flooded towns and villages, destroyed
arable lands, devastated the economy and caused
inestimable damage. To diminish the magnitude of
the catastrophe, the citizens heeded the call of their
Government and expressed a high level of solidarity,
fighting courageously and calmly to save what was
possible to save. Unfortunately, notwithstanding an
enormous will and desire, we cannot rebuild alone
what has been destroyed. We need assistance to make it
possible for the citizens to restore what they have lost,
to redo agricultural work where possible and, where it
is not, to help them weather the year and begin the next
year under more normal conditions. The Council has
received DVDs featuring some of the tragedy that hit
Serbia. I would appreciate it if Council members viewed
them. Humans do not demean themselves if they ask for
help, but they are great only if they proffer help.
I express my gratitude to all countries and peoples
that have helped or that will help Serbia in the coming
period to overcome the tragedy and destruction brought
about in catastrophic floods. We do not ask from others
what they do not have, but only part of what they have
in excess of their needs. Their little more is much for
us, and it is necessary. For what is the meaning of life
other than to show empathy and the will to help others.
The President: I thank His Excellency Mr. Nikolić
for his statement.
I now give the floor to Ms. Atifete Jahjaga.
Ms. Jahjaga: It is a distinct pleasure to be with
the Council here today to share the developments in
the Republic of Kosovo over the last three months, a
period during which we have achieved much progress
in consolidating our State, extending the rule of law
into all corners of our territory and contributing to
the peace and stability of the whole region of SouthEastern Europe.
On behalf of the institutions of Kosovo and its
citizens, I would like to express our appreciation to
United Nations Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon for
12/30

27/05/2014

his contribution to peace and stability in Kosovo and
the region, and to the member countries of the Security
Council for their interest in and support to the overall
progress of Kosovo and the region.
I would also like to use this opportunity to express
our sincere condolences to the President of Serbia and
its citizens for the loss of lives and property as they have
battled terrible floods in the past few weeks. President
Nikolić, our thoughts and prayers are with your citizens
affected by that tragic natural disaster.
Over the past several months, the Republic of
Kosovo has shown political maturity, courage and
leadership, and we have reaped tangible results, inching
us closer to our overall goal of creating a multi-ethnic
and multicultural State of equal citizens living in peace
and prosperity regardless of their ethnicity, gender,
religious affiliation or race. Beyond our daily efforts to
reach out, protect and integrate all of Kosovo’s ethnic
communities in the country’s institutional and social
life, we have constructively engaged with the Republic
of Serbia in a thorough dialogue to normalize the
relations between our States and to better the lives of
our citizens.
Today Kosovo is a very different place from the
destroyed country we inherited 15 years ago, with
thousands of civilian deaths, many victims of torture
and rape used as a tool of war, physical destruction and
a legacy of hostilities and ethnic cleansing conducted
by the Serbian forces. Recovery has not been easy. It
took the generosity of the international community and
the will of our citizens to get to where we stand today. It
also took political will and courage to move on.
I take note of the support that Serbia’s President,
Mr. Tomislav Nikolić, has given to the process of dialogue
between Kosovo and Serbia in the normalization of
the relations between our countries. While we have
our differences over Kosovo, it is important that we
recognize the reality of Kosovo’s independence and its
irreversibility.
In conjunction with the political progress, we have
focused much of our attention on further consolidating
our sovereignty, extending and strengthening the rule of
law, building a sound basis for economic development
and attracting much-needed foreign investment,
solidifying credible institutions and showing political
will and maturity to press ahead and come closer to
realizing our aspiration to join the European Union
(EU) and other international bodies.

14-40918

27/05/2014

United Nations Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo

The Republic of Kosovo remains committed to
the dialogue process with the Republic of Serbia. In
that process — which began in 2011 and culminated
in the comprehensive First Agreement of Principles
Governing the Normalization of Relations of 19 April
2013, facilitated by the EU High Representative
for Foreign Affairs and Security Policy, Baroness
Catherine Ashton, and supported by the international
community — we have reached political and societal
inclusion and consensus. We have gone beyond
ideological boundaries and the daily political agendas.
We are determined to move on and to move forward.
The process of the dialogue with Serbia has been one
of our major efforts, and its implications reach far
beyond the consolidation of Kosovo’s sovereignty and
territorial integrity and its membership in international
organizations.
Agreements reached in Brussels are facilitating the
full integration of the Serbian community in Kosovo.
They have ended the operation of the illegal security
structures supported by Serbia in parts of Kosovo,
bringing the much-needed rule of law to the citizens
of the northern part, who lived in an atmosphere of
intimidation and lawlessness for far too long. Those
agreements will bring daily services closer to the
citizens of the northern municipalities. They have
enhanced their freedom of movement as they have
eased the movement of goods and increased the wellbeing of citizens on both sides of the border through
proper revenue collection. While much of the focus
has been on the north, we see those developments as
positive for our entire society and beneficial to citizens
across the country.
Agreements negotiated and signed in Brussels
have boosted European perspectives for Kosovo and
Serbia based on cooperation and good neighbourly
relations, while setting them on distinctive paths to the
European Union. The success of the dialogue process
has confirmed once again the transformational power
that the European Union project holds, paving the way
to this Union and to us, to advance the momentum of
the region’s integration in its midst.
In that vein, I encourage the remaining five EU
member States to recognize Kosovo’s independence
and further this perspective, which remains crucial to
peace and stability in the Western Balkans and beyond.
I also take this opportunity to express our appreciation
to more than 100 countries around the world for
recognizing Kosovo’s statehood and endorsing its

S/PV.7183

vision for a democratic and multi-ethnic country. And I
urge the remaining United Nations Members that have
yet to recognize Kosovo to do so.
As we marked the first anniversary of the bilateral
normalization agreement reached in Brussels through
the EU mediation of April 2013 between the Prime
Ministers of both countries, Kosovo institutions have
focused on the successful implementation of its 15
points. We are convinced that its full implementation
in a consistent and effective manner will further
transform our future relations and bring stability to the
region. We thank our partners — the European Union,
for its role as facilitator and guarantor of the dialogue
process, and the United States, a strong supporter of
this process — and encourage them to continue to stand
by us as we move forward.
Considerable progress has been achieved in the
implementation of the agreements, and we expect it
to gain momentum again once the electoral processes
in both countries are completed. In particular I would
like to again highlight the successful completion of the
local elections organized throughout Kosovo, including
the official inauguration and adoption of municipal
statutes in accordance with Kosovo law, as called for
in the Brussels Agreement. I am pleased to note that
participation by the Serbian community and other
ethnic communities in Kosovo has been satisfactory.
With the completion of the statutes of the four
northern municipalities, the association of the Serb
majority municipalities can be created in accordance
with Kosovo’s Constitution, laws and the European
Charter of Local Self-Government to ensure the
integration of the Serbian community in the country.
The association will be an integral part of the Kosovo
institutions.
Similarly, good progress has been made on
the customs revenue collection at the northern
border crossings, as well as the establishment of the
development fund and its management board, the
closure of the offices of the Serbian Ministry of the
Interior operating in those municipalities and the
integration of their personnel in the Kosovo police
force, as stipulated in the Brussels Agreement. We look
forward to concluding the agreement on dismantling
the parallel courts at the next meeting in Brussels, and
we expect Serbia to meet its responsibilities in ceasing
the work of those courts and paving the way to the
integration of Kosovo Serb judges and prosecutors into
Kosovo’s justice system.

14-4091813/30

S/PV.7183

United Nations Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo

More remains to be done in the area of security
in the four northern municipalities, including the
disbandment of the remaining parallel structures. In
this period, I note with concern instances of resistance
to the establishment of rule of law in the four northern
municipalities by paramilitary and criminal groups who
have kept hostage the progress of the Serbiancommunity
in Kosovo over the last 15 years. These structures
also continue to endanger the staff of domestic and
international law enforcement agencies, as witnessed
recently with the attack on vehicles belonging to the
European Union Rule of Law Mission in Kosovo
(EULEX), as well as with the erection of barricades
that continue to prevent the freedom of movement. We
expect the new Government in Serbia to keep its end of
the Agreement and continue to engage constructively
to ensure that Kosovo Serbs accept and endorse the
agreements reached in Brussels in our joint efforts to
bring stability and peace to our citizens, the region and
beyond.
As we approach the early general elections in
Kosovo, I have called on all mechanisms and all
parties in Kosovo to ensure the stable environment and
democratic and fair conditions that would allow for a
free and inclusive vote. I reiterate my call on all Kosovo’s
ethnic communities to exercise their constitutional
right through their full participation in the elections to
choose their own representatives, who will give voice
to their interests and demands, and to work jointly with
us in strengthening democracy in Kosovo.
Kosovo’s institutions remain committed to the
return of all refugees and those displaced by the war.
To make these returns sustainable, we have taken a
comprehensive approach by investing in the housing
sector, health and security, access to education and
economic development. I am particularly encouraged
that some of the recent returns have taken place in the
urban centres, as well as by the cooperation of countries
of the region in working with Kosovo’s Government in
facilitating these returns.
The Republic of Kosovo is committed to a
comprehensive reform process that will enhance its
future prospects for membership of the European
Union (EU), the main priority that unifies the citizens
of Kosovo and the option that enjoys institutional and
societal consensus. Building on this tangible progress, I
am pleased to inform the Council that earlier this month,
Kosovo completed the negotiations on a stabilization
and association agreement with the European Union as

14/30

27/05/2014

the first key step in our path to future membership. I
look forward to the swift formalization of the results
of the negotiations following the general elections
in Kosovo, as we work to ensure a safe and sound
environment for our citizens and a better quality of life
as we pursue this European perspective. We have made
significant progress in meeting the conditions to join
the visa-free regime with the European Union, and we
expect this process to be concluded soon.
During this period we have also completed a
strategic review of our security sector. This whole-ofgovernment process, conducted for the first time,
was executed in an organic and transparent manner,
studied the current and future security environment,
and assessed the security needs of all our citizens
and Kosovo’s strategic security goals. Among the
recommendations stemming from this process is the
creation of the Kosovo armed forces, designed as a
lightly armed defence force that we believe will meet the
security challenges of Kosovo in the long term and be
the vehicle through which we contribute to the Balkan
region’s collective security. The creation of the Kosovo
armed forces will be a gradual, phased, decade-long
and inclusive process that will seek not only the
support of all the ethnic communities, but their active
participation. Both security organizations in Kosovo
have a good record of inclusiveness. Some 15 per cent
of Kosovo’s police force consists of officers from ethnic
minorities, and about 9 per cent of the Kosovo Security
Force are members of ethnic minorities.
On the creation of Kosovo armed forces, we
have reached out to ethnic communities in Kosovo,
the countries of the region and our international
stakeholders in NATO to explain the outcomes of the
review process, and we shall continue this important
dialogue. In our effort to become security providers,
Kosovo’s institutions have and shall continue to act
in partnership with the international community, and
especially with NATO, in this process.
In our clear commitment to a European future
for Kosovo, we have partnered with EULEX to
strengthen the rule of law throughout the country.
As we translate this strong commitment against
corruption and organized crime into concrete actions,
I have asked the European Union for an extension of
the EULEX mandate until 2016. While EULEX will
transition from an executive mandate into a mentoring
role, its continued contribution to strengthening the
independence of our multi-ethnic justice system will

14-40918

27/05/2014

United Nations Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo

be invaluable. Under the new mandate, EULEX will
complete the pending cases and take up new ones upon
the request of Kosovo’s institutions. The new EULEX
mandate, which was endorsed by Kosovo’s Parliament,
will continue to assist in the implementation, where
agreed, of the EU-facilitated dialogue between Kosovo
and Serbia.
In our efforts to stay true to the commitment to
build a democratic Kosovo, at peace with itself and its
neighbours, and the values and ideals enshrined in our
Constitution, Kosovo’s Parliament has endorsed the
creation of a special court, with internal and external
seats, to address war crime allegations arising from a
report of the Council of Europe in 2010. The creation
of the special court reflects Kosovo’s determination
to engage in an independent and impartial process to
credibly address these allegations, as we believe that
a commitment to justice for all is the only way to true
reconciliation in the region.
As we speak here today, working-level teams from
Kosovo and Serbia are digging out a mass grave in the
Serbian town of Rudnica, unearthing the remains of
some of the 1,712 missing from the Kosovo war. These
are bodies of Kosovo Albanian civilians abducted and
executed by Serbian forces during the war. Closing
this chapter goes beyond politics. As leaders of our
countries, it is our obligation to help bring closure to
thousands of shattered families by empowering the
Commissions working on the issue of the missing to
investigate their fates and showing political will and
courage to bring to justice those that perpetrated these
horrendous crimes.
We have worked intensively to open a new chapter
in Kosovo, where each and every citizen shall enjoy
equality and live in freedom and peace. A lot has been
achieved and much remains to be accomplished. I am
encouraged by the change we have seen in the region
and the endorsement that we have received from the
international community, which stood by our side to
offer clear and distinct perspectives to Kosovo and
Serbia on their paths to the European Union.
Kosovo will stay committed to building good
relations with its neighbours that promote cooperation
and mutual trust — a paradigm shift for a region engulfed
in war less than two decades ago. On this path, we were
guided by the deep conviction that we must not allow
a repetition of the painful past and the immeasurable
suffering inflicted upon the lives of Kosovo’s citizens.
There will continue to be contradictions and tensions

S/PV.7183

as we move forward, yet I believe that the progress
achieved thus far should and will be maintained as we
stand determined to secure a prosperous future for the
young generations.
We want to continue to cement the gains we
have made in strengthening Kosovo internally and
consolidating it internationally, as the two processes
are tightly linked. As we move forward, we seek the
Council’s help and guidance, as the success in Kosovo
and the advancement of this momentum will be our
joint legacy, just as today’s Kosovo, living in peace and
prosperity, is our joint success.
I would also like to add that there can be no more
credible testimony to who did what during the 1990s
than the verdicts of the International Tribunal for the
Former Yugoslavia, which was established by the
United Nations. Also, there can be no more authoritative
indication of the legality of Kosovo’s independence
than the opinion of the International Court of Justice,
a United Nations organ. I thank Council members for
their attention and support for progress in Kosovo.
The President: I thank Ms. Jahjaga for her
statement. I now give the floor to Council members.
Mr. Churkin (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We welcome the participation of President
Tomislav Nikolić in this Council meeting. At the
outset, we would like to express our condolences for
the natural disaster that has struck Serbia. The Russian
Federation has been providing assistance in overcoming
the consequences of the disaster. We agree with the
comments and share the assessments of President
Nikolić. We also listened closely to the statement by
Ms. Atifete Jahjaga. We would like to thank Mr. Zarif
for presenting the report of the Secretary-General
(S/2014/305) on the work of the United Nations Interim
Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK).
The United Nations Mission is the main
international presence in the province. We call upon it
to fully and actively implement its mandate. To do so, it
needs to have all the necessary resources. We condemn
attempts to undermine the role of UNMIK and we call
on the Kosovo Albanian side to provide full-fledged
cooperation with the United Nations presence.
We note the steps that have been taken towards
normalizing relations between Belgrade and Pristina
in the framework of dialogue at the highest political
level. It is important for that work to lead to progress
on ensuring the rights of the Serb population of the

14-4091815/30

S/PV.7183

United Nations Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo

province. We share the assessment in the report of the
Secretary-General on the need to establish as quickly as
possible a community of Serb municipalities of Kosovo
as an instrument to protect collective Serb interests
and, consequently, stability in the region as a whole.
The situation of Serbs in Kosovo continues to
be rather dispiriting. There has been practically no
progress in the return of Serbian refugees and the
re-establishment of their property rights. People are
afraid to return to Kosovo, given the threat of ethnically
motivated violence, the lack of security guarantees and
the failure of local authorities to protect their rights. It
is important to recall that the creation of conditions to
achieve that is one of the main demands of resolution
1244 (1999). We continue to witness ongoing looting
and usurpation of Serb property and the desecration of
Serb cemeteries. Exiled Serbs often cannot even visit
the tombs of their ancestors, even during orthodox
holidays. On the walls of Serbs monasteries and homes,
insulting slogans and threats have appeared. Recently,
a similar incident occurred in the monastery of Visoki
Dečani, which is under the protection of NATO’s Kosovo
Force. Routine public condemnations by the Kosovo
Albanian authorities is insufficient. There is a need for
a true combatting of all forms of ethnic and religious
intolerance. However, the results of investigations into
a number of high-profile ethnic crimes have yet to be
seen.
We believe that the initiative of creating the socalled Kosovo armed forces is counterproductive.
Unfortunately, the report of the Secretary-General gives
very vague assessments of such moves by Pristina.
We note the decision to extend the European Union
Rule of Law Mission in Kosovo (EULEX) until June
2016. We call upon it to be guided by its mandate and to
act in an entirely neutral manner. At the same time, as
the report of the European Court of Auditors states, the
effectiveness of EU assistance to Pristina in the area of
the rule of law is insignificant. It is important to note
that, of course, the authority of the Security Council
cannot be delegated to a third party, in particular
Pristina’s structures.
We also welcome the Special Investigative Task
Force’s continued efforts to look into the crimes
uncovered by the Council of Europe Special Rapporteur,
Mr. Marty, including trafficking in human organs. All
those who are guilty need to be brought to justice,
and we hope that the unusual format of the Task Force
will make it possible to ensure objective and impartial
16/30

27/05/2014

justice that will not be subject to any kind of political
expediency.
The reports of participation by Kosovo Albanians
in the Syrian conflict is very worrisome, in particular
regarding their affiliation with Al-Qaida-affiliated
terrorist groups such as Jabhat al-Nusra and the Islamic
State in Iraq in the Levant. We very strongly support
putting an end to that kind of activity.
We would like to confirm that Russia’s position
on the issue of Kosovo remains unchanged. We are in
favour of the sovereignty and territorial integrity of
Serbia. We believe that resolution 1244 (1999) remains
fully relevant and lays out the obligations for all
involved, as the international legal framework for the
resolution of the Kosovo conflict.
Mr. Lamek (France) (spoke in French): I thank
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General
for his statement, and I welcome President Jahjaga and
President Nikolić.
At the outset, I would like to extend my deepest
condolences to President Nikolić following the disaster
of exceptional magnitude that has affected his country
and neighbouring States bordering the Sava. The
international community stands side by side with
them in that ordeal. The European Union (EU) and
its member States have already mobilized and will
continue to bring them the assistance they need.
A year has passed since the historic First Agreement
of Principles Governing the Normalization of Relations
of 19 April 2013. It is crucial that the spirit of harmony
and cooperation that has prevailed continue to reign
between the parties in terms of its implementation and
that the dialogue between Pristina and Belgrade remain
regular and of high quality. The parties must remain
committed and engaged and retain a constructive spirit
in the search for compromise.
We will pay attention, as the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General invites us to do, to the pursuit
of the effective implementation of the Agreement of
19 April 2013, including the complete dismantling
of Serb parallel structures in northern Kosovo; the
early conclusion of a legal agreement; and finally the
development, in a spirit of openness, of a community of
Serb municipalities in Kosovo, with real responsibilities.
We would also like to welcome the decision by the
Kosovo Parliament, on 24 April, to ratify an exchange
of letters between EU High Representative Catherine

14-40918

27/05/2014

United Nations Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo

Ashton and the President of Kosovo, whom I commend
for adopting a responsible attitude. That exchange of
letters and its approval by a large majority in Parliament
shows Kosovar parties’ and leaders’ vision and thus
their political maturity. Thanks to that exchange of
letters, the European Union Rule of Law Mission in
Kosovo (EULEX), the strategic review of which was
conducted with close cooperation between Pristina and
Brussels, has been extended for two additional years.
Moreover, the exchange of letters establishes a
Kosovar court of law, the mechanisms of which will
enable follow-up, under the best possible conditions, of
the work carried out by Lead Prosecutor Williamson
of the Special Investigative Task Force. That decision
shows the desire of Kosovars to engage in a legal process
that will allow for a credible and impartial response
to serious allegations. By agreeing to shed light on
acts allegedly committed by individuals, Kosovo
thus demonstrates that it is ready to close the painful
chapter of war, contribute to regional reconciliation and
demonstrate its commitment to European values.
We condemn last month’s incident involving a
EULEX vehicle, which took place only a few months
after the death of a Lithuanian officer in the Mission in
the performance of his functions. It is unacceptable that
those personnel are endangered, and we recall that all
parties must respect the freedom of movement of troops
and personnel deployed as part of the Kosovo Force
and EULEX. However — and fortunately — Kosovo
continues to enjoy a generally calm and stable situation.
France supports the development of a sovereign,
peaceful, democratic and multi-ethnic Kosovo, living in
peace with its neighbours. The parliamentary elections
are planned to take place on 8 June. We invite Kosovars
from all communities to go to the polls and thus
participate in the construction of their common destiny.
We call for the holding of transparent and democratic
elections, for which the European Union has already
deployed a new election observation mission.
It is important to protect the rights of the various
communities throughout the territory of Kosovo,
in particular regarding their cultural and religious
heritage. We strongly condemn any desecration
of Serbian monasteries and cemeteries and, more
generally, any attack against religious or cultural sites.
Such actions should not go unpunished. They must be
unanimously condemned for what they are: an obstacle
to the emergence of a multi-ethnic State respectful of the

S/PV.7183

rights of its minorities. We encourage fruitful dialogue
launched between the authorities in Pristina and the
Serbian Orthodox Church in Kosovo. In addition, it is
also important to facilitate the return of refugees and
internally displaced persons in conditions of safety and
socioeconomic reintegration.
The positive developments seen in Kosovo over
recent years must also be accompanied by concrete
measures to strengthen the rule of law and transparency,
and to enable the development of a climate favourable
to business and economic development. Interference in
judicial proceedings is not acceptable.
I conclude by commending the joint progress
of Kosovo and Serbia towards Europe following the
normalization of their relations. An important step in
the negotiations between the European Commission
and Pristina with a view towards the finalization of the
Stabilization and Association Agreement was begun on
6 May. We hope it will soon be concluded.
Serbia, for its part, has made significant efforts
in terms of internal reforms and relations with its
neighbours. These culminated in the launch on
21 January of negotiations on accession to the European
Union. It is now up to the two countries to uphold
their commitments in the context of these negotiations
with a view to continuing their respective European
integration.
Mr. Laro (Nigeria): I join other speakers in
thanking Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral Zarif for his comprehensive update on the
situation in Kosovo. I also thank the President of Serbia
and Ms. Atifete Jahjaga for their statements.
Nigeria expresses its deepest sympathy to the people
of Serbia for the loss of life and substantial material
damage caused by the recent floods in the country.
The continued collaboration between the United
Nations Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo,
the European Union Rule of Law Mission in Kosovo
(EULEX) and other facilitators, such as the Kosovo
Force (KFOR) and the Organization for Security and
Co-operation in Europe (OSCE), has helped with the
consolidation of peace and stability in Kosovo and the
attainment of progress in the implementation of the First
Agreement of Principles Governing the Normalization
of Relations of 19 April 2013. This is evident in the
willingness of the parties to narrow their differences
in their respective positions, thus making it easier to
achieve consensus on residual issues.

14-4091817/30

S/PV.7183

United Nations Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo

The integration of former Serbian police officers
into the Kosovo Police, as well as the ongoing European
Union-facilitated dialogue between Belgrade and
Pristina to commence accession negotiations are
further indications of commitment towards the 19 April
Agreement. These strategies, aimed at facilitating
sustainable peace and stability, should be encouraged
by all parties.
The report of the Secretary-General (S/2014/305)
indicates that members of the Assembly of Kosovo
representing the Kosovo Serb and other minority
communities have expressed concern that certain
provisions of the draft law on general elections are
setting new criteria for voter eligibility, which these
groups believe will affect their eligibility to vote. The
OSCE considers that draft law to be incompatible with
other laws, and has acknowledged that the changes
in the voter eligibility criteria might discourage
participation in elections by minority voters. In the
interests of fairness and inclusiveness, we believe that
the law should take into consideration the concerns of
the Serbs and other minority groups in Kosovo.
One of the recommendations emerging from the
two-year Strategic Security Sector Review is for the
Kosovo Security Force (KSF) to be transformed into the
Kosovo armed forces. We note that neither NATO nor
KFOR was involved in drafting the recommendation.
That is significant, as the report indicates that any
changes to the mandate and structure of the Kosovo
Security Force might have an impact on NATO’s
provision of continued support to Kosovo.
The report also shows that the Serbian authorities
and Kosovo Serb representatives have expressed serious
reservations about the proposed transformation of the
KSF into the Kosovo armed forces. Indeed, the Serbian
authorities view it as a violation of resolution 1244
(1999). In that regard, we see the need for the Kosovo to
proceed carefully with this aspect of its security sector
review by taking into consideration the concerns of all
stakeholders. We welcome the assurances given here
today by Ms. Jahjaga that the authorities of Kosovo will
continue their engagement on this issue.
While we acknowledge the gains made in the
implementation of the first agreement, the situation
in northern Kosovo remains a cause for concern.
Increasing political tensions arising from arrest,
detentions, protests and offences against EULEX give
rise to heightened insecurity in Kosovo, and must be
comprehensively addressed. Restrictions imposed on
18/30

27/05/2014

visits to Kosovo by Serbian officials, police actions in
Shtërpcë/Štrpce and retaliatory attacks on the Kosovo
Police are issues that require urgent attentions in order
to avoid an escalation of tensions.
We urge all sides to take steps to prevent a relapse
into violence while making strident efforts to reach
a comprehensive and mutually acceptable solution to
issues in the territory and the region. We also encourage
the unimpeded resettlement of minority returnees and
internally displaced persons in Kosovo. We believe that
the effort of the Government to address the low rate of
voluntary return and reintegration of displaced persons
is vital. We take note of the strategy for communities
and returns for 2014-2018 and hope that it will promote
voluntary returns in the medium-to-long term.
We welcome the extension of the EULEX mandate
until 14 June 2016 and commend its role in stabilizing
the region. We look forward to the finalization of its
strategic review, which will adjust its operations and
improve the Mission’s performance on the ground.
Finally, we commend Special Representative of
the Secretary-General Zarif and his team for their
unrelenting efforts in promoting peace and stability in
Kosovo, as well as in the region. We assure him and his
Mission of our continued support.
Ms. King (Australia): I would like to thank the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General Zarif
for his briefing to the Council on the activities of the
United Nations Interim Administration Mission in
Kosovo (UNMIK) during the reporting period. I would
also like to welcome to the Council the President of
Serbia, Mr. Tomislav Nikolić, and the President of
Kosovo, Mrs. Atifete Jahjaga, and to thank them very
much for their statements. I would also like to convey
Australia’s condolence to President Nikolić and to the
communities in Serbia which have suffered the loss of
family members in the unprecedented flooding. These
losses are being deeply felt within affected communities
in Australia.
Serbia and Kosovo have achieved remarkable
progress over the past two years in their high-level
political dialogue to normalize their relations and in the
implementation of the 19 April 2013 agreement. As the
Secretary-General says in his report (S/2014/305), the
parties have been steadily narrowing their differences.
We welcome the efforts of political leaders in both
Belgrade and Pristina, and commend them for the
progress they have made. The progress on the police

14-40918

27/05/2014

United Nations Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo

integration chapter of the First Agreement of Principles
Governing the Normalization of Relations of 19 April
2013has been particularly important. The 284 former
Serbian police officers now serving with the Kosovo
police force enhance the trust that Kosovo Serbs
have in Kosovar institutions and therefore represent
an important confidence-building measure for the
community. As the Secretary-General observes in his
report, some challenges remain, including with regard
to the establishment of the association of Serbian
municipalities in Kosovo. Yet that, too, remains
important. We encourage both sides to work towards
finding an appropriate role for the association.
Australia commends the Kosovo Assembly’s
decision on 23 April to establish a special court within
the Kosovo court system with seats within and outside
Kosovo, designed to adjudicate allegations arising from
the work of the Special Investigative Task Force. We
acknowledge that this was a difficult and sensitive
decision. In establishing a credible judicial process
that we hope can finally resolve the grave allegations
of organ trafficking during the 1990s conflict, Kosovo
has reaffirmed its commitment to the rule of law, and
we commend this decision.
The proposal to reform Kosovo’s security forces has
also proved to be a sensitive issue, both domestically
and regionally. Australia recognizes Kosovo’s right
as an independent nation to develop its security
forces, particularly in the framework of its continued
cooperation with NATO. We recommend that every
effort be made to ensure that Kosovo’s armed forces
are developed in full transparency and dialogue with
key regional neighbours.
We would like to acknowledge the importance of
the continued deployment of the European Union Rule
of Law Mission in Kosovo (EULEX). We acknowledge
the report of the European Union High Representative
for Foreign Affairs and Security Policy on EULEX
activities. EULEX’s refocused mandate, voted on
by the Kosovo Assembly and supported by President
Jahjaga in her April letter, will ensure that EULEX can
continue to investigate and prosecute serious organized
crime and war crimes, and help build the capacity of
Kosovo’s multi-ethnic justice and police institutions
until 15 June 2016. We condemn the attack on EULEX
vehicles on 25 April and call for a swift and thorough
investigation. We remain encouraged, however, that the
overall security situation remains calm and that Kosovo
remains on a positive trajectory. This lends credence,

S/PV.7183

in our view, to the argument that the Security Council
could decrease the frequency of its debates on the
situation in Kosovo.
The return of the significant numbers of people
displaced during the Kosovo conflict is an essential
component of the long-term reconciliation process
in Kosovo, but this cannot happen without a holistic
approach to returns policy, addressing housing,
security, freedom of movement, access to public
services and employment opportunities. Australia
welcomes Kosovo’s new strategy for communities and
returns for the period 2014-2018, and encourages all
relevant Kosovar authorities to implement it fully.
To conclude, the opening by Serbia in January
of accession talks with the European Union, and the
conclusion of negotiations on a future stabilization
and association agreement for Kosovo, are historic
steps on the respective paths of both countries towards
European integration. Following the understandable
short pause during the general elections in Serbia, and
the forthcoming parliamentary elections in Kosovo
scheduled for 8 June, it is now important that the newly
elected leaderships in Belgrade and Pristina re-engage
with renewed purpose and vision in the political
dialogue supported by the European Union. This will
ensure that positive momentum is maintained and full
normalization of relations achieved, to the mutual
benefit and prosperity of the people of Serbia and
Kosovo.
Mr. Tatham (United Kingdom): I thank the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for Kosovo,
Mr. Farid Zarif, for his briefing today. I am delighted
to welcome to the Council Her Excellency President
Atifete Jahjaga and His Excellency President Tomislav
Nikolić.
We recognize that President Nikolić’s visit comes
at a very difficult time for Serbia, following the
catastrophic flooding and tragic loss of life that his
country has experienced in recent weeks. It has been
devastating for the hundreds of thousands affected
in Serbia and across the region. My Government is
providing support in response to the floods through the
coordinated approach of the European Union (EU). A
team from London has travelled to Belgrade to look at
how we can assist in a needs assessment to make the
best possible use of the international support now and
in future reconstruction efforts. The United Kingdom
expresses its solidarity with the Serbian people, and

14-4091819/30

S/PV.7183

United Nations Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo

indeed all those in the region who are suffering as a
result of this natural disaster.
Turning to the subject of the debate, the United
Kingdom welcomes Kosovo’s continued progress both
internally and on the international stage. We welcome
the fact that Kosovo is recognized by more than half the
United Nations Member States, and we encourage those
countries that have not yet recognized Kosovo to do so.
Regarding internal progress, the United Kingdom
notes in particular the conclusion of local elections
in Mitrovica North, and looks forward to similarly
successful parliamentary elections next month. Before
its dissolution, the Kosovo Assembly undertook two
significant steps towards strengthening Kosovo’s
relationship with the European Union. The United
Kingdom welcomes its ratification of an exchange of
letters to extend the mandate of the European Union
Rule of Law Mission in Kosovo (EULEX) for two
years, and the signing of the agreement on the content
of the Stabilization and Association Agreement
between the European Union and Kosovo. We continue
to support the important work of EULEX, including its
assistance in the implementation of the EU-facilitated
dialogue agreements. In particular, we urge continued
cooperation with EULEX operations on the part of
communities and elected leaders in the north of Kosovo.
We strongly condemn the attack on the EULEX convoy
last month, and call on those with information about
that incident, and about the murder of the Lithuanian
customs officer last September, to help the police with
their inquiries.
We are pleased to note the Kosovo Assembly’s
decision to establish the framework for a special court
to hear any cases that may arise from the report of the
EULEX Special Investigative Task Force, led by Clint
Williamson. This has been a major achievement, and it
demonstrates Kosovo’s willingness to confront difficult
rule-of-law issues. We urge all parties to continue to
support this important judicial process.
The United Kingdom congratulates both Serbia and
Kosovo on their efforts so far to normalize relations
through the EU-faciliated dialogue. The SecretaryGeneral’s report (S/2014/305) rightly refers to the
remarkable progress achieved since the start of the
dialogue at prime-ministerial level in October 2012. It
is now vital to sustain and build on that progress. It
is perhaps inevitable that the combination of Serbian
elections and forthcoming elections in Kosovo have

20/30

27/05/2014

resulted in a slowdown in the pace of the dialogue;
nevertheless, we hope that the next meeting will
take place soon, and we urge both sides to redouble
their efforts, to avoid losing the impressive earlier
momentum.
We urge both Belgrade and Pristina to continue
implementing the First Agreement of Principles
Governing the Normalization of Relations of 19 April
2013. We recognize that steps have been taken, but
full implementation of the dialogue agreement is not
yet in sight. It is essential that the establishment of
the association of Serb-majority municipalities and its
statute be agreed on soon, and that other commitments,
such as on the judiciary and on telecommunications and
energy, are concluded without further delay. We also
call on both sides to ensure the maximum participation
of all communities in Kosovo’s upcoming national
elections.
I would like to react to concerns that have been
expressed by some about the proposed transition of the
Kosovo Security Force into the Kosovo armed forces.
Neither the Kosovo Security Force nor the Kosovo armed
forces is mentioned or prohibited by resolution 1244
(1999). The resolution does make specific reference to
armed Kosovo Albanian groups. The Kosovo Security
Force cannot, in our view, be classed as such, given that
it is multi-ethnic and controlled by the civil State.
Reference has been made in statements today to
Kosovo Albanians participating in foreign conflicts.
We welcome the fact that there has been strong
condemnation of such participation by numerous
local and international actors, including the Islamic
community of Kosovo. We also note the stated intention
of the Kosovo authorities to establish clear legislation
prohibiting such participation.
I would like to take this opportunity to welcome the
launch by President Jahjaga in Kosovo on 7 March of a
national council for survivors of sexual violence. I also
note subsequent legislative amendments adopted by the
Kosovo Assembly to recognize and protect survivors of
sexual violence.
The Council is rightly very focused on the
prevention of sexual violence. The United Kingdom
supports efforts to deal effectively and sensitively with
the consequences of sexual violence on those tragic
occasions where it has happened. The United Kingdom
welcomes the fact that the challenge is being addressed
in Kosovo.

14-40918

27/05/2014

United Nations Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo

Finally, the United Kingdom reiterates its view that
the Council should consider reducing the frequency with
which we meet for these debates. The overall positive
backdrop makes that, in our view, an appropriate step.
Ms. Murmokaitė (Lithuania): I would like to start
by thanking Mr. Farid Zarif, the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General, for his briefing. I would also
like to thank His Excellency Mr. Tomislav Nikolić,
President of Serbia, and Her Excellency Ms. Atifete
Jahjaga, President of Kosovo, for their statements.
Let me first of all express Lithuania’s condolences
to and solidarity with all those in Serbia affected by
the worst flooding in the region in over a century.
Lithuania, together with other international partners,
stands ready to offer assistance and support to the flood
victims.
I would like to note Kosovo’s constructive approach
in the negotiations for a Stabilization and Association
Agreement with the European Union (EU), which were
formally completed on 6 May. That is a reflection of
Kosovo’s commitment to continuing comprehensive
reforms on its European path.
Today, I would like to touch upon three
elements — implementation of the Belgrade-Pristina
First Agreement of Principles Governing the
Normalization of Relations, elections and the extension
of the mandate of the European Union Rule of Law
Mission in Kosovo (EULEX).
During the reporting period, Belgrade and Pristina
maintained active engagement in the EU-facilitated
dialogue, even though the pace was somewhat reduced
due to the electoral cycles in both Serbia and Kosovo.
The continued commitment and political will of the
leaders to proceed with the dialogue and implementation
of the Agreement is commendable and encouraging.
We welcome the statement made by the head of the new
Government of Serbia, Mr. Vučić, that the continuation
of the Brussels-based dialogue is a priority for his
Government and is in the best interests of the Serbs in
Kosovo.
We hope that after the results of the parliamentary
elections in Kosovo on 8 June, tangible steps towards
normalization of relations with Serbia will continue as
well. The progress achieved so far must be sustained and
further advanced. We trust that a fair and democratic
conduct of the parliamentary elections in Kosovo will
further strengthen the functioning of democracy there

S/PV.7183

and will increase confidence in State institutions.
The elections in Kosovo will be followed closely by
the international community. We support the role of
European Union Election Observation Mission and the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe in
providing assistance to local authorities in conducting
the elections in accordance with international standards.
At the moment, the Kosovo Force and the United
Nations Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo
(UNMIK) continue to contribute to the maintenance
of peace and stability on the ground, while EULEX
plays a key role in the consolidation of the rule of law.
It is in Kosovo’s legitimate interest to develop its own
capabilities to ensure rule of law and security within
its territory. That goal is fully achievable. Lithuania
welcomes the decision of the Kosovo Assembly on
the creation of a special court to follow-up on cases
investigated by the Special Investigative Task Force
on war crimes, as well as the invitation to extend the
EULEX mandate for another two years.
Much remains to be done, however. The escape
of the three high-profile war crimes suspects is a
cause for concern. We call on the Kosovo authorities
to ensure due process in war crimes investigations
and to bring all perpetrators to justice. The situation
in the north remains complex. Security gaps affect
institutions, international actors and the daily life of
local communities. A recent attack on 25 April against
EULEX police reminded us of the 19 September 2013
attack, when a Lithuanian customs officer was killed.
We call on the respective authorities to thoroughly
investigate all such criminal acts and to bring their
perpetrators to justice.
The implementation of the April Agreement aims
at building inclusive societies and bridges between
people. Tackling the legacies of the past and ensuring
transitional and transnational justice for all the victims,
including minority refugees and displaced persons,
remains a cornerstone of peaceful cohabitation within
the State and among the countries. In the context
of progress in implementing the Belgrade-Pristina
Agreement, my delegation, like others whose
representatives have spoken before me, remains open
to reviewing the current UNMIK debate cycle with a
view to reducing its frequency, as well as considering a
reduction of the United Nations peacekeeping operation
in Kosovo in accordance with the development of facts
on the ground.

14-4091821/30

S/PV.7183

United Nations Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo

Mrs. Perceval (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish): First
of all, on behalf of Argentina, I would like to express our
full solidarity with Serbia in the light of the regrettable
situation it is experiencing due to the recent floods,
which, as has been said, are the worst in the past 120
years. We would like to express our condolences to the
family members of the victims, to the Government of
Serbia and to the region as a whole at this difficult time.
I would like to thank the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General, Mr. Farid Zarif, for presenting
the report (S/2014/305) on the United Nations Interim
Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK). We
would also like to welcome the participation of
President Tomislav Nikolić and Ms. Atifete Jahjaga.
Argentina, as is our tradition, would like to
emphasize the important role that the United Nations
is playing in Kosovo through UNMIK in promoting
security, stability and respect for human rights as
well as in its cooperation with the Kosovo Force and
the European Union Rule of Law Mission in Kosovo
(EULEX), which has maintained a neutral position
with regard to the status of Kosovo under the auspices
of the United Nations.
It is important to recall that Argentina voted in
favour of resolution 1244 (1999) when it was also a
member of the Security Council. Argentina believes
that the resolution continues to be the international legal
basis that applies in Kosovo to achieve a comprehensive
solution through a political process and through
negotiations. We reiterate once again the importance
of UNMIK, not only in assisting the process of local
elections that were held in November and December,
last year but also in supporting Belgrade and Pristina,
whose firm leadership has permitted the taking of the
measures necessary to the full establishment of new
municipal Governments in the north of Kosovo.
With regard to security, we welcome the fact that
crime rates dropped during the reporting period and
that the overall situation is stable. However, we are
concerned that attacks against Serb Kosovars continue,
especially in Pejë/Peć and in the town of Istog/Istok.
We also condemn the repeated acts of vandalism against
cemeteries and property of the Serbian Orthodox
Church. It is up to the corresponding authorities to take
measures so that those acts are not repeated. Bearing
that in mind, we think that the response of the Kosovo
police with regard to crimes against ethnic minorities
has improved and that the increase in patrolling in

22/30

27/05/2014

areas shared by different ethnic populations, as has
occurred in the municipality of Klinë/Klina, could be
an important step forward.
We welcome the commitment of the parties to
continuing the high-level dialogue under the auspices
of the European Union and we highlight the important
progress achieved in implementing the historic First
Agreement of Principles Governing the Normalization
of Relations of 19 April 2013. We urge the parties to
continue those efforts and consolidate the progress
achieved, in particular by reaching an agreement on
the establishment of the community or association of
Serbian municipalities. We underline the progress in
one area of the Agreement that is particularly sensitive,
namely, the incorporation of the personnel of the
Ministry of Interior of Serbia into the Kosovo police.
We urge the parties to continue on that path through
dialogue and the application of the Agreement in order
to make progress on the related issue of the judiciary
and other areas of the rule of law.
The Republic of Serbia, in particular, has continued
to show its genuine commitment to the process of
implementing the April 2013 Agreement. We would
therefore encourage all the international stakeholders
on the ground to continue working together in line with
their respective mandates in order to contribute towards
consolidating the achievements and the effective
resolution of pending issues.
While we are encouraged that the security situation
in Kosovo has been mostly calm, that does not mean
that we should not continue to focus on the security
situation in northern Mitrovica. In that regard, we
reiterate that the important work of UNMIK continues
to be essential in providing the greatest support to the
political processes, in particular giving special attention
to the implementation of the 19 April 2013 Agreement.
Argentina believes that it is very important to
achieve full respect for the human rights of displaced
persons and members of minority groups so that they can
return to their places of origin and accede to substantive
rights and not be the victims of discrimination or
intimidation. While the adoption of a strategy for
communities and returns for 2014-2018, which
prioritizes housing construction, security, freedom of
movement, access to public services and employment
opportunities, and the fact that the situation of displaced
Kosovo Roma, Kosovo Ashkali and Kosovo Egyptians
has improved are both positive, the report recognizes

14-40918

27/05/2014

United Nations Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo

that displaced Serbs continue to face difficulties. We
urge the authorities to redouble their efforts to promote
tolerance, respect and reconciliation and to confront all
forms of discrimination.
Argentina remains concerned by the relatively
low rate of voluntary returns of Kosovars to the region
since their displacement 15 years ago. We call on the
authorities to continue working to implement measures,
such as the aforementioned strategy, to address those
unresolved issues, which remain obstacles to facilitating
the return and definitive reintegration of internally
displaced persons.
It is also crucially important to continue to give
priority to the tasks of overcoming the traces and legacy
of the conflict, including the pending cases of 1,712
disappeared persons. We underscore the holding of new
meetings of the Working Group on Missing Persons in
Belgrade and Pristina, under the chairmanship of the
International Committee of the Red Cross. UNMIK
should continue to support and encourage efforts to
ascertain the fate of disappeared persons. We also call
for redoubled efforts and cooperation so that impunity
is the not the last word on serious violations of human
rights.
We highlight the work being done by UNMIK
to support the rule of law, especially its cooperation
with all the pertinent interested parties with regard
to the main problems on the ground. We think that it
is important for international presences to continue
strengthening mutual cooperation in order to establish
the appropriate conditions to implement the 19 April
2013 Agreement in the best way possible.
We conclude by highlighting the work done by the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General to
promote security, stability and respect for human rights
in Kosovo in accordance with resolution 1244 (1999).
Mr. Nduhungirehe (Rwanda): I would like to
thank Mr. Farid Zarif, Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, for his comprehensive briefing, and
commend the United Nations Interim Administration
Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK), under his leadership,
for its achievements in implementing its mission. I
thank His Excellency Mr. Tomislav Nikolić, President
of Serbia, and Ms. Atifete Jahjaga of Kosovo for their
respective statements. Our thoughts and prayers go to
the Serbian people, under the Serbian Government,
after the devastating floods of last week.

S/PV.7183

Rwanda welcomes the continued dialogue between
Pristina and Belgrade towards the full implementation
of the First Agreement of Principles Governing the
Normalization of Relations of 19 April 2013. We
commend the European Union (EU) for facilitating the
ongoing dialogue and encourage both sides to remain
engaged in fruitful discussions on their common
objective of integration within the European Union.
We also acknowledge the achievements of the
European Union Rule of Law Mission in Kosovo
(EULEX) in promoting the rule of law in Kosovo. We
take note of the extension of EULEX mandate until
15 June 2016 and the continuation of the EULEX
Special Investigative Task Force, which is focused on
investigating the alleged trafficking of organs. We
hope that the ongoing EULEX strategic review will
enable the Mission to continue supporting Kosovo
in strengthening the rule of law, particularly in the
judiciary customs and police areas.
Rwanda welcomes the progress made towards the
normalization of relations between Serbia and Kosovo,
as demonstrated by the inclusion of former Serbian
police officers who are now on active duty in northern
Kosovo as part of the integration of the Serbian Ministry
of the Interior personnel into the Kosovo police. That
is an encouraging confidence-building effort, which
we hope will be followed by a final agreement on the
integration of Serbian parallel judicial institutions into
Kosovo’s legal system within the framework of the
EU-facilitated dialogue.
On the return of displaced persons, we remain
concerned that the rate of return remains relatively
low. However, we welcome Kosovo’s strategy for
communities and returns for 2014-2018, which is aimed
at improving and providing a conducive environment
for returnees with regard to housing construction,
local security, freedom of movement, access to public
services and employment. We consider that initiative
to be an important step in the overall integration of
Serbs into Kosovo and we welcome the efforts of all
municipalities south of the Ibar/Ibër river that have
complied with the statutory requirement of appointing
minority community officers to key positions.
On the security situation, we note that Kosovo
remains generally stable and that the crime rate
continues to decline. We underscore the central role and
the important work done by the authorities and police
in that regard. However, we are concerned about the

14-4091823/30

S/PV.7183

United Nations Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo

multiplication of incidents in northern Kosovo, mainly
attacks on UNMIK convoys, the arrest of Kosovo
Serb officials, violent protests and the restrictions on
visits by Serbian officials. We also express concern at
incidents affecting Kosovo Serbs, mainly violations of
property, including property of the Serbian Orthodox
Church, the desecration of graves and offensive graffiti.
We urge the Kosovo authorities to redouble their efforts
in preventing and investigating those incidents so that
the authors can be held accountable. We stress the need
for the Kosovo authorities to protect Kosovo Serbs
and other ethnic minorities, which is a prerequisite for
reconciliation.
In conclusion, as Kosovo prepares for parliamentary
elections on 8 June, my delegation recognizes the
tremendous efforts and progress made by both parties
towards the full implementation of the 19 April 2013
Agreement. We encourage them to go the extra mile
through dialogue, which is the only way to ensure
sustainable peace between both sides. We thank the
European Union for its continued facilitation and we
pay tribute to Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral Farid Zarif for his continued commitment in
implementing the UNMIK mandate.
Prince Zeid Ra’ad Zeid Al-Hussein (Jordan)
(spoke in Arabic): I thank Mr. Farid Zarif, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General and Head of
the United Nations Interim Administration Mission
in Kosovo (UNMIK), for his comprehensive briefing.
I welcome both Her Excellency the President of the
Republic of Kosovo, Ms. Atifete Jahjaga, and His
Excellency the President of the Republic of Serbia,
Mr. Nikolić, and thank them both for their statements.
Allow me to convey the condolences of the Kingdom of
Jordan to the Government of Serbia and its people and
to the Governments of neighbouring countries for the
victims of the flood that hit the Balkans region earlier
this month.
The progress made in Kosovo and the calm security
situation prompts a certain optimism at a time when
the agenda of the Security Council is crowded with
complex disputes and delicate situations in various
regions. Today we must commend the leaders in Kosovo
and the different parts of the Kosovar community for
their dedication in building a unified multi-ethnic and
democratic State and for their serious engagement with
the international community. We call on all countries to
support them in their endeavours.

24/30

27/05/2014

Jordan supports the ongoing active participation of
Belgrade and Pristina in the European Union-facilitated
dialogue, and the serious commitment shown by
both sides during those meetings. We applaud recent
agreements regarding technical judicial matters. We
believe that both parties share the responsibility to
pursue the dialogue and to continue making progress
towards the full and faithful implementation of the First
Agreement of Principles Governing the Normalization
of Relations.
The European Union continues to play a pivotal role
in advancing progress in that dialogue. We express the
hope that the aspirations of both parties to integration
into the European Union and to strengthening
relations with regional organizations will contribute
to promoting regional security and stability, as well
as the development of cooperation among countries
of the region in various fields in a manner that meets
the aspirations of the people and contributes to their
prosperity.
We welcome the ongoing cooperation between
Kosovo and the European Union on extending the
mandate of the European Union Rule of Law Mission
in Kosovo and the strategic review of the role of the
Mission and its functions in the upcoming period of its
mandate, while taking into account the progress made
in the implementation of relevant agreements on the
rule of law on the ground.
Ensuring the prosecution of the perpetrators of
grave crimes committed during conflicts, regardless of
the ethnicity of the perpetrator or the victim, is a main
pillar of transitional justice. It is equally important
in post-conflict societies seeking to consolidate
reconciliation to ensure that all parties feel that justice
in the future will always be sought and provided for
in a fair and adequate manner. In that regard, Jordan
commends the commitment of Kosovo to ensuring the
rule of law and its establishment of a special court to
look into the allegations contained in the 2010 Marty
report.
All issues arising from the past conflict must
continue to be addressed because they have a
significant impact on the collective psychological state
of the different communities in Kosovo and the region,
including issues related to internally displaced persons,
returnees and missing persons. We hope that UNMIK
and other international organizations will continue to

14-40918

27/05/2014

United Nations Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo

contribute to addressing such issues in order to build
trust and deepen reconciliation.
The successful conduct of local elections in the
Republic of Kosovo is proof of the Government’s
commitment to building inclusive State institutions and
of the abilities of the Kosovo authorities to manage the
democratic process and to hold free and fair elections,
as has been emphasized by international observers.
Jordan hopes that preparations for the legislative
elections in Kosovo will continue apace and with wide
participation. We also hope that the elections will be
held with equal success.
In conclusion, we would like to express our
appreciation to the Head of UNMIK for his and for the
efforts of all UNMIK personnel in the implementation
of all aspects of the Mission.
Mr. Cherif (Chad) (spoke in French): I thank
Mr. Farid Zarif, Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral, for his briefing. I also welcome the presence
of His Excellency Mr. Tomislav Nikolić, President of
Serbia, and Ms. Atifete Jahjaga, President of Kosovo,
and thank them for their statements.
On behalf of Chad, I would like to offer to President
Nikolić and the Government and people of Serbia our
sincerest condolences following the flooding that has
taken so many lives and caused considerable material
destruction.
Chad welcomes the ongoing, active participation of
Serbia and Kosovo in the European Union-facilitated
dialogue and that encouraging progress has been
made in the implementation of the First Agreement of
Principles Governing the Normalization of Relations of
19 April 2013. I commend the parties for pursuing the
dialogue and for the progress that has been achieved.
We welcome the integration of 284 former officials of
the Serbian Ministry of the Interior into the Kosovo
police. We urge the parties to redouble their efforts to
establish the future association/community of Serbian
municipalities in Kosovo. We welcome the measures
that have been taken to establish the new municipal
community safety councils in northern Kosovo
following the 2013 elections.
We encourage the draft bill on general elections
and call upon the authorities to work to ensure the
integration and inclusion of everyone, particularly
the Serbian population of Kosovo, as well as the other
minority communities. The restoration of mutual trust

S/PV.7183

among the communities will be a yardstick for the
success of the ongoing talks. With regard to the initiative
to transform the Kosovo Security Force into the Kosovo
armed forces, all necessary precautions should be taken
to study all aspects of the question, without excluding
the possibility for Kosovo to create its own defence and
security forces in the long term.
On the justice front, we congratulate the European
Union Rule of Law Mission in Kosovo for its work under
the authority the United Nations Interim Administration
Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK) in the overall framework
of resolution 1244 (1999). We welcome the decision
to renew its mandate. We particularly welcome
the agreement on the inclusion of Serbian parallel
judicial institutions into the Kosovo system and the
strengthening of the rule of law throughout Kosovo, as
evidenced in several prosecutions and judgements that
have been delivered in the area of organized crime and
corruption. We also welcome the initiative of the Kosovo
Government to create a special tribunal to consider war
crimes. We welcome the agreement on the integration
of Serbian parallel judicial institutions into the Kosovo
legal system. We hope that a final agreement will be
concluded under the European Union-promoted talks.
We note with satisfaction that with respect to security,
the situation in Kosovo is stable, despite continued acts
of theft, arson, attacks on property, and vandalism and
desecration of cemeteries. Chad condemns such acts,
which incite violence and hatred. We welcome the
efforts of UNMIK to facilitate communication between
the Kosovo authorities and INTERPOL and to establish
a strategic interinstitutional cooperation plan to fight
organized crime and corruption with the nomination of
an anti-corruption national coordinator.
We welcome and encourage the Working Group on
Missing Persons, which enjoys the participation of the
International Committee of the Red Cross, UNMIK and
national and local authorities, although 1,712 persons
remain missing since the end of the war in Kosovo. We
also commend the Kosovo Government for approving
a strategy on communities and the return of displaced
persons for 2014-2018, guaranteeing all their necessary
rights.
Finally, Chad encourages the entire international
community, and the Security Council in particular, to
support the normalization of relations between Belgrade
and Pristina through the European Union-facilitated
dialogue. The resulting progress should inspire UNMIK

14-4091825/30

S/PV.7183

United Nations Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo

to meet expectations and better prepare in terms of
facing future challenges.
Mr. Barros Melet (Chile) (spoke in Spanish): My
delegation thanks Mr. Farid Zarif for his briefing on the
report of the Secretary-General on the implementation
of the mandate of the United Nations Interim
Administration Mission in Kosovo (S/2014/305). We
also welcome His Excellency Mr. Tomislav Nikolić,
President of the Republic of Serbia, and Ms. Atifete
Jahjaga. We begin with a message of support to the
countries of the Balkans that have been affected by
the recent floods and welcome the solidarity among
countries that were parties to the conflict that devastated
the former-Yugoslavia 20 years ago.
Today, the Security Council is meeting for the
fourth time since the signing of the First Agreement of
Principles Governing the Normalization of Relations of
19 April 2013. We value the important progress achieved
in its implementation. In particular, we highlight
the agreement among the parties on the outstanding
technical issues regarding the integration of Serbian
parallel judicial institutions into the legal framework of
Kosovo. Moreover, the active participation of Belgrade
and Pristina in the dialogue facilitated by the European
Union is essential to achieving their common objective
of improving their cooperation with the Union’s
institutions. In that context, we commend Serbia’s
official launch of talks in Brussels on 21 January with a
view to acceding to the European Union.
My country stresses the role of regional organizations
in peacebuilding efforts and in re-establishing the rule
of law. In that context, we call special attention to the
efforts on the ground of the Organization for Security
and Cooperation in Europe and the European Union Rule
of Law Mission and to their contribution in restoring
the rule of law and maintaining security in Kosovo.
We recognize the role played by the European Union in
bringing the parties closer together, which culminated
in the First Agreement of Principles Governing the
Normalization of Relations of 19 April 2013.
We remain concerned about the complex situation
of displaced persons in Kosovo. Chile highlights the
assistance of the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees in resolving the problem.
While local authorities have shown tolerance in
allowing returns, efforts should be redoubled to avoid
any hint of discrimination, particularly against minority
populations. We also reiterate the importance of the

26/30

27/05/2014

ongoing implementation of resolution 1325 (2000) at
all levels so as to guarantee the participation of women
in decision-making and the due consideration of their
needs.
We stress the central role of the United Nations
Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK)
in promoting peace and security in the area of human
rights, which is a priority in fostering reconciliation
among the communities. Only in an atmosphere of
respect and adequate protection for fundamental
human rights will it be possible to hope for national
reconciliation and a future life in peace.
Despite the progress made in the political dialogue,
we are concerned about certain cases in which the
interim administration of Kosovo has acted contrary to
the conditions agreed and defined under resolution 1244
(1999) for the status of Kosovo. That is why we express
reservations with respect to the plan to transform the
Kosovo Security Force into the Kosovo armed forces.
We also call upon the provisional authorities of Kosovo
to refrain from preventing Serbian authorities from
entering the territory, in order to avoid any additional
conflict.
Experience in other conflict situations has shown
that reconciliation processes must be based on truth
and justice. In that respect, we highlight the progress
made by the parties in identifying missing persons.
Especially relevant in that respect is the work carried
out by the authorities of Serbia and Kosovo through the
Working Group on Missing Persons, with the help of
UNMIK. We must move forward in the search for truth
and the whereabouts of every one of the missing.
We have amply demonstrated the importance
of justice in peacebuilding efforts and the process
of national reconciliation. We underscore the work
carried out by EULEX in transitional matters and
in strengthening the rule of law. In conclusion, we
reaffirm the importance of resolution 1244 (1999) as a
guiding document for Kosovo to promote reconciliation,
stability and prosperous communities.
Mr. Wang Min (China) (spoke in Chinese): I thank
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General for
Kosovo, Mr. Farid Zarif, for his briefing. I welcome
the presence of the President of Serbia, His Excellency
Mr. Tomislav Nikolić, in today’s meeting and his
statement. I also listened carefully to the statement
made by Ms. Atifete Jahjaga.

14-40918

27/05/2014

United Nations Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo

The recent severe flooding in Serbia resulted in
significant loss of life and property. China expresses
condolences to the victims. Our sympathy goes out to
the bereaved families and to the injured. China shall
do all it can to provide support and assistance based on
Serbia’s needs.
China respects Serbia’s sovereignty and territorial
integrity and understands the legitimate concerns
over the issue of Kosovo. China believes that the best
solution to the Kosovo issue lies in reaching agreements
acceptable to all parties through dialogue and
negotiation, within the framework of relevant Council
resolutions and in accordance with the purposes and
principles of the Charter of the United Nations.
At present, the overall situation in Kosovo is calm.
The two parties to the Kosovo issue are pursuing the
dialogue, which has yielded some positive results that
China welcomes. We encourage both parties to continue
their dialogue and negotiation, overcome difficulties
and challenges, actively implement the agreements
previously reached, effectively protect the legitimate
interests of all ethnic groups, and resolve the problem
of the return of internally displaced persons so that all
people will be able to collectively benefit from peace
and development and build a better life.
Resolving the Kosovo issue in a proper way and
building a Kosovo where all ethnic communities live
harmoniously plays a part in the peace and stability
of the Balkans and the rest of Europe. That is also a
common goal of the international community. China
encourages the United Nations Interim Administration
Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK) to continue to implement
the Security Council’s mandate under the leadership
of Special Representative Zarif. It is China’s hope
that the international presence — including UNMIK,
the European Union Rule of Law Mission in Kosovo
and the Kosovo Force — will strengthen coordination
and cooperation in accordance with their respective
mandates to continue to contribute to the peace,
stability and development of Kosovo.
Mrs. DiCarlo (United States of America): I thank
Special Representative Zarif for his briefing. I would
like to welcome President Jahjaga and President Nikolić
to their first time before the Council, and thank them
both for their statements.
I would like to express our deep condolences to all
those in Serbia, as well as in Bosnia and Herzegovina
and Croatia, who have suffered as a result of the

S/PV.7183

devastating floods. We stand with them as they begin
to recover and rebuild.
The United States commends both Serbia and
Kosovo for their continued dedication to the European
Union-facilitated Kosovo-Serbia dialogue and the
implementation of the First Agreement of Principles
Governing the Normalization of Relations of 19 April
2013. Both Governments have made difficult decisions
that are critical to realizing a more stable, peaceful
and prosperous region. We would in particular like to
recognize the efforts of President Jahjaga, the first and
only female head of State in the Western Balkans, to
promote inclusivity in Kosovo. We also thank the new
Government in Serbia for its renewed commitment
to continuing the normalization process, in line with
Kosovo’s legal and institutional framework and in
accordance with the Agreement.
I would like to raise three points today: Kosovo’s
upcoming parliamentary elections, the European
Union Rule of Law Mission in Kosovo (EULEX), and
Kosovo’s strategic security review.
We welcome President Jahjaga’s announcement
that parliamentary elections will be held on 8 June.
The 2013 municipal elections demonstrated Kosovo’s
capacity to meet international electoral standards, and
it will be important for Kosovo’s leaders to show the
political will to do the same during this pre- and postelection period. We were pleased to hear President
Jahjaga’s assurances in this regard. Such open and fair
political processes help Kosovo cement its place in
Europe.
The United States commends the Kosovo
Government and the Kosovo Assembly for their
approval of the exchange of letters on the EULEX
transition and the extension of its mandate, and on their
support for establishing a special court to hear potential
cases of the Special Investigative Task Force. We also
thank the European Union for its continued role in
Kosovo. The letters set out a new two-year EULEX
mandate, taking into account Kosovo’s progress since
2008, and detailed guidelines to ensure creation of an
internationally credible judicial structure and process
for any trials that may result from the work of the Task
Force.
The strong vote by the Assembly underscored
Kosovo’s commitment to justice and the rule of law.
Following elections next month, we look forward to
the new Assembly’s prompt consideration of related

14-4091827/30

S/PV.7183

United Nations Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo

implementing legislation. It is in our common interest
to resolve the 2010 Council of Europe report allegations
once and for all, to strengthen Kosovo’s international
credibility and to advance its European aspirations.
Finally, I would like to comment on Kosovo’s
strategic security sector review, which was facilitated by
a team of United States advisors, to evaluate Kosovo’s
legitimate security needs. The final report released in
March outlined a responsible plan to gradually develop,
over a period of years, a limited territorial self-defence
capacity, in accordance with Euro-Atlantic norms and
built on the existing multi-ethnic Kosovo Security
Force. This process has been conducted in a transparent
and professional manner over the past two years.
In its facilitation role, the United States engaged
the Government of Serbia on this issue on several
occasions, and the Kosovo Government has briefed
regional partners and NATO members on the review’s
recommendations to transfer the Kosovo Security
Force (KSF) to the Kosovo armed forces, in keeping
with resolution 1244 (1999). We are confident that with
the involvement of NATO and regional partners, we can
build trust between the two sides and ensure that the
arrangements will strengthen the security and stability
of the region. In this vein, we welcomed the written
assurances of the Kosovo Government to NATO that
reaffirm its earlier commitment, made in conjunction
with the April 2013 Agreement, that the KSF and its
successor would undertake no mission in the north
without the prior concurrence of the Kosovo Force.
Further, as a member of NATO, the United States notes
that the Alliance’s commitment to Kosovo remains
unchanged.
We are moving towards the day when Kosovo and
Serbia will be not only good neighbours, but partners
in the European Union and Euro-Atlantic institutions.
Kosovo has made great progress in consolidating its
democracies since its declaration of independence. Over
one half of United Nations Member States, including
nine members of the Council, now recognize Kosovo
as a sovereign and independent State. For the sake of
greater stability in the region, we urge those States that
have not recognized Kosovo to do so. We hope that the
leaderships in Belgrade and Pristina will continue their
positive momentum as they work to establish peaceful
and secure environment that will allow their citizens
to flourish. They will have full support of the United
States in this regard.

28/30

27/05/2014

Ms. Lucas (Luxembourg) (spoke in French): I,
too, would like to thank the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General and Head of the United Nations
Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo, Mr. Farid
Zarif, for his briefing. I welcome the President of
Kosovo, Her Excellency Ms. Atifete Jahjaga, and the
President of Serbia, His Excellency Mr. Tomislav
Nikolić.
At the outset, I would like to express Luxembourg’s
solidarity with and compassion for the victims of the
floods in the Western Balkans. Our thoughts are with
all those affected by the disaster.
During the period covered by the most recent report
of the Secretary-General (S/2014/305), elections were
held in Kosovo and Serbia. Despite the relative slowing
in the pace of implementation of the agreements
reached in the dialogue between Belgrade and
Pristina, facilitated by the European Union, important
progress has been made since the beginning of the
year. Discussions on the organization and scope of the
judicial institutions in northern Kosovo have made
good progress and will, we hope, be concluded shortly.
The integration of police officers into Kosovo’s police
continued. The partial elections to elect the mayors of
Mitrovica North took place without incident, and all the
mayors were sworn in.
The Serb Government elected following the
16 March parliamentary elections has demonstrated its
intention to pursue the European integration process,
and we welcome that fact. That process requires a
normalization of relations with Kosovo. Kosovars,
for their part, will have a chance to make their voices
heard at the polls on 8 June. We welcome the European
Union’s launching, on 20 May, of an electoral observer
mission, which is working in close cooperation with the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe.
The quality of the electoral process in Kosovo will be
important in gauging the young country’s maturity,
and we hope that the positive developments that began
with the municipal elections in November 2013 will
continue. We also encourage all Serbs in Kosovo to
exercise that democratic right, which is also their duty
as citizens.
Once the new Government of Kosovo is in place,
the normalization process will be able to resume
with renewed momentum. The implementation of
the agreements reached thus far should continue. I
would highlight in particular the establishment of an

14-40918

27/05/2014

United Nations Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo

S/PV.7183

association of Serb municipalities in Kosovo, which is
at the heart of the historic agreement of 19 April 2013.

the coming months a Stabilization and Association
Agreement between the European Union and Kosovo.

The pursuit of reforms aimed at guaranteeing the
rule of law is crucial to Kosovo’s European integration.
It is therefore commendable that, on 23 April, Kosovo’s
parliament approved an exchange of letters between
the President of Kosovo and the High Representative
of the European Union, Catherine Ashton, with a view
to extending the mandate of the European Union Rule
of Law Mission in Kosovo (EULEX) to 15 June 2016.

These positive developments should encourage
Belgrade and Pristina to make irreversible progress
on the path of reform and in the normalization of their
relations. We are confident that the leaders and citizens
of the two countries will show the commitment and
courage necessary to realize their European future. As
a faithful partner of solidarity of Serbia and of Kosovo,
Luxembourg will spare no effort in supporting them in
their endeavours.

Significant progress has been made since the
deployment of EULEX in 2008. While adapting its work
to promote enhanced responsibility for the Kosovars,
EULEX will continue to play a key role in three areas:
support to the Kosovar authorities to strengthen their
institutions, the fight against organized crime and
corruption, and bringing to justice perpetrators of war
crimes and the most serious crimes, including through
investigating the allegations contained in the report
on inhumane treatment and human organ trafficking
in Kosovo. We welcome the progress achieved by the
Special Investigative Task Force and the preparations
under way aimed at establishing a special tribunal to
try those allegedly involved.
Luxembourg attaches particular importance to
the fate of the 1,712 people missing since the end of
the conflict in Kosovo. The exhumation work in the
Rudnica quarry must continue with support from
international partners and in the presence of Kosovar
authorities in order for the victims’ families to learn the
fate of their loved ones.
We recognize the efforts by the Government of
Kosovo to increase the rate of voluntary returns and
promote the reintegration of those displaced. The
strategy for communities and for returns of displaced
persons for 2014-2018 in Kosovo is a step in the right
direction. We welcome President Jahjaga’s remarks
reaffirming Kosovo’s determination to eliminate the
obstacles to the return of displaced persons, including
Serbs.
For more than a year now, Serbia and Kosovo have
been resolutely committed, under the auspices of the
European Union, to the normalization their relations.
The determination of their leaders has allowed the two
countries to take crucial steps. Serbia began negotiations
on joining the European Union on 21 January, and
Kosovo concluded on 2 May its negotiations with the
European Commission with a view to reaching in

The President: I shall now make a statement in my
capacity as the representative of the Republic of Korea.
My delegation would like to thank Special
Representative Farid Zarif for his briefing. We warmly
welcome President Nikolić and President Jahjaga to
the Council and thank them for their statements today.
I would also like to express our deep sympathy and
condolences to those affected by the recent floods in
Serbia and other countries in the Balkans, and wish
them a rapid recovery.
A year after the signing of the historic 19 April
agreement between Belgrade and Pristina, there has
been significant progress on their path towards the
normalization of relations. Building on such hard-won
gains, we look to Serbia and Kosovo to continue to
engage constructively in the European Union-facilitated
dialogue with a view to resolving the remaining issues
expeditiously, including the establishment of the
association/community of Serb municipalities.
While we commend such accomplishments, we
remain concerned over violent incidents in northern
Kosovo, such as the recent attacks on Kosovo Police
and the European Union Rule of Law Mission in Kosovo
(EULEX), as well as the protests against their law
enforcement activities. We believe that such incidents
illustrate the need to strengthen the credibility of the
justice system. In this regard, we stress the importance
of the work of EULEX in consolidating the rule of law
in Kosovo’s institutions. We encourage leaders in the
north, as well as in Belgrade and Pristina, to cooperate
constructively with EULEX.
Lastly, we encourage the Kosovo authorities to
promote the protection of minorities. In particular,
further emphasis should be given to facilitating the safe
and voluntary return of internally displaced persons.
The strategy for the reintegration of repatriated person
for 2014-2018 is a positive development in this regard.

14-4091829/30

S/PV.7183

United Nations Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo

We once again commend the entire staff of the
United Nations Interim Administration Mission in
Kosovo, EULEX and other international partners
for their tireless efforts for the continued peace and
stability of Kosovo.
I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.
His Excellency President Nikolić has requested to
take the floor to make a further statement.
President Nikolić (spoke in Serbian; English
interpretation provided by the delegation): I do not
intend to make any comments on the statements by the
Council members; they reflect the positions of their
Governments. By commenting, I would perhaps put the
citizens of my country at odds with the positions taken
by some countries just because I do not agree with some
Council members. I would simply ask members, when
thinking about this problem, to think as if it happened
in their own country. I wish that such a situation never
occurs in other countries.
I wanted to address the Council again to thank
members for their condolences and compassion towards
the citizens of Serbia, Bosnia and Herzegovina and
Croatia who have suffered due to the terrible flooding.
Without international help, they will face great
difficulties in alleviating the consequences. There is
life beyond politics, outside of these walls, but I know
that we will manage to live with the consequences with
the help of our friends.
The President: Ms. Jahjaga has requested to take
the floor to make a further statement.
Ms. Jahjaga: In reference to the issue of the
incidents on the property of the Serbian Orthodox
Church as raised here by previous speakers, allow me
to present our position. I have strongly and publicly
condemned the recent incidents against the Serbian
Orthodox Church in Kosovo, in particular the latest
incident of graffiti on the gates of the Dečani monastery,
which I recently had the pleasure to visit. Kosovo has a
long tradition of interreligious tolerance and a history
of preservation of our common cultural heritage. These
acts go against the spirit of what we are trying to build

30/30

27/05/2014

in Kosovo. Any attempt to desecrate such objects of
cult is totally unacceptable.
I have asked the authorities to swiftly bring to
justice the perpetrators of such acts, and the authorities
are dealing with these incidents. In the particular
instance of the Dečani monastery, the police have
opened a case file on that matter. No church, mosque
or other place of worship will be destroyed in Kosovo.
We have a long tradition of interfaith tolerance, and we
will preserve it.
In reference to the issue of Syria as raised in the
meeting, the problem of foreign fighters who have
been recruited or who have joined the war in Syria has
posed a challenge for all countries around the world.
Unfortunately, the Republic of Kosovo is not immune
to this problem either. But we have taken bold steps to
curb this threat, and I want to assure the Council that we
are confronting this matter effectively. Our approach
has included legal and security measures, as well as
outreach to the Kosovo public. Kosovo’s leadership
is united and vocal in condemning this phenomenon
and discouraging our citizens from joining the fight in
Syria. Our religious communities have also engaged
in raising awareness about the negative implications
that this has for Kosovo and the region. Kosovo’s
Government has drafted and approved a law that will
punish, with 15 years’ imprisonment, those who join
this fight. We will revoke the citizenship of anyone
joining the Syrian war. Our security mechanisms are
working around the clock to address this challenge,
and they have successfully conducted operations to
prevent this problem. According to our estimates, we
are talking about a fringe group that has joined the war
in Syria. The absolute majority of Kosovo’s citizens
are determined in our fight against this negative
phenomenon. Kosovo will not be a safe haven or a
transit route for these elements, and we will continue
to work with our partners and international security
organizations to further address this matter.
The President: There are no more names inscribed
on the list of speakers. The Security Council has thus
concluded the present stage of its consideration of the
item on its agenda.
The meeting rose at 5.50 p.m.

14-40918
