S/PV.7098

United Nations

asdf

Security Council

Provisional

Sixty-ninth year

7098th meeting

Wednesday, 22 January 2014, 3 p.m.
New York

President:

Prince Zeid Ra’ad Zeid Al-Hussein . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

(Jordan)

Members:

Argentina . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Australia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Chad . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Chile . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Lithuania. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Luxembourg . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Nigeria . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Republic of Korea . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Rwanda . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . . 
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Estreme
Ms. King
Mr. Mangaral
Mr. Errázuriz
Mr. Zhao Yong
Mr. Araud
Ms. Murmokaitė
Mr. Maes
Mrs. Ogwu
Mr. Sul Kyung-hoon
Mr. Iliichev
Mr. Nduhungirehe
Mr. Wilson
Ms. Power

Agenda
The situation in the Central African Republic

14-21250 (E)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the
delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-506.

*1421250*

S/PV.7098

The situation in the Central African Republic

The meeting was called to order at 3.10 p.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in the Central African Republic
The President (spoke in Arabic): In accordance with
rule 39 of the Council’s provisional rules of procedure,
I invite the following briefers to participate in this
meeting: Ms. Leila Zerrougui, Special Representative
of the Secretary-General for Children and Armed
Conflict; Mr. Adama Dieng, Special Adviser to the
Secretary-General on the Prevention of Genocide;
Ms. Zainab Bangura, Special Representative of the
Secretary-General on Sexual Violence in Conflict; and
Ms. Kyung-wha Kang, Assistant Secretary-General for
Humanitarian Affairs and Deputy Emergency Relief
Coordinator.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I now give the floor to Ms. Zerrougui.
Ms. Zerrougui: I wish to thank you, Sir, for
inviting me to brief the Security Council on our visit to
the Central African Republic from 17 to 21 December
2013, and in particular on the situation of children and
armed conflict. At the outset, allow me to also express
my appreciation to the Permanent Representative of
Luxembourg, Ambassador Sylvie Lucas, and General
Babacar Gaye, Special Representative and Head of
the United Nations Integrated Peacebuilding Office
in the Central African Republic (BINUCA), for their
leadership and support for the children and armed
conflict mandate.
In the light of growing protection concerns resulting
from mounting attacks against civilians and the deep
human rights crisis ravaging the country, I travelled
with my colleagues, Special Adviser Adama Dieng
and Ms. Nancee Oku Bright, a senior representative of
the Office of Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral Bangura, to assess the impact of the conflict
on women and children as well as the risk of genocide.
The goal of our mission, in line with the “Rights up
front” framework, was to advocate for action and
responses from the transitional authorities and obtain
their commitment to stopping the violence. Our visit
took place soon after the 5 December attacks on the
capital, Bangui, and against the backdrop of increasing
sectarian violence, which is continuing today.
2/8

22/01/2014

Despite its chronic instability, the Central African
Republic had not previously suffered from such a
violent outbreak of religiously motivated violence. Yet,
today, the country is trapped in a spiral of vengeance
that has destroyed the social fabric and undermined
trust among communities for generations to come. I
have witnessed members of those communities pitted
against one another, fleeing and seeking refuge in
churches and mosques. They are living in fear of being
attacked. They are even afraid of burying their dead.
Entire villages have been burned and are burning down
as we speak in this Chamber today.
The impact of the conflict on children has been
dramatic, with unprecedented levels of brutality.
Children have been directly attacked, maimed, killed
and beheaded in Bangui, Bouar, Bossangoa and
Bozoum. For over a year, ex-Séléka combatants and,
more recently, anti-Balaka militias, have actively
recruited children and forced them to commit atrocities.
Recent estimates indicate that as many as 6,000 children
could be currently associated with armed forces and
groups. During my visit, I witnessed youths who had
taken up arms, having been manipulated by both sides
and divided along religious lines. They have become
both victims and perpetrators of the ongoing sectarian
violence.
The lack of security has resulted in the displacement
over the course of 2013 of nearly half a million children
across the country. Those children are in urgent need
of protection and assistance and are at a greater risk
of suffering violations. Schools and hospitals have
been attacked and looted. Medical personnel have been
repeatedly threatened and brutally targeted everywhere
in the country, leaving an already fragile social
infrastructure and basic services in complete disarray.
Our visit coincided with the transfer of authority
from the Mission for the Consolidation of Peace
in the Central African Republic to the African-led
International Support Mission in the Central African
Republic (MISCA) and with the initial phase of the
deployment of Operation Sangaris. While the presence
of African Union and French forces is deterring
ongoing violence, too many civilians remain without
basic protection, as crimes are being committed
daily in Bangui and in the provinces. I am hopeful
that the commendable efforts of the African Union,
the deployment of additional troops by the European
Union, together with the evolution of the political
landscape, will contribute to re-establishing law and

14-21250

22/01/2014

The situation in the Central African Republic

order. The rapid strengthening of BINUCA and the
deployment of MISCA’s civilian component will be
key to ensuring adequate human rights monitoring and
protection expertise.
We must urgently ensure better coordination
among all actors on the ground, including through
civil-military liaisons. We should optimize existing
resources in Bangui and scale up capacity in the
provinces where military deployment and the presence
of humanitarian actors remains too limited.
On a positive note, on 6 January the process of
identifying and separating children started at five
ex-Séléka cantonment sites. On 17 January, 23 children
were released in Bangui and taken to a UNICEFsupported transit and orientation centre. That is
the result of the dialogue between United Nations
representatives and the transitional authorities to allow
child protection actors unimpeded access to military
and cantonment sites. The former head of the transition
reiterated that commitment to me during our visit, and
it is my hope that that engagement will continue in the
new phase of the transitional process. I am encouraged
by the recent election of Ms. Catherine Samba-Panza as
Head of the Transition in the Central African Republic,
and I join her in urging all parties to immediately stop
the violence.
The process of separating and reintegrating
children associated with armed forces and groups
in the Central African Republic will not be an easy
task. First, it cannot happen in a vacuum but must be
part of a comprehensive and holistic disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration (DDR) process.
Secondly, the current United Nations civilian capacity
remains all too limited and must be strengthened
urgently to confront the ongoing situation, as well as
the challenges of the DDR process.
Child protection actors need adequate human and
financial resources to provide the needed reintegration
assistance. At the same time, the sustained support
and cooperation of the military forces on the ground
are key to ensuring children’s security and continued
protection. As recent experience in the Central African
Republic shows, children formerly associated with
armed forces and groups are especially vulnerable to
rerecruitment and retaliatory violence.
We need to send a stronger signal to the
perpetrators of these atrocious crimes that they will be
held to account. The international community should

S/PV.7098

spare no effort and use all the tools at its disposal. It is
crucial to assist the transitional authorities to restore
law enforcement and establish a judicial response to
the ongoing violations. This is essential to deterring
further violence and starting to re-establish trust
among communities.
I strongly welcome the imminent establishment
of a commission of inquiry, as well as the Council’s
intention to adopt targeted measures against
perpetrators of violations against children. I also
welcome the appointment by the Human Rights
Council of the Independent Expert Marie-Thérèse
Keita Bocoum, and I look forward to working closely
with all mandate-holders to ensure complementarities
in our work.
This crisis has been looming for over a year, and
we have run out of time to prevent the violence from
escalating. Our only option today is to scale up our
response with robust, immediate and urgent actions.
I am here today to plead for the Council’s continued
attention to the crisis in which the Central African
Republic has plunged. It is my hope that the Council
will unite to step up and sustain its engagement, with
the support of the African Union and States of the
region. Today’s political commitment and mobilization
of the international community to end the crisis in the
Central African Republic must be swiftly translated
into adequate responses to protect civilians, provide
emergency assistance to the most vulnerable, and
accompany the transition towards the stabilization of
the country.
The President (spoke in
Ms. Zerrougui for her briefing.

Arabic):

I

thank

I now give the floor to Mr. Dieng.
Mr. Dieng: I should like first of all to thank the
Missions of Jordan and Luxembourg — and particularly
you, Mr. President, and Ambassador Sylvie Lucas — for
convening this briefing.
As Council members are aware, during our visit to
the Central African Republic, our main objective was
to assess the risk of genocide, war crimes and crimes
against humanity occurring in the country and to
advocate with transitional authorities and other relevant
stakeholders for a cessation of violence and enhanced
protection of the civilian population.
It was evident from what we saw and heard that
the situation in the Central African Republic was

14-212503/8

S/PV.7098

The situation in the Central African Republic

desperate. We received reports and testimony from
victims and witnesses that told of shocking episodes of
violence perpetrated against innocent Central Africans,
including women and children. And this violence
continues even as we are discussing the human rights
and humanitarian situation in the Central African
Republic today.
As I said in my previous statement at the Arria
Formula meeting of the Security Council on 1 November
2013, we face a situation of widespread and massive
violations of human rights and abuses such as have never
been witnessed before in the country. There have been
widespread reports of summary executions and other
forms of extrajudicial killings, enforced disappearances,
forced displacements, and acts of mutilation and sexual
violence committed against adults and children, as well
as the destruction and widespread looting of property,
including hospitals, schools, churches and mosques. At
the same time, as Council members will hear in greater
detail from my colleague Assistant Secretary-General
Kyung-wha Kang, the humanitarian situation is equally
very disturbing.
In response to continued attacks by ex-Séléka
elements targeting Christian civilians since December
2012, traditional, community-based self-defence groups
across the country evolved into a more organized
Christian militias known as the anti-Balaka, which
have targeted ex-Séléka members and Muslim civilians
suspected of supporting them. Reports received indicate
that the anti-Balaka militias are becoming more
organized than before and reportedly include some
former army soldiers sympathetic to former President
Bozizé. These former soldiers have reportedly played
a leadership role in organizing attacks against Muslim
civilians. For example, attacks in Bangui on 5 and
6 December resulted in the deaths of at least 1,000
people, most of whom were ex-Séléka members and
Muslim civilians. In interviews with some individuals
who claimed to be members of anti-Balaka militias in
Bangui, they alleged that the militias have deployed in
all 16 provinces of the country to mobilize Christian
civilians against Muslim civilians.
On the other hand, the ex-Séléka elements continue
to carry out attacks against Christian civilians
throughout the country. While in the Central African
Republic, we received testimony from people who had
witnessed the killing of Christian civilians by ex-Séléka
during a series of reprisal attacks.

4/8

22/01/2014

The religious leaders in Bossangoa had divergent
views on who bore responsibility for the ongoing
violence in the province. The Bishop of Bossangoa
diocese decried the abuses committed against
Christians and the perceived complicity of the Muslim
communities. On the other hand, the representative of
the Muslim community in Bossangoa decried continued
attacks against Muslims by anti-Balaka, who in his
view were being hosted and supported by the local
Catholic bishop.
In consultations with the then Head of Transition,
Michel Djotodia, I stated to him clearly that he bears
primary responsibility for security and that he should
take all measures possible to protect all populations,
irrespective of their ethnic or religious affiliation.
We urged Mr. Djotodia to join forces with religious
leaders and civil society to immediately embark on a
reconciliation campaign aimed at putting an end to the
violence and to the hatred between communities.
The violence that was initially perceived as a
confrontation between ex-Séléka and anti-Balaka
militias quickly evolved into a very dangerous
confrontation between Muslim and Christian civilians,
and the level of hatred between these communities
shocked me. Incitement to commit violence on the
basis of religion or ethnicity and deliberate and targeted
attacks against civilians based on their identity are
factors that indicate a high risk both of crimes against
humanity and of genocide.
There is no doubt that the actions of the Africanled International Support Mission for the Central
African Republic (MISCA) and of French troops have
contributed immensely to the protection of Central
Africans, in particular in and around camps for
internally displaced persons. However, it is evident
that their resources and capacity to protect are limited,
given the scale of the violence and the fact that it is
happening across the country and MISCA is still only
partially deployed. There is an urgent need for the
full deployment of MISCA peacekeepers as soon as
possible.
Another concern emerging from our mission and
which has had a negative impact on civilian protection
was the perception by some that peacekeepers deployed
in the country were not neutral. Some interlocutors
alleged that peacekeepers, in some instances, were
perceived to side either with anti-Balaka or ex-Séléka

14-21250

22/01/2014

The situation in the Central African Republic

elements, which has eroded trust in some instances and
affected their capacity to act.
In our interaction with religious leaders, we noted
that, despite concerted efforts by the Archbishop and
the Imam of Bangui to promote peace and dialogue, the
impact of the initiatives undertaken since December
2012 remains limited. There is an urgent need to
support and intensify such interreligious dialogue, both
at the national and at the community levels.
In my assessment, the widespread, unchecked
nature of attacks by ex-Séléka and anti-Balaka militias,
as well as by armed civilians associated with them,
against civilians on the basis of religion or ethnicity
constitute crimes against humanity. If not halted, there
is a risk of genocide in the country.
The primary responsibility for the protection of the
population lies with the Central African authorities.
However, recognizing the fact that the transitional
authorities have neither the capacity to protect the
civilian population nor to exercise control over the
armed elements that are attacking them, particularly
women and children, the international community must
take concrete measures to assist the State to stop the
abuses and protect civilians. There is an urgent need to
support the full and effective deployment of MISCA.
African countries should urgently contribute troops to
the Mission.
There should be concerted efforts to promote and
support a national peace and reconciliation process.
There is an urgent need to promote dialogue between
Christians and Muslims to mitigate the existing ethnic
and religious divisions in the country. As a first step
among a series of initiatives, my Office is working to
support the efforts of the President of the Commission
on Human Rights of the National Transitional Council
and the National Coordinator of the International
Conference on the Great Lakes Region to organize
peace forums in the country that will bring together
community and religious leaders from seven provinces.
But that is not enough. I urge the international
community to contribute to the process.
It will be difficult to promote reconciliation
and restore peace in the country without addressing
the current culture of impunity. The human rights
violations and abuses that have occurred have sowed
seeds of hatred in communities. It is very important that
we support all initiatives, including the Commission
of Inquiry, to identify perpetrators and hold those

S/PV.7098

responsible for violations and abuses accountable. We
should also consider the establishment of transitional
justice mechanisms. There can be no excuse or
justification for condoning impunity.
Although the international community is
responding late in the day, there is still a window to act
to mobilize appropriate resources and to reverse one of
the worst human rights and humanitarian crises of our
time. We need to uphold our responsibility to protect
Central Africans from the risk of genocide, crimes
against humanity and war crimes.
The President (spoke in Arabic): I thank Mr. Dieng
for his briefing.
I now give the floor to Ms. Bangura.
Ms. Bangura: I want to thank the Security Council,
under the presidency of the Kingdom of Jordan, for
inviting us to contribute to the efforts to end violence
in the Central African Republic. I am also grateful to
the Permanent Representation of the Grand Duchy of
Luxembourg for supporting this initiative.
Exactly one year ago, I briefed the Council
following my visit to the Central African Republic
from 5 to 13 December 2012 (see S/PV.6899). I
noted the horrendous trends of sexual violence and
warned that, if parties were not made to respect their
obligations under international humanitarian law, the
consequences would be grave. I referred to two joint
communiqués, the first signed between the United
Nations and the Government and the other with armed
groups participating in the national steering committee
on disarmament, demobilization and reintegration,
aimed at consolidating the commitment of the parties
to the conflict to prevent crimes of conflict-related
sexual violence. I also recalled that the Central African
Republic was a forgotten conflict, and I warned the
international community to pay particular attention to
the management of regional aspects of the crisis.
Today, the situation in Central African Republic has
deteriorated and many of the worst predictions have,
unfortunately, come true. Communities have taken up
weapons, killing each other based on religious affinity.
Part of the tragedy is that this extreme animosity is
new; previously, those communities lived with each
other, worked side by side and intermarried. Clearly
this could have been prevented.
The participation of children in the commission
of those atrocious crimes may signify the point of

14-212505/8

S/PV.7098

The situation in the Central African Republic

no return, beyond which the cohabitation of certain
communities may be impossible in the near future.
There should be no doubt that the violence in the
Central African Republic will stain the conscience of
its people and the world forever.
At the invitation of Special Representative of the
Secretary-General Babacar Gaye, I dispatched Nancee
Oku Bright, my Chief of Staff, to participate in a joint
mission to the Central African Republic, together with
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General
for Children and Armed Conflict and the Special
Adviser to the Secretary-General on the Prevention
of Genocide, from 17 to 21 December 2013. The
mission was assisted by a joint technical-level mission
organized in conjunction with the Office of the Special
Representative for Children and Armed Conflict,
from 12 to 23 December, which travelled to Bouar and
coordinated with a fact-finding team deployed by the
Office of the United Nations High Commissioner on
Human Rights, during the same period.
The delegation observed the unfolding situation of
violence in the Central African Republic and, in some
cases, eye-witnessed near-lynching incidents and empty
villages with homes still burning. We learned about the
growing strength and organization of armed groups, in
particular anti-Balaka, who have colluded with former
elements of the Forces armées centrafricaines (FACA)
and are targeting Muslim combatants and civilians.
Likewise, Muslim civilians have created militias to
protect themselves and have engaged in retaliatory
attacks, reportedly with the aid of Séléka and Chadian
elements.
Sexual violence continues to be pervasive in the
conflict. Between January and November 2013, the
United Nations recorded at least 4,530 cases of sexual
violence perpetrated by armed men, largely believed
to be Séléka, in Bangui, Boali, Bossembélé, Damara,
Mbaiki, Sibut and Prefecture de l’Ouham Pende.
Following the 5 December attacks by anti-Balaka
and FACA elements on military positions in Bangui,
there are reports that conflict-related sexual violence
has continued to be used. The team received reports
of sexual violence used by anti-Balaka and ex-Séléka
militias during house-to-house searches and retaliatory
attacks. The mission also confirmed that forced
marriages, sometimes involving children, were being
contracted mainly by ex-Séléka elements.
There are also numerous allegations that internally
displaced person camps, most of which shelter elements
6/8

22/01/2014

of armed groups, are the locus of conflict-related sexual
violence. Victims are afraid to come forward to report
these crimes due to the continued presence of elements
of armed groups in communities and the absence of
law and order. I am very disturbed by the finding of
the mission that adequate provisions were not made to
assist victims of sexual violence during the year-long
conflict.
There are, however, some encouraging signs
that the situation could improve. The involvement of
religious leaders — Muslims and Christians alike — in
ongoing initiatives to reconcile communities in the
Central African Republic is commendable and should
be supported by the international community.
The efforts of the United Nations Integrated
Peacebuilding Office in the Central African Republic,
under the able leadership of Special Representative of
the Secretary-General Babacar Gaye, in the management
of two delicate political transitions are worthy of high
praise. In that regard, the international community,
which has responded decisively in deploying the
African-led International Support Mission in the
Central African Republic and the French Operation
Sangaris, deserve commendation. I also welcome the
recent announcement of the European Union of its
intention to deploy a mission to the Central African
Republic. The international community should provide
the necessary support required for the implementation
of resolutions 2121 (2013) and 2127 (2013).
However, important steps are required to be taken
to stop the violence in the Central African Republic and
limit the damage that is being inflicted on the citizens
of that nation and on the conscience of humanity
as a whole. The historic appointment of the firstever female interim President of the Central African
Republic is a source of hope and inspiration for all.
Women’s leadership at the highest levels of government
is a powerful symbol of progress and change, but no
leader can steer this transition alone. I therefore urge
the international community to lend her its full support
and cooperation so that she may be a force for unity
and peace in a country that has known too much chaos
and war.
Secondly, there is a need to conduct a comprehensive
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration
programme, which should include the repatriation of
foreign combatants. Immediate steps should also be
taken to improve the protection of civilians. This will
help dissuade the creation of community-based self14-21250

22/01/2014

The situation in the Central African Republic

defence groups. Subsequent efforts to build a national
army should take into account the application of human
rights standards, as prescribed in resolutions 2121
(2013) and 2127 (2013) .
Thirdly, the international community must
improve the coordination of its efforts in the Central
African Republic. The establishment of simple tools,
such as emergency hotlines and coordinated rapid
response mechanisms, can save lives. International
forces operating in the Central African Republic also
need to be sensitive to the specificities of the conflict,
which requires an in-depth understanding of the
crisis and its causes. This requires the deployment of
specific expertise in civil-military coordination and
the protection of civilians. Furthermore, the proactive
management of regional dynamics could pay rapid
dividends and lay the foundation for solving this crisis.
I congratulate the Council for its attention and the
important steps it has already taken to stop the violence
and ensure accountability for crimes. I commend the
Council for establishing sanctions mechanisms and
a commission of inquiry on human rights violations
in the Central African Republic and call for their
expedited implementation. The importance of
deploying various fact-finding missions by the United
Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights cannot
be overestimated.
Finally, I once again call for an increased focus
on the prevention of conflict-related sexual violence
by international partners to ensure that services are
available to victims of sexual violence, especially in
places of displacement and isolated locations.
The President (spoke in
Ms. Bangura for her briefing.

Arabic):

I

thank

I now give the floor to Ms. Kyung-wha Kang.
Ms. Kyung-wha Kang: I would like to thank
you in particular, Mr. President, and the Permanent
Representative of Luxembourg for giving us this
opportunity to update the Security Council on the
human rights and humanitarian situation in the Central
African Republic.
During the two months since the Arria Formula
briefing by the Office for the Coordination of
Humanitarian Affairs (OCHA) Emergency Operations
Director, the humanitarian crisis in the Central African
Republic has deepened. The political system has
failed, security infrastructure has disintegrated, there

S/PV.7098

has been a complete breakdown of law and order, and
public service institutions, which were already weak
and overstretched prior to the current crisis, have
ceased functioning. Horrific atrocities continue to be
perpetrated against ordinary people in the country,
as has been so powerfully described by the previous
speaker.
More than half of the country’s population —
2.5 million out of 4.6 million people — have been
affected by the crisis and are in need of assistance,
and people across the country are living in fear. More
than 900,000 people have fled their homes and are
internally displaced, including some 480,000 in the
capital, Bangui, alone. At the airport in Bangui, around
100,000 people are sleeping out in the open with little
access to basic services and very limited supplies.
Outside Bangui, thousands of people are hiding in the
forest with no aid or services, too afraid to come out.
Half of the displaced are children.
In addition to those internally displaced, some
86,000 Central Africans have fled as refugees and
sought protection in neighbouring countries over the
last year, mostly in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, but also in Chad, Cameroon and the Republic
of the Congo. This brings the total number of Central
African Republic refugees in the subregion to 246,000.
Some 28,000 third-country nationals have been
evacuated from the Central African Republic since the
crisis escalated in mid-December 2013.
We have received horrendous reports of people
being killed or injured while attempting to flee the
violence. Just a couple of days ago, a convoy carrying
mostly Muslim families being evacuated from the
village of Vakap and ultimately destined for refuge
in neighbouring Cameroon was reportedly stopped in
Bouar, northwestern Central African Republic, and
attacked by people carrying grenades and machetes. At
least 3 children and 19 adults were killed, and at least
23 people, including children, were injured.
The crisis in the Central African Republic is a top
priority for the international humanitarian community.
On 11 December 2013, we activated our highest level of
response, known as a level 3 system-wide humanitarian
emergency activation. We have reinforced humanitarian
leadership on the ground through the deployment of a
Senior Humanitarian Coordinator, Mr. Abdou Dieng.
We have also sent our most experienced and skilled
staff, released emergency funds and mobilized relief

14-212507/8

S/PV.7098

The situation in the Central African Republic

supplies and pipelines. The Inter-Agency Standing
Committee principals met twice this month to take
stock of the situation and identity areas needing urgent
attention. OCHA’s Emergency Operations Director
was back in the country just last week to meet with
humanitarian partners and communities affected by the
crisis.
On the ground, non-governmental organization
partners and the staff of humanitarian United Nations
agencies, funds and programmes are working closely
with civil society and religious leaders from all
communities to deliver assistance in a very dangerous
and unpredictable environment. The World Food
Programme has mobilized food for around 315,000
people in December and January. Médecins Sans
Frontières is leading medical assistance. The Office of
the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees
has provided crucial relief items, including blankets
and mattresses, for some 20,000 people this month,
and thousands more will receive relief in the coming
days. UNICEF and the World Health Organization have
supported the Ministry of Health and other partners
to vaccinate some 72,500 children at 17 sites this
month. The International Organization for Migration
is monitoring displacement and airlifting thousands of
stranded migrants from the Central African Republic
with priority attention given to the most vulnerable,
such as those needing medical attention.
One of our main challenges to date has been the
international community’s chronic underfunding of the
crisis. Last week, we revised the humanitarian appeal,
taking into account the rapidly deteriorating situation.
We now require over $551 million for our response in
2014.
On that point we have good news. At the High-Level
Meeting on Humanitarian Action in the Central African
Republic, which was co-chaired in Brussels on Monday
by the Emergency Relief Coordinator, Ms. Valerie
Amos, and the European Union Commissioner for
International Cooperation, Humanitarian Aid and
Crisis Response, Ms. Kristalina Georgieva, Member
States generously pledged over $200 million for
humanitarian assistance and an additional $280 million
for development and long-term reconstruction.
Those very welcome pledges will allow us to provide
life-saving food, drinking water, shelter and health care
for the next few months. However, we need much more.

8/8

22/01/2014

Humanitarian assistance cannot solve the situation
in the Central African Republic. The collapsing State,
after years of neglect and failure by the international
community to heed the warning signs of a looming
crisis, cannot be shored up with humanitarian assistance.
Security and stability must be urgently restored.
The ongoing deployment of the African-led
International Support Mission in the Central African
Republic, supported by French troops, has had a
positive effect in the areas where it is operating, and the
political developments over the past week, including
the designation of a new interim President and the
agreement of the European Union to deploy troops,
have given people in the Central African Republic
hope. However, they remain fearful and sceptical in the
light of the horror that they have seen and endured. The
international community must consider all options for
re-establishing security.
The international response must also build stronger
and more resilient communities in the Central African
Republic. We need to look beyond today and take
immediate action to restore livelihoods, preserve
community support structures and strengthen local
economies in order to provide a foundation for early
recovery and long-term development.
The root causes of the conflict, including lack of
effective, inclusive and efficient governance institutions,
poor management and distribution of access to natural
resources, including diamonds, fragile social cohesion
and deep-seated feelings of marginalization must be
urgently addressed. We need to support civil society,
religious leaders and local communities as they strive
to heal the wounds of violent conflict, rebuild social
cohesion, stabilize communities and reduce sectarian
violence, including through interfaith dialogue.
Community reconciliation is crucial to protecting the
internally displaced people in the Central African
Republic.
We have already seen the human cost of the
international community’s neglect of the Central
African Republic. We need to act urgently.
The President (spoke in Arabic): I thank Ms. Kang
for his briefing.
I now invite Council members to informal
consultations to continue our discussion on the subject.
The meeting rose at 3.50 p.m.

14-21250
