A/62/49 (Vol. III)

Resolutions
and
Decisions
adopted by the General Assembly
during its sixty-second session
Volume III

23 December 2007 – 15 September 2008

General Assembly
Official Records  Sixty-second Session
Supplement No. 49 (A/62/49)

United Nations  New York, 2008

NOTE
The resolutions and decisions of the General Assembly are identified as follows:
Regular sessions
Until the thirtieth regular session, the resolutions of the General Assembly were
identified by an arabic numeral followed by a roman numeral in parentheses
indicating the session (for example: resolution 3363 (XXX)). When several
resolutions were adopted under the same number, each of them was identified by a
capital letter placed between the two numerals (for example: resolution
3367 A (XXX), resolutions 3411 A and B (XXX), resolutions 3419 A to D (XXX)).
The decisions were not numbered.
Since the thirty-first session, as part of the new system adopted for symbols of
General Assembly documents, resolutions and decisions have been identified by an
arabic numeral, indicating the session, followed by an oblique stroke and another
arabic numeral (for example: resolution 31/1, decision 31/301). When several
resolutions or decisions were adopted under the same number, each of them has been
identified by a capital letter placed after the two numerals (for example: resolution
31/16 A, resolutions 31/6 A and B, decisions 31/406 A to E).
Special sessions
Until the seventh special session, the resolutions of the General Assembly were
identified by an arabic numeral followed, in parentheses, by the letter “S” and a
roman numeral indicating the session (for example: resolution 3362 (S-VII)). The
decisions were not numbered.
Since the eighth special session, resolutions and decisions have been identified
by the letter “S” and an arabic numeral indicating the session, followed by an oblique
stroke and another arabic numeral (for example: resolution S-8/1, decision S-8/11).
Emergency special sessions
Until the fifth emergency special session, the resolutions of the General
Assembly were identified by an arabic numeral followed, in parentheses, by the
letters “ES” and a roman numeral indicating the session (for example: resolution
2252 (ES-V)). The decisions were not numbered.
Since the sixth emergency special session, resolutions and decisions have been
identified by the letters “ES” and an arabic numeral indicating the session, followed
by an oblique stroke and another arabic numeral (for example: resolution ES-6/1,
decision ES-6/11).
In each of the series described above, the numbering follows the order of adoption.
*
*

*

The present volume contains the resolutions and decisions adopted by the General
Assembly from 23 December 2007 to 15 September 2008. Resolutions adopted by the
Assembly from 18 September to 22 December 2007 appear in volume I. Volume II
contains the decisions adopted by the Assembly during that period.

ISSN 0252-7014

Contents
Section

Page

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee......................................................... 1
II. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Special Political and Decolonization Committee
(Fourth Committee)......................................................................................................................... 25
III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee .................................................................. 27
IV. Decisions ....................................................................................................................................... 97
A. Elections and appointments..................................................................................................... 99
B. Other decisions ..................................................................................................................... 104
1.

Decisions adopted without reference to a Main Committee....................................................... 104

2.

Decisions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee........................................................... 107
Annexes

I. Allocation of agenda items.......................................................................................................... 111
II. Checklist of resolutions and decisions ........................................................................................ 113

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee
Contents
Resolution
No.

Title

Page

62/242.

Modalities, format and organization of the high-level meeting on Africa’s development needs...................................... 2

62/243.

The situation in the occupied territories of Azerbaijan ................................................................................................. 3

62/244.

Improving global road safety..................................................................................................................................... 5

62/249.

Status of internally displaced persons and refugees from Abkhazia, Georgia................................................................. 7

62/270.

Global Forum on Migration and Development ........................................................................................................... 8

62/271.

Sport as a means to promote education, health, development and peace...................................................................... 10

62/272.

The United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy............................................................................................ 11

62/274.

Strengthening transparency in industries................................................................................................................... 13

62/275.

Implementation of the recommendations contained in the report of the Secretary-General on the causes of
conflict and the promotion of durable peace and sustainable development in Africa.................................................... 14

62/276.

Revitalization of the work of the General Assembly.................................................................................................. 19

62/277.

System-wide coherence........................................................................................................................................... 19

62/278.

Mandate review...................................................................................................................................................... 23

1

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

RESOLUTION 62/242
Adopted at the 85th plenary meeting, on 4 March 2008, without a vote, on the basis of draft resolution
A/62/L.29/Rev.1 and Add.1, sponsored by Antigua and Barbuda (on behalf of the States Members of the
United Nations that are members of the Group of 77 and China) and Israel

62/242. Modalities, format and organization of the high-level meeting on Africa’s
development needs
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 61/229 of 22 December 2006 and 62/179 of 19 December 2007, in
which it decided to convene, during its sixty-third session, a high-level meeting on the theme
“Africa’s development needs: state of implementation of various commitments, challenges and
the way forward”,
Recalling also the 2005 World Summit Outcome1 and its follow-up resolution 60/265 of
30 June 2006,
Recalling further its resolutions 57/270 B of 23 June 2003, 61/230 of 22 December 2006
and 61/296 of 17 September 2007 and the ministerial declaration of the high-level segment of the
substantive session of 2001 of the Economic and Social Council of 18 July 2001, entitled “The
role of the United Nations in support of the efforts of African countries to achieve sustainable
development”,2
Reaffirming its determination to address the special needs of Africa, which is the only
continent not on track to meet the Millennium Development Goals by 2015,
Noting that the implementation of commitments made to and by African countries will
contribute to the continent’s achievement of the Millennium Development Goals by 2015,
Convinced that the high-level meeting will constitute a significant event that will review the
implementation of all commitments made to and by Africa in order to comprehensively address
the special development needs of the continent,
1. Decides that the high-level meeting will be held on 22 September 2008, prior to the
general debate of the sixty-third session of the General Assembly;
2. Decides also that the meeting will be held at the highest possible political level, with
the participation of Heads of State or Government, ministers, special representatives and other
representatives, as appropriate;
3. Decides further that the meeting will be composed of an opening plenary meeting,
followed by two high-level round tables in the morning and two high-level round tables in the
afternoon, which will address the overall theme of the meeting, and a closing plenary meeting;
4. Requests the President of the General Assembly to finalize the organizational
arrangements for the meeting;
5.
needs;

Decides that the meeting will result in a political declaration on Africa’s development

6. Requests the President of the General Assembly to produce a concise draft text, in
consultation with Member States and based on their inputs, and convene informal consultations on
the initial draft text at an appropriate date to enable sufficient discussion;
7.

Strongly urges all Member States to actively participate in the meeting;

_______________
1

See resolution 60/1.
See Official Records of the General Assembly, Fifty-sixth Session, Supplement No. 3 (A/56/3/Rev.1), chap. III,
para. 29.
2

2

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

8. Decides that the preparations for the meeting will be conducted in close consultations
between the United Nations and the African Union;
9. Invites the Holy See, in its capacity as observer State, and Palestine, in its capacity as
observer, to participate in the meeting;
10. Decides that the President of the General Assembly will consult with representatives
of non-governmental organizations in consultative status with the Economic and Social Council,
civil society organizations and the private sector, and with Member States, as appropriate, on the
list of representatives of non-governmental organizations, civil society organizations and the
private sector that may participate in the round tables of the meeting;
11. Decides also that the meeting will be chaired by the President of the General
Assembly;
12. Invites intergovernmental organizations and entities that have observer status with the
General Assembly to participate in the meeting;
13. Invites heads of the United Nations funds, programmes and agencies to participate in
the meeting, in consultation with the President of the General Assembly;
14. Invites the Bretton Woods institutions, the World Trade Organization, the regional
development banks, the United Nations Conference on Trade and Development and development
partners to participate in the meeting;
15. Requests the Secretary-General to submit to the meeting a comprehensive report, with
recommendations, on “Africa’s development needs: state of implementation of various
commitments, challenges and the way forward” in cooperation with relevant development
agencies of the United Nations, the Bretton Woods institutions and other relevant regional and
international financial and trade institutions.
RESOLUTION 62/243
Adopted at the 86th plenary meeting, on 14 March 2008, by a recorded vote of 39 to 7, with
100 abstentions,* on the basis of draft resolution A/62/L.42, sponsored by Azerbaijan
* In favour: Afghanistan, Azerbaijan, Bahrain, Bangladesh, Brunei Darussalam, Cambodia, Colombia,
Comoros, Djibouti, Gambia, Georgia, Indonesia, Iraq, Jordan, Kuwait, Libyan Arab Jamahiriya, Malaysia,
Maldives, Moldova, Morocco, Myanmar, Niger, Nigeria, Oman, Pakistan, Qatar, Saudi Arabia, Senegal,
Serbia, Sierra Leone, Somalia, Sudan, Turkey, Tuvalu, Uganda, Ukraine, United Arab Emirates,
Uzbekistan, Yemen
Against: Angola, Armenia, France, India, Russian Federation, United States of America, Vanuatu
Abstaining: Albania, Algeria, Andorra, Antigua and Barbuda, Argentina, Australia, Austria, Bahamas,
Barbados, Belgium, Bolivia, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Botswana, Brazil, Bulgaria, Cameroon, Canada,
Chile, China, Congo, Costa Rica, Croatia, Cyprus, Czech Republic, Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea, Denmark, Dominican Republic, Ecuador, Egypt, El Salvador, Equatorial Guinea, Estonia, Finland,
Germany, Ghana, Greece, Grenada, Guatemala, Guyana, Haiti, Honduras, Hungary, Iceland, Ireland,
Israel, Italy, Jamaica, Japan, Kazakhstan, Kenya, Latvia, Liberia, Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg,
Madagascar, Malta, Mauritius, Mexico, Monaco, Mongolia, Montenegro, Mozambique, Namibia, Nepal,
Netherlands, New Zealand, Nicaragua, Norway, Panama, Papua New Guinea, Peru, Philippines, Poland,
Portugal, Republic of Korea, Romania, Saint Lucia, Samoa, San Marino, Singapore, Slovakia, Slovenia,
Solomon Islands, South Africa, Spain, Sri Lanka, Suriname, Swaziland, Sweden, Switzerland, Thailand,
the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Timor-Leste, Togo, Trinidad and Tobago, United Kingdom of
Great Britain and Northern Ireland, Uruguay, Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of), Zambia

62/243. The situation in the occupied territories of Azerbaijan
The General Assembly,
Guided by the purposes, principles and provisions of the Charter of the United Nations,
Recalling Security Council resolutions 822 (1993) of 30 April 1993, 853 (1993) of 29 July
1993, 874 (1993) of 14 October 1993 and 884 (1993) of 12 November 1993, as well as General
3

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

Assembly resolutions 48/114 of 20 December 1993, entitled “Emergency international assistance
to refugees and displaced persons in Azerbaijan”, and 60/285 of 7 September 2006, entitled “The
situation in the occupied territories of Azerbaijan”,
Recalling also the report of the fact-finding mission of the Minsk Group of the Organization
for Security and Cooperation in Europe to the occupied territories of Azerbaijan surrounding
Nagorno-Karabakh and the letter on the fact-finding mission from the Co-Chairmen of the Minsk
Group addressed to the Permanent Council of the Organization for Security and Cooperation in
Europe,3
Taking note of the report of the environmental assessment mission led by the Organization
for Security and Cooperation in Europe to the fire-affected territories in and around the NagornoKarabakh region,4
Reaffirming the commitments of the parties to the conflict to abide scrupulously by the rules
of international humanitarian law,
Seriously concerned that the armed conflict in and around the Nagorno-Karabakh region of
the Republic of Azerbaijan continues to endanger international peace and security, and mindful of
its adverse implications for the humanitarian situation and development of the countries of the
South Caucasus,
1. Reaffirms continued respect and support for the sovereignty and territorial integrity of
the Republic of Azerbaijan within its internationally recognized borders;
2. Demands the immediate, complete and unconditional withdrawal of all Armenian
forces from all the occupied territories of the Republic of Azerbaijan;
3. Reaffirms the inalienable right of the population expelled from the occupied territories
of the Republic of Azerbaijan to return to their homes, and stresses the necessity of creating
appropriate conditions for this return, including the comprehensive rehabilitation of the conflictaffected territories;
4. Recognizes the necessity of providing normal, secure and equal conditions of life for
Armenian and Azerbaijani communities in the Nagorno-Karabakh region of the Republic of
Azerbaijan, which will allow an effective democratic system of self-governance to be built up in
this region within the Republic of Azerbaijan;
5. Reaffirms that no State shall recognize as lawful the situation resulting from the
occupation of the territories of the Republic of Azerbaijan, nor render aid or assistance in
maintaining this situation;
6. Expresses its support to the international mediation efforts, in particular those of the
Co-Chairmen of the Minsk Group of the Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe,
aimed at peaceful settlement of the conflict in accordance with the norms and principles of
international law, and recognizes the necessity of intensifying these efforts with a view to
achieving a lasting and durable peace in compliance with the provisions stipulated above;
7. Calls upon Member States and international and regional organizations and
arrangements to effectively contribute, within their competence, to the process of settlement of the
conflict;
8. Requests the Secretary-General to submit to the General Assembly at its sixty-third
session a comprehensive report on the implementation of the present resolution;
9. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its sixty-third session the item entitled
“The situation in the occupied territories of Azerbaijan”.
_______________
3
4

See A/59/747-S/2005/187.
A/61/696, annex.

4

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

RESOLUTION 62/244
Adopted at the 87th plenary meeting, on 31 March 2008, without a vote, on the basis of draft resolution
A/62/L.43 and Add.1, sponsored by: Afghanistan, Albania, Algeria, Andorra, Angola, Argentina, Armenia,
Austria, Bahamas, Bahrain, Belarus, Belgium, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Botswana, Brazil, Brunei
Darussalam, Burkina Faso, Canada, Cape Verde, China, Costa Rica, Croatia, Cuba, Cyprus, Djibouti,
Dominican Republic, Egypt, El Salvador, Estonia, Fiji, Finland, France, Greece, Guyana, Haiti, Hungary,
Iceland, India, Indonesia, Iran (Islamic Republic of), Iraq, Ireland, Israel, Italy, Jamaica, Jordan,
Kazakhstan, Kuwait, Lao People’s Democratic Republic, Lebanon, Libyan Arab Jamahiriya, Luxembourg,
Malaysia, Maldives, Malta, Mauritania, Mexico, Moldova, Monaco, Mongolia, Montenegro, Morocco,
Netherlands, Niger, Oman, Paraguay, Philippines, Poland, Portugal, Qatar, Romania, Russian
Federation, Saudi Arabia, Serbia, Singapore, Slovenia, Somalia, South Africa, Spain, Sri Lanka, Sudan,
Syrian Arab Republic, Thailand, the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Trinidad and Tobago,
Tunisia, Turkey, Uganda, Ukraine, United Arab Emirates, United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern
Ireland, Viet Nam, Yemen, Zambia

62/244. Improving global road safety
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 57/309 of 22 May 2003, 58/9 of 5 November 2003, 58/289 of
14 April 2004 and 60/5 of 26 October 2005 on improving global road safety,
Having considered the note by the Secretary-General transmitting the report on improving
global road safety,5
Noting with appreciation the adoption on 23 May 2007 of World Health Assembly
resolution 60.22 on emergency care systems,6
Underlining the importance for Member States to continue using the World Report on Road
Traffic Injury Prevention as a framework for road safety efforts and implementing its
recommendations by paying particular attention to five of the main risk factors identified, namely,
the non-use of safety belts and child restraints, the non-use of helmets, drinking and driving,
inappropriate and excessive speed and the lack of appropriate infrastructure, and by paying
particular attention also to the needs of vulnerable road users such as pedestrians, cyclists and
motorcyclists, and users of public transport, and improving post-crash care for victims of road
crashes,
Commending the World Health Organization for its role in implementing the mandate
conferred upon it by the General Assembly to work with the United Nations regional commissions
to coordinate road safety issues within the United Nations system, and the progress of the United
Nations Road Safety Collaboration as a coordination mechanism whose members are providing
Governments and civil society with good-practice guidelines to support action to tackle the major
road safety risk factors,
Recognizing the work of the United Nations regional commissions and their subsidiary
bodies in increasing their road safety activities and advocating for increased political commitment
to road safety, and in this context also recognizing the continuing commitment of the Economic
Commission for Europe to global action in the elaboration of safety-related global technical
vehicle regulations and amendments to the Convention on Road Traffic7 and the Convention on
Road Signs and Signals,8 resolution 63/9 of 23 May 2007 of the Economic and Social
Commission for Asia and the Pacific,9 in which the Commission encouraged members to continue
_______________
5

A/62/257.
See World Health Organization, Sixtieth World Health Assembly, Geneva, 14–23 May 2007, Resolutions and
Decisions, Annexes (WHA60/2007/REC/1).
7
United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 1042, No. 15705.
8
Ibid., vol. 1091, No. 16743.
9
See Official Records of the Economic and Social Council, Supplement No. 19 (E/2007/39), chap. IV, sect. A.
6

5

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

to act upon recommendations contained in the Ministerial Declaration on Improving Road Safety
in Asia and the Pacific,10 the Accra Declaration of African Ministers responsible for transport and
health of 8 February 2007, the Declaration of San José on road safety of 14 September 2006 and
resolution 279 (XXIV) of 11 May 2006 of the Economic and Social Commission for Western
Asia on follow-up to implementation of components of the Integrated Transport System in the
Arab Mashreq, including follow-up on road safety,11
Commending the World Bank for its initiative in establishing the Global Road Safety
Facility, the first funding mechanism designed to support capacity-building and provide technical
support for road safety at the global, regional and country levels, welcoming the financial
assistance given to the Facility by the Governments of Australia, the Netherlands and Sweden, and
by the FIA Foundation for the Automobile and Society, and encouraging more financial
contributions to the Facility,
Commending also the World Health Organization and the United Nations regional
commissions for organizing, in collaboration with the other members of the United Nations Road
Safety Collaboration, the first United Nations Global Road Safety Week in April 2007, during
which hundreds of events were held all over the world, including the World Youth Assembly for
Road Safety and the second Stakeholders’ Forum for Global Road Safety, in Geneva, which
helped to draw attention to the fact that road traffic crashes have become the leading cause of
death among young people aged between 10 and 24,
Taking note of all national and regional initiatives to improve awareness of road safety
issues, including the second European Road Safety Day, to be observed on 13 October 2008,
Taking note also of the report of the Commission for Global Road Safety, Make Roads Safe:
A New Priority for Sustainable Development, which links road safety with sustainable
development and which calls for increased resources for road safety, a new commitment for road
infrastructure assessment and a global ministerial conference on road safety under the auspices of
the United Nations,
Expressing its concern at the continued increase in road traffic fatalities and injuries
worldwide, in particular in developing countries,
Reaffirming the need for the further strengthening of international cooperation and
knowledge-sharing in road safety, taking into account the needs of developing countries,
1. Invites Member States to actively participate in the development of the global road
safety status report being prepared by the World Health Organization;
2. Invites all Member States to participate in the projects to be implemented by the
United Nations regional commissions to assist low- and middle-income countries in setting their
own national road traffic casualty reduction targets, as well as regional targets;
3. Reaffirms the importance of addressing global road safety issues and the need for the
further strengthening of international cooperation, taking into account the needs of developing
countries by building capacities in the field of road safety and providing financial and technical
support for their efforts;
4. Encourages Member States to continue to strengthen their commitment to road safety,
including by observing the World Day of Remembrance for Road Traffic Victims on the third
Sunday of November every year;
5. Invites the World Health Organization and the United Nations regional commissions,
in cooperation with other partners in the United Nations Road Safety Collaboration, to promote
_______________
10
11

6

E/ESCAP/63/13, chap. IV.
See Official Records of the Economic and Social Council, Supplement No. 21 (E/2006/41), chap. I.

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

multisectoral collaboration by organizing, when appropriate, United Nations Global Road Safety
Weeks, including Stakeholders’ Forums for Global Road Safety;
6. Encourages organizations in both the private and the public sector with vehicle fleets,
including agencies of the United Nations system, to develop and implement policies and practices
that will reduce crash risks for vehicle occupants and other road users;
7. Welcomes the offer by the Government of the Russian Federation to host and provide
the necessary financial support for the first global high-level (ministerial) conference on road
safety, to be held in 2009, to bring together delegations of ministers and representatives dealing
with transport, health, education, safety and related traffic law enforcement issues, to discuss
progress in implementing the recommendations of the World Report on Road Traffic Injury
Prevention and the General Assembly resolutions on improving global road safety, and provide an
opportunity for Member States to exchange information and best practices;
8. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its sixty-fourth session the item entitled
“Global road safety crisis”, and requests the Secretary-General to report to the General Assembly
at that session on the progress made in improving global road safety.
RESOLUTION 62/249
Adopted at the 97th plenary meeting, on 15 May 2008, by a recorded vote of 14 to 11, with
105 abstentions,* on the basis of draft resolution A/62/L.45, sponsored by Georgia
* In favour: Albania, Azerbaijan, Czech Republic, Estonia, Georgia, Hungary, Latvia, Lithuania, Poland,
Romania, Slovakia, Sweden, Ukraine, United States of America
Against: Armenia, Belarus, Democratic People’s Republic of Korea, India, Iran (Islamic Republic of),
Myanmar, Russian Federation, Serbia, Sudan, Syrian Arab Republic, Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of)
Abstaining: Algeria, Andorra, Argentina, Australia, Austria, Bahamas, Bahrain, Bangladesh, Belgium,
Bhutan, Bolivia, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Botswana, Brunei Darussalam, Bulgaria, Burkina Faso,
Canada, Chile, China, Colombia, Comoros, Congo, Costa Rica, Cyprus, Denmark, Djibouti, Dominican
Republic, Ecuador, Egypt, El Salvador, Finland, France, Germany, Ghana, Greece, Guatemala, Guinea,
Guyana, Haiti, Honduras, Iceland, Indonesia, Ireland, Israel, Italy, Jamaica, Japan, Jordan, Kazakhstan,
Kenya, Kuwait, Kyrgyzstan, Lesotho, Liberia, Libyan Arab Jamahiriya, Liechtenstein, Luxembourg,
Madagascar, Malaysia, Maldives, Malta, Mauritius, Mexico, Moldova, Monaco, Mongolia, Montenegro,
Morocco, Mozambique, Namibia, Nepal, Netherlands, New Zealand, Nicaragua, Nigeria, Norway,
Pakistan, Panama, Peru, Philippines, Portugal, Qatar, Republic of Korea, San Marino, Saudi Arabia,
Senegal, Singapore, Slovenia, South Africa, Spain, Sri Lanka, Swaziland, Switzerland, Thailand, the
former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Togo, Tunisia, Turkey, United Arab Emirates, United Kingdom of
Great Britain and Northern Ireland, Uruguay, Uzbekistan, Viet Nam, Yemen, Zambia

62/249. Status of internally displaced persons and refugees from Abkhazia, Georgia
The General Assembly,
Recalling its relevant resolutions on the protection of and assistance to internally displaced
persons, including its resolution 62/153 of 18 December 2007,
Recognizing the Guiding Principles on Internal Displacement12 as an important international
framework for the protection of internally displaced persons,
Deeply concerned about violations of human rights and international humanitarian law in
Abkhazia, Georgia, particularly ethnicity-based violence,
Recalling all relevant Security Council resolutions, and noting the conclusions of the
Budapest (1994), Lisbon (1996) and Istanbul (1999) summits of the Organization for Security and
Cooperation in Europe, in particular the reports of “ethnic cleansing” and other serious violations
of international humanitarian law in Abkhazia, Georgia,
_______________
12

E/CN.4/1998/53/Add.2, annex.

7

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

Deploring practices of arbitrary forced displacement and their negative impact on the
enjoyment of human rights and fundamental freedoms by large groups of people, and deeply
concerned by the humanitarian situation created by the expulsion of hundreds of thousands of
persons from Abkhazia, Georgia,
Deeply concerned by the demographic changes resulting from the conflict in Abkhazia,
Georgia, and regretting any attempt to alter the pre-conflict demographic composition in
Abkhazia, Georgia,
Emphasizing that the rights of the Abkhaz population living in Abkhazia, Georgia, have to
be protected and guaranteed,
1. Recognizes the right of return of all refugees and internally displaced persons and their
descendants, regardless of ethnicity, to Abkhazia, Georgia;
2. Emphasizes the importance of preserving the property rights of refugees and internally
displaced persons from Abkhazia, Georgia, including victims of reported “ethnic cleansing”, and
calls upon all Member States to deter persons under their jurisdiction from obtaining property
within the territory of Abkhazia, Georgia, in violation of the rights of returnees;
3. Underlines the urgent need for the rapid development of a timetable to ensure the
prompt voluntary return of all refugees and internally displaced persons to their homes in
Abkhazia, Georgia;
4. Requests the Secretary-General to submit to the General Assembly at its sixty-third
session a comprehensive report on the implementation of the present resolution;
5. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its sixty-third session the item entitled
“Protracted conflicts in the GUAM area and their implications for international peace, security and
development”.
RESOLUTION 62/270
Adopted at the 109th plenary meeting, on 20 June 2008, by a recorded vote of 86 to 2, with
55 abstentions,* on the basis of draft resolution A/62/L.25/Rev.2 and Add.1, sponsored by: Belarus,
Bolivia, Chile, Colombia, Dominican Republic, Ecuador, El Salvador, Fiji, Guatemala, Honduras,
Kyrgyzstan, Mexico, Nicaragua, Paraguay, Peru, Sri Lanka, Tajikistan, Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of)
* In favour: Afghanistan, Albania, Algeria, Angola, Antigua and Barbuda, Argentina, Armenia,
Azerbaijan, Bahrain, Bangladesh, Barbados, Belarus, Bolivia, Brazil, Burkina Faso, Cameroon, Chile,
China, Colombia, Comoros, Congo, Costa Rica, Côte d’Ivoire, Cuba, Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea, Dominican Republic, Ecuador, Egypt, El Salvador, Ethiopia, Fiji, Ghana, Guatemala, GuineaBissau, Guyana, Haiti, Honduras, India, Iraq, Israel, Jamaica, Jordan, Kazakhstan, Kenya, Kuwait,
Kyrgyzstan, Lebanon, Lesotho, Libyan Arab Jamahiriya, Madagascar, Malawi, Maldives, Mali, Mauritania,
Mauritius, Mexico, Mongolia, Morocco, Mozambique, Nepal, Nicaragua, Niger, Nigeria, Oman, Pakistan,
Panama, Paraguay, Peru, Qatar, Rwanda, Saudi Arabia, Senegal, South Africa, Sri Lanka, Sudan,
Suriname, Syrian Arab Republic, Tajikistan, Togo, Tunisia, United Arab Emirates, Uruguay, Venezuela
(Bolivarian Republic of), Yemen, Zambia, Zimbabwe
Against: Canada, United States of America
Abstaining: Andorra, Australia, Austria, Bahamas, Belgium, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Brunei
Darussalam, Bulgaria, Croatia, Cyprus, Czech Republic, Denmark, Estonia, Finland, France, Germany,
Greece, Hungary, Iceland, Indonesia, Ireland, Italy, Japan, Latvia, Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg,
Malaysia, Malta, Moldova, Monaco, Myanmar, Namibia, Netherlands, New Zealand, Norway, Philippines,
Poland, Portugal, Republic of Korea, Romania, Russian Federation, San Marino, Serbia, Singapore,
Slovakia, Slovenia, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland, Thailand, the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia,
Turkey, Ukraine, United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland

62/270. Global Forum on Migration and Development
The General Assembly,
Recalling that the 2005 World Summit Outcome acknowledged the important nexus
between international migration and development and the need to deal with the challenges and
8

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

opportunities that migration presents and reaffirmed the resolve to take measures to ensure respect
for and protection of the human rights of migrants, migrant workers and members of their
families,13
Considering that the summary of the High-level Dialogue on International Migration and
Development, held in New York on 14 and 15 September 2006, as contained in a note by the
President of the General Assembly,14 underlined the close link between migration, development
and human rights, as well as the fact that respect for the human rights and fundamental freedoms
of all migrants was essential for taking advantage of the positive aspects of international
migration,
Recalling its resolutions 61/208 of 20 December 2006 on international migration and
development and 62/156 of 18 December 2007 on the protection of migrants,
Stressing the need to promote a comprehensive and coherent discussion on all aspects of the
phenomenon of migration, taking into account its importance on the global agenda,
Recognizing the need for Member States to consider the multidimensional aspects of
international migration and development, in order to identify appropriate ways and means of
dealing with the challenges and opportunities that international migration presents,
Recalling the important contribution provided by migrants and migration to development, as
well as the interrelationship between migration and development, and the importance of including
the perspective of the human rights of migrants as a priority matter in relevant debates and
discussions that are held in the United Nations system,
Considering that the report of the Secretary-General of 18 May 2006 on international
migration and development, prepared pursuant to General Assembly resolutions 59/241 of
22 December 2004 and 60/227 of 23 December 2005, highlighted the fact that, within the United
Nations system, there is no entity mandated to systematically address all matters related to
international migration,15
Recalling that Member States participating in the High-level Dialogue on International
Migration and Development expressed interest in continuing the dialogue on migration and
development, and that there was widespread support for the proposal of the Secretary-General to
create a global forum to address, in depth and in a systematic manner, all topics related to
international migration and development,
Taking note of the summary report of the first meeting of the Global Forum on Migration
and Development, held in Brussels from 9 to 11 July 2007 under the auspices of the Government
of Belgium,16 and the generous offer of the Government of the Philippines to host the second
meeting, from 27 to 30 October 2008, in Manila,
Noting with appreciation that the convening of the first meeting of the Global Forum on
Migration and Development has already resulted in the establishment of official focal points on
migration and development at the national level,
Recognizing that the Global Forum on Migration and Development currently functions
under the Guiding Principles of the Forum of 2007 and as a State-led initiative, and that it should
be strengthened with the aim of addressing the multidimensional aspects of international
migration and development with a comprehensive approach,
_______________
13

See resolution 60/1, paras. 61 and 62.
A/61/515.
15
See A/60/871.
16
A/C.2/62/2, annex.
14

9

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

1. Recognizes that exchanges of information and expertise, consultation and closer
cooperation between the Global Forum on Migration and Development and the United Nations
could have a positive impact, and in this regard:
(a) Welcomes the transmission to the Secretary-General by the Government of Belgium
of the summary report of the first meeting of the Global Forum on Migration and Development,
circulated as a document of the General Assembly,16 and invites organizers of subsequent
meetings of the Forum to continue this practice;
(b) Requests the Secretary-General to include in his report called for in resolution 61/208
an evaluation of the existing cooperation mechanisms on migration and development and to make
it available to the Global Forum on Migration and Development, at its second meeting, in 2008;
(c) Encourages Member States to participate actively in, and the organizations that are
members of the Global Migration Group, within their respective areas of expertise, to contribute
and to provide technical support to, the Global Forum on Migration and Development;
(d) Notes that the Global Forum on Migration and Development, through its Steering
Group, maintains links with the Secretary-General, notably through his Special Representative on
International Migration and Development;
2. Takes note with interest of the agenda prepared for the discussions of the Global
Forum on Migration and Development, and the title of the second meeting of the Global Forum,
“Protecting and empowering migrants for development”, and particularly welcomes the inclusion
of the topic of the human rights of migrants;
3. Requests the Secretary-General to submit to the General Assembly at its sixty-third
session a report on the implementation of the present resolution.
RESOLUTION 62/271
Adopted at the 115th plenary meeting, on 23 July 2008, without a vote, on the basis of draft resolution
A/62/L.46 and Add.1, sponsored by: Afghanistan, Albania, Algeria, Andorra, Argentina, Armenia, Australia,
Austria, Belarus, Benin, Bolivia, Brazil, Bulgaria, Burundi, Cape Verde, Chile, China, Colombia, Costa
Rica, Croatia, Cuba, Cyprus, Czech Republic, Democratic Republic of the Congo, Ecuador, Egypt, Fiji,
Germany, Greece, Grenada, Guatemala, Guinea, Haiti, Hungary, Iceland, Indonesia, Iraq, Israel, Italy,
Japan, Jordan, Kazakhstan, Kenya, Lithuania, Maldives, Malta, Mexico, Moldova, Monaco, Morocco,
Netherlands, Norway, Philippines, Portugal, Qatar, Russian Federation, Saint Vincent and the
Grenadines, San Marino, Senegal, Serbia, Sierra Leone, Slovakia, Slovenia, South Africa, Spain,
Swaziland, Switzerland, Thailand, the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Togo, Trinidad and
Tobago, Turkey, Ukraine, United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, Uruguay, Viet Nam,
Zambia

62/271. Sport as a means to promote education, health, development and peace
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 60/9 of 3 November 2005 and 61/10 of 3 November 2006, in which
it underlines the importance of sport as a means to encourage, enhance and promote peace,
dialogue and understanding between peoples and civilizations,
Recalling also its resolution 62/4 of 31 October 2007, in which it urges Member States to
observe, within the framework of the Charter of the United Nations, the Olympic Truce,
individually or collectively, during the Games of the XXIX Olympiad in Beijing,
Taking note with appreciation of the report of the Secretary-General which details the
actions carried out by States Members of the United Nations, United Nations funds, programmes
and specialized agencies and other partners, using sport as a tool for development and peace,17
_______________
17

See A/62/325 and Corr.1.

10

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

Welcoming the decision of the Secretary-General to renew the mandate of the Special
Adviser to the Secretary-General on Sport for Development and Peace,
Also welcoming the decision of the Secretariat to make the necessary arrangements for the
effective functioning of the Office of Sport for Development and Peace,
Further welcoming the decision of the Secretary-General to establish a Trust Fund for Sport
for Development and Peace,
1. Requests the Secretary-General to report to the General Assembly at its sixty-third
session on progress at the national, regional and international levels to encourage policies and best
practices on sport for development and peace;
2. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its sixty-third session the item entitled
“Sport for peace and development”.
RESOLUTION 62/272
Adopted at the 120th plenary meeting, on 5 September 2008, without a vote, on the basis of draft
resolution A/62/L.48, submitted by the President of the General Assembly

62/272. The United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy
The General Assembly,
Reaffirming the United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy, contained in General
Assembly resolution 60/288 of 8 September 2006, which called for, inter alia, an examination in
two years of progress made in the implementation of the Strategy and for consideration to be
given to updating it to respond to changes, as provided for in paragraph 3 (b) of that resolution,
Recalling the pivotal role of the General Assembly in following up the implementation and
the updating of the Strategy,
Renewing its unwavering commitment to strengthen international cooperation to prevent and
combat terrorism in all its forms and manifestations,
Recognizing that international cooperation and any measures undertaken by Member States
to prevent and combat terrorism must fully comply with their obligations under international law,
including the Charter of the United Nations and relevant international conventions and protocols,
in particular human rights law, refugee law and international humanitarian law,
Convinced that the General Assembly is the competent organ with universal membership to
address the issue of international terrorism,
Mindful of the need to enhance the role of the United Nations and the specialized agencies,
within their mandates, in the implementation of the Strategy,
Stressing that the Counter-Terrorism Implementation Task Force shall carry out its activities
within the framework of its mandate, with policy guidance offered by Member States through
interaction with the General Assembly on a regular basis,
Recognizing the importance of institutionalizing the Task Force within the Secretariat,
1. Reiterates its strong condemnation of terrorism in all its forms and manifestations,
committed by whomever, wherever and for whatever purposes, as it constitutes one of the most
serious threats to international peace and security;
2. Reaffirms the United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy and its four pillars,
which constitute an ongoing effort, and calls upon Member States, the United Nations and other
appropriate international, regional and subregional organizations to step up their efforts to
implement the Strategy in an integrated manner and in all its aspects;

11

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

3. Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General entitled “United Nations Global
Counter-Terrorism Strategy: activities of the United Nations system in implementing the
Strategy”;18
4. Also takes note of the measures that Member States as well as appropriate
international, regional and subregional organizations have adopted within the framework of the
Strategy, as presented at the first biennial review of the Strategy, on 4 and 5 September 2008, all of
which strengthen cooperation to fight terrorism, in particular through the exchange of best
practices;
5. Reaffirms the primary responsibility of Member States to implement the Strategy
while further recognizing the need to enhance the important role the United Nations plays, in
coordination with other international, regional and subregional organizations, as appropriate, in
facilitating coherence in the implementation of the Strategy at the national, regional and global
levels and in providing assistance, especially in the area of capacity-building;
6. Encourages non-governmental organizations and civil society to engage, as
appropriate, on how to enhance efforts to implement the Strategy, including through interaction
with Member States and the United Nations system;
7. Calls upon the United Nations entities involved in supporting counter-terrorism efforts
to continue to facilitate the promotion and protection of human rights and fundamental freedoms
while countering terrorism;
8. Calls upon States that have not done so to consider becoming parties in a timely
manner to the existing international conventions and protocols against terrorism, and upon all
States to make every effort to conclude a comprehensive convention on international terrorism,
and recalls the commitments of Member States with regard to the implementation of General
Assembly and Security Council resolutions relating to international terrorism;
9. Notes with appreciation the continued contribution of United Nations entities and
subsidiary bodies of the Security Council to the Counter-Terrorism Implementation Task Force;
10. Reaffirms the need to enhance international cooperation in countering terrorism, and in
this regard recalls the role of the United Nations system in promoting international cooperation
and capacity-building as one of the elements of the Strategy;
11. Urges the Secretary-General to make the necessary arrangements to carry out the
institutionalization of the Task Force, in accordance with resolution 60/288, in order to ensure
overall coordination and coherence in the counter-terrorism efforts of the United Nations system;
12. Decides to interact with the Task Force on a regular basis, in order to receive briefings
and reports on its current and future work, assess the work being undertaken on the Strategy
implementation efforts, including the work of the Task Force, and to offer policy guidance;
13. Requests the Secretary-General to submit to the General Assembly at its sixty-fourth
session a report on progress made in the implementation of the Strategy, which could contain
suggestions for its future implementation by the United Nations system, as well as in the
implementation of the present resolution;
14. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its sixty-fourth session the item entitled
“The United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy” in order to undertake in two years an
examination of the report of the Secretary-General requested in paragraph 13 above, as well as the
implementation of the Strategy on the part of Member States and to consider updating the Strategy
to respond to changes.
_______________
18

A/62/898.

12

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

RESOLUTION 62/274
Adopted at the 121st plenary meeting, on 11 September 2008, without a vote, on the basis of draft
resolution A/62/L.41/Rev.1 and Add.1, sponsored by: Armenia, Australia, Azerbaijan, Belgium, Canada,
Congo, Democratic Republic of the Congo, France, Germany, Iraq, Israel, Italy, Kazakhstan, Kyrgyzstan,
Liberia, Netherlands, Nigeria, Norway, Peru, Moldova, Sierra Leone, Spain, Sweden, Timor-Leste, Turkey,
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, Yemen

62/274. Strengthening transparency in industries
The General Assembly,
Recalling the 2005 World Summit Outcome,19
Reaffirming the Accra Accord, the outcome of the twelfth session of the United Nations
Conference on Trade and Development, held in Accra from 20 to 25 April 2008,20
Recalling the United Nations Convention against Corruption,21 which reaffirms that
corruption is no longer a local matter but a transnational phenomenon that affects all societies and
economies, making international cooperation to prevent and control it essential,
Also recalling its resolution 1803 (XVII) of 14 December 1962, in which it declared that the
right of peoples and nations to permanent sovereignty over their natural wealth and resources must
be exercised in the interest of their national development and of the well-being of the people of the
State concerned,
Reaffirming that every State has and shall freely exercise full permanent sovereignty over all
its wealth, natural resources and economic activities,
Taking note of all relevant voluntary initiatives, including the Extractive Industries
Transparency Initiative, aimed at improving transparency in the extractive industries,
Convinced that rule-based and predictable trade and financial systems are essential to
promote transparency in trade and financial industries and combat corruption in commercial and
financial transactions in all countries,
1. Emphasizes that transparency and accountability are objectives that should be
embraced and promoted by all Member States, regardless of their size, level of development or
resource endowment;
2. Reaffirms, as stated in the United Nations Convention against Corruption,21 the need to
combat corruption and enhance transparency, in accordance with the fundamental principles of
domestic law, and to take such measures as may be necessary to enhance transparency in public
administration, including with regard to organization, functioning and decision-making processes,
where appropriate;
3. Encourages the international community to strengthen, as appropriate, upon request,
the capacity of States endowed with natural resources, especially those emerging from conflict
situations, to negotiate mutually satisfactory, transparent and equitable contractual terms for the
use, extraction and processing of their natural resources;
4. Notes the efforts of countries that are participating in all relevant voluntary initiatives
to improve transparency and accountability in industries, including in the Extractive Industries
Transparency Initiative in the extractive sector, and to share their experience with interested
Member States;
_______________
19

See resolution 60/1.
TD/442 and Corr.l, sect. II.
21
Resolution 58/4, annex.
20

13

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

5. Reaffirms its commitment to governance, equity and transparency in the financial,
monetary and trading systems, as well as its commitment to open, equitable, rule-based,
predictable and non-discriminatory multilateral trading and financial systems;
6. Encourages business and industry, in particular transnational corporations, to establish
worldwide corporate policies on sustainable development, arrange for environmentally sound
technologies to be available to affiliates owned substantially by their parent company in
developing countries without extra external charges and to modify procedures in order to reflect
local ecological conditions and share experiences with local authorities, national Governments and
international organizations;
7. Urges the private sector, including corporations engaged in the extractive industries, to
ensure transparency and verifiable processes, while adhering to and promoting the principles of
honesty, transparency and accountability in order to maximize the contribution of the private
sector to the realization of social and people-centred sustainable development.
RESOLUTION 62/275
Adopted at the 121st plenary meeting, on 11 September 2008, without a vote, on the basis of draft
resolution A/62/L.47 and Add.1, sponsored by: Albania, Antigua and Barbuda (on behalf of the States
Members of the United Nations that are members of the Group of 77 and China), Austria, Belgium,
Bulgaria, Croatia, Cyprus, Estonia, Finland, France, Germany, Ireland, Israel, Italy, Lithuania,
Luxembourg, Malta, Netherlands, Poland, Portugal, Slovenia, United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland

62/275. Implementation of the recommendations contained in the report of the SecretaryGeneral on the causes of conflict and the promotion of durable peace and
sustainable development in Africa
The General Assembly,
Recalling the report of the Open-ended Ad Hoc Working Group on the Causes of Conflict
and the Promotion of Durable Peace and Sustainable Development in Africa22 and its resolutions
53/92 of 7 December 1998, 54/234 of 22 December 1999, 55/217 of 21 December 2000, 56/37 of
4 December 2001, 57/296 of 20 December 2002, 57/337 of 3 July 2003, 58/235 of 23 December
2003, 59/255 of 23 December 2004, 60/223 of 23 December 2005 and 61/230 of 22 December
2006, as well as its resolutions 62/179 of 19 December 2007 on the New Partnership for Africa’s
Development and 59/213 of 20 December 2004 on cooperation between the United Nations and
the African Union,
Recalling also, in this context, Security Council resolutions 1809 (2008) of 16 April 2008 on
peace and security in Africa, 1325 (2000) of 31 October 2000 and 1820 (2008) of 19 June 2008 on
women and peace and security, 1366 (2001) of 30 August 2001 on the role of the Council in the
prevention of armed conflicts, 1612 (2005) of 26 July 2005 on children and armed conflict,
1625 (2005) of 14 September 2005 on strengthening the effectiveness of the Council’s role in
conflict prevention, particularly in Africa, and 1631 (2005) of 17 October 2005 on cooperation
between the United Nations and regional and subregional organizations in maintaining
international peace and security,
Recalling further the 2005 World Summit Outcome,23 through which world leaders
reaffirmed their commitment to addressing the special needs of Africa,
Recognizing that development, peace, security and human rights are interlinked and
mutually reinforcing,
_______________
22
23

Official Records of the General Assembly, Fifty-sixth Session, Supplement No. 45 (A/56/45).
See resolution 60/1.

14

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

Recalling the creation by the Economic and Social Council, by its resolution 2002/1 of
15 July 2002, of ad hoc advisory groups on African countries emerging from conflict,
Stressing that the responsibility for peace and security in Africa, including the capacity to
address the root causes of conflict and to resolve conflicts in a peaceful manner, lies primarily with
African countries, while recognizing the need for support from the international community,
Recognizing, in particular, the importance of strengthening the capacity of the African Union
and subregional organizations to address the causes of conflict in Africa,
Noting that despite the positive trends and advances in obtaining durable peace in Africa, the
conditions required for sustainable development have yet to be consolidated throughout the
continent and that there is therefore an urgent need to develop African human and institutional
capacities, particularly in countries emerging from conflict,
Noting also that conflict prevention and the consolidation of peace would benefit from the
coordinated, sustained and integrated efforts of the United Nations system and Member States,
and regional and subregional organizations, as well as international and regional financial
institutions,
Reaffirming the need to strengthen the synergy between Africa’s economic and social
development programmes and its peace and security agenda,
Reaffirming also the importance of the Peacebuilding Commission as a dedicated
mechanism to address, in an integrated manner, the special needs of countries emerging from
conflict towards recovery, reintegration and reconstruction and to assist them in laying the
foundation for peace and sustainable development,
Underlining the need to address the negative implications of the illegal exploitation of
natural resources in all its aspects for peace, security and development in Africa, and underlining
also the fact that the illicit trade in natural resources is a matter of serious international concern,
which can be directly linked to the fuelling of armed conflicts and the illicit trade in and
proliferation of arms, especially small arms and light weapons,
1. Takes note of the progress report of the Secretary-General24 on the implementation of
the recommendations contained in his report on the causes of conflict and the promotion of
durable peace and sustainable development in Africa,25 and welcomes recent institutional
developments in addressing such causes and other efforts in conflict prevention, peacemaking,
peacekeeping and peacebuilding undertaken by African countries, African regional organizations
and the United Nations system;
2. Welcomes the progress made, in particular by the African Union and the subregional
organizations, in the prevention, management and resolution of conflict and in post-conflict
peacebuilding in a number of African countries, and calls for intensified efforts and a coordinated
approach between national Governments, the African Union, subregional organizations, the
United Nations system and partners with a view to achieving further progress towards the goal of
a conflict-free Africa;
3. Recognizes that international and regional efforts to prevent conflict and consolidate
peace in Africa should be channelled towards the sustainable development of Africa and human
and institutional capacity-building of African countries and organizations, particularly in priority
areas identified at the continental level;
4. Calls upon the United Nations system to continue to mainstream the special needs of
Africa in all its normative and operational activities;
_______________
24
25

A/62/204.
A/52/871-S/1998/318.

15

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

5. Welcomes efforts to enhance practical cooperation, within the framework of an
effective partnership, between the United Nations and the African Union in the realm of conflict
prevention and resolution, crisis management, peacemaking, peacekeeping and post-conflict
peacebuilding in Africa, and in this context urges the United Nations system and the international
community to increase, coordinate and sustain their efforts aimed at assisting African countries in
addressing the full range of causes of conflict in Africa;
6. Recalls the signing of the declaration on enhancing cooperation between the United
Nations and the African Union, in Addis Ababa, on 16 November 2006,26 and the ongoing efforts
in this regard, and underlines the importance of the implementation of the ten-year capacitybuilding programme for the African Union, mainly focusing on peace and security, in particular
the operationalization of the African Standby Force, urges all stakeholders to support the full
implementation of the ten-year programme for the African Union, and requests the SecretaryGeneral to include in his next annual report on the implementation of the recommendations
contained in his 1998 report,25 a detailed account of the progress achieved in this regard;
7. Welcomes the ongoing efforts of the African Union and the subregional organizations
to strengthen their peacekeeping capacity and to take the lead in peacekeeping operations in the
continent, in accordance with Chapter VIII of the Charter of the United Nations and in close
coordination with the United Nations, through the Peace and Security Council of the African
Union, as well as ongoing efforts to develop a continental early warning system, response
capacity, such as the African Standby Force, and enhanced mediation capacity, including through
the Panel of the Wise;
8. Notes with appreciation the establishment of the multidisciplinary African Union
Peacekeeping Support Team within the Department for Peacekeeping Operations at the
Secretariat, and reaffirms the need for the United Nations and other development partners to
increase their support for the African Union, including through existing forums for cooperation
with Africa, in order to enhance its capacity and effectiveness in the planning, deployment and
management of peacekeeping operations, including in the advanced training of African
peacekeepers, and in peacebuilding activities, and encourages the donor community to provide
further support to the African Union, including through the replenishment of its Peace Fund;
9. Calls for a holistic and coordinated approach at the national, subregional, regional and
international levels to improve the effectiveness of mechanisms for conflict prevention and
resolution, crisis management, peacemaking, peacekeeping and post-conflict peacebuilding efforts
in Africa, and reaffirms the need for observing such an approach in the design and implementation
of all programmes within the context of the ten-year capacity-building programme;
10. Stresses the critical importance of a regional approach to conflict prevention, in
particular with respect to cross-border issues such as disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration programmes, the prevention of illegal exploitation of natural resources and
trafficking in high-value commodities and the illicit trade in small arms and light weapons in all its
aspects, and in this regard emphasizes the central role of the African Union and the subregional
organizations in addressing such issues;
11. Reaffirms its commitment to address the special needs of Africa, where some progress
can be noted but where some countries remain off track in meeting the Millennium Development
Goals by 2015, in order to enable it to enter the mainstream of the world economy, and to
strengthen cooperation with the New Partnership for Africa’s Development27 by providing
coherent support for the programmes drawn up by African leaders within that framework,
including by mobilizing internal and external financial resources and facilitating approval of such
programmes by the multilateral financial institutions;
_______________
26
27

A/61/630, annex.
A/57/304, annex.

16

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

12. Welcomes the adoption of Security Council resolution 1809 (2008) on peace and
security in Africa;
13. Notes with concern that violence against women and children everywhere continues
and often increases, even as armed conflicts draw to an end, urges further progress in the
implementation of policies and guidelines relating to the protection of and assistance to women
and children in conflict and post-conflict situations, and notes the adoption of Security Council
resolution 1820 (2008) on women and peace and security;
14. Calls upon the United Nations system and Member States to support the African
Union in its effort to effectively integrate training in international humanitarian law and
international human rights law, with particular emphasis on the rights of women and children, in
the training of civilian and military personnel of national standby contingents at both the
operational and tactical levels, as set out in article 13 of the Protocol Relating to the Establishment
of the Peace and Security Council of the African Union;28
15. Welcomes the ongoing efforts of the African Union to ensure protection of the rights of
women in conflict and post-conflict situations, recalls, in this regard, the adoption of the Protocol
to the African Charter on Human and Peoples’ Rights on the Rights of Women in Africa28 and the
Solemn Declaration on Gender Equality in Africa28 by the Assembly of Heads of State and
Government of the African Union at their second and third ordinary sessions, held in Maputo in
July 2003 and Addis Ababa in July 2004, and their entry into force, stresses the significance of
those instruments for all countries in Africa in strengthening the role of women in peace and
conflict prevention in the continent, and strongly urges the United Nations and all parties to
redouble their efforts and support in this regard;
16. Calls for the enhancement of the role of women in conflict prevention, conflict
resolution and post-conflict peacebuilding consistent with Security Council resolution
1325 (2000);
17. Notes with concern the tragic plight of children in conflict situations in Africa, in
particular the phenomenon of child soldiers, as well as other grave violations against children, and
stresses the need for the protection of children in armed conflicts, post-conflict counselling,
rehabilitation and education, with due regard to the relevant resolutions of the General Assembly
and the Security Council;
18. Takes note of the conclusions of the expert group meeting on “Youth in Africa:
participation of youth as partners in peace and development in post-conflict countries”, held in
Namibia in November 2006,29 and calls upon the United Nations system and Member States to
adopt strategies to include youth as central stakeholders and key actors in the rehabilitation,
reconciliation and rebuilding of war-torn communities and in contributing to sustainable
development in their countries;
19. Recognizes the important role of the good offices of the Secretary-General in Africa,
and encourages the Secretary-General to continue to use mediation as often as possible to help to
solve conflicts peacefully, taking due consideration of the work performed by the African Union
and the subregional organizations in that regard;
20. Notes the efforts of the Mediation Support Unit, newly established in the Department
of Political Affairs of the Secretariat, in particular the establishment of a standby team of
mediation experts who will be on call to assist in peacemaking efforts around the world;
21. Invites the United Nations and the donor community to increase efforts to support
ongoing regional efforts to build African mediation and negotiation capacity;
_______________
28
29

Available from www.africa-union.org.
Available from www.un.org/africa/osaa/reports.html.

17

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

22. Welcomes African-led initiatives to strengthen political, economic and corporate
governance, such as the African Peer Review Mechanism, encourages even more African
countries to join this process, and calls upon the United Nations system and Member States to
assist African Member States and regional and subregional organizations in their efforts to
enhance good governance, including the promotion of the rule of law and the holding of free and
fair elections;
23. Recognizes the role of the Peacebuilding Commission in ensuring that national
ownership of the peacebuilding process in countries emerging from conflict is observed and that
nationally identified priorities are at the core of international and regional efforts in post-conflict
peacebuilding in the countries under consideration, notes the important steps taken by the
Commission in engaging with Sierra Leone, Burundi, Guinea-Bissau and the Central African
Republic through integrated peacebuilding strategies, calls for sustained regional and international
commitment to the implementation of these strategies and their design process, recalls the
adoption of the Sierra Leone Peacebuilding Cooperation Framework30and the Strategic
Framework for Peacebuilding for Burundi,31 and calls for their implementation;
24. Calls upon the United Nations system and invites Member States to assist African
countries emerging from conflict in their efforts to build national capacities of governance,
including the rehabilitation of the security sector, disarmament, demobilization and the
reintegration of ex-combatants, provision for the safe return of internally displaced persons and
refugees, the launch of income-generation activities, particularly for youth and women, and the
delivery of basic public services;
25. Stresses the importance of effectively addressing challenges that continue to hamper
the achievement of peace, stability and sustainable development on the continent, inter alia, the
increased prevalence of infectious disease such as HIV/AIDS, the effects of global warming and
climate change, the extremely high rates of youth unemployment, human trafficking, massive
displacements of people, the illegal exploitation of natural resources, the illicit trade in small arms
and light weapons, the emergence of terrorist networks and the increased activity of transnational
organized crime, and in this regard encourages the United Nations system and Member States to
assist African countries to effectively address these challenges;
26. Also stresses the importance of creating an environment conducive to national
reconciliation and social and economic recovery in countries emerging from conflict;
27. Encourages African Governments to establish appropriate structures and policies to
create an environment conducive to attracting direct foreign investment, calls upon African
Member States and regional and subregional organizations to assist African countries emerging
from conflict in devising national natural resources and public revenue management structures,
and invites the international community to assist in that process by providing adequate financial
and technical assistance, as well as by renewing its commitment to efforts aimed at combating the
illegal exploitation of the natural resources of those countries;
28. Welcomes the various important initiatives of Africa’s development partners in recent
years, inter alia, the Africa Partnership Forum, the New Asian-African Strategic Partnership, the
China-Africa Partnership, the European Union-Africa Strategic Partnership, the Group of EightAfrica Partnership, the Millennium Challenge Account, the Emergency Plan for AIDS Relief of
the President of the United States of America and the Tokyo International Conference on African
Development, and emphasizes, in this regard, the importance of coordination in such initiatives on
Africa and the need for their effective implementation;
_______________
30
31

PBC/2/SLE/1.
PBC/1/BDI/4, annex.

18

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

29. Requests the Secretary-General to consider the need to submit to the General
Assembly at its sixty-fifth session a report on the outcome of the review of his 1998 report;
30. Decides to continue to monitor the implementation of the recommendations contained
in the 1998 report of the Secretary-General;
31. Requests the Secretary-General to submit to the General Assembly at its sixty-third
session a progress report on the implementation of the present resolution.
RESOLUTION 62/276
Adopted at the 122nd plenary meeting, on 15 September 2008, without a vote, on the basis of the report
of the Ad Hoc Working Group on the Revitalization of the General Assembly (A/62/952)

62/276. Revitalization of the work of the General Assembly
The General Assembly,
Reaffirming its previous resolutions relating to the revitalization of its work, including
resolutions 46/77 of 12 December 1991, 47/233 of 17 August 1993, 48/264 of 29 July 1994,
51/241 of 31 July 1997, 52/163 of 15 December 1997, 55/14 of 3 November 2000, 55/285 of
7 September 2001, 56/509 of 8 July 2002, 57/300 of 20 December 2002, 57/301 of 13 March
2003, 58/126 of 19 December 2003, 58/316 of 1 July 2004, 59/313 of 12 September 2005, 60/286
of 8 September 2006 and 61/292 of 2 August 2007,
Stressing the importance of implementing resolutions on the revitalization of its work,
Recognizing the need to further enhance the role, authority, effectiveness and efficiency of
the General Assembly,
1. Takes note with appreciation of the report of the Ad Hoc Working Group on the
Revitalization of the General Assembly established by resolution 61/292;32
2. Decides to establish, at its sixty-third session, an ad hoc working group on the
revitalization of the General Assembly, open to all Member States:
(a) To identify further ways to enhance the role, authority, effectiveness and efficiency of
the Assembly, inter alia, by building on previous resolutions;
(b)

To submit a report thereon to the Assembly at its sixty-third session.
RESOLUTION 62/277

Adopted at the 122nd plenary meeting, on 15 September 2008, without a vote, on the basis of draft
resolution A/62/L.51, submitted by the President of the General Assembly

62/277. System-wide coherence
The General Assembly,
Recalling the consensus 2005 World Summit Outcome,33
Recalling also its consensus resolution 62/208 of 19 December 2007 on the triennial
comprehensive policy review,
_______________
32
33

A/62/952.
See resolution 60/1.

19

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

Commending the pragmatic, transparent, balanced and inclusive approach taken by the CoChairs of the consultative follow-up process by the General Assembly on system-wide coherence,
the Permanent Representatives of Ireland and the United Republic of Tanzania to the United
Nations, to their work on behalf of the Assembly, which built upon the efforts of their
distinguished predecessors, the Permanent Representatives of Barbados and Luxembourg to the
United Nations, at the sixty-first session of the General Assembly,
Having considered the paper on “Institutional options to strengthen United Nations work on
gender equality and the empowerment of women”, which the Deputy Secretary-General provided
to the President of the General Assembly on 23 July 2008 in response to a consensus request from
Member States,
Looking forward to the independent evaluation foreseen in its resolution 62/208, which will
help it to form a comprehensive view of the “Delivering as one” approach to the provision of
development assistance through the United Nations system and, in the meantime, acknowledging
the interim assessment of progress made and challenges remaining in this regard, as contained in
the “Maputo Declaration”,34 issued in May 2008 by a number of least developed and middle
income countries which have voluntarily embraced this approach,
1. Takes note of the report of the High-level Panel on United Nations System-wide
Coherence35 and the report of the Secretary-General containing his comments thereon;36
2. Welcomes the report presented by the Co-Chairs of the consultative follow-up process
by the General Assembly on system-wide coherence, the Permanent Representatives of Ireland
and the United Republic of Tanzania to the United Nations, to the President of the General
Assembly on 21 July 2008,37 the conclusions and recommendations of which are contained in the
annex to the present resolution;
3. Decides, accordingly, that the continuing and deepening intergovernmental work of
the General Assembly on system-wide coherence will focus exclusively and in an integrated
manner on “Delivering as one” at country and regional levels, harmonization of business
practices, funding, governance, and gender equality and the empowerment of women;
4. Requests the Secretary-General, drawing on the resources and expertise of the United
Nations system and building on the outcome of its triennial comprehensive policy review, to
provide to Member States substantive papers on the issues of funding and governance, as those
issues arise in the context of system-wide coherence, with a view to facilitating substantive action
by the General Assembly during the sixty-third session;
5. Welcomes, in this overall context, the paper on “Institutional options to strengthen
United Nations work on gender equality and the empowerment of women”, which the Deputy
Secretary-General provided to the President of the General Assembly on 23 July 2008, and
requests the Secretary-General to provide a further, detailed modalities paper in respect of the
options set out in the Deputy Secretary-General’s paper, covering funding, governance structure,
staffing, specific functions, relationship with the Commission on the Status of Women and other
relevant bodies and, having regard to the totality of views expressed by Member States in informal
plenary consultations on 8 September 2008, focusing in particular on the “composite entity”
option with a view to facilitating substantive action by the General Assembly during the sixtythird session;
6. Resolves, at the conclusion of its entire process on system-wide coherence, to review
and take stock of all of its prior actions and deliberations in a single resolution or decision.
_______________
34

See A/63/85-E/2008/83.
See A/61/583.
36
A/61/836.
37
See A/63/362.
35

20

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

Annex
Conclusions and recommendations of the Co-Chairs of the consultative follow-up process
by the General Assembly on system-wide coherence, the Permanent Representatives of
Ireland and the United Republic of Tanzania to the United Nations
1. As the Co-Chairs for system-wide coherence at the sixty-second session of the General
Assembly we have sought to conduct an open, transparent, balanced and inclusive process of
consultations among the entire membership. Our aim has been to present a report that, by and
large, will sit well with all parts of the Assembly in that all groupings of States should be able to
feel that the report addresses seriously many of their principal priorities and concerns. In this way
we have sought to facilitate a balanced and fair compromise outcome to the deliberations of the
Assembly during the sixty-second session.
2. The following conclusions and recommendations flow from the present report overall, but
are perhaps best seen in tandem with the introductory section. The landmark 2006 report of the
High-level Panel on United Nations System-wide Coherence,35 while a very important
contribution to the work of the General Assembly to increase coherence across the United Nations
system, did not launch that work. The Millennium Summit and the 2005 World Summit as well as
consensus positions of the Assembly, not least the triennial comprehensive policy reviews,
constitute much of the bedrock for building further progress in this area.
3. Since the outset of the sixty-second session, the broad membership has signalled that the
continuing efforts on system-wide coherence should focus on four priority areas, namely (a) the
United Nations delivering as one at the country level with the related aspect of harmonization of
business practices; (b) funding; (c) governance; and (d) gender equality and the empowerment of
women.
4. The present report should be taken together with the paper on gender (in its institutional
dimension) which is being provided by the Secretary-General to Member States in response to
their request of 16 June 2008.38
5. As for “Delivering as one”, we have sought to provide the Member States with an accurate
and up-to-date picture of the process as it is actually developing on the ground in upwards of thirty
developing countries and not simply as it is perceived from afar. We have been helped in this by
our on-the-ground consultations with Heads of State and Government, Cabinet ministers,
parliamentarians, United Nations country teams, development partners and others in some eight
developing countries. We have also conferred at length with United Nations agency heads in
New York, Geneva, Rome, Paris and Vienna. We have taken careful note of the “Maputo
Declaration” issued in May 2008 by pilot and other developing countries, in which they formally
request the Assembly to encourage them in the “Delivering as one” approach that they have
voluntarily embraced in partnership with the United Nations system.
6. Our conclusion is that the experience of “Delivering as one” to date (that is to say, halfway
through its second year) at the country level is clearly and preponderantly positive, even if a
number of challenges remain to be fully addressed in regard to each of the “four ones”. We note
that this view is shared by the large and growing number of developing countries which are
applying the “Delivering as one” approach and proactively moving towards implementing the
consensus resolution on the triennial comprehensive policy review. They state that important
principles are in fact being observed in practice, including national ownership and leadership and
“no one size fits all”. Through the “Delivering as one” approach United Nations country team
activities are being aligned to an unprecedented degree with the national development strategies
and policies of the developing countries concerned. Assistance is being delivered with greater
effectiveness, savings are being realized and greater reductions in transaction costs are clearly in
prospect.
_______________
38

The paper, entitled “Institutional options to strengthen United Nations work on gender equality and the
empowerment of women”, was provided on 23 July 2008.

21

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

7. At the same time the picture that emerges at present is interim in nature since the
independent evaluation of “Delivering as one”, as foreseen by the 2007 triennial comprehensive
policy review, will come only towards the end of 2009 and, in any event, concrete development
outputs arising from a new way of doing business take longer than eighteen months to emerge
definitively.
8. It seems to us clear that the Assembly ought to be in a position during the sixty-second
session to give a positive political impetus to “Delivering as one”, thereby giving encouragement
to those many developing countries which have voluntarily embraced this approach, and to enjoin
the United Nations development system to continue to pursue it. Moving forward, it will be
essential to safeguard the principles underlying “Delivering as one”, in particular that of enhancing
national ownership and leadership in the design and implementation of United Nations
development system support programmes at the country level. The international community
should by the same token be encouraged to continue to respond positively through additional
commitments where the combination of strong national leadership and an empowered United
Nations country team, delivering as one, together generate a better-aligned and more effective
United Nations programme of support.
9. For the most part, the funds, programmes and specialized agencies of the system, at the
leadership level, have gradually become increasingly engaged with and supportive of the
“Delivering as one” approach. The atmosphere in which they collaborate within the United
Nations System Chief Executives Board for Coordination under the chairmanship of the
Secretary-General has been transformed for the better as they and their collaborators continue
consideration of the implications of the “four ones” (one programme, one budgetary framework
and fund, one leader and one office) at the country level. At the same time, it is to be
recommended that headquarters levels across the system empower the respective country-level
agency representatives with much greater latitude, flexibility and encouragement to advance a
more coherent and therefore more effective delivery of United Nations system assistance on the
ground in line with the “Delivering as one” approach.
10. In all of this, the particular situations affecting middle-income countries should receive
adequate attention.
11. Turning to the issue of funding in the context of system-wide coherence, there clearly need
to be greater flows of and greater predictability in funding. In general, overall commitments made
solemnly and repeatedly need to be implemented more faithfully. Commendation is due to those
development partners which have made concrete contributions to advancing the “Delivering as
one” approach at the country level in response to the strategies, priorities, policies and plans of the
developing countries concerned. At the same time, support for “Delivering as one” at the country
level must not be at the expense of core funding to agencies through their headquarters. Overall,
there needs to be a significantly improved balance between core and non-core funding. Funds,
programmes and specialized agencies should be invited, if necessary through changes in statute,
rules and/or regulations, to give effect to the consensus view in the General Assembly that savings
realized at the country level ought to be ploughed back into programmatic development work in
the countries where the savings are realized. In this and in other ways, “Delivering as one” must
deliver more.
12. As for intergovernmental governance at the central level, we have detected no palpable
appetite in the General Assembly for establishing new intergovernmental bodies, including the
putative Sustainable Development Board which was recommended by the High-level Panel. At
the same time the new realities emerging from a growing number of developing countries
applying the “Delivering as one” approach at the country level will need to be accommodated and
addressed more effectively by the existing boards and not least by the Economic and Social
Council. In the light of the ongoing and emerging nature of the “Delivering as one” approach, it
may be necessary to continue and to deepen discussion of these issues during the sixty-third
session.

22

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

13. If, in that context, the Assembly focuses first on the functions that need to be discharged
centrally and intergovernmentally in the “Delivering as one” approach, it will perhaps then be
easier to address the question of which institutions, as these continue to adapt, are best placed to
discharge the functions in question.
14. We also believe that the United Nations system and the Bretton Woods institutions ought to
be consistently encouraged to develop, in a pragmatic manner, a far greater degree of cooperation
and collaboration in the context described in the present report. Some progress is already being
made. This needs to be developed and enlarged.
15. As for gender equality and the empowerment of women, we recommend that the Assembly
be invited to address the matter, including in the light of the Secretary-General’s paper on the
institutional dimension,38 in open, informal plenary consultations at an early opportunity, perhaps
early in September. During the sixty-second session the Member States have advanced together,
by agreement, in their consideration of the issue of gender equality and women’s empowerment.
With assistance from the Secretary-General, they have identified critical gaps in the way the
system assists Member States in implementing globally agreed mandates and their own
internationally made commitments in this area. With further open and genuine discussion the
Assembly may be in a position, before the conclusion of its sixty-second session, to signal in
general terms, but nevertheless clearly, which institutional option or combination of options,
perhaps with adjustments, it wishes to pursue. Detailed working through of such an agreed
approach could then be taken up and completed at the sixty-third session. We have the very strong
impression that no Government, whether for substantive or “tactical” reasons, would wish to stand
in the way of a consensus to advance the issue of gender equality and the empowerment of
women through a measured but significant step forward.
16. We believe that in the light of the present report and the Secretary-General’s options paper
on gender equality and the empowerment of women (in its institutional aspect)38 Member States
ought to be equipped for decision-making during the sixty-second session. With these substantive
elements in hand, Member States are also better placed to weigh the format of the decisionmaking of the Assembly.
17. In the first instance, and on the basis of the foregoing report and these conclusions, Member
States may, during the sixty-second session, wish to address, perhaps in a package decision, the
four core priority areas listed in paragraph 3 above, which they have highlighted throughout.
18. The same decision could signal that henceforth, in the context of intergovernmental
discussion on system-wide coherence, the Assembly will focus exclusively on these priority areas
and will exclude from this context the issues of environment/environmental governance,
humanitarian assistance and human rights, in line with the considerations set out in the present
report.
RESOLUTION 62/278
Adopted at the 122nd plenary meeting, on 15 September 2008, without a vote, on the basis of draft
resolution A/62/L.52, submitted by the President of the General Assembly

62/278. Mandate review
The General Assembly,
Recalling paragraph 163 (b) of the 2005 World Summit Outcome,39 regarding mandate
review,
_______________
39

See resolution 60/1.

23

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

Welcoming the last review process, initiated in 2007 by the President of the General
Assembly at its sixty-second session, in a letter dated 6 November 2007, as well as the previous
processes conducted during the sixtieth and sixty-first sessions,
Having considered the final report of the Co-Chairs of the mandate review process during
the sixty-second session, dated 8 August 2008,
1. Takes note of the final report of the Co-Chairs of the mandate review process during
the sixty-second session, including on the review of the thematic clusters relating to the effective
coordination of humanitarian assistance and the development of Africa;
2. Recognizes the usefulness of the existing online mandate registry, and decides to
maintain it as an accessible working tool for Member States and to revert to the issue in the
context of its consideration of the proposed programme budget for the biennium 2010–2011;
3. Notes that one of the important findings of the process is the difficulty of identifying
resources associated with one particular mandate, which limited the potential of the review
process to fulfil its objective of strengthening and updating the programme of work of the
Organization and improving the allocation of resources for the effective implementation of
mandates;
4. Calls upon its relevant bodies and subsidiary organs, within their respective mandates
and in accordance with the established regulations and rules governing programme planning, to
continue improving the implementation of mandates and addressing the continuing validity of
legislative decisions and the effective coordination among units of the Secretariat and other
structures of the United Nations system.

24

II. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Special Political
and Decolonization Committee (Fourth Committee)
Contents
Resolution
No.

62/273.

Title

Page

Comprehensive review of the whole question of peacekeeping operations in all their aspects ...................................... 26

25

II. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Special Political and Decolonization Committee (Fourth Committee)

RESOLUTION 62/273
Adopted at the 121st plenary meeting, on 11 September 2008, without a vote, on the recommendation
1
of the Committee (A/62/406/Add.1, para. 7)

62/273. Comprehensive review of the whole question of peacekeeping operations
in all their aspects
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 2006 (XIX) of 18 February 1965 and all other relevant resolutions,
Recalling in particular its resolutions 61/267 A of 16 May 2007 and 61/267 B and 61/291 of
24 July 2007,
Affirming that the efforts of the United Nations in the peaceful settlement of disputes,
including through its peacekeeping operations, are indispensable,
Convinced of the need for the United Nations to continue to improve its capabilities in the
field of peacekeeping and to enhance the effective and efficient deployment of its peacekeeping
operations,
Considering the contribution that all States Members of the United Nations make to
peacekeeping,
Noting the widespread interest in contributing to the work of the Special Committee on
Peacekeeping Operations expressed by Member States, in particular troop-contributing countries,
Bearing in mind the continuous necessity of preserving the efficiency and strengthening the
effectiveness of the work of the Special Committee,
1. Welcomes the report of the Special Committee on Peacekeeping Operations and its
Working Group;2
2. Endorses the proposals, recommendations and conclusions of the Special Committee,
contained in paragraphs 15 to 199 of its report;
3. Urges Member States, the Secretariat and relevant organs of the United Nations to take
all necessary steps to implement the proposals, recommendations and conclusions of the Special
Committee;
4. Reiterates that those Member States that become personnel contributors to the United
Nations peacekeeping operations in years to come or participate in the future in the Special
Committee for three consecutive years as observers shall, upon request in writing to the Chairman
of the Special Committee, become members at the following session of the Special Committee;
5. Decides that the Special Committee, in accordance with its mandate, shall continue its
efforts for a comprehensive review of the whole question of peacekeeping operations in all their
aspects and shall review the implementation of its previous proposals and consider any new
proposals so as to enhance the capacity of the United Nations to fulfil its responsibilities in this
field;
6. Requests the Special Committee to submit a report on its work to the General
Assembly at its sixty-third session;
7. Decides to include in the draft agenda of its sixty-third session the item entitled
“Comprehensive review of the whole question of peacekeeping operations in all their aspects”.
_______________
1

The draft resolution recommended in the report was sponsored in the Committee by: Argentina, Canada, Egypt,
Japan, Nigeria and Poland.
2
Official Records of the General Assembly, Sixty-second Session, Supplement No. 19 (A/62/19).

26

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee*
Contents
Resolution
No.

Title

Page

*

62/223.

Financial reports and audited financial statements, and reports of the Board of Auditors.............................................. 28
Resolution B .......................................................................................................................................................... 28

62/232.

Financing of the African Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur .............................................................. 29
Resolution B .......................................................................................................................................................... 29

62/233.

Financing of the United Nations Mission in the Central African Republic and Chad ................................................... 31
Resolution B .......................................................................................................................................................... 31

62/245.

Special subjects relating to the programme budget for the biennium 2008–2009......................................................... 34

62/246.

Report of the Joint Inspection Unit for 2007 and programme of work for 2008........................................................... 36

62/247.

Strengthening investigations.................................................................................................................................... 37

62/248.

Human resources management................................................................................................................................ 40

62/250.

Support account for peacekeeping operations ........................................................................................................... 40

62/251.

Financing of the United Nations Logistics Base at Brindisi, Italy ............................................................................... 46

62/252.

Reformed procedures for determining reimbursement to Member States for contingent-owned equipment................... 47

62/253.

Financing of the United Nations Operation in Burundi.............................................................................................. 48

62/254.

Financing of the United Nations Operation in Côte d’Ivoire ...................................................................................... 49

62/255.

Financing of the United Nations Peacekeeping Force in Cyprus ................................................................................ 51

62/256.

Financing of the United Nations Organization Mission in the Democratic Republic of the Congo................................ 55

62/257.

Financing of the United Nations Mission of Support in East Timor............................................................................ 59

62/258.

Financing of the United Nations Integrated Mission in Timor-Leste........................................................................... 60

62/259.

Financing of the United Nations Mission in Ethiopia and Eritrea ............................................................................... 63

62/260.

Financing of the United Nations Observer Mission in Georgia................................................................................... 66

62/261.

Financing of the United Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti .................................................................................. 69

62/262.

Financing of the United Nations Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo .............................................................. 72

62/263.

Financing of the United Nations Mission in Liberia .................................................................................................. 75

62/264.

Financing of the United Nations Disengagement Observer Force............................................................................... 78

62/265.

Financing of the United Nations Interim Force in Lebanon........................................................................................ 81

62/266.

Financing of the United Nations Mission in Sierra Leone.......................................................................................... 85

62/267.

Financing of the United Nations Mission in the Sudan .............................................................................................. 85

62/268.

Financing of the United Nations Mission for the Referendum in Western Sahara........................................................ 89

62/269.

Procurement reform................................................................................................................................................ 92

_______________
* Unless otherwise stated, the draft resolutions recommended in the reports were submitted by the Chairman or another officer of the Bureau of the
Committee.

27

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

RESOLUTION 62/223 B
Adopted at the 109th plenary meeting, on 20 June 2008, without a vote, on the recommendation of the
Committee (A/62/534/Add.1, para. 6)

62/223. Financial reports and audited financial statements, and reports of the Board
of Auditors
B1
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 58/249 B of 18 June 2004, 59/264 B of 22 June 2005, 60/234 B of
30 June 2006, 61/233 B of 29 June 2007 and 62/223 A of 22 December 2007,
Having considered the financial report and audited financial statements for the twelvemonth period from 1 July 2006 to 30 June 2007 and the report of the Board of Auditors on the
United Nations peacekeeping operations, 2 the report of the Advisory Committee on
Administrative and Budgetary Questions on the report of the Board of Auditors on the accounts of
the United Nations peacekeeping operations for the financial period ended 30 June 20073 and the
report of the Secretary-General on the implementation of the recommendations of the Board of
Auditors concerning the United Nations peacekeeping operations for the financial period ended
30 June 2007,4
1. Accepts the audited financial statements of the United Nations peacekeeping
operations for the period from 1 July 2006 to 30 June 2007;2
2. Takes note of the observations and endorses the recommendations contained in the
report of the Board of Auditors;5
3. Reiterates that the issue of outstanding assessed contributions is a policy matter of the
General Assembly, and urges all Member States to make every possible effort to ensure the
payment of their assessed contributions in full;
4. Takes note of the observations and endorses the recommendations contained in the
report of the Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions on the report of the
Board of Auditors;3
5. Commends the Board of Auditors for the quality of its report and the streamlined
format thereof;
6. Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General on the implementation of the
recommendations of the Board of Auditors concerning the United Nations peacekeeping
operations for the financial period ended 30 June 2007;4
7. Requests the Secretary-General to ensure the full implementation of the
recommendations of the Board of Auditors, including those relating to the cancellation of
unliquidated obligations and the system of assets management, and the related recommendations
of the Advisory Committee in a prompt and timely manner, subject to the provisions of the present
resolution;
8. Also requests the Secretary-General to continue to indicate an expected time frame for
the implementation of the recommendations of the Board of Auditors as well as the priorities for
_______________
1

Resolution 62/223, in section VI of the Official Records of the General Assembly, Sixty-second Session, Supplement
No. 49 (A/62/49), vol. I, becomes resolution 62/223 A.
2
Official Records of the General Assembly, Sixty-second Session, Supplement No. 5, vol. II (A/62/5 (Vol. II)).
3
A/62/823.
4
A/62/784.
5
Official Records of the General Assembly, Sixty-second Session, Supplement No. 5, vol. II (A/62/5 (Vol. II)),
chap. II.

28

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

their implementation, including the office-holders to be held accountable and measures taken in
that regard;
9. Further requests the Secretary-General to continue to provide, in future reports on the
implementation of the recommendations of the Board of Auditors concerning the United Nations
peacekeeping operations, a full explanation for delays in the implementation of all outstanding
recommendations of the Board.
RESOLUTION 62/232 B
Adopted at the 109th plenary meeting, on 20 June 2008, without a vote, on the recommendation of the
Committee (A/62/601/Add.1, para. 7)

62/232. Financing of the African Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur
B6
The General Assembly,
Having considered the report of the Secretary-General on the financing of the African
Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur 7 and the related report of the Advisory
Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions,8
Recalling Security Council resolution 1769 (2007) of 31 July 2007, by which the Council
established the African Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur for an initial period of
twelve months as from 31 July 2007,
Recalling also its resolution 62/232 A of 22 December 2007 on the financing of the
Operation,
Reaffirming the general principles underlying the financing of United Nations peacekeeping
operations, as stated in its resolutions 1874 (S-IV) of 27 June 1963, 3101 (XXVIII) of
11 December 1973 and 55/235 of 23 December 2000,
Mindful of the fact that it is essential to provide the Operation with the financial resources
necessary to enable it to fulfil its responsibilities under the resolution of the Security Council,
Noting the hybrid nature of the Operation, and in that regard stressing the importance of
ensuring full coordination of efforts between the African Union and the United Nations at the
strategic level, unity of command at the operational level and clear delegation of authority and
accountability lines,
1. Requests the Secretary-General to entrust the Head of Mission with the task of
formulating future budget proposals in full accordance with the provisions of General Assembly
resolutions 59/296 of 22 June 2005, 60/266 of 30 June 2006 and 61/276 of 29 June 2007, as well
as other relevant resolutions;
2. Takes note of the status of contributions to the African Union-United Nations Hybrid
Operation in Darfur as at 30 May 2008, including the contributions outstanding in the amount of
345.1 million United States dollars, representing some 27 per cent of the total assessed
contributions, notes with concern that only sixty-four Member States have paid their assessed
contributions in full, and urges all other Member States, in particular those in arrears, to ensure
payment of their outstanding assessed contributions;
_______________
6

Resolution 62/232, in section VI of the Official Records of the General Assembly, Sixty-second Session, Supplement
No. 49 (A/62/49), vol. I, becomes resolution 62/232 A.
7
A/62/791 and Corr.1 and 2.
8
A/62/781/Add.14.

29

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

3. Expresses its appreciation to those Member States that have paid their assessed
contributions in full, and urges all other Member States to make every possible effort to ensure
payment of their assessed contributions to the Operation in full;
4. Expresses concern at the financial situation with regard to peacekeeping activities, in
particular as regards the reimbursements to troop contributors that bear additional burdens owing
to overdue payments by Member States of their assessments;
5. Also expresses concern at the delay experienced by the Secretary-General in deploying
and providing adequate resources to some recent peacekeeping missions, in particular those in
Africa;
6. Emphasizes that all future and existing peacekeeping missions shall be given equal and
non-discriminatory treatment in respect of financial and administrative arrangements;
7. Also emphasizes that all peacekeeping missions shall be provided with adequate
resources for the effective and efficient discharge of their respective mandates;
8. Reiterates its request to the Secretary-General to make the fullest possible use of
facilities and equipment at the United Nations Logistics Base at Brindisi, Italy, in order to
minimize the costs of procurement for the Operation;
9. Endorses the conclusions and recommendations contained in the report of the
Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions,8 subject to the provisions of the
present resolution, and requests the Secretary-General to ensure their full implementation;
10. Requests the Secretary-General to ensure the full implementation of the relevant
provisions of its resolutions 59/296, 60/266 and 61/276;
11. Also requests the Secretary-General to take all necessary action to ensure that the
Operation is administered with a maximum of efficiency and economy;
12. Further requests the Secretary-General to include in his future budget submission
details of the mechanisms that exist at Headquarters and in the field for ensuring coordination and
collaboration among all United Nations actors active in the relevant mission area;
13. Requests the Secretary-General to ensure that future budgets for the Operation contain
sufficient information, explanation and justification of the proposed resource requirements relating
to its operational costs in order to allow Member States to take well-informed decisions;
14. Also requests the Secretary-General, in order to reduce the cost of employing General
Service staff, to continue efforts to recruit local staff for the Operation against General Service
posts, commensurate with the requirements of the Operation;
Budget estimates for the period from 1 July 2008 to 30 June 2009
15. Decides to appropriate to the Special Account for the African Union-United Nations
Hybrid Operation in Darfur the amount of 1,569,255,200 dollars for the period from 1 July 2008
to 30 June 2009, inclusive of 1,499,710,000 dollars for the maintenance of the Operation,
60,624,500 dollars for the support account for peacekeeping operations and 8,920,700 dollars for
the United Nations Logistics Base;
Financing of the appropriation
16. Also decides to apportion among Member States the amount of 147,437,934 dollars
for the period from 1 to 31 July 2008, in accordance with the levels updated in General Assembly
resolution 61/243 of 22 December 2006, and taking into account the scale of assessments for
2008, as set out in its resolution 61/237 of 22 December 2006;
17. Further decides that, in accordance with the provisions of its resolution 973 (X) of
15 December 1955, there shall be set off against the apportionment among Member States, as
provided for in paragraph 16 above, their respective share in the Tax Equalization Fund of
30

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

2,242,000 dollars, comprising the estimated staff assessment income of 1,697,825 dollars
approved for the Operation, the prorated share of 485,408 dollars of the estimated staff assessment
income approved for the support account and the prorated share of 58,767 dollars of the estimated
staff assessment income approved for the United Nations Logistics Base;
18. Decides to apportion among Member States the amount of 771,962,266 dollars,
comprising the amount of 708,212,500 dollars for the maintenance of the Operation for the period
from 1 August to 31 December 2008 at a monthly rate of 141,642,500 dollars and the amount of
63,749,766 dollars for the support account and the United Nations Logistics Base for the period
from 1 August 2008 to 30 June 2009 at the monthly rate of 5,795,433 dollars, in accordance with
the levels updated in General Assembly resolution 61/243, and taking into account the scale of
assessments for 2008 and 2009, as set out in its resolution 61/237, subject to a decision of the
Security Council to extend the mandate of the Operation;
19. Also decides that, in accordance with the provisions of its resolution 973 (X), there
shall be set off against the apportionment among Member States, as provided for in paragraph 18
above, their respective share in the Tax Equalization Fund of 14,475,050 dollars, comprising the
estimated staff assessment income of 8,489,125 dollars approved for the Operation, the prorated
share of 5,339,492 dollars of the estimated staff assessment income approved for the support
account and the prorated share of 646,433 dollars of the estimated staff assessment income
approved for the United Nations Logistics Base;
20. Emphasizes that no peacekeeping mission shall be financed by borrowing funds from
other active peacekeeping missions;
21. Encourages the Secretary-General to continue to take additional measures to ensure
the safety and security of all personnel participating in the Operation under the auspices of the
United Nations, bearing in mind paragraphs 5 and 6 of Security Council resolution 1502 (2003) of
26 August 2003;
22. Invites voluntary contributions to the Operation in cash and in the form of services and
supplies acceptable to the Secretary-General, to be administered, as appropriate, in accordance
with the procedure and practices established by the General Assembly;
23. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its sixty-third session the item entitled
“Financing of the African Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur”.
RESOLUTION 62/233 B
Adopted at the 109th plenary meeting, on 20 June 2008, without a vote, on the recommendation of the
Committee (A/62/602/Add.1, para. 8)

62/233. Financing of the United Nations Mission in the Central African Republic
and Chad
B9
The General Assembly,
Having considered the report of the Secretary-General on the financing of the United
Nations Mission in the Central African Republic and Chad10 and the related report of the Advisory
Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions,11
_______________
9

Resolution 62/233, in section VI of the Official Records of the General Assembly, Sixty-second Session, Supplement
No. 49 (A/62/49), vol. I, becomes resolution 62/233 A.
10
A/62/804.
11
A/62/781/Add.15.

31

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

Recalling Security Council resolution 1778 (2007) of 25 September 2007, by which the
Council approved the establishment in Chad and the Central African Republic, in consultation
with the authorities of Chad and the Central African Republic, of a multidimensional presence and
decided that the multidimensional presence should include, for a period of one year, a United
Nations Mission in the Central African Republic and Chad,
Recalling also its resolution 62/233 A of 22 December 2007,
Reaffirming the general principles underlying the financing of United Nations peacekeeping
operations, as stated in General Assembly resolutions 1874 (S-IV) of 27 June 1963,
3101 (XXVIII) of 11 December 1973 and 55/235 of 23 December 2000,
Mindful of the fact that it is essential to provide the Mission with the financial resources
necessary to enable it to fulfil its responsibilities under the resolution of the Security Council,
Noting with appreciation that voluntary contributions have been made to the Mission,
1. Requests the Secretary-General to entrust the Head of Mission with the task of
formulating future budget proposals, in full accordance with the provisions of General Assembly
resolutions 59/296 of 22 June 2005, 60/266 of 30 June 2006 and 61/276 of 29 June 2007, as well
as other relevant resolutions;
2. Takes note of the status of contributions to the United Nations Mission in the Central
African Republic and Chad as at 30 April 2008, including the contributions outstanding in the
amount of 45 million United States dollars, representing some 25 per cent of the total assessed
contributions, notes with concern that only fifty-six Member States have paid their assessed
contributions in full, and urges all other Member States, in particular those in arrears, to ensure
payment of their outstanding assessed contributions;
3. Expresses its appreciation to those Member States which have paid their assessed
contributions in full, and urges all other Member States to make every possible effort to ensure
payment of their assessed contributions to the Mission in full;
4. Expresses concern at the financial situation with regard to peacekeeping activities, in
particular as regards the reimbursements to troop contributors that bear additional burdens owing
to overdue payments by Member States of their assessments;
5. Also expresses concern at the delay experienced by the Secretary-General in deploying
and providing adequate resources to some recent peacekeeping missions, in particular those in
Africa;
6. Emphasizes that all future and existing peacekeeping missions shall be given equal and
non-discriminatory treatment in respect of financial and administrative arrangements;
7. Also emphasizes that all peacekeeping missions shall be provided with adequate
resources for the effective and efficient discharge of their respective mandates;
8. Reiterates its request to the Secretary-General to make the fullest possible use of
facilities and equipment at the United Nations Logistics Base at Brindisi, Italy, in order to
minimize the costs of procurement for the Mission;
9. Endorses the conclusions and recommendations contained in the report of the
Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions,11 and requests the SecretaryGeneral to ensure their full implementation;
10. Recalls paragraph 14 of the report of the Advisory Committee on Administrative and
Budgetary Questions,11 and encourages the United Nations Mission in the Central African
Republic and Chad and other United Nations missions in the region to continue, where possible,
their efforts to achieve greater synergy, while bearing in mind that individual missions are
responsible for the preparation and implementation of their own budgets and for controlling their
own assets and logistical operations;

32

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

11. Requests the Secretary-General to include in future budget submissions details of the
mechanisms that exist at Headquarters and in the field for ensuring coordination and collaboration
among all United Nations actors active in the relevant mission area;
12. Also requests the Secretary-General to ensure the full implementation of the relevant
provisions of its resolutions 59/296, 60/266 and 61/276;
13. Further requests the Secretary-General to take all action necessary to ensure that the
Mission is administered with a maximum of efficiency and economy;
14. Requests the Secretary-General, in order to reduce the cost of employing General
Service staff, to continue efforts to recruit local staff for the Mission against General Service posts,
commensurate with the requirements of the Mission;
Budget estimates for the period from 1 July 2008 to 30 June 2009
15. Decides to appropriate to the Special Account for the United Nations Mission in the
Central African Republic and Chad the amount of 315,083,400 dollars for the period from 1 July
2008 to 30 June 2009, inclusive of 301,124,200 dollars for the maintenance of the Mission,
12,168,700 dollars for the support account for peacekeeping operations and 1,790,500 dollars for
the United Nations Logistics Base;
Financing of the appropriation for the period from 1 July 2008 to 30 June 2009
16. Also decides to apportion among Member States the amount of 73,519,456 dollars for
the period from 1 July to 24 September 2008, in accordance with the levels updated in General
Assembly resolution 61/243 of 22 December 2006, and taking into account the scale of
assessments for 2008, as set out in its resolution 61/237 of 22 December 2006;
17. Further decides that, in accordance with the provisions of its resolution 973 (X) of
15 December 1955, there shall be set off against the apportionment among Member States, as
provided for in paragraph 16 above, their respective share in the Tax Equalization Fund of the
amount of 1,742,182 dollars, comprising the estimated staff assessment income of 1,436,352
dollars approved for the Mission, the prorated share of 272,838 dollars of the estimated staff
assessment income approved for the support account and the prorated share of 32,992 dollars of
the estimated staff assessment income approved for the United Nations Logistics Base;
18. Decides to apportion among Member States the amount of 241,563,944 dollars for the
period from 25 September 2008 to 30 June 2009 at a monthly rate of 26,256,950 dollars, in
accordance with the levels updated in General Assembly resolution 61/243, and taking into
account the scale of assessments for 2008 and 2009, as set out in its resolution 61/237, subject to a
decision of the Security Council to extend the mandate of the Mission;
19. Also decides that, in accordance with the provisions of its resolution 973 (X), there
shall be set off against the apportionment among Member States, as provided for in paragraph 18
above, their respective share in the Tax Equalization Fund of the amount of 5,724,318 dollars,
comprising the estimated staff assessment income of 4,719,448 dollars approved for the Mission,
the prorated share of 896,462 dollars of the estimated staff assessment income approved for the
support account and the prorated share of 108,408 dollars of the estimated staff assessment
income approved for the United Nations Logistics Base;
20. Emphasizes that no peacekeeping mission shall be financed by borrowing funds from
other active peacekeeping missions;
21. Encourages the Secretary-General to continue to take additional measures to ensure
the safety and security of all personnel under the auspices of the United Nations participating in
the Mission, bearing in mind paragraphs 5 and 6 of Security Council resolution 1502 (2003) of
26 August 2003;

33

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

22. Invites voluntary contributions to the Mission in cash and in the form of services and
supplies acceptable to the Secretary-General, to be administered, as appropriate, in accordance
with the procedure and practices established by the General Assembly;
23. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its sixty-third session the item entitled
“Financing of the United Nations Mission in the Central African Republic and Chad”.
RESOLUTION 62/245
Adopted at the 91st plenary meeting, on 3 April 2008, without a vote, on the recommendation of the
Committee (A/62/563/Add.3, para. 8)

62/245. Special subjects relating to the programme budget for the biennium 2008–2009
The General Assembly,
I
Revised estimates resulting from resolutions adopted by
the Human Rights Council
Having considered the report of the Secretary-General on revised estimates resulting from
resolutions adopted by the Human Rights Council at its sixth session and its fifth special session in
2007 12 and the related report of the Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary
Questions,13
1.

Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General;12

2. Also takes note of the preliminary estimated requirements of 2,916,000 United States
dollars for the biennium 2008–2009;
3. Further takes note that the estimated requirements of 2,449,300 dollars have been
included in the programme budget for the biennium 2008–2009 and that the balance of 466,700
dollars is to be considered in the context of a consolidated statement of requirements arising from
the continuing review by the Human Rights Council of its subsidiary machinery;
4. Endorses the conclusions and recommendations contained in the report of the
Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions;13
5. Requests the Secretary-General to submit proposals to improve the procedure for
presenting the financial requirements arising from resolutions and decisions of the Human Rights
Council for consideration at its sixty-third session;
II
Financing of field missions of the Peacebuilding Commission
Having considered the note by the Secretary-General on the financing of field missions of
the Peacebuilding Commission 14 and the related report of the Advisory Committee on
Administrative and Budgetary Questions,15
_______________
12

A/62/671.
A/62/7/Add.34. For the final text, see Official Records of the General Assembly, Sixty-second Session, Supplement
No. 7A.
14
A/62/670.
15
A/62/7/Add.33. For the final text, see Official Records of the General Assembly, Sixty-second Session, Supplement
No. 7A.
13

34

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

1.

Takes note of the note by the Secretary-General;14

2. Also takes note of the preliminary estimate of 676,300 dollars for field missions of the
Peacebuilding Commission under the programme budget for the biennium 2008–2009;
3. Endorses the conclusions and recommendations contained in the report of the
Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions;15
III
Estimates in respect of special political missions, good offices and other political
initiatives authorized by the General Assembly and/or the Security Council:
additional requirements for special political missions for the period
from 1 January to 31 December 2008
Recalling section V of its resolution 62/238 of 22 December 2007,
Having considered the report of the Secretary-General on estimates in respect of special
political missions, good offices and other political initiatives authorized by the General Assembly
and/or the Security Council16 and the related report of the Advisory Committee on Administrative
and Budgetary Questions,17
1.

Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General;16

2. Endorses the conclusions and recommendations contained in the report of the
Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions,17 subject to the provisions of
the present resolution;
3. Decides to maintain the staffing for the Office of the Special Envoy of the SecretaryGeneral for Lord’s Resistance Army-affected areas at the level currently funded under the
provisions of its resolution 62/239 of 22 December 2007 on unforeseen and extraordinary
expenses for the biennium 2008–2009;
4. Also decides to review the staffing and resource allocation for the Special Envoy of the
Secretary-General for Lord’s Resistance Army-affected areas at the main part of its sixty-third
session in the context of the 2009 budget proposal for special political missions;
5. Further decides to redeploy twenty-two positions (Local level) from the Electoral
Assistance Office of the United Nations Mission in Nepal according to the needs of the Mission;
6. Approves additional budgets for special political missions for 2008 totalling
48,954,400 dollars net (53,571,500 dollars gross);
7. Takes note of the balance of 17,322,800 dollars in the overall provision for special
political missions under section 3, Political affairs, of the programme budget for the biennium
2008–2009;
8. Decides to appropriate, under the procedure provided for in paragraph 11 of annex I to
its resolution 41/213 of 19 December 1986, an additional amount of 31,631,600 dollars under
section 3, Political affairs, of the programme budget for the biennium 2008–2009;
9. Also decides to appropriate an amount of 4,617,100 dollars under section 35, Staff
assessment, to be offset by a corresponding amount under income section 1, Income from staff
assessment, of the programme budget for the biennium 2008–2009.
_______________
16

A/62/512/Add.6.
A/62/7/Add.37. For the final text, see Official Records of the General Assembly, Sixty-second Session, Supplement
No. 7A.
17

35

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

RESOLUTION 62/246
Adopted at the 91st plenary meeting, on 3 April 2008, without a vote, on the recommendation of the
Committee (A/62/536/Add.1, para. 6)

62/246. Report of the Joint Inspection Unit for 2007 and programme of work
for 2008
The General Assembly,
Reaffirming its previous resolutions on the Joint Inspection Unit, in particular resolutions
31/192 of 22 December 1976, 50/233 of 7 June 1996, 54/16 of 29 October 1999, 55/230 of
23 December 2000, 56/245 of 24 December 2001, 57/284 A and B of 20 December 2002, 58/286
of 8 April 2004, 59/267 of 23 December 2004, 60/258 of 8 May 2006, 61/238 of 22 December
2006, 61/260 of 4 April 2007 and 62/226 of 22 December 2007,
Reiterating that the impact of the Unit on the cost-effectiveness of activities within the
United Nations system is a shared responsibility of the Member States, the Unit and the
secretariats of the participating organizations,
Reaffirming the commitment by the Unit, the legislative organs and the secretariats of the
participating organizations to implement a system of follow-up to the recommendations of the
Unit, as set out in resolution 54/16,
Reaffirming also the unique role of the Unit as the only system-wide external oversight
body,
Having considered the report of the Joint Inspection Unit for 2007 and programme of work
for 2008,18
1.

Recalls its resolutions 61/260 and 62/226;

2. Takes note with appreciation of the report of the Joint Inspection Unit for 2007 and
programme of work for 2008;18
3. Welcomes the joint presentation of the annual report and the programme of work of the
Unit for consideration at the first part of its resumed session;
4. Also welcomes progress in the reform process of the Unit, and encourages further
efforts on the part of the participating organizations to consider the recommendations of the Unit;
5. Commends the Unit for its internal reform process aimed at improving its efficiency
and effectiveness, and invites the Unit to report to the General Assembly at its sixty-third session
on measures the Unit deems necessary to continue to improve its functioning;
6. Requests the Unit, in line with its mandate, to continue to focus its work and reports on
system-wide issues of interest and relevance to the participating organizations and the States
Members of the United Nations and to provide advice on ways to ensure more efficient and
effective use of resources in implementing the mandates of the Organization;
7. Reiterates its request to the executive heads of the participating organizations to fully
comply with the statutory procedures for consideration of the reports of the Unit, in particular to
submit their comments and to distribute reports in time for their consideration by legislative
organs;
8. Requests the Secretary-General, in his capacity as Chairman of the United Nations
System Chief Executives Board for Coordination, to expedite the implementation of the present
resolution, including through the expected provision of support to the Unit by the secretariats of
_______________
18

Official Records of the General Assembly, Sixty-second Session, Supplement No. 34A (A/62/34/Add.1).

36

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

the participating organizations for the preparation of its reports, notes and confidential letters, and
the consideration of and action on the Unit’s recommendations in the light of pertinent resolutions
of the General Assembly, and to report to the Assembly on an annual basis on the results achieved;
9. Reiterates its request to the Secretary-General and the other executive heads of the
participating organizations to fully assist the Unit, with the timely provision of all information
requested by it;
10. Reiterates its invitation to the legislative organs of the participating organizations to
take concrete action on the recommendations of the Unit;
11. Notes with appreciation the ongoing efforts of the Unit to report on the impact of its
recommendations, as illustrated in paragraph 49 of its annual report,18 and in this context requests
the Unit to work in coordination with participating organizations to provide in future annual
reports the financial implications that have resulted from its recommendations, wherever possible;
12. Invites the Unit to report in the context of its annual reports on experience in the
implementation of the follow-up system by the participating organizations;
13. Notes with appreciation the introduction of a table for system-wide reports entitled
“Overview of action to be taken by participating organizations on Joint Inspection Unit
recommendations” which identifies those recommendations that are relevant to each organization
and which specifies those recommendations that require legislative decisions and those that can be
implemented by the executive head of the organization;
14. Notes with concern paragraph 39 of the annual report,18 in which the Unit describes
the difficulty it has had in obtaining from some organizations updated information on the status of
its recommendations, and in this regard requests the Unit to study the feasibility of using a webbased system to monitor the status of recommendations and receive updates from individual
organizations;
15. Expresses its readiness to apply the follow-up system to review recommendations of
the Unit requiring action by the General Assembly;
16. Affirms that oversight is a shared responsibility of Member States, the organizations
and the internal and external oversight bodies;
17. Recalls paragraph 9 of its resolution 62/224 of 22 December 2007, and encourages the
Secretary-General, in his capacity as Chairman of the Chief Executives Board, to enhance the
dialogue of the Board with the Joint Inspection Unit on coordination issues;
18. Welcomes the coordination of the Unit with the Board of Auditors and the Office of
Internal Oversight Services of the Secretariat, and encourages those bodies to continue sharing
experiences, knowledge, best practices and lessons learned with other United Nations audit and
oversight bodies as well as with the Independent Audit Advisory Committee;
19. Takes note with appreciation of the information contained in paragraph 63 of the
annual report,18 and encourages the Unit to keep the General Assembly informed, if necessary,
about any difficulty or delay in obtaining visas for the official travel of the inspectors, as well as
members of its secretariat;
20. Requests the Unit to provide at its earliest convenience a detailed explanation of the
nature and scope of the investigations the Unit envisions conducting.
RESOLUTION 62/247
Adopted at the 91st plenary meeting, on 3 April 2008, without a vote, on the recommendation of the
Committee (A/62/773, para. 6)

37

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

62/247. Strengthening investigations
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 48/218 B of 29 July 1994, 54/244 of 23 December 1999, 57/282,
section IV, of 20 December 2002, 59/272 of 23 December 2004, 59/287 of 13 April 2005, 61/245
of 22 December 2006, 61/267 B of 24 July 2007, 61/275 and 61/279 of 29 June 2007 and 62/234
of 22 December 2007,
Recalling also paragraph 10 of its resolution 59/287,
Having considered the report of the Secretary-General on strengthening investigations,19 the
report of the Office of Internal Oversight Services on the activities of the Procurement Task Force
for the eighteen-month period ended 30 June 2007, 20 the note by the Secretary-General
transmitting his comments thereon 21 and the related report of the Advisory Committee on
Administrative and Budgetary Questions,22
1. Takes note of the report of the Office of Internal Oversight Services20 and the related
note by the Secretary-General;21
2. Endorses the conclusions and recommendations contained in the report of the
Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions,22 subject to the provisions of
the present resolution;
3.
report;

Notes in particular the concern of the Advisory Committee stated in paragraph 5 of its

4. Stresses that the lack of explicitly written rules and regulations for procedures relating
to investigations negatively affects fairness and due process rights;
5. Expresses concern that the current investigations manual of the Office of Internal
Oversight Services of the Secretariat appears to lack useful and practical information for
investigators compared with similar manuals used in other international organizations and that it
also appears not to contain sufficient working instructions for conducting investigations;
6. Notes with appreciation the efforts being made by the Office of Internal Oversight
Services to improve the conduct of its investigations by applying international best practices and
ensuring respect for the due process rights of all United Nations staff;
7. Affirms that transparent, predictable, accountable and objective operational strategies
and investigation procedures contribute to the effective functioning of the system of
administration of justice;
8. Notes with concern that concerns have been raised regarding due process rights in
investigations, stresses that the due process rights afforded to staff in investigations carried out by
the Office of Internal Oversight Services have to withstand review by the system of administration
of justice, and reiterates its request to the Secretary-General to develop a comprehensive approach
to fully undertake the Organization’s responsibility in ensuring the due process rights of its staff
under investigation;
9. Re-emphasizes the principle of separation, impartiality and fairness on the part of those
with responsibility for investigation functions;
10. Stresses that the purpose of the Office of Internal Oversight Services is to assist the
Secretary-General in fulfilling his internal oversight responsibilities;
_______________
19

A/62/582 and Corr.1.
A/62/272.
21
A/62/272/Add.1.
22
A/62/7/Add.35. For the final text, see Official Records of the General Assembly, Sixty-second Session, Supplement
No. 7A.
20

38

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

11. Reaffirms that the Office of Internal Oversight Services is the internal body entrusted
with investigation in the United Nations;
12. Also reaffirms that trained heads of offices, programme managers and boards of
inquiry, as well as the Department of Safety and Security and the Ethics Office, may carry out
administrative inquiries and investigations, except in cases of serious misconduct and/or criminal
behaviour, in accordance with resolution 59/287;
13. Takes note of the development of a comprehensive training module designed to build
the capacity of United Nations staff to support administrative inquiries or investigations, as well as
of a special training programme for investigating allegations of sexual harassment, by the Office
of Internal Oversight Services;
14. Recalls paragraphs 3, 8 and 10 of its resolution 59/287, and requests the SecretaryGeneral to continue to increase basic investigation training, as appropriate, for the handling of
minor forms of misconduct;
15. Reaffirms its decision that in cases of serious misconduct and/or criminal behaviour,
investigations should be conducted by professional investigators;
16. Also reaffirms that any changes that have administrative and financial implications will
be submitted by the Secretary-General and will be subject to the review and approval of the
General Assembly in accordance with established procedures;
17. Requests the Secretary-General to prepare, in close cooperation with the Office of
Internal Oversight Services, for its consideration at its sixty-third session, a report providing
detailed information regarding, inter alia:
(a)

The status of implementation of its resolution 59/287;

(b) Updated and detailed information on all the entities other than the Office of Internal
Oversight Services carrying out administrative inquiries and investigations, their legislative basis
and precise role, the number and types of cases handled, related resources, reporting mechanisms,
standards and guidelines involved and training imparted;
(c) The status of work done under general temporary assistance resources equivalent to
six positions to establish a training capacity for the Investigations Division to enable programme
managers to handle category II cases of misconduct23 and the assessment of such work and any
other related work carried out for the same purpose, as well as the future workplan thereof;
18. Also requests the Secretary-General to prepare for its consideration and approval, in
close cooperation with the Office of Internal Oversight Services, a report providing detailed
information on terms of reference with regard to the proposed comprehensive review of
investigations in the United Nations before the General Assembly decides on the necessity of such
a review, taking into account the role and mandate of the Office of Internal Oversight Services as
established in its resolution 48/218 B, the framework for investigation adopted in section IV of its
resolution 57/282 and in its resolution 59/287, the reform of the system of administration of
justice, the decisions of the Assembly to strengthen the investigation function of the Office of
Internal Oversight Services and its decisions on the accountability framework, results-based
management, enterprise risk management and the internal control framework;
19. Further requests the Secretary-General to report to the General Assembly on practices
related to the sharing of information between the Organization and law enforcement authorities of
Member States as well as to referrals to such authorities of possible criminal cases related to
United Nations staff, United Nations officials and experts on mission, taking into account its
resolution 62/63 of 6 December 2007 and other relevant legal instruments.
_______________
23

See A/58/708, para. 27.

39

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

RESOLUTION 62/248
Adopted at the 91st plenary meeting, on 3 April 2008, without a vote, on the recommendation of the
Committee (A/62/772, para. 6)

62/248. Human resources management
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 59/266 of 23 December 2004, 61/244 of 22 December 2006,
section VIII of its resolution 61/276 of 29 June 2007 and section XXI of its resolution 62/238 of
22 December 2007, as well as its other relevant resolutions and decisions,
Having considered the reports of the Secretary-General on the staffing of field missions,
including the use of 300- and 100-series appointments,24 on detailed proposals for streamlining
United Nations contractual arrangements25 and on the harmonization of conditions of service,26
the addendum to the report of the International Civil Service Commission for the year 200627 and
section II of the report of the Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions,28
1. Takes note of the reports of the Secretary-General on the staffing of field missions,
including the use of 300- and 100-series appointments,24 on detailed proposals for streamlining
United Nations contractual arrangements25 and on the harmonization of conditions of service;26
2. Decides to continue consideration of the issue of contractual arrangements and
conditions of service, including in United Nations field operations, as a matter of priority at the
main part of its sixty-third session, taking into account the conclusions and recommendations
contained in section II of the report of the Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary
Questions,28 with a view to the implementation of new arrangements and conditions on 1 July
2009.
RESOLUTION 62/250
Adopted at the 109th plenary meeting, on 20 June 2008, without a vote, on the recommendation of the
Committee (A/62/600/Add.1, para. 13)

62/250. Support account for peacekeeping operations
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 45/258 of 3 May 1991, 47/218 A of 23 December 1992, 48/226 A
of 23 December 1993, 55/238 of 23 December 2000, 56/241 of 24 December 2001, 56/293 of
27 June 2002, 57/318 of 18 June 2003, 58/298 of 18 June 2004, 59/301 of 22 June 2005,
60/268 of 30 June 2006, 61/245 and 61/246 of 22 December 2006, 61/256 of 15 March 2007 and
61/279 of 29 June 2007, its decisions 48/489 of 8 July 1994, 49/469 of 23 December 1994 and
50/473 of 23 December 1995 and its other relevant resolutions,
Having considered the reports of the Secretary-General on the financing of the support
account for peacekeeping operations29 and on the comprehensive analysis of the Office of Military
Affairs of the Department of Peacekeeping Operations,30 the preliminary report of the Secretary_______________
24

A/61/732.
A/62/274.
26
A/61/861.
27
Official Records of the General Assembly, Sixty-first Session, Supplement No. 30, addendum (A/61/30/Add.1).
28
A/62/7/Add.14. For the final text, see Official Records of the General Assembly, Sixty-second Session, Supplement
No. 7A.
29
A/62/766 and Add.1 and A/62/783 and Corr.1.
30
A/62/752.
25

40

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

General on the status of implementation of General Assembly resolution 61/279 on strengthening
the capacity of the United Nations to manage and sustain peacekeeping operations,31 the report of
the Independent Audit Advisory Committee on the proposed budget for the Office of Internal
Oversight Services under the support account for peacekeeping operations for the period from
1 July 2008 to 30 June 200932 and the related report of the Advisory Committee on Administrative
and Budgetary Questions,33
Recognizing the importance of the ability of the United Nations to respond and deploy
rapidly to a peacekeeping operation upon adoption of a relevant resolution of the Security
Council, within thirty days for traditional peacekeeping operations and ninety days for complex
peacekeeping operations,
Recognizing also the need for adequate support during all phases of peacekeeping
operations, including the liquidation and termination phases,
Mindful that the level of the support account should broadly correspond to the mandate,
number, size and complexity of peacekeeping missions,
1. Takes note of the reports of the Secretary-General on the financing of the support
account for peacekeeping operations29 and on the comprehensive analysis of the Office of Military
Affairs of the Department of Peacekeeping Operations,30 the preliminary report of the SecretaryGeneral on the status of implementation of General Assembly resolution 61/279 on strengthening
the capacity of the United Nations to manage and sustain peacekeeping operations31 and the report
of the Independent Audit Advisory Committee on the proposed budget for the Office of Internal
Oversight Services under the support account for peacekeeping operations for the period from
1 July 2008 to 30 June 2009;32
2. Reaffirms its role with regard to the structure of the Secretariat, and stresses that
proposals that amend the overall departmental structure, as well as the format of the budgets of the
Organization and the biennial programme plan, are subject to review and approval by the General
Assembly;
3. Also reaffirms its role in carrying out a thorough analysis and approval of human and
financial resources and policies with a view to ensuring the full, effective and efficient
implementation of all mandated programmes and activities and the implementation of policies in
this regard;
4. Further reaffirms that the Fifth Committee is the appropriate Main Committee of the
General Assembly entrusted with responsibility for administrative and budgetary matters;
5.

Reaffirms rule 153 of its rules of procedure;

6. Emphasizes that ongoing management reforms must be fully taken into account when
presenting additional proposals for reform;
7. Reaffirms that the support account funds shall be used for the sole purpose of financing
human resources and non-human resource requirements for backstopping and supporting
peacekeeping operations at Headquarters, and that any changes in this limitation require the prior
approval of the General Assembly;
8. Also reaffirms the need for adequate funding for the backstopping of peacekeeping
operations, as well as the need for justification for that funding in support account budget
submissions;
9. Recalls the role of the Secretary-General as the Chief Administrative Officer of the
Organization, in accordance with the provisions of Article 97 of the Charter of the United Nations;
_______________
31

A/62/741.
A/62/814 and Add.1.
33
A/62/855.
32

41

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

10. Reiterates that the delegation of authority on the part of the Secretary-General should
be in order to facilitate the better management of the Organization, but stresses that the overall
responsibility for management of the Organization rests with the Secretary-General as the Chief
Administrative Officer;
11. Affirms the need for the Secretary-General to ensure that the delegation of authority to
the Department of Peacekeeping Operations, the Department of Field Support and field missions
is in strict compliance with relevant resolutions and decisions, as well as relevant rules and
procedures of the General Assembly on this matter;
12. Stresses that heads of departments report to and are accountable to the SecretaryGeneral;
13. Notes the unique nature of the reporting line from the head of the Department of Field
Support to the Under-Secretary-General for Peacekeeping Operations, and decides that having one
head of department (Department of Field Support) report to and take direction from another head
of department (Department of Peacekeeping Operations) shall not set a precedent in the
Secretariat;
14. Requests the Secretary-General to address systemic issues that hamper good
management of the Organization, including by improving work processes and procedures, and in
that context stresses that structural change is no substitute for managerial improvement;
15. Reiterates the importance of strengthened accountability in the Organization and of
ensuring greater accountability of the Secretary-General to Member States, inter alia, for the
effective and efficient implementation of legislative mandates and the use of human and financial
resources;
16. Recalls its request to the Secretary-General to specifically define accountability, as
well as clear accountability mechanisms, including to the General Assembly, and to propose clear
parameters for its application and the instruments for its rigorous enforcement, without exception,
at all levels, to ensure effective and efficient operations and management of resources in the
Organization;
17. Emphasizes the importance of preserving the unity of command in missions at all
levels, as well as a coherence in policy and strategy and clear command structures in the field and
up to and including Headquarters;
18. Requests the Secretary-General to ensure a clear chain of command, accountability,
coordination and maintenance of an adequate system of checks and balances;
19. Emphasizes the importance of interaction and coordination with troop-contributing
countries;
20. Also emphasizes the need to ensure the safety and security of United Nations
personnel;
21. Urges the Secretary-General, within the framework established in its resolutions
52/12 B of 19 December 1997 and 52/220 of 22 December 1997, to define explicitly the role and
duties of the Deputy Secretary-General in the reform set out in its resolution 61/279, including in
relation to the Department of Peacekeeping Operations, the Department of Field Support, the
Department of Political Affairs and the Department of Management;
22. Recalls section I, paragraph 6, of its resolution 55/238, paragraph 11 of its resolution
56/241 and paragraph 19 of its resolution 61/279, and requests the Secretary-General to ensure the
proper representation of troop-contributing countries in the Department of Peacekeeping
Operations and the Department of Field Support, taking into account their contribution to United
Nations peacekeeping;
23. Reiterates that the Secretary-General, in employing staff, shall ensure the highest
standards of efficiency, competence and integrity as the paramount consideration, with due regard
42

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

for the principle of equitable geographical distribution, in accordance with Article 101,
paragraph 3, of the Charter and relevant resolutions of the General Assembly;
24. Reaffirms paragraph 67 of its resolution 61/279, and requests the Secretary-General to
include detailed information on mechanisms in place and measures taken to address the
management challenges which the new organizational structure of the Department of
Peacekeeping Operations/Department of Field Support poses, and the improvement that the new
structure has brought in ensuring efficiency and effectiveness in the support for peacekeeping
operations and special political missions, as well as to coordination with the Department of
Political Affairs, in the context of the comprehensive report to be submitted at the second part of
its resumed sixty-third session;
25. Notes with concern the late submission of the budgets of some peacekeeping
operations, which puts considerable strain on the work of the General Assembly and the Advisory
Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions, and, while recognizing the challenges
faced in preparing the budget proposals and related reports on peacekeeping and special factors
affecting some missions, requests the Secretary-General to intensify his efforts to improve the
quality and timely issuance of peacekeeping documents;
26. Reiterates its request in paragraph 13 of its resolution 60/268 and paragraph 32 of its
resolution 61/279, and urges the Secretary-General to submit the comprehensive report on the
evolution of the support account at the second part of its resumed sixty-third session within the
context of his next budget proposal for the support account;
27. Notes that the application of an accurate vacancy rate is good budgetary practice and
essential for the appropriate assessment on Member States;
28. Requests the Secretary-General, when submitting his budget proposals, to include
details of the full annual cost of posts for the subsequent budget;
29. Takes note of paragraph 48 of the report of the Advisory Committee on Administrative
and Budgetary Questions;33
30. Stresses the importance of complementarity of efforts and avoiding duplication
between integrated operational teams and substantive components of the Secretariat, and requests
the Secretary-General to report thereon, and to provide a clear definition of the roles and
responsibilities of the integrated operational teams, in the comprehensive report to be submitted to
the General Assembly at the second part of its resumed sixty-third session;
31. Affirms the importance of ensuring that the information and communications
technology operations and requirements relating to peacekeeping are fully addressed and properly
managed, taking into account the principle of unity of command;
32. Reaffirms the need for effective and efficient administration and financial management
of peacekeeping operations, and urges the Secretary-General to continue to identify measures to
increase the productivity and efficiency of the support account;
33. Requests the Secretary-General to ensure the full implementation of the relevant
provisions of General Assembly resolutions 59/296 of 22 June 2005, 60/266 of 30 June 2006 and
61/276 of 29 June 2007 and other relevant resolutions;
34. Endorses the conclusions and recommendations contained in the report of the
Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions,33 subject to the provisions of
the present resolution;
35. Takes note of paragraphs 81 to 87 of the report of the Advisory Committee on
Administrative and Budgetary Questions,33 and decides to establish the following posts in the
current structure of the Office of Military Affairs:
(a) One D-1, two P-5, ten P-4 and four P-3 posts in the Office of the Military Adviser and
one P-4 post for a civilian officer;
43

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

(b)

Three P-4 posts and two P-3 posts in the Force Generation Service;

(c)

Twelve P-4 posts in the Military Planning Service;

(d)

Four P-4 posts in the Current Military Operations Service;

(e) One P-4 and three P-3 posts to be assigned to the Logistics Support Division of the
Department of Field Support;
(f) One P-4 and one P-3 to be assigned to the Information and Communications
Technology Division of the Department of Field Support;
36. Requests the Secretary-General to submit for its consideration at its sixty-fourth
session a comprehensive report on the implementation of the strengthening of the Office of
Military Affairs and its impact on the organization and capacities of the Office;
37. Requests the Special Committee on Peacekeeping Operations to consider the report
referred to in paragraph 36 above at its 2010 substantive session;
38. Decides to approve the following posts:
(a) One P-5 post for a Security Focal Point in the Situation Centre, Department of
Peacekeeping Operations;
(b) Two P-4 posts for a Policy Adviser and a Policy Development Officer in the Police
Division, Department of Peacekeeping Operations;
(c) One P-3 post for a Programme Officer in the Risk Management Unit of the Office of
the Under-Secretary-General for Field Support;
(d) One P-3 post for a Finance and Budget Officer in the Budget and Performance
Reporting Service of the Field Budget and Finance Division, Department of Field Support;
(e) One D-2 post for the Director of the Information and Communications Technology
Division, Department of Field Support;
(f) One General Service (Other level) post for a Human Resources Assistant (Roster
Development) in the Office of Human Resources Management;
39. Decides not to approve the following posts:
(a) One D-1 post for a Principal Officer and one General Service (Other level) post for an
Administrative Assistant in the Asia and Middle East Division, Department of Peacekeeping
Operations;
(b) One P-3 post in the Engineering Section of the Logistics Support Division,
Department of Field Support;
(c) One P-4 post in the Property Management Section of the Logistics Support Division,
Department of Field Support;
(d) One P-4 post for a Technical Information Operations Support Officer, Department of
Field Support;
(e) One P-4 post for a Management Analyst Officer in the Management Support Service
of the Office of the Under-Secretary-General for Management;
(f) One General Service (Other level) Finance Assistant (Health and Life Insurance
Section) in the Accounts Division, Department of Management;
(g) One P-4 and one P-3 post for Procurement Officers in the Procurement Division,
Department of Management;
(h)

44

One P-4 Legal Officer in the Office of the Legal Counsel, Office of Legal Affairs;

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

40. Decides to convert one P-5 and one General Service general temporary assistance
position in the Conduct and Discipline Unit to posts;
41. Also decides to approve the following positions as general temporary assistance:
(a) One P-4 Human Resources Officer (Outreach and Strategic Staffing Section) in the
Office of Human Resources Management, Department of Management;
(b)

One P-3 Finance Officer in the Treasury Division, Department of Management;

42. Takes note of paragraph 130 of the report of the Advisory Committee on
Administrative and Budgetary Questions,33 and decides to continue the four P-3 positions in the
Peacekeeping Financing Division, Department of Management;
43. Decides to reduce the non-post resources by 1,899,100 United States dollars, and
requests the Secretary-General to consider applying the reduction, inter alia, to the consultancy
requirements referred to in paragraphs 297 and 354 of the report of the Secretary-General on the
budget for the support account for peacekeeping operations for the period from 1 July 2008 to
30 June 2009;34
44. Also decides to maintain, for the financial period from 1 July 2008 to 30 June 2009,
the funding mechanism for the support account used in the current period, from 1 July 2007 to
30 June 2008, as approved in paragraph 3 of its resolution 50/221 B of 7 June 1996;
Financial performance report for the period from 1 July 2006 to 30 June 2007
45. Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General on the financial performance of the
support account for peacekeeping operations for the period from 1 July 2006 to 30 June 2007;35
46. Decides not to transfer the amount of 2,014,000 dollars included in the amount of
7,097,000 dollars, previously authorized in its resolution 61/279, representing the excess of the
authorized level of the Peacekeeping Reserve Fund utilized to finance the requirements of the
support account in respect of the period from 1 July 2007 to 30 June 2008;
47. Decides to apply the total amount of 13,790,000 dollars, comprising the
unencumbered balance of 5,491,600 dollars and other income of 1,759,000 dollars in respect of
the financial period ended 30 June 2007, the support account fund balance in respect of financial
periods ended 30 June 1997, 30 June 1998, 30 June 1999 and 30 June 2000 in the total amount of
2,138,000 dollars, and the excess of the authorized level of the Peacekeeping Reserve Fund in
respect of the financial period ended 30 June 2007 in the amount of 4,401,400 dollars, to the
support account requirements for the period from 1 July 2006 to 30 June 2007;
48. Also decides to apply the excess of the authorized level of the Peacekeeping Reserve
Fund in respect of the financial period ended 30 June 2007 in the amount of 2,014,000 dollars to
the support account requirements for the period from 1 July 2007 to 30 June 2008;
Budget estimates for the financial period from 1 July 2008 to 30 June 2009
49. Approves the support account requirements in the amount of 273,922,800 dollars for
the financial period from 1 July 2008 to 30 June 2009, including 1,122 continuing and 98 new
temporary posts and their related post and non-post requirements;
Financing of the budget estimates
50. Decides that the requirements for the support account for peacekeeping operations for
the financial period from 1 July 2008 to 30 June 2009 shall be financed as follows:
_______________
34
35

A/62/783 and Corr.1.
A/62/766 and Add.1.

45

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

(a) The amount of 469,600 dollars, representing the balance remaining of the excess of
the authorized level of the Peacekeeping Reserve Fund in respect of the financial period ended
30 June 2007, to be applied to the resources required for the financial period from 1 July 2008 to
30 June 2009;
(b) The balance of 273,453,200 dollars to be prorated among the budgets of the active
peacekeeping operations for the financial period from 1 July 2008 to 30 June 2009;
(c) The estimated staff assessment income of 26,274,600 dollars, comprising the amount
of 26,221,200 dollars for the financial period from 1 July 2008 to 30 June 2009 and the increase of
53,400 dollars in respect of the financial period ended 30 June 2007, to be offset against the
balance referred to in subparagraph (b) above, to be prorated among the budgets of the individual
active peacekeeping operations.
RESOLUTION 62/251
Adopted at the 109th plenary meeting, on 20 June 2008, without a vote, on the recommendation of the
Committee (A/62/600/Add.1, para. 13)

62/251. Financing of the United Nations Logistics Base at Brindisi, Italy
The General Assembly,
Recalling section XIV of its resolution 49/233 A of 23 December 1994 and its resolution
62/231 of 22 December 2007,
Recalling also its decision 50/500 of 17 September 1996 on the financing of the United
Nations Logistics Base at Brindisi, Italy, and its subsequent resolutions thereon, the latest of which
was resolution 61/277 of 29 June 2007,
Recalling further its resolution 56/292 of 27 June 2002 concerning the establishment of the
strategic deployment stocks and its subsequent resolutions on the status of the implementation of
the strategic deployment stocks, the latest of which was resolution 61/277,
Having considered the reports of the Secretary-General on the financing of the United
Nations Logistics Base36 and the related report of the Advisory Committee on Administrative and
Budgetary Questions,37
Reiterating the importance of establishing an accurate inventory of assets,
1. Notes with appreciation the facilities provided by the Government of Italy to the
United Nations Logistics Base at Brindisi, Italy;
2. Endorses the conclusions and recommendations contained in the report of the
Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions,37 and requests the SecretaryGeneral to ensure their full implementation;
3. Requests the Secretary-General to ensure the full implementation of the relevant
provisions of its resolutions 59/296 of 22 June 2005, 60/266 of 30 June 2006 and 61/276 of
29 June 2007, as well as other relevant resolutions;
Financial performance report for the period from 1 July 2006 to 30 June 2007
4. Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General on the financial performance of the
United Nations Logistics Base for the period from 1 July 2006 to 30 June 2007;38
_______________
36

A/62/669 and A/62/769.
A/62/781/Add.12.
38
A/62/669.
37

46

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

Budget estimates for the period from 1 July 2008 to 30 June 2009
5. Approves the cost estimates for the United Nations Logistics Base amounting to
45,769,000 United States dollars for the period from 1 July 2008 to 30 June 2009;
Financing of the budget estimates
6. Decides that the requirements for the United Nations Logistics Base for the period
from 1 July 2008 to 30 June 2009 shall be financed as follows:
(a) The unencumbered balance and other income in the total amount of 5,532,100 dollars
in respect of the financial period ended 30 June 2007 to be applied against the resources required
for the period from 1 July 2008 to 30 June 2009;
(b) The balance of 40,236,900 dollars to be prorated among the budgets of the active
peacekeeping operations for the period from 1 July 2008 to 30 June 2009;
(c) The net estimated staff assessment income of 3,179,400 dollars, comprising the
amount of 3,473,400 dollars for the period from 1 July 2008 to 30 June 2009 and the decrease of
294,000 dollars in respect of the financial period ended 30 June 2007, to be set off against the
balance referred to in subparagraph (b) above, to be prorated among the budgets of the individual
active peacekeeping operations;
7. Also decides to consider at its sixty-third session the question of the financing of the
United Nations Logistics Base at Brindisi, Italy.
RESOLUTION 62/252
Adopted at the 109th plenary meeting, on 20 June 2008, without a vote, on the recommendation of the
Committee (A/62/600/Add.1, para. 13)

62/252. Reformed procedures for determining reimbursement to Member States
for contingent-owned equipment
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 55/274 of 14 June 2001 and 59/298 of 22 June 2005,
Having considered the report of the Secretary-General on the reformed procedures for
determining reimbursement to Member States for contingent-owned equipment,39 the report of the
2008 Working Group on Contingent-Owned Equipment, as transmitted by the Chairman of the
Working Group to the Chairman of the Fifth Committee,40 and the related report of the Advisory
Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions,41
1. Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General on the reformed procedures for
determining reimbursement to Member States for contingent-owned equipment39 and the report of
the 2008 Working Group on Contingent-Owned Equipment, as transmitted by the Chairman of
the Working Group to the Chairman of the Fifth Committee;40
2. Endorses the conclusions and recommendations contained in the report of the
Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions,41 subject to the provisions of
the present resolution;
3. Takes note of paragraph 6 of the report of the Advisory Committee, and invites the
Working Group to reconsider its recommendation at its next meeting;
_______________
39

A/62/774 and Corr.1.
See A/C.5/62/26.
41
A/62/851.
40

47

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

4. Recalls paragraph 8 of its resolution 55/274, and requests the Secretary-General to
submit an update of his report, including the arrangements for recreational leave allowance, for its
consideration at the second part of its resumed sixty-third session.
RESOLUTION 62/253
Adopted at the 109th plenary meeting, on 20 June 2008, without a vote, on the recommendation of the
Committee (A/62/866, para. 6)

62/253. Financing of the United Nations Operation in Burundi
The General Assembly,
Having considered the report of the Secretary-General on the financing of the United
Nations Operation in Burundi,42 the related report of the Advisory Committee on Administrative
and Budgetary Questions 43 and the statements made by the representative of the SecretaryGeneral and the Chairperson of the Advisory Committee,44
Recalling Security Council resolution 1545 (2004) of 21 May 2004, by which the Council
authorized, for an initial period of six months as from 1 June 2004, with the intention to renew it
for further periods, the deployment of a peacekeeping operation called the United Nations
Operation in Burundi, and the subsequent resolutions by which the Council extended the mandate
of the Operation, the last of which was resolution 1692 (2006) of 30 June 2006, by which the
Council extended the mandate of the Operation until 31 December 2006,
Recalling also its resolution 58/312 of 18 June 2004 on the financing of the Operation and
its subsequent resolutions thereon, the latest of which was resolution 61/9 B of 29 June 2007,
Reaffirming the general principles underlying the financing of United Nations peacekeeping
operations, as stated in General Assembly resolutions 1874 (S-IV) of 27 June 1963,
3101 (XXVIII) of 11 December 1973 and 55/235 of 23 December 2000,
1. Takes note of the status of contributions to the United Nations Operation in Burundi as
at 31 March 2008, including the credits in the amount of 27.5 million United States dollars;
2. Endorses the conclusions and recommendations contained in the report of the
Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions,43 subject to the provisions of
the present resolution, and requests the Secretary-General to ensure their full implementation;
Financial performance report for the period from 1 July 2006 to 30 June 2007
3. Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General on the financial performance of the
Operation for the period from 1 July 2006 to 30 June 2007;42
4.

Also takes note of paragraphs 14 and 15 of the report of the Advisory Committee;

5. Decides that Member States that have fulfilled their financial obligations to the
Operation shall be credited with their respective share of the unencumbered balance and other
income in the amount of 30,729,800 dollars in respect of the financial period ended 30 June 2007,
in accordance with the levels updated in General Assembly resolution 61/243 of 22 December
2006, and taking into account the scale of assessments for 2007, as set out in its resolution 61/237
of 22 December 2006;
6. Also decides that, for Member States that have not fulfilled their financial obligations
to the Operation, their share of the unencumbered balance and other income in the amount of
_______________
42

A/62/668.
A/62/781/Add.2.
44
See Official Records of the General Assembly, Sixty-second Session, Fifth Committee, 37th meeting
(A/C.5/62/SR.37), and corrigendum.
43

48

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

30,729,800 dollars in respect of the financial period ended 30 June 2007 shall be set off against
their outstanding obligations, in accordance with the scheme set out in paragraph 5 above;
7. Further decides that the decrease of 378,700 dollars in the estimated staff assessment
income in respect of the financial period ended 30 June 2007 shall be set off against the credits
from the amount of 30,729,800 dollars referred to in paragraphs 5 and 6 above;
8. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its sixty-third session the item entitled
“Financing of the United Nations Operation in Burundi”.
RESOLUTION 62/254
Adopted at the 109th plenary meeting, on 20 June 2008, without a vote, on the recommendation of the
Committee (A/62/867, para. 7)

62/254. Financing of the United Nations Operation in Côte d’Ivoire
The General Assembly,
Having considered the reports of the Secretary-General on the financing of the United
Nations Operation in Côte d’Ivoire 45 and the related report of the Advisory Committee on
Administrative and Budgetary Questions,46
Recalling Security Council resolution 1528 (2004) of 27 February 2004, by which the
Council established the United Nations Operation in Côte d’Ivoire for an initial period of twelve
months as from 4 April 2004, and the subsequent resolutions by which the Council extended the
mandate of the Operation, the latest of which was resolution 1795 (2008) of 15 January 2008, by
which the Council extended the mandate of the Operation until 30 July 2008,
Recalling also its resolution 58/310 of 18 June 2004 on the financing of the Operation and
its subsequent resolutions thereon, the latest of which was resolution 61/247 B of 29 June 2007,
Reaffirming the general principles underlying the financing of United Nations peacekeeping
operations, as stated in General Assembly resolutions 1874 (S-IV) of 27 June 1963,
3101 (XXVIII) of 11 December 1973 and 55/235 of 23 December 2000,
Mindful of the fact that it is essential to provide the Operation with the financial resources
necessary to enable it to fulfil its responsibilities under the relevant resolutions of the Security
Council,
1. Requests the Secretary-General to entrust the Head of Mission with the task of
formulating future budget proposals in full accordance with the provisions of General Assembly
resolutions 59/296 of 22 June 2005, 60/266 of 30 June 2006 and 61/276 of 29 June 2007, as well
as other relevant resolutions;
2. Takes note of the status of contributions to the United Nations Operation in Côte
d’Ivoire as at 30 April 2008, including the contributions outstanding in the amount of 67 million
United States dollars, representing some 3.5 per cent of the total assessed contributions, notes with
concern that only fifty-two Member States have paid their assessed contributions in full, and urges
all other Member States, in particular those in arrears, to ensure payment of their outstanding
assessed contributions;
3. Expresses its appreciation to those Member States which have paid their assessed
contributions in full, and urges all other Member States to make every possible effort to ensure
payment of their assessed contributions to the Operation in full;
_______________
45
46

A/62/642 and A/62/750.
A/62/781/Add.13.

49

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

4. Expresses concern at the financial situation with regard to peacekeeping activities, in
particular as regards the reimbursements to troop contributors that bear additional burdens owing
to overdue payments by Member States of their assessments;
5. Also expresses concern at the delay experienced by the Secretary-General in deploying
and providing adequate resources to some recent peacekeeping missions, in particular those in
Africa;
6. Emphasizes that all future and existing peacekeeping missions shall be given equal and
non-discriminatory treatment in respect of financial and administrative arrangements;
7. Also emphasizes that all peacekeeping missions shall be provided with adequate
resources for the effective and efficient discharge of their respective mandates;
8. Reiterates its request to the Secretary-General to make the fullest possible use of
facilities and equipment at the United Nations Logistics Base at Brindisi, Italy, in order to
minimize the costs of procurement for the Operation;
9. Endorses the conclusions and recommendations contained in the report of the
Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions,46 subject to the provisions of
the present resolution, and requests the Secretary-General to ensure their full implementation;
10. Takes note of paragraph 22 (b) of the report of the Advisory Committee, and decides to
establish a national Professional post for an Engineer to be responsible for local environmental
protection;
11. Requests the Secretary-General to ensure the full implementation of the relevant
provisions of its resolutions 59/296, 60/266 and 61/276;
12. Also requests the Secretary-General to take all necessary action to ensure that the
Operation is administered with a maximum of efficiency and economy;
13. Further requests the Secretary-General, in order to reduce the cost of employing
General Service staff, to continue efforts to recruit local staff for the Operation against General
Service posts, commensurate with the requirements of the Operation;
Financial performance report for the period from 1 July 2006 to 30 June 2007
14. Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General on the financial performance of the
Operation for the period from 1 July 2006 to 30 June 2007;47
Budget estimates for the period from 1 July 2008 to 30 June 2009
15. Decides to appropriate to the Special Account for the United Nations Operation in
Côte d’Ivoire the amount of 497,455,100 dollars for the period from 1 July 2008 to 30 June 2009,
inclusive of the amount of 475,402,600 dollars for the maintenance of the Operation, 19,223,800
dollars for the support account for peacekeeping operations and 2,828,700 dollars for the United
Nations Logistics Base;
Financing of the appropriation
16. Also decides to apportion among Member States the amount of 40,117,347 dollars for
the period from 1 to 30 July 2008, in accordance with the levels updated in General Assembly
resolution 61/243 of 22 December 2006, and taking into account the scale of assessments for
2008, as set out in its resolution 61/237 of 22 December 2006;
17. Further decides that, in accordance with the provisions of its resolution 973 (X) of
15 December 1955, there shall be set off against the apportionment among Member States, as
_______________
47

A/62/642.

50

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

provided for in paragraph 16 above, their respective share in the Tax Equalization Fund of
953,605 dollars, comprising the estimated staff assessment income of 786,613 dollars approved
for the Operation, the prorated share of 148,960 dollars of the estimated staff assessment income
approved for the support account and the prorated share of 18,032 dollars of the estimated staff
assessment income approved for the United Nations Logistics Base;
18. Decides to apportion among Member States the amount of 457,337,753 dollars for the
period from 31 July 2008 to 30 June 2009, at a monthly rate of 41,454,592 dollars, in accordance
with the levels updated in resolution 61/243, and taking into account the scale of assessments for
2008 and 2009, as set out in resolution 61/237, subject to a decision of the Security Council to
extend the mandate of the Operation;
19. Also decides that, in accordance with the provisions of its resolution 973 (X), there
shall be set off against the apportionment among Member States, as provided for in paragraph 18
above, their respective share in the Tax Equalization Fund of 10,871,095 dollars, comprising the
estimated staff assessment income of 8,967,387 dollars approved for the Operation, the prorated
share of 1,698,140 dollars of the estimated staff assessment income approved for the support
account and the prorated share of 205,568 dollars of the estimated staff assessment income
approved for the United Nations Logistics Base;
20. Further decides that, for Member States that have fulfilled their financial obligations to
the Operation, there shall be set off against their apportionment, as provided for in paragraph 16
above, their respective share of the unencumbered balance and other income in the total amount of
38,685,500 dollars in respect of the financial period ended 30 June 2007, in accordance with the
levels updated in resolution 61/243, and taking into account the scale of assessments for 2007, as
set out in resolution 61/237;
21. Decides that, for Member States that have not fulfilled their financial obligations to the
Operation, there shall be set off against their outstanding obligations their respective share of the
unencumbered balance and other income in the total amount of 38,685,500 dollars in respect of
the financial period ended 30 June 2007, in accordance with the scheme set out in paragraph 20
above;
22. Also decides that the decrease of 422,200 dollars in the estimated staff assessment
income in respect of the financial period ended 30 June 2007 shall be set off against the credits
from the amount of 38,685,500 dollars referred to in paragraphs 20 and 21 above;
23. Emphasizes that no peacekeeping mission shall be financed by borrowing funds from
other active peacekeeping missions;
24. Encourages the Secretary-General to continue to take additional measures to ensure
the safety and security of all personnel participating in the Operation under the auspices of the
United Nations, bearing in mind paragraphs 5 and 6 of Security Council resolution 1502 (2003) of
26 August 2003;
25. Invites voluntary contributions to the Operation in cash and in the form of services and
supplies acceptable to the Secretary-General, to be administered, as appropriate, in accordance
with the procedure and practices established by the General Assembly;
26. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its sixty-third session the item entitled
“Financing of the United Nations Operation in Côte d’Ivoire”.
RESOLUTION 62/255
Adopted at the 109th plenary meeting, on 20 June 2008, without a vote, on the recommendation of the
Committee (A/62/868, para. 7)

51

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

62/255. Financing of the United Nations Peacekeeping Force in Cyprus
The General Assembly,
Having considered the reports of the Secretary-General on the financing of the United
Nations Peacekeeping Force in Cyprus,48 the note by the Secretary-General on the financing
arrangements for the Force49 and the related report of the Advisory Committee on Administrative
and Budgetary Questions,50
Recalling Security Council resolution 186 (1964) of 4 March 1964, regarding the
establishment of the United Nations Peacekeeping Force in Cyprus and the subsequent resolutions
by which the Council extended the mandate of the Force, the latest of which was resolution
1789 (2007) of 14 December 2007, by which the Council extended the mandate of the Force until
15 June 2008,
Recalling also its resolution 47/236 of 14 September 1993 on the financing of the Force and
its subsequent resolutions and decisions thereon, the latest of which was resolution 61/280 of
29 June 2007,
Reaffirming the general principles underlying the financing of United Nations peacekeeping
operations, as stated in General Assembly resolutions 1874 (S-IV) of 27 June 1963,
3101 (XXVIII) of 11 December 1973 and 55/235 of 23 December 2000,
Noting with appreciation that voluntary contributions have been made to the Force by
certain Governments,
Noting that voluntary contributions were insufficient to cover all the costs of the Force,
including those incurred by troop-contributing Governments prior to 16 June 1993, and regretting
the absence of an adequate response to appeals for voluntary contributions, including that
contained in the letter dated 17 May 1994 from the Secretary-General to all Member States,51
Mindful of the fact that it is essential to provide the Force with the financial resources
necessary to enable it to fulfil its responsibilities under the relevant resolutions of the Security
Council,
1. Requests the Secretary-General to entrust the Head of Mission with the task of
formulating future budget proposals in full accordance with the provisions of General Assembly
resolutions 59/296 of 22 June 2005, 60/266 of 30 June 2006 and 61/276 of 29 June 2007, as well
as other relevant resolutions;
2. Takes note of the status of contributions to the United Nations Peacekeeping Force in
Cyprus as at 31 March 2008, including the contributions outstanding in the amount of 19.1 million
United States dollars, representing some 6 per cent of the total assessed contributions, notes with
concern that only forty-one Member States have paid their assessed contributions in full, and urges
all other Member States, in particular those in arrears, to ensure payment of their outstanding
assessed contributions;
3. Expresses its appreciation to those Member States which have paid their assessed
contributions in full, and urges all other Member States to make every possible effort to ensure
payment of their assessed contributions to the Force in full;
4. Expresses concern at the financial situation with regard to peacekeeping activities, in
particular as regards the reimbursements to troop contributors that bear additional burdens owing
to overdue payments by Member States of their assessments;
_______________
48

A/62/649 and A/62/718 and Corr.1.
A/62/779.
50
A/62/781/Add.9.
51
S/1994/647.
49

52

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

5. Also expresses concern at the delay experienced by the Secretary-General in deploying
and providing adequate resources to some recent peacekeeping missions, in particular those in
Africa;
6. Emphasizes that all future and existing peacekeeping missions shall be given equal and
non-discriminatory treatment in respect of financial and administrative arrangements;
7. Also emphasizes that all peacekeeping missions shall be provided with adequate
resources for the effective and efficient discharge of their respective mandates;
8. Reiterates its request to the Secretary-General to make the fullest possible use of
facilities and equipment at the United Nations Logistics Base at Brindisi, Italy, in order to
minimize the costs of procurement for the Force;
9. Endorses the conclusions and recommendations contained in the report of the
Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions,50 subject to the provisions of
the present resolution, and requests the Secretary-General to ensure their full implementation;
10. Decides to reclassify the posts of Associate Public Information Officer, Chief Security
Officer and Chief of Integrated Support Services to the P-3, P-4 and P-5 levels, respectively;
11. Welcomes the steps taken so far by the host Government and the Force regarding the
renovation of the accommodation of military contingent personnel and of other personnel of the
Force, and requests the Secretary-General to continue making every effort, in coordination with
the host Government, to ensure that the renovations are completed as scheduled and to report
thereon in the context of his next budget submission;
12. Requests the Secretary-General to ensure the full implementation of the relevant
provisions of its resolutions 59/296, 60/266 and 61/276;
13. Also requests the Secretary-General to take all necessary action to ensure that the
Force is administered with a maximum of efficiency and economy;
14. Further requests the Secretary-General, in order to reduce the cost of employing
General Service staff, to continue efforts to recruit local staff for the Force against General Service
posts, commensurate with the requirements of the Force;
Financial performance report for the period from 1 July 2006 to 30 June 2007
15. Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General on the financial performance of the
Force for the period from 1 July 2006 to 30 June 2007;52
16. Decides to appropriate to the Special Account for the United Nations Peacekeeping
Force in Cyprus the amount of 2,516,500 dollars for the maintenance of the Force for the period
from 1 July 2006 to 30 June 2007, in addition to the amount of 46,770,000 dollars already
appropriated for the Force for the same period under the terms of its resolution 60/270 of 30 June
2006;
Financing of the additional appropriation for the period from 1 July 2006
to 30 June 2007
17. Notes with appreciation that a one-third share of the net additional appropriation,
equivalent to 741,433 dollars, will be funded through voluntary contributions from the
Government of Cyprus;
18. Decides, taking into account the amount of 25,354,700 dollars already apportioned
under the terms of its resolution 60/270, to apportion among Member States the additional amount
of 1,775,067 dollars for the maintenance of the Force for the period from 1 July 2006 to 30 June
_______________
52

A/62/649.

53

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

2007, in accordance with the levels updated in its resolutions 58/256 of 23 December 2003 and
61/243 of 22 December 2006, and taking into account the scale of assessments for 2006, as set out
in its resolution 58/1 B of 23 December 2003, and the scale of assessments for 2007, as set out in
its resolution 61/237 of 22 December 2006;
19. Also decides that, in accordance with the provisions of its resolution 973 (X) of
15 December 1955, there shall be set off against the apportionment among Member States, as
provided for in paragraph 18 above, their respective share in the Tax Equalization Fund of the
amount of 292,200 dollars, representing the additional staff assessment income for the Force for
the period from 1 July 2006 to 30 June 2007;
20. Further decides that, for Member States that have fulfilled their financial obligations to
the Force, there shall be set off against their apportionment, as provided for in paragraph 18 above,
their respective share of other income in the amount of 641,518 dollars in respect of the financial
period ended 30 June 2007, in accordance with the scheme set out in paragraph 18 above;
21. Decides that, for Member States that have not fulfilled their financial obligations to the
Force, there shall be set off against their outstanding obligations their respective share of other
income in the amount of 641,518 dollars in respect of the financial period ended 30 June 2007, in
accordance with the scheme set out in paragraph 18 above;
22. Also decides, taking into account its voluntary contribution for the financial period
ended 30 June 2007, that one third of other income in the amount of 403,829 dollars in respect of
the financial period ended 30 June 2007 shall be returned to the Government of Cyprus;
23. Further decides, taking into account its voluntary contribution for the financial period
ended 30 June 2007, that the prorated share of other income in the amount of 167,353 dollars in
respect of the financial period ended 30 June 2007 shall be returned to the Government of Greece;
Financing arrangements for the period from 1 July 2007 to 30 June 2008
24. Takes note of the note by the Secretary-General on the financing arrangements for the
Force for the period from 1 July 2007 to 30 June 2008;49
25. Decides to appropriate to the Special Account for the Force the amount of 3,646,500
dollars for the maintenance of the Force for the period from 1 July 2007 to 30 June 2008, in
addition to the amount of 48,847,500 dollars already appropriated for the Force for the same
period under the terms of its resolution 61/280;
Financing of the additional appropriation for the period from 1 July 2007
to 30 June 2008
26. Notes with appreciation that a one-third share of the net additional appropriation,
equivalent to 1,166,700 dollars, will be funded through voluntary contributions from the
Government of Cyprus;
27. Decides, taking into account the amount of 26,804,234 dollars already apportioned
under the terms of its resolution 61/280, to apportion among Member States the additional amount
of 2,376,475 dollars for the maintenance of the Force for the period from 1 July 2007 to 15 June
2008, in accordance with the levels updated in resolution 61/243, and taking into account the scale
of assessments for 2007 and 2008, as set out in resolution 61/237;
28. Also decides that, in accordance with the provisions of its resolution 973 (X), there
shall be set off against the apportionment among Member States, as provided for in paragraph 27
above, their respective share in the Tax Equalization Fund of the amount of 140,204 dollars,
representing the additional staff assessment income approved for the Force for the period from
1 July 2007 to 15 June 2008;
29. Further decides to apportion among Member States the additional amount of 103,325
dollars for the maintenance of the Force for the period from 16 to 30 June 2008, in accordance
54

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

with the levels updated in resolution 61/243, and taking into account the scale of assessments for
2008, as set out in resolution 61/237, subject to a decision by the Security Council to extend the
mandate of the Force;
30. Decides that, in accordance with the provisions of its resolution 973 (X), there shall be
set off against the apportionment among Member States, as provided for in paragraph 29 above,
their respective share in the Tax Equalization Fund of the amount of 6,096 dollars, representing
the additional estimated staff assessment income approved for the Force for the period from 16 to
30 June 2008;
Budget estimates for the period from 1 July 2008 to 30 June 2009
31. Also decides to appropriate to the Special Account for the Force the amount of
57,392,000 dollars for the period from 1 July 2008 to 30 June 2009, inclusive of 54,851,100
dollars for the maintenance of the Force, 2,215,000 dollars for the support account for
peacekeeping operations and 325,900 dollars for the United Nations Logistics Base;
Financing of the appropriation for the period from 1 July 2008 to 30 June 2009
32. Notes with appreciation that a one-third share of the net appropriation, equivalent to
18,264,450 dollars, will be funded through voluntary contributions from the Government of
Cyprus and the amount of 6.5 million dollars from the Government of Greece;
33. Decides to apportion among Member States the amount of 32,627,550 dollars at a
monthly rate of 2,718,962 dollars, in accordance with the levels updated in resolution 61/243, and
taking into account the scale of assessments for 2008 and 2009, as set out in resolution 61/237,
subject to a decision of the Security Council to extend the mandate of the Force;
34. Also decides that, in accordance with the provisions of its resolution 973 (X), there
shall be set off against the apportionment among Member States, as provided for in paragraph 33
above, their respective share in the Tax Equalization Fund of 2,543,800 dollars, comprising the
estimated staff assessment income of 2,305,200 dollars approved for the Force, the prorated share
of 212,900 dollars of the estimated staff assessment income approved for the support account and
the prorated share of 25,700 dollars of the estimated staff assessment income approved for the
United Nations Logistics Base;
35. Further decides to continue to maintain as separate the account established for the
Force for the period prior to 16 June 1993, invites Member States to make voluntary contributions
to that account, and requests the Secretary-General to continue his efforts in appealing for
voluntary contributions to the account;
36. Emphasizes that no peacekeeping mission shall be financed by borrowing funds from
other active peacekeeping missions;
37. Encourages the Secretary-General to continue to take additional measures to ensure
the safety and security of all personnel participating in the Force under the auspices of the United
Nations, bearing in mind paragraphs 5 and 6 of Security Council resolution 1502 (2003) of
26 August 2003;
38. Invites voluntary contributions to the Force in cash and in the form of services and
supplies acceptable to the Secretary-General, to be administered, as appropriate, in accordance
with the procedure and practices established by the General Assembly;
39. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its sixty-third session the item entitled
“Financing of the United Nations Peacekeeping Force in Cyprus”.
RESOLUTION 62/256
Adopted at the 109th plenary meeting, on 20 June 2008, without a vote, on the recommendation of the
Committee (A/62/869, para. 7)

55

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

62/256. Financing of the United Nations Organization Mission in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo
The General Assembly,
Having considered the reports of the Secretary-General on the financing of the United
Nations Organization Mission in the Democratic Republic of the Congo53 and the related report of
the Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions,54
Recalling Security Council resolutions 1258 (1999) of 6 August 1999 and 1279 (1999) of
30 November 1999 regarding, respectively, the deployment to the region of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo of military liaison personnel and the establishment of the United Nations
Organization Mission in the Democratic Republic of the Congo, and the subsequent resolutions by
which the Council extended the mandate of the Mission, the latest of which was resolution
1794 (2007) of 21 December 2007, by which the Council extended the mandate of the Mission
until 31 December 2008,
Recalling also its resolution 54/260 A of 7 April 2000 on the financing of the Mission and its
subsequent resolutions thereon, the latest of which was resolution 61/281 of 29 June 2007,
Recalling further its resolution 58/315 of 1 July 2004,
Reaffirming the general principles underlying the financing of United Nations peacekeeping
operations, as stated in General Assembly resolutions 1874 (S-IV) of 27 June 1963,
3101 (XXVIII) of 11 December 1973 and 55/235 of 23 December 2000,
Noting with appreciation that voluntary contributions have been made to the Mission,
Mindful of the fact that it is essential to provide the Mission with the financial resources
necessary to enable it to fulfil its responsibilities under the relevant resolutions of the Security
Council,
1. Requests the Secretary-General to entrust the Head of Mission with the task of
formulating future budget proposals in full accordance with the provisions of General Assembly
resolutions 59/296 of 22 June 2005, 60/266 of 30 June 2006 and 61/276 of 29 June 2007, as well
as other relevant resolutions;
2. Takes note of the status of contributions to the United Nations Organization Mission in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo as at 31 March 2008, including the contributions
outstanding in the amount of 343.6 million United States dollars, representing some 7 per cent of
the total assessed contributions, notes with concern that only thirty-six Member States have paid
their assessed contributions in full, and urges all other Member States, in particular those in
arrears, to ensure payment of their outstanding assessed contributions;
3. Expresses its appreciation to those Member States which have paid their assessed
contributions in full, and urges all other Member States to make every possible effort to ensure
payment of their assessed contributions to the Mission in full;
4. Expresses concern at the financial situation with regard to peacekeeping activities, in
particular as regards the reimbursements to troop contributors that bear additional burdens owing
to overdue payments by Member States of their assessments;
5. Also expresses concern at the delay experienced by the Secretary-General in deploying
and providing adequate resources to some recent peacekeeping missions, in particular those in Africa;
6. Emphasizes that all future and existing peacekeeping missions shall be given equal and
non-discriminatory treatment in respect of financial and administrative arrangements;
_______________
53
54

A/62/737 and A/62/755.
A/62/781/Add.8.

56

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

7. Also emphasizes that all peacekeeping missions shall be provided with adequate
resources for the effective and efficient discharge of their respective mandates;
8. Reiterates its request to the Secretary-General to make the fullest possible use of
facilities and equipment at the United Nations Logistics Base at Brindisi, Italy, in order to
minimize the costs of procurement for the Mission;
9. Endorses the conclusions and recommendations contained in the report of the
Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions,54 subject to the provisions of
the present resolution, and requests the Secretary-General to ensure their full implementation;
10. Decides to establish two P-3 posts for the Conduct and Discipline Team and one P-3
position to be funded from general temporary assistance;
11. Also decides not to abolish the eight P-3 posts and two National Officer posts of the
Child Protection Section, and requests the Secretary-General to make every effort to fill all
vacancies in the Section;
12. Notes with concern that the Mission continues to experience high vacancy and staff
turnover rates, and urges the Secretary-General to ensure expeditious recruitment for all positions
to ensure mandate delivery, including for the upcoming elections;
13. Acknowledges with appreciation that the use of the logistics hub in Entebbe, Uganda,
has been cost-effective and has resulted in savings for the United Nations, and welcomes the
expansion of the logistics hub to provide logistical support to peacekeeping operations in the
region and to contribute further to their enhanced efficiency and responsiveness, taking into
account the ongoing efforts in this regard;
14. Notes that there has been cooperation among the missions to explore new avenues for
achieving greater synergies in the use of the resources of the Organization, including the concept
of a regional support base in Entebbe for the United Nations Organization Mission in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, the United Nations Integrated Office in Burundi and the
United Nations Mission in the Sudan, bearing in mind that individual missions are responsible for
the preparation and implementation of their own budgets and for controlling their assets and
logistical operations;
15. Decides to establish the post of Coordination Assistant (Field Service) for the Office of
the Deputy Special Representative;
16. Also decides to establish the post of Administrative Officer (P-3) in the Office of the
Special Representative;
17. Underlines the fact that the temporary positions required for the local elections shall
serve solely for that purpose and that the deployment shall be aligned to the schedule of the
election;
18. Requests the Secretary-General to ensure close coordination with the United Nations
country team in order to ensure integration of efforts in the support of the forthcoming local
elections in the Democratic Republic of the Congo;
19. Takes note of paragraph 23 of the report of the Advisory Committee, and recalls
paragraph 17, section II, of its resolution 61/244 of 22 December 2006, in which it acknowledged
that the interaction of United Nations personnel with the local population in the field is essential
and that language skills constitute an important element of the selection and training processes and
therefore affirmed that a good command of the official language(s) spoken in the country of
residence should be taken into account as an additional asset during those processes;
20. Requests the Secretary-General to ensure the full implementation of the relevant
provisions of its resolutions 59/296, 60/266 and 61/276;
21. Also requests the Secretary-General to take all necessary action to ensure that the
Mission is administered with a maximum of efficiency and economy;
57

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

22. Further requests the Secretary-General, in order to reduce the cost of employing
General Service staff, to continue efforts to recruit local staff for the Mission against General
Service posts, commensurate with the requirements of the Mission;
Financial performance report for the period from 1 July 2006 to 30 June 2007
23. Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General on the financial performance of the
Mission for the period from 1 July 2006 to 30 June 2007;55
Budget estimates for the period from 1 July 2008 to 30 June 2009
24. Decides to appropriate to the Special Account for the United Nations Organization
Mission in the Democratic Republic of the Congo the amount of 1,242,729,000 dollars for the
period from 1 July 2008 to 30 June 2009, inclusive of 1,187,676,400 dollars for the maintenance
of the Mission, 47,991,000 dollars for the support account for peacekeeping operations and
7,061,600 dollars for the United Nations Logistics Base;
Financing of the appropriation
25. Also decides to apportion among Member States the amount of 621,364,500 dollars
for the period from 1 July to 31 December 2008, in accordance with the levels updated in General
Assembly resolution 61/243 of 22 December 2006, and taking into account the scale of
assessments for 2008, as set out in its resolution 61/237 of 22 December 2006;
26. Further decides that, in accordance with the provisions of its resolution 973 (X) of
15 December 1955, there shall be set off against the apportionment among Member States, as
provided for in paragraph 25 above, their respective share in the Tax Equalization Fund of the
amount of 14,584,200 dollars, comprising the estimated staff assessment income of 11,999,600
dollars approved for the Mission, the prorated share of 2,305,600 dollars of the estimated staff
assessment income approved for the support account and the prorated share of 279,000 dollars of
the estimated staff assessment income approved for the United Nations Logistics Base;
27. Decides to apportion among Member States the amount of 621,364,500 dollars for the
period from 1 January to 30 June 2009 at a monthly rate of 103,560,750 dollars, in accordance
with the levels updated in resolution 61/243, and taking into account the scale of assessments for
2009, as set out in resolution 61/237, subject to a decision of the Security Council to extend the
mandate of the Mission;
28. Also decides that, in accordance with the provisions of its resolution 973 (X), there
shall be set off against the apportionment among Member States, as provided for in paragraph 27
above, their respective share in the Tax Equalization Fund of the amount of 14,584,200 dollars,
comprising the estimated staff assessment income of 11,999,600 dollars approved for the Mission,
the prorated share of 2,305,600 dollars of the estimated staff assessment income approved for the
support account and the prorated share of 279,000 dollars of the estimated staff assessment
income approved for the United Nations Logistics Base;
29. Further decides that, for Member States that have fulfilled their financial obligations to
the Mission, there shall be set off against their apportionment, as provided for in paragraph 25
above, their respective share of the unencumbered balance and other income in the total amount of
61,577,300 dollars in respect of the financial period ended 30 June 2007, in accordance with the
levels updated in resolution 61/243, and taking into account the scale of assessments for 2007, as
set out in resolution 61/237;
30. Decides that, for Member States that have not fulfilled their financial obligations to the
Mission, there shall be set off against their outstanding obligations their respective share of the
_______________
55

A/62/737.

58

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

unencumbered balance and other income in the total amount of 61,577,300 dollars in respect of
the financial period ended 30 June 2007, in accordance with the scheme set out in paragraph 29
above;
31. Also decides that the increase of 1,225,500 dollars in the estimated staff assessment
income in respect of the financial period ended 30 June 2007 shall be added to the credits from the
amount of 61,577,300 dollars referred to in paragraphs 29 and 30 above;
32. Emphasizes that no peacekeeping mission shall be financed by borrowing funds from
other active peacekeeping missions;
33. Encourages the Secretary-General to continue to take additional measures to ensure
the safety and security of all personnel participating in the Mission under the auspices of the
United Nations, bearing in mind paragraphs 5 and 6 of Security Council resolution 1502 (2003) of
26 August 2003;
34. Invites voluntary contributions to the Mission in cash and in the form of services and
supplies acceptable to the Secretary-General, to be administered, as appropriate, in accordance
with the procedure and practices established by the General Assembly;
35. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its sixty-third session the item entitled
“Financing of the United Nations Organization Mission in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo”.
RESOLUTION 62/257
Adopted at the 109th plenary meeting, on 20 June 2008, without a vote, on the recommendation of the
Committee (A/62/870, para. 7)

62/257. Financing of the United Nations Mission of Support in East Timor
The General Assembly,
Recalling its decision 62/545 A of 22 December 2007,
Having considered the report of the Secretary-General on the final performance of the
United Nations Mission of Support in East Timor56 and the related report of the Advisory
Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions,57
1. Takes note of the status of contributions to the United Nations Transitional
Administration in East Timor and the United Nations Mission of Support in East Timor as at
31 March 2008, including the contributions outstanding in the amount of 10 million United States
dollars, representing some 1 per cent of the total assessed contributions, notes with concern that
only one hundred and forty-three Member States have paid their assessed contributions in full, and
urges all other Member States, in particular those in arrears, to ensure payment of their outstanding
assessed contributions;
2. Endorses the conclusions and recommendations contained in the report of the
Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions,57 subject to the provisions of
the present resolution;
3. Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General on the final performance of the
United Nations Mission of Support in East Timor;56
4. Decides that Member States that have fulfilled their financial obligations to the
Mission shall be credited with their respective share of the net cash available in the Special
_______________
56
57

A/62/555.
A/62/574.

59

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

Account for the United Nations Mission of Support in East Timor in the amount of 3,853,000
dollars as at 30 April 2008 from the unencumbered balance and other income in the amount of
31,835,900 dollars in respect of the financial period ended 30 June 2006, in accordance with the
levels updated in General Assembly resolution 58/256 of 23 December 2003, and taking into
account the scale of assessments for 2006, as set out in its resolution 58/1 B of 23 December 2003;
5. Encourages Member States that are owed credits referred to in paragraph 4 above to
apply those credits to any accounts where the Member State concerned has outstanding assessed
contributions;
6. Decides that, for Member States that have not fulfilled their financial obligations to the
Mission, there shall be set off against their outstanding obligations their respective share of the net
cash available in the Special Account for the Mission in the amount of 3,853,000 dollars as at
30 April 2008 from the unencumbered balance and other income in the amount of 31,835,900
dollars in respect of the financial period ended 30 June 2006, in accordance with the scheme set
out in paragraph 4 above;
7. Also decides that updated information on the financial position of the Mission shall be
included in the report to be considered by the General Assembly at its sixty-third session on the
updated position of closed peacekeeping missions under the item entitled “Administrative and
budgetary aspects of the financing of the United Nations peacekeeping operations”;
8. Further decides that the item entitled “Financing of the United Nations Mission of
Support in East Timor” shall be deleted from its agenda.
RESOLUTION 62/258
Adopted at the 109th plenary meeting, on 20 June 2008, without a vote, on the recommendation of the
Committee (A/62/871, para. 7)

62/258. Financing of the United Nations Integrated Mission in Timor-Leste
The General Assembly,
Having considered the reports of the Secretary-General on the financing of the United
Nations Integrated Mission in Timor-Leste,58 the note by the Secretary-General on the financing
arrangements for the Mission 59 and the related report of the Advisory Committee on
Administrative and Budgetary Questions,60
Recalling Security Council resolution 1704 (2006) of 25 August 2006, by which the Council
decided to establish a follow-on mission in Timor-Leste, the United Nations Integrated Mission in
Timor-Leste, for an initial period of six months, with the intention to renew it for further periods,
and the subsequent resolutions by which the Council extended the mandate of the Mission, the
latest of which was resolution 1802 (2008) of 25 February 2008, by which the Council extended
the mandate of the Mission until 26 February 2009,
Recalling also its resolutions 61/249 A of 22 December 2006 and 61/249 B of 2 April 2007,
as well as resolution 61/249 C of 29 June 2007 on the financing of the Mission,
Reaffirming the general principles underlying the financing of United Nations peacekeeping
operations, as stated in General Assembly resolutions 1874 (S-IV) of 27 June 1963,
3101 (XXVIII) of 11 December 1973 and 55/235 of 23 December 2000,
_______________
58

A/62/645 and A/62/753.
A/62/796.
60
A/62/781/Add.11.
59

60

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

Mindful of the fact that it is essential to provide the Mission with the financial resources
necessary to enable it to fulfil its responsibilities under the relevant resolutions of the Security
Council,
1. Requests the Secretary-General to entrust the Head of Mission with the task of
formulating future budget proposals in full accordance with the provisions of General Assembly
resolutions 59/296 of 22 June 2005, 60/266 of 30 June 2006 and 61/276 of 29 June 2007, as well
as other relevant resolutions;
2. Takes note of the status of contributions to the United Nations Integrated Mission in
Timor-Leste as at 31 March 2008, including the contributions outstanding in the amount of
61.3 million United States dollars, representing some 18 per cent of the total assessed
contributions, notes with concern that only seventy-six Member States have paid their assessed
contributions in full, and urges all other Member States, in particular those in arrears, to ensure
payment of their outstanding assessed contributions;
3. Expresses its appreciation to those Member States which have paid their assessed
contributions in full, and urges all other Member States to make every possible effort to ensure
payment of their assessed contributions to the Mission in full;
4. Expresses concern at the financial situation with regard to peacekeeping activities, in
particular as regards the reimbursements to troop contributors that bear additional burdens owing
to overdue payments by Member States of their assessments;
5. Also expresses concern at the delay experienced by the Secretary-General in deploying
and providing adequate resources to some recent peacekeeping missions, in particular those in
Africa;
6. Emphasizes that all future and existing peacekeeping missions shall be given equal and
non-discriminatory treatment in respect of financial and administrative arrangements;
7. Also emphasizes that all peacekeeping missions shall be provided with adequate
resources for the effective and efficient discharge of their respective mandates;
8. Reiterates its request to the Secretary-General to make the fullest possible use of
facilities and equipment at the United Nations Logistics Base at Brindisi, Italy, in order to
minimize the costs of procurement for the Mission;
9. Endorses the conclusions and recommendations contained in the report of the
Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions,60 subject to the provisions of
the present resolution, and requests the Secretary-General to ensure their full implementation;
10. Decides to establish one P-4 general temporary assistance position for a Legal Officer
and one P-3 post for a Legal Officer;
11. Also decides to establish one P-3 general temporary assistance position for a
Coordination Officer;
12. Further decides not to approve the upgrading of the two Security Officers;
13. Requests the Secretary-General to review the staffing structure, including the senior
management level, of the Mission on an ongoing basis, bearing in mind, in particular, the mandate
and concept of operations of the Mission, and to report thereon in his budget proposals;
14. Also requests the Secretary-General to take the necessary steps to facilitate the
acceleration of the recruitment process and improve incumbency levels in the Mission and to
report on the results achieved in the context of the budget for the Mission for the period from
1 July 2009 to 30 June 2010;
15. Further requests the Secretary-General to ensure the full implementation of the
relevant provisions of its resolutions 59/296, 60/266 and 61/276;

61

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

16. Requests the Secretary-General to take all necessary action to ensure that the Mission
is administered with a maximum of efficiency and economy;
17. Also requests the Secretary-General, in order to reduce the cost of employing General
Service staff, to continue efforts to recruit local staff for the Mission against General Service posts,
commensurate with the requirements of the Mission;
Financial performance report for the period from 1 July 2006 to 30 June 2007
18. Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General on the financial performance of the
Mission for the period from 25 August 2006 to 30 June 2007;61
Financing arrangements for the period from 1 July 2007 to 30 June 2008
19. Also takes note of the note by the Secretary-General on the financing arrangements for
the Mission for the period from 1 July 2007 to 30 June 2008;59
20. Decides to appropriate to the Special Account for the United Nations Integrated
Mission in Timor-Leste the amount of 16,436,500 dollars for the maintenance of the Mission for
the period from 1 July 2007 to 30 June 2008, in addition to the amount of 160,589,900 dollars
already appropriated for the Mission for the same period under the terms of its resolution
61/249 C;
Financing of the additional appropriation for the period from 1 July 2007
to 30 June 2008
21. Also decides, taking into account the amount of 160,589,900 dollars already
apportioned under the terms of its resolution 61/249 C, to apportion among Member States the
additional amount of 16,436,500 dollars for the maintenance of the Mission for the period from
1 July 2007 to 30 June 2008, in accordance with the levels updated in General Assembly
resolution 61/243 of 22 December 2006, and taking into account the scale of assessments for 2007
and 2008, as set out in its resolution 61/237 of 22 December 2006;
22. Further decides that, in accordance with the provisions of its resolution 973 (X) of
15 December 1955, there shall be set off against the apportionment among Member States, as
provided for in paragraph 21 above, their respective share in the Tax Equalization Fund of the
amount of 1,439,800 dollars, representing the additional staff assessment income approved for the
Mission for the period from 1 July 2007 to 30 June 2008;
Budget estimates for the period from 1 July 2008 to 30 June 2009
23. Decides to appropriate to the Special Account for the Mission the amount of
180,841,100 dollars for the period from 1 July 2008 to 30 June 2009, inclusive of 172,842,000
dollars for the maintenance of the Mission, 6,973,100 dollars for the support account for
peacekeeping operations and 1,026,000 dollars for the United Nations Logistics Base;
Financing of the appropriation for the period from 1 July 2008 to 30 June 2009
24. Also decides to apportion among Member States the amount of 119,484,292 dollars
for the period from 1 July 2008 to 26 February 2009, in accordance with the levels updated in
resolution 61/243, and taking into account the scale of assessments for 2008 and 2009, as set out
in resolution 61/237;
25. Further decides that, in accordance with the provisions of its resolution 973 (X), there
shall be set off against the apportionment among Member States, as provided for in paragraph 24
above, their respective share in the Tax Equalization Fund of 4,982,574 dollars, comprising the
_______________
61

A/62/645.

62

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

estimated staff assessment income of 4,486,382 dollars approved for the Mission, the prorated
share of 442,675 dollars of the estimated staff assessment income approved for the support
account and the prorated share of 53,517 dollars of the estimated staff assessment income
approved for the United Nations Logistics Base;
26. Decides to apportion among Member States the amount of 61,356,808 dollars for the
period from 27 February to 30 June 2009 at a monthly rate of 15,070,091 dollars, in accordance
with the levels updated in resolution 61/243, and taking into account the scale of assessments for
2009, as set out in resolution 61/237, subject to a decision of the Security Council to extend the
mandate of the Mission;
27. Also decides that, in accordance with the provisions of its resolution 973 (X), there
shall be set off against the apportionment among Member States, as provided for in paragraph 26
above, their respective share in the Tax Equalization Fund of 2,558,626 dollars, comprising the
estimated staff assessment income of 2,303,818 dollars approved for the Mission, the prorated
share of 227,325 dollars of the estimated staff assessment income approved for the support
account and the prorated share of 27,483 dollars of the estimated staff assessment income
approved for the United Nations Logistics Base;
28. Further decides that, for Member States that have fulfilled their financial obligations to
the Mission, there shall be set off against their apportionment, as provided for in paragraph 24
above, their respective share of the unencumbered balance and other income in the total amount of
39,078,000 dollars in respect of the financial period ended 30 June 2007, in accordance with the
levels updated in resolution 61/243, and taking into account the scale of assessments for 2007, as
set out in resolution 61/237;
29. Decides that, for Member States that have not fulfilled their financial obligations to the
Mission, there shall be set off against their outstanding obligations their respective share of the
unencumbered balance and other income in the total amount of 39,078,000 dollars in respect of
the financial period ended 30 June 2007, in accordance with the scheme set out in paragraph 28
above;
30. Also decides that the decrease of 827,600 dollars in the estimated staff assessment
income in respect of the financial period ended 30 June 2007 shall be set off against the credits
from the amount of 39,078,000 dollars referred to in paragraphs 28 and 29 above;
31. Emphasizes that no peacekeeping mission shall be financed by borrowing funds from
other active peacekeeping missions;
32. Encourages the Secretary-General to continue to take additional measures to ensure
the safety and security of all personnel participating in the Mission under the auspices of the
United Nations, bearing in mind paragraphs 5 and 6 of Security Council resolution 1502 (2003) of
26 August 2003;
33. Invites voluntary contributions to the Mission in cash and in the form of services and
supplies acceptable to the Secretary-General, to be administered, as appropriate, in accordance
with the procedure and practices established by the General Assembly;
34. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its sixty-third session the item entitled
“Financing of the United Nations Integrated Mission in Timor-Leste”.
RESOLUTION 62/259
Adopted at the 109th plenary meeting, on 20 June 2008, without a vote, on the recommendation of the
Committee (A/62/872, para. 7)

63

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

62/259. Financing of the United Nations Mission in Ethiopia and Eritrea
The General Assembly,
Having considered the reports of the Secretary-General on the financing of the United
Nations Mission in Ethiopia and Eritrea62 and the related report of the Advisory Committee on
Administrative and Budgetary Questions,63
Recalling Security Council resolution 1312 (2000) of 31 July 2000, by which the Council
established the United Nations Mission in Ethiopia and Eritrea, and the subsequent resolutions by
which the Council extended the mandate of the Mission, the latest of which was resolution
1798 (2008) of 30 January 2008, by which the Council extended the mandate of the Mission until
31 July 2008,
Recalling also its resolution 55/237 of 23 December 2000 on the financing of the Mission
and its subsequent resolutions thereon, the latest of which was resolution 61/248 B of 29 June
2007,
Reaffirming the general principles underlying the financing of United Nations peacekeeping
operations, as stated in General Assembly resolutions 1874 (S-IV) of 27 June 1963,
3101 (XXVIII) of 11 December 1973 and 55/235 of 23 December 2000,
Noting with appreciation that voluntary contributions have been made to the Mission,
Mindful of the fact that it is essential to provide the Mission with the financial resources
necessary to enable it to fulfil its responsibilities under the relevant resolutions of the Security
Council,
1. Requests the Secretary-General to entrust the Head of Mission with the task of
formulating future budget proposals in full accordance with the provisions of General Assembly
resolutions 59/296 of 22 June 2005, 60/266 of 30 June 2006 and 61/276 of 29 June 2007, as well
as other relevant resolutions;
2. Takes note of the status of contributions to the United Nations Mission in Ethiopia and
Eritrea as at 30 April 2008, including the contributions outstanding in the amount of 26.5 million
United States dollars, representing some 2 per cent of the total assessed contributions, notes with
concern that only sixty-six Member States have paid their assessed contributions in full, and urges
all other Member States, in particular those in arrears, to ensure payment of their outstanding
assessed contributions;
3. Expresses its appreciation to those Member States which have paid their assessed
contributions in full, and urges all other Member States to make every possible effort to ensure
payment of their assessed contributions to the Mission in full;
4. Expresses concern at the financial situation with regard to peacekeeping activities, in
particular as regards the reimbursements to troop contributors that bear additional burdens owing
to overdue payments by Member States of their assessments;
5. Also expresses concern at the delay experienced by the Secretary-General in deploying
and providing adequate resources to some recent peacekeeping missions, in particular those in
Africa;
6. Emphasizes that all future and existing peacekeeping missions shall be given equal and
non-discriminatory treatment in respect of financial and administrative arrangements;
7. Also emphasizes that all peacekeeping missions shall be provided with adequate
resources for the effective and efficient discharge of their respective mandates;
_______________
62
63

A/62/560 and Corr.1 and A/62/811.
A/62/781/Add.17 and Corr.1.

64

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

8. Reiterates its request to the Secretary-General to make the fullest possible use of
facilities and equipment at the United Nations Logistics Base at Brindisi, Italy, in order to
minimize the costs of procurement for the Mission;
9. Endorses the conclusions and recommendations contained in the report of the
Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions,63 and requests the SecretaryGeneral to ensure their full implementation;
10. Requests the Secretary-General to ensure the full implementation of the relevant
provisions of its resolutions 59/296, 60/266 and 61/276;
11. Also requests the Secretary-General to take all necessary action to ensure that the
Mission is administered with a maximum of efficiency and economy;
12. Further requests the Secretary-General, in order to reduce the cost of employing
General Service staff, to continue efforts to recruit local staff for the Mission against General
Service posts, commensurate with the requirements of the Mission;
Financial performance report for the period from 1 July 2006 to 30 June 2007
13. Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General on the financial performance of the
Mission for the period from 1 July 2006 to 30 June 2007;64
Budget estimates for the period from 1 July 2008 to 30 June 2009
14. Decides to appropriate to the Special Account for the United Nations Mission in
Ethiopia and Eritrea the amount of 105,010,000 dollars for the period from 1 July 2008 to 30 June
2009, inclusive of 100,367,400 dollars for the maintenance of the Mission, 4,047,100 dollars for
the support account for peacekeeping operations and 595,500 dollars for the United Nations
Logistics Base;
Financing of the appropriation
15. Also decides to apportion among Member States the amount of 8,750,833 dollars for
the period from 1 to 31 July 2008, in accordance with the levels updated in General Assembly
resolution 61/243 of 22 December 2006, and taking into account the scale of assessments for
2008, as set out in its resolution 61/237 of 22 December 2006;
16. Further decides that, in accordance with the provisions of its resolution 973 (X) of
15 December 1955, there shall be set off against the apportionment among Member States, as
provided for in paragraph 15 above, their respective share in the Tax Equalization Fund of the
amount of 231,307 dollars for the period from 1 to 31 July 2008, comprising the estimated staff
assessment income of 194,983 dollars approved for the Mission, the prorated share of 32,408
dollars of the estimated staff assessment income approved for the support account and the prorated
share of 3,916 dollars of the estimated staff assessment income approved for the United Nations
Logistics Base;
17. Decides to apportion among Member States the amount of 46,075,167 dollars,
comprising the amount of 41,819,750 dollars for the maintenance of the Mission for the period
from 1 August to 31 December 2008 at a monthly rate of 8,363,950 dollars, and the amount of
4,255,717 dollars for the support account and the United Nations Logistics Base for the period
from 1 August 2008 to 30 June 2009 at a monthly rate of 386,883 dollars, in accordance with the
levels updated in resolution 61/243, and taking into account the scale of assessments for 2008 and
2009, as set out in resolution 61/237, subject to a decision of the Security Council to extend the
mandate of the Mission;
_______________
64

A/62/560 and Corr.1.

65

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

18. Also decides that, in accordance with the provisions of its resolution 973 (X), there
shall be set off against the apportionment among Member States, as provided for in paragraph 17
above, their respective share in the Tax Equalization Fund of the amount of 1,374,493 dollars for
the period from 1 August 2008 to 30 June 2009, comprising the estimated staff assessment income
of 974,917 dollars approved for the Mission, the prorated share of 356,492 dollars of the estimated
staff assessment income approved for the support account and the prorated share of 43,084 dollars
of the estimated staff assessment income approved for the United Nations Logistics Base;
19. Further decides that, for Member States that have fulfilled their financial obligations to
the Mission, there shall be set off against their apportionment, as provided for in paragraph 15
above, their respective share of the unencumbered balance and other income in the total amount of
18,012,400 dollars in respect of the financial period ended 30 June 2007, in accordance with the
levels updated in resolution 61/243, and taking into account the scale of assessments for 2007, as
set out in resolution 61/237;
20. Decides that, for Member States that have not fulfilled their financial obligations to the
Mission, there shall be set off against their outstanding obligations their respective share of the
unencumbered balance and other income in the total amount of 18,012,400 dollars in respect of
the financial period ended 30 June 2007, in accordance with the scheme set out in paragraph 19
above;
21. Also decides that the decrease of 32,900 dollars in the estimated staff assessment
income in respect of the financial period ended 30 June 2007 shall be set off against the credits
from the amount of 18,012,400 dollars referred to in paragraphs 19 and 20 above;
22. Emphasizes that no peacekeeping mission shall be financed by borrowing funds from
other active peacekeeping missions;
23. Encourages the Secretary-General to continue to take additional measures to ensure
the safety and security of all personnel participating in the Mission under the auspices of the
United Nations, bearing in mind paragraphs 5 and 6 of Security Council resolution 1502 (2003) of
26 August 2003;
24. Invites voluntary contributions to the Mission in cash and in the form of services and
supplies acceptable to the Secretary-General, to be administered, as appropriate, in accordance
with the procedure and practices established by the General Assembly;
25. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its sixty-third session the item entitled
“Financing of the United Nations Mission in Ethiopia and Eritrea”.
RESOLUTION 62/260
Adopted at the 109th plenary meeting, on 20 June 2008, without a vote, on the recommendation of the
Committee (A/62/873, para. 7)

62/260. Financing of the United Nations Observer Mission in Georgia
The General Assembly,
Having considered the reports of the Secretary-General on the financing of the United
Nations Observer Mission in Georgia65 and the related report of the Advisory Committee on
Administrative and Budgetary Questions,66
Recalling Security Council resolution 854 (1993) of 6 August 1993, by which the Council
approved the deployment of an advance team of up to ten United Nations military observers for a
_______________
65
66

A/62/633 and A/62/680.
A/62/781/Add.1.

66

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

period of three months and the incorporation of the advance team into a United Nations observer
mission if such a mission was formally established by the Council,
Recalling also Security Council resolution 858 (1993) of 24 August 1993, by which the
Council established the United Nations Observer Mission in Georgia, and the subsequent
resolutions by which the Council extended the mandate of the Observer Mission, the latest of
which was resolution 1808 (2008) of 15 April 2008,
Recalling further its decision 48/475 A of 23 December 1993 on the financing of the
Observer Mission and its subsequent resolutions and decisions thereon, the latest of which was
resolution 61/283 of 29 June 2007,
Reaffirming the general principles underlying the financing of United Nations peacekeeping
operations, as stated in General Assembly resolutions 1874 (S-IV) of 27 June 1963,
3101 (XXVIII) of 11 December 1973 and 55/235 of 23 December 2000,
Mindful of the fact that it is essential to provide the Observer Mission with the financial
resources necessary to enable it to fulfil its responsibilities under the relevant resolutions of the
Security Council,
1. Requests the Secretary-General to entrust the Head of Mission with the task of
formulating future budget proposals in full accordance with the provisions of General Assembly
resolutions 59/296 of 22 June 2005, 60/266 of 30 June 2006 and 61/276 of 29 June 2007, as well
as other relevant resolutions;
2. Takes note of the status of contributions to the United Nations Observer Mission in
Georgia as at 31 March 2008, including the contributions outstanding in the amount of 9.3 million
United States dollars, representing some 3 per cent of the total assessed contributions, notes with
concern that only sixty-nine Member States have paid their assessed contributions in full, and
urges all other Member States, in particular those in arrears, to ensure payment of their outstanding
assessed contributions;
3. Expresses its appreciation to those Member States which have paid their assessed
contributions in full, and urges all other Member States to make every possible effort to ensure
payment of their assessed contributions to the Observer Mission in full;
4. Expresses concern at the delay experienced by the Secretary-General in deploying and
providing adequate resources to some recent peacekeeping missions, in particular those in Africa;
5. Emphasizes that all future and existing peacekeeping missions shall be given equal and
non-discriminatory treatment in respect of financial and administrative arrangements;
6. Also emphasizes that all peacekeeping missions shall be provided with adequate
resources for the effective and efficient discharge of their respective mandates;
7. Reiterates its request to the Secretary-General to make the fullest possible use of
facilities and equipment at the United Nations Logistics Base at Brindisi, Italy, in order to
minimize the costs of procurement for the Observer Mission;
8. Endorses the conclusions and recommendations contained in the report of the
Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions,66 subject to the provisions of
the present resolution, and requests the Secretary-General to ensure their full implementation;
9. Decides to maintain the staffing for the General Services Office for the Observer
Mission at the level currently funded under the provisions of its resolution 61/283;
10. Requests the Secretary-General to ensure the full implementation of the relevant
provisions of its resolutions 59/296, 60/266 and 61/276;
11. Also requests the Secretary-General to take all action necessary to ensure that the
Observer Mission is administered with a maximum of efficiency and economy;

67

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

12. Further requests the Secretary-General, in order to reduce the cost of employing
General Service staff, to continue efforts to recruit local staff for the Observer Mission against
General Service posts, commensurate with the requirements of the Mission;
Financial performance report for the period from 1 July 2006 to 30 June 2007
13. Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General on the financial performance of the
Observer Mission for the period from 1 July 2006 to 30 June 2007;67
Budget estimates for the period from 1 July 2008 to 30 June 2009
14. Decides to appropriate to the Special Account for the United Nations Observer
Mission in Georgia the amount of 36,084,000 dollars for the period from 1 July 2008 to 30 June
2009, inclusive of 34,484,200 dollars for the maintenance of the Observer Mission, 1,394,600
dollars for the support account for peacekeeping operations and 205,200 dollars for the United
Nations Logistics Base;
Financing of the appropriation
15. Also decides to apportion among Member States the amount of 10,524,500 dollars for
the period from 1 July to 15 October 2008, in accordance with the levels updated in General
Assembly resolution 61/243 of 22 December 2006, and taking into account the scale of
assessments for 2008, as set out in its resolution 61/237 of 22 December 2006;
16. Further decides that, in accordance with the provisions of its resolution 973 (X) of
15 December 1955, there shall be set off against the apportionment among Member States, as
provided for in paragraph 15 above, their respective share in the Tax Equalization Fund of
747,804 dollars, comprising the estimated staff assessment income of 703,996 dollars approved
for the Observer Mission, the prorated share of 39,083 dollars of the estimated staff assessment
income approved for the support account and the prorated share of 4,725 dollars of the estimated
staff assessment income approved for the United Nations Logistics Base;
17. Decides to apportion among Member States the amount of 25,559,500 dollars for the
period from 16 October 2008 to 30 June 2009 at a monthly rate of 3,007,000 dollars, in
accordance with the levels updated in resolution 61/243, and taking into account the scale of
assessments for 2008 and 2009, as set out in resolution 61/237, subject to a decision of the
Security Council to extend the mandate of the Observer Mission;
18. Also decides that, in accordance with the provisions of its resolution 973 (X), there
shall be set off against the apportionment among Member States, as provided for in paragraph 17
above, their respective share in the Tax Equalization Fund of 1,816,096 dollars, comprising the
estimated staff assessment income of 1,709,704 dollars approved for the Observer Mission, the
prorated share of 94,917 dollars of the estimated staff assessment income approved for the support
account and the prorated share of 11,475 dollars of the estimated staff assessment income
approved for the United Nations Logistics Base;
19. Further decides that, for Member States that have fulfilled their financial obligations to
the Observer Mission, there shall be set off against their apportionment, as provided for in
paragraph 15 above, their respective share of the unencumbered balance and other income in the
amount of 1,906,700 dollars in respect of the financial period ended 30 June 2007, in accordance
with the levels updated in resolution 61/243, and taking into account the scale of assessments for
2007, as set out in resolution 61/237;
20. Decides that, for Member States that have not fulfilled their financial obligations to the
Observer Mission, there shall be set off against their outstanding obligations their respective share
_______________
67

A/62/633.

68

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

of the unencumbered balance and other income in the total amount of 1,906,700 dollars in respect
of the financial period ended 30 June 2007, in accordance with the scheme set out in paragraph 19
above;
21. Also decides that the decrease of 85,100 dollars in the estimated staff assessment
income in respect of the financial period ended 30 June 2007 shall be set off against the credits
from the amount of 1,906,700 dollars referred to in paragraphs 19 and 20 above;
22. Emphasizes that no peacekeeping mission shall be financed by borrowing funds from
other active peacekeeping missions;
23. Encourages the Secretary-General to continue to take additional measures to ensure
the safety and security of all personnel participating in the Observer Mission under the auspices of
the United Nations, bearing in mind paragraphs 5 and 6 of Security Council resolution
1502 (2003) of 26 August 2003;
24. Invites voluntary contributions to the Observer Mission in cash and in the form of
services and supplies acceptable to the Secretary-General, to be administered, as appropriate, in
accordance with the procedure and practices established by the General Assembly;
25. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its sixty-third session the item entitled
“Financing of the United Nations Observer Mission in Georgia”.
RESOLUTION 62/261
Adopted at the 109th plenary meeting, on 20 June 2008, without a vote, on the recommendation of the
Committee (A/62/874, para. 7)

62/261. Financing of the United Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti
The General Assembly,
Having considered the reports of the Secretary-General on the financing of the United
Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti68 and the related report of the Advisory Committee on
Administrative and Budgetary Questions,69
Recalling Security Council resolution 1529 (2004) of 29 February 2004, by which the
Council declared its readiness to establish a United Nations stabilization force to support
continuation of a peaceful and constitutional political process and the maintenance of a secure and
stable environment in Haiti,
Recalling also Security Council resolution 1542 (2004) of 30 April 2004, by which the
Council decided to establish the United Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti for an initial period
of six months, and the subsequent resolutions by which the Council extended the mandate of the
Mission, the latest of which was resolution 1780 (2007) of 15 October 2007, by which the Council
extended the mandate of the Mission until 15 October 2008,
Recalling further its resolution 58/315 of 1 July 2004,
Recalling its resolution 58/311 of 18 June 2004 on the financing of the Mission and its
subsequent resolutions thereon, the latest of which was resolution 61/284 of 29 June 2007,
Reaffirming the general principles underlying the financing of United Nations peacekeeping
operations, as stated in General Assembly resolutions 1874 (S-IV) of 27 June 1963,
3101 (XXVIII) of 11 December 1973 and 55/235 of 23 December 2000,
_______________
68
69

A/62/631 and A/62/720.
A/62/781/Add.6.

69

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

Mindful of the fact that it is essential to provide the Mission with the financial resources
necessary to enable it to fulfil its responsibilities under the relevant resolutions of the Security
Council,
1. Requests the Secretary-General to entrust the Head of Mission with the task of
formulating future budget proposals in full accordance with the provisions of General Assembly
resolutions 59/296 of 22 June 2005, 60/266 of 30 June 2006 and 61/276 of 29 June 2007, as well
as other relevant resolutions;
2. Takes note of the status of contributions to the United Nations Stabilization Mission in
Haiti as at 31 March 2008, including the contributions outstanding in the amount of 171.5 million
United States dollars, representing some 10 per cent of the total assessed contributions, notes with
concern that only sixty-three Member States have paid their assessed contributions in full, and
urges all other Member States, in particular those in arrears, to ensure payment of their outstanding
assessed contributions;
3. Expresses its appreciation to those Member States which have paid their assessed
contributions in full, and urges all other Member States to make every possible effort to ensure
payment of their assessed contributions to the Mission in full;
4. Expresses concern at the financial situation with regard to peacekeeping activities, in
particular as regards the reimbursements to troop contributors that bear additional burdens owing
to overdue payments by Member States of their assessments;
5. Also expresses concern at the delay experienced by the Secretary-General in deploying
and providing adequate resources to some recent peacekeeping missions, in particular those in
Africa;
6. Emphasizes that all future and existing peacekeeping missions shall be given equal and
non-discriminatory treatment in respect of financial and administrative arrangements;
7. Also emphasizes that all peacekeeping missions shall be provided with adequate
resources for the effective and efficient discharge of their respective mandates;
8. Reiterates its request to the Secretary-General to make the fullest possible use of
facilities and equipment at the United Nations Logistics Base at Brindisi, Italy, in order to
minimize the costs of procurement for the Mission;
9. Endorses the conclusions and recommendations contained in the report of the
Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions,69 subject to the provisions of
the present resolution, and requests the Secretary-General to ensure their full implementation;
10. Decides to approve the upgrade and redeployment of one P-5 post from the Civil
Affairs Section to the Office of the Principal Deputy Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral;
11. Also decides to approve the establishment of fourteen national General Service
temporary positions for Drivers;
12. Requests the Secretary-General to make every effort for the Mission to comply with
United Nations aviation safety standards, in particular regarding meteorological information and
firefighting equipment;
13. Also requests the Secretary-General to strengthen the coordination between the
Mission, the United Nations country team and other United Nations entities, including in
addressing the root causes of unexpected emergencies such as the unrest generated by the recent
food crisis in Haiti;
14. Further requests the Secretary-General to take all necessary steps to address the high
vacancy rate in national posts as a matter of urgency;

70

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

15. Decides to allocate up to 2 million dollars for quick-impact projects for the period
from 1 July 2008 to 30 June 2009;
16. Also decides that quick-impact projects shall be conducted by the Mission in
accordance with the requirements set out in resolution 61/276, and requests the Secretary-General
to report thereon to the General Assembly at its sixty-third session;
17. Requests the Secretary-General to ensure the full implementation of the relevant
provisions of its resolutions 59/296, 60/266 and 61/276;
18. Also requests the Secretary-General to take all necessary action to ensure that the
Mission is administered with a maximum of efficiency and economy;
19. Further requests the Secretary-General, in order to reduce the cost of employing
General Service staff, to continue efforts to recruit local staff for the Mission against General
Service posts, commensurate with the requirements of the Mission;
Financial performance report for the period from 1 July 2006 to 30 June 2007
20. Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General on the financial performance of the
Mission for the period from 1 July 2006 to 30 June 2007;70
Budget estimates for the period from 1 July 2008 to 30 June 2009
21. Decides to appropriate to the Special Account for the United Nations Stabilization
Mission in Haiti the amount of 601,580,100 dollars for the period from 1 July 2008 to 30 June
2009, inclusive of 574,916,500 dollars for the maintenance of the Mission, 23,243,500 dollars for
the support account for peacekeeping operations and 3,420,100 dollars for the United Nations
Logistics Base;
Financing of the appropriation
22. Also decides to apportion among Member States the amount of 175,460,862 dollars
for the period from 1 July to 15 October 2008, in accordance with the levels updated in General
Assembly resolution 61/243 of 22 December 2006, and taking into account the scale of
assessments for 2008, as set out in its resolution 61/237 of 22 December 2006;
23. Further decides that, in accordance with the provisions of its resolution 973 (X) of
15 December 1955, there shall be set off against the apportionment among Member States, as
provided for in paragraph 22 above, their respective share in the Tax Equalization Fund of
4,557,495 dollars, comprising the estimated staff assessment income of 3,827,308 dollars
approved for the Mission, the prorated share of 651,379 dollars of the estimated staff assessment
income approved for the support account and the prorated share of 78,808 dollars of the estimated
staff assessment income approved for the United Nations Logistics Base;
24. Decides to apportion among Member States the amount of 426,119,238 dollars for the
period from 16 October 2008 to 30 June 2009 at a monthly rate of 50,131,675 dollars, in
accordance with the levels updated in resolution 61/243, and taking into account the scale of
assessments for 2008 and 2009, as set out in resolution 61/237, subject to a decision of the
Security Council to extend the mandate of the Mission;
25. Also decides that, in accordance with the provisions of its resolution 973 (X), there
shall be set off against the apportionment among Member States, as provided for in paragraph 24
above, their respective share in the Tax Equalization Fund of 11,068,205 dollars, comprising the
estimated staff assessment income of 9,294,892 dollars approved for the Mission, the prorated
share of 1,581,921 dollars of the estimated staff assessment income approved for the support
_______________
70

A/62/631.

71

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

account and the prorated share of 191,392 dollars of the estimated staff assessment income
approved for the United Nations Logistics Base;
26. Further decides that, for Member States that have fulfilled their financial obligations to
the Mission, there shall be set off against their apportionment, as provided for in paragraph 22
above, their respective share of the unencumbered balance and other income in the total amount of
39,781,200 dollars in respect of the financial period ended 30 June 2007, in accordance with the
levels updated in resolution 61/243, and taking into account the scale of assessments for 2007, as
set out in resolution 61/237;
27. Decides that, for Member States that have not fulfilled their financial obligations to the
Mission, there shall be set off against their outstanding obligations their respective share of the
unencumbered balance and other income in the total amount of 39,781,200 dollars in respect of
the financial period ended 30 June 2007, in accordance with the scheme set out in paragraph 26
above;
28. Also decides that the decrease of 85,200 dollars in the estimated staff assessment
income in respect of the financial period ended 30 June 2007 shall be set off against the credits
from the amount of 39,781,200 dollars referred to in paragraphs 26 and 27 above;
29. Emphasizes that no peacekeeping mission shall be financed by borrowing funds from
other active peacekeeping missions;
30. Encourages the Secretary-General to continue to take additional measures to ensure
the safety and security of all personnel participating in the Mission under the auspices of the
United Nations, bearing in mind paragraphs 5 and 6 of Security Council resolution 1502 (2003) of
26 August 2003;
31. Invites voluntary contributions to the Mission in cash and in the form of services and
supplies acceptable to the Secretary-General, to be administered, as appropriate, in accordance
with the procedure and practices established by the General Assembly;
32. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its sixty-third session the item entitled
“Financing of the United Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti”.
RESOLUTION 62/262
Adopted at the 109th plenary meeting, on 20 June 2008, without a vote, on the recommendation of the
Committee (A/62/875, para. 7)

62/262. Financing of the United Nations Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo
The General Assembly,
Having considered the reports of the Secretary-General on the financing of the United
Nations Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo,71 the note by the Secretary-General on the
financing arrangements for the Mission72 and the related report of the Advisory Committee on
Administrative and Budgetary Questions,73 the report of the Office of Internal Oversight Services
on the comprehensive audit of the Mission mandate implementation74 and the oral statement by
the representative of the Secretary-General transmitting his comments thereon,75
_______________
71

A/62/610 and A/62/687.
A/62/801.
73
A/62/781/Add.18.
74
A/62/807.
75
See Official Records of the General Assembly, Sixty-second Session, Fifth Committee, 49th meeting
(A/C.5/62/SR.49), and corrigendum.
72

72

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

Recalling Security Council resolution 1244 (1999) of 10 June 1999 regarding the
establishment of the United Nations Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo,
Recalling also its resolution 53/241 of 28 July 1999 on the financing of the Mission and its
subsequent resolutions thereon, the latest of which was resolution 61/285 of 29 June 2007,
Acknowledging the complexity of the Mission,
Reaffirming the general principles underlying the financing of United Nations peacekeeping
operations, as stated in General Assembly resolutions 1874 (S-IV) of 27 June 1963,
3101 (XXVIII) of 11 December 1973 and 55/235 of 23 December 2000,
Mindful of the fact that it is essential to provide the Mission with the financial resources
necessary to enable it to fulfil its responsibilities under the relevant resolution of the Security
Council,
1. Requests the Secretary-General to entrust the Head of Mission with the task of
formulating future budget proposals in full accordance with the provisions of General Assembly
resolutions 59/296 of 22 June 2005, 60/266 of 30 June 2006 and 61/276 of 29 June 2007, as well
as other relevant resolutions;
2. Takes note of the status of contributions to the United Nations Interim Administration
Mission in Kosovo as at 30 April 2008, including the contributions outstanding in the amount of
48.9 million United States dollars, representing some 2 per cent of the total assessed contributions,
notes with concern that only ninety-six Member States have paid their assessed contributions in
full, and urges all other Member States, in particular those in arrears, to ensure payment of their
outstanding assessed contributions;
3. Expresses its appreciation to those Member States which have paid their assessed
contributions in full, and urges all other Member States to make every possible effort to ensure
payment of their assessed contributions to the Mission in full;
4. Expresses concern at the financial situation with regard to peacekeeping activities, in
particular as regards the reimbursements to troop contributors that bear additional burdens owing
to overdue payments by Member States of their assessments;
5. Also expresses concern at the delay experienced by the Secretary-General in deploying
and providing adequate resources to some recent peacekeeping missions, in particular those in
Africa;
6. Emphasizes that all future and existing peacekeeping missions shall be given equal and
non-discriminatory treatment in respect of financial and administrative arrangements;
7. Also emphasizes that all peacekeeping missions shall be provided with adequate
resources for the effective and efficient discharge of their respective mandates;
8. Reiterates its request to the Secretary-General to make the fullest possible use of
facilities and equipment at the United Nations Logistics Base at Brindisi, Italy, in order to
minimize the costs of procurement for the Mission;
9. Endorses the conclusions and recommendations contained in the report of the
Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions,73 and requests the SecretaryGeneral to ensure their full implementation;
10. Requests the Secretary-General to ensure the full implementation of the relevant
provisions of its resolutions 59/296, 60/266 and 61/276;
11. Also requests the Secretary-General to take all necessary action to ensure that the
Mission is administered with a maximum of efficiency and economy;
12. Further requests the Secretary-General, in order to reduce the cost of employing
General Service staff, to continue efforts to recruit local staff for the Mission against General
Service posts, commensurate with the requirements of the Mission;
73

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

13. Takes note of the report of the Office of Internal Oversight Services on the
comprehensive audit of the Mission mandate implementation74 and the oral statement by the
representative of the Secretary-General transmitting his comments thereon;75
Financial performance report for the period from 1 July 2006 to 30 June 2007
14. Also takes note of the report of the Secretary-General on the financial performance of
the Mission for the period from 1 July 2006 to 30 June 2007;76
Financing arrangements for the period from 1 July 2007 to 30 June 2008
15. Further takes note of the note by the Secretary-General on the financing arrangements
for the Mission for the period from 1 July 2007 to 30 June 2008;72
16. Decides to appropriate to the Special Account for the United Nations Interim
Administration Mission in Kosovo the additional amount of 9,799,600 dollars for the maintenance
of the Mission for the period from 1 July 2007 to 30 June 2008, taking into account the amount of
220,897,200 dollars already appropriated for the Mission for the same period under the provisions
of resolution 61/285;
Financing of the additional appropriation for the period from 1 July 2007
to 30 June 2008
17. Also decides to apportion among Member States the amount of 9,799,600 dollars,
taking into account the amount of 220,897,200 dollars already apportioned by the General
Assembly for the maintenance of the Mission in its resolution 61/285 for the period from 1 July
2007 to 30 June 2008, in accordance with the levels updated in General Assembly resolution
61/243 of 22 December 2006, and taking into account the scale of assessments for 2007 and 2008,
as set out in its resolution 61/237 of 22 December 2006;
18. Further decides that, in accordance with the provisions of its resolution 973 (X) of
15 December 1955, the decrease of 823,800 dollars in estimated staff assessment income in
respect of the financial period from 1 July 2007 to 30 June 2008 shall be added to the
apportionment among Member States as provided for in paragraph 17 above;
Budget estimates for the period from 1 July 2008 to 30 June 2009
19. Decides to appropriate to the Special Account for the Mission the amount of
207,203,100 dollars for the period from 1 July 2008 to 30 June 2009, inclusive of 198,012,000
dollars for the maintenance of the Mission, 8,012,200 dollars for the support account for
peacekeeping operations and 1,178,900 dollars for the United Nations Logistics Base;
Financing of the appropriation
20. Also decides to apportion among Member States the amount of 207,203,100 dollars, in
accordance with the levels updated in resolution 61/243, and taking into account the scale of
assessments for 2008 and 2009, as set out in resolution 61/237;
21. Further decides that, in accordance with the provisions of its resolution 973 (X), there
shall be set off against the apportionment among Member States, as provided for in paragraph 20
above, their respective share in the Tax Equalization Fund of the amount of 16,141,400 dollars,
comprising the estimated staff assessment income of 15,278,400 dollars approved for the Mission,
the prorated share of 769,900 dollars of the estimated staff assessment income approved for the
support account and the prorated share of 93,100 dollars of the estimated staff assessment income
approved for the United Nations Logistics Base;
_______________
76

A/62/610.

74

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

22. Decides that, for Member States that have fulfilled their financial obligations to the
Mission, there shall be set off against their apportionment, as provided for in paragraph 20 above,
their respective share of the unencumbered balance and other income in the total amount of
13,465,200 dollars in respect of the financial period ended 30 June 2007, in accordance with the
levels updated in resolution 61/243, and taking into account the scale of assessments for 2007, as
set out in resolution 61/237;
23. Also decides that, for Member States that have not fulfilled their financial obligations
to the Mission, there shall be set off against their outstanding obligations their respective share of
the unencumbered balance and other income in the total amount of 13,465,200 dollars in respect
of the financial period ended 30 June 2007, in accordance with the scheme set out in paragraph 22
above;
24. Further decides that the decrease of 171,300 dollars in the estimated staff assessment
income in respect of the financial period ended 30 June 2007 shall be set off against the credits
from the amount of 13,465,200 dollars referred to in paragraphs 22 and 23 above;
25. Emphasizes that no peacekeeping mission shall be financed by borrowing funds from
other active peacekeeping missions;
26. Encourages the Secretary-General to continue to take additional measures to ensure
the safety and security of all personnel participating in the Mission under the auspices of the
United Nations, bearing in mind paragraphs 5 and 6 of Security Council resolution 1502 (2003) of
26 August 2003;
27. Invites voluntary contributions to the Mission in cash and in the form of services and
supplies acceptable to the Secretary-General, to be administered, as appropriate, in accordance
with the procedure and practices established by the General Assembly;
28. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its sixty-third session the item entitled
“Financing of the United Nations Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo”.
RESOLUTION 62/263
Adopted at the 109th plenary meeting, on 20 June 2008, without a vote, on the recommendation of the
Committee (A/62/876, para. 7)

62/263. Financing of the United Nations Mission in Liberia
The General Assembly,
Having considered the reports of the Secretary-General on the financing of the United
Nations Mission in Liberia77 and the related report of the Advisory Committee on Administrative
and Budgetary Questions,78
Recalling Security Council resolution 1497 (2003) of 1 August 2003, by which the Council
declared its readiness to establish a United Nations stabilization force to support the transitional
government and to assist in the implementation of a comprehensive peace agreement in Liberia,
Recalling also Security Council resolution 1509 (2003) of 19 September 2003, by which the
Council decided to establish the United Nations Mission in Liberia for a period of twelve months,
and the subsequent resolutions by which the Council extended the mandate of the Mission, the
latest of which was resolution 1777 (2007) of 20 September 2007, by which the Council extended
the mandate of the Mission until 30 September 2008,
_______________
77
78

A/62/648 and A/62/764.
A/62/781/Add.10.

75

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

Recalling further its resolution 58/315 of 1 July 2004,
Recalling its resolution 58/261 A of 23 December 2003 on the financing of the Mission and
its subsequent resolutions thereon, the latest of which was resolution 61/286 of 29 June 2007,
Reaffirming the general principles underlying the financing of United Nations peacekeeping
operations, as stated in General Assembly resolutions 1874 (S-IV) of 27 June 1963,
3101 (XXVIII) of 11 December 1973 and 55/235 of 23 December 2000,
Noting with appreciation that voluntary contributions have been made to the Mission,
Mindful of the fact that it is essential to provide the Mission with the financial resources
necessary to enable it to fulfil its responsibilities under the relevant resolutions of the Security
Council,
1. Requests the Secretary-General to entrust the Head of Mission with the task of
formulating future budget proposals in full accordance with the provisions of General Assembly
resolutions 59/296 of 22 June 2005, 60/266 of 30 June 2006 and 61/276 of 29 June 2007, as well
as other relevant resolutions;
2. Takes note of the status of contributions to the United Nations Mission in Liberia as at
30 April 2008, including the contributions outstanding in the amount of 71 million United States
dollars, representing some 2 per cent of the total assessed contributions, notes with concern that
only sixty-five Member States have paid their assessed contributions in full, and urges all other
Member States, in particular those in arrears, to ensure payment of their outstanding assessed
contributions;
3. Expresses its appreciation to those Member States which have paid their assessed
contributions in full, and urges all other Member States to make every possible effort to ensure
payment of their assessed contributions to the Mission in full;
4. Expresses concern at the financial situation with regard to peacekeeping activities, in
particular as regards the reimbursements to troop contributors that bear additional burdens owing
to overdue payments by Member States of their assessments;
5. Also expresses concern at the delay experienced by the Secretary-General in deploying
and providing adequate resources to some recent peacekeeping missions, in particular those in
Africa;
6. Emphasizes that all future and existing peacekeeping missions shall be given equal and
non-discriminatory treatment in respect of financial and administrative arrangements;
7. Also emphasizes that all peacekeeping missions shall be provided with adequate
resources for the effective and efficient discharge of their respective mandates;
8. Reiterates its request to the Secretary-General to make the fullest possible use of
facilities and equipment at the United Nations Logistics Base at Brindisi, Italy, in order to
minimize the costs of procurement for the Mission;
9. Endorses the conclusions and recommendations contained in the report of the
Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions,78 and requests the SecretaryGeneral to ensure their full implementation;
10. Recalls paragraph 13 of its resolution 60/121 B of 30 June 2006, and reiterates, in
view of the importance of ensuring coordination and collaboration of efforts with the United
Nations agencies and programmes, its request to the Secretary-General to report to the General
Assembly on the progress made in the development of a collaboration framework and the efforts
towards developing an integrated workplan in the context of his budget submission at the sixtythird session of the Assembly;

76

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

11. Requests the Secretary-General to review the staffing structure of the Mission and its
related costs and to report thereon in his next budget proposal;
12. Also requests the Secretary-General to ensure the full implementation of the relevant
provisions of its resolutions 59/296, 60/266 and 61/276;
13. Further requests the Secretary-General to take all necessary action to ensure that the
Mission is administered with a maximum of efficiency and economy;
14. Requests the Secretary-General, in order to reduce the cost of employing General
Service staff, to continue efforts to recruit local staff for the Mission against General Service posts,
commensurate with the requirements of the Mission;
Financial performance report for the period from 1 July 2006 to 30 June 2007
15. Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General on the financial performance of the
Mission for the period from 1 July 2006 to 30 June 2007;79
Budget estimates for the period from 1 July 2008 to 30 June 2009
16. Decides to appropriate to the Special Account for the United Nations Mission in
Liberia the amount of 631,689,100 dollars for the period from 1 July 2008 to 30 June 2009,
inclusive of 603,708,000 dollars for the maintenance of the Mission, 24,392,000 dollars for the
support account for peacekeeping operations and 3,589,100 dollars for the United Nations
Logistics Base;
Financing of the appropriation
17. Also decides to apportion among Member States the amount of 157,922,278 dollars
for the period from 1 July to 30 September 2008, in accordance with the levels updated in General
Assembly resolution 61/243 of 22 December 2006, and taking into account the scale of
assessments for 2008, as set out in its resolution 61/237 of 22 December 2006;
18. Further decides that, in accordance with the provisions of its resolution 973 (X) of
15 December 1955, there shall be set off against the apportionment among Member States, as
provided for in paragraph 17 above, their respective share in the Tax Equalization Fund of
3,567,150 dollars, comprising the estimated staff assessment income of 2,910,325 dollars
approved for the Mission, the prorated share of 585,925 dollars of the estimated staff assessment
income approved for the support account and the prorated share of 70,900 dollars of the estimated
staff assessment income approved for the United Nations Logistics Base;
19. Decides to apportion among Member States the amount of 473,766,822 dollars for the
period from 1 October 2008 to 30 June 2009, at a monthly rate of 52,640,758 dollars, in
accordance with the levels updated in resolution 61/243, and taking into account the scale of
assessments for 2008 and 2009, as set out in resolution 61/237, subject to a decision of the
Security Council to extend the mandate of the Mission;
20. Also decides that, in accordance with the provisions of its resolution 973 (X), there
shall be set off against the apportionment among Member States, as provided for in paragraph 19
above, their respective share in the Tax Equalization Fund of 10,701,450 dollars, comprising the
estimated staff assessment income of 8,730,975 dollars approved for the Mission, the prorated
share of 1,757,775 dollars of the estimated staff assessment income approved for the support
account and the prorated share of 212,700 dollars of the estimated staff assessment income
approved for the United Nations Logistics Base;
21. Further decides that, for Member States that have fulfilled their financial obligations to
the Mission, there shall be set off against their apportionment, as provided for in paragraph 17
_______________
79

A/62/648.

77

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

above, their respective share of the unencumbered balance and other income in the total amount of
84,508,500 dollars in respect of the financial period ended 30 June 2007, in accordance with the
levels updated in resolution 61/243, and taking into account the scale of assessments for 2007, as
set out in resolution 61/237;
22. Decides that, for Member States that have not fulfilled their financial obligations to the
Mission, there shall be set off against their outstanding obligations their respective share of the
unencumbered balance and other income in the total amount of 84,508,500 dollars in respect of
the financial period ended 30 June 2007, in accordance with the scheme set out in paragraph 21
above;
23. Also decides that the increase of 758,400 dollars in the estimated staff assessment
income in respect of the financial period ended 30 June 2007 shall be added to the credits from the
amount of 84,508,500 dollars referred to in paragraphs 21 and 22 above;
24. Emphasizes that no peacekeeping mission shall be financed by borrowing funds from
other active peacekeeping missions;
25. Encourages the Secretary-General to continue to take additional measures to ensure
the safety and security of all personnel participating in the Mission under the auspices of the
United Nations, bearing in mind paragraphs 5 and 6 of Security Council resolution 1502 (2003) of
26 August 2003;
26. Invites voluntary contributions to the Mission in cash and in the form of services and
supplies acceptable to the Secretary-General, to be administered, as appropriate, in accordance
with the procedure and practices established by the General Assembly;
27. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its sixty-third session the item entitled
“Financing of the United Nations Mission in Liberia”.
RESOLUTION 62/264
Adopted at the 109th plenary meeting, on 20 June 2008, without a vote, on the recommendation of the
Committee (A/62/877, para. 7)

62/264. Financing of the United Nations Disengagement Observer Force
The General Assembly,
Having considered the reports of the Secretary-General on the financing of the United
Nations Disengagement Observer Force80 and the related report of the Advisory Committee on
Administrative and Budgetary Questions,81
Recalling Security Council resolution 350 (1974) of 31 May 1974 regarding the
establishment of the United Nations Disengagement Observer Force and the subsequent
resolutions by which the Council extended the mandate of the Force, the latest of which was
resolution 1788 (2007) of 14 December 2007,
Recalling also its resolution 3211 B (XXIX) of 29 November 1974 on the financing of the
United Nations Emergency Force and of the United Nations Disengagement Observer Force and
its subsequent resolutions thereon, the latest of which was resolution 61/287 of 29 June 2007,
Reaffirming the general principles underlying the financing of United Nations peacekeeping
operations, as stated in General Assembly resolutions 1874 (S-IV) of 27 June 1963,
3101 (XXVIII) of 11 December 1973 and 55/235 of 23 December 2000,
_______________
80
81

A/62/562 and A/62/719 and Corr.1.
A/62/781/Add.7 and Corr.1.

78

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

Mindful of the fact that it is essential to provide the Force with the financial resources
necessary to enable it to fulfil its responsibilities under the relevant resolutions of the Security
Council,
1. Requests the Secretary-General to entrust the Head of Mission with the task of
formulating future budget proposals in full accordance with the provisions of General Assembly
resolutions 59/296 of 22 June 2005, 60/266 of 30 June 2006 and 61/276 of 29 June 2007, as well
as other relevant resolutions;
2. Takes note of the status of contributions to the United Nations Disengagement
Observer Force as at 31 March 2008, including the contributions outstanding in the amount of
15 million United States dollars, representing some 1 per cent of the total assessed contributions,
notes with concern that only forty-nine Member States have paid their assessed contributions in
full, and urges all other Member States, in particular those in arrears, to ensure payment of their
outstanding assessed contributions;
3. Expresses its appreciation to those Member States which have paid their assessed
contributions in full, and urges all other Member States to make every possible effort to ensure
payment of their assessed contributions to the Force in full;
4. Expresses concern at the financial situation with regard to peacekeeping activities, in
particular as regards the reimbursements to troop contributors that bear additional burdens owing
to overdue payments by Member States of their assessments;
5. Also expresses concern at the delay experienced by the Secretary-General in deploying
and providing adequate resources to some recent peacekeeping missions, in particular those in
Africa;
6. Emphasizes that all future and existing peacekeeping missions shall be given equal and
non-discriminatory treatment in respect of financial and administrative arrangements;
7. Also emphasizes that all peacekeeping missions shall be provided with adequate
resources for the effective and efficient discharge of their respective mandates;
8. Reiterates its request to the Secretary-General to make the fullest possible use of
facilities and equipment at the United Nations Logistics Base at Brindisi, Italy, in order to
minimize the costs of procurement for the Force;
9. Endorses the conclusions and recommendations contained in the report of the
Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions,81 subject to the provisions of
the present resolution, and requests the Secretary-General to ensure their full implementation;
10. Takes note of paragraph 30 of the report of the Advisory Committee;
11. Requests the Secretary-General to ensure the full implementation of the relevant
provisions of its resolutions 59/296, 60/266 and 61/276;
12. Also requests the Secretary-General to take all necessary action to ensure that the
Force is administered with a maximum of efficiency and economy;
13. Further requests the Secretary-General, in order to reduce the cost of employing
General Service staff, to continue efforts to recruit local staff for the Force against General Service
posts, commensurate with the requirements of the Force;
Financial performance report for the period from 1 July 2006 to 30 June 2007
14. Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General on the financial performance of the
Force for the period from 1 July 2006 to 30 June 2007;82
_______________
82

A/62/562.

79

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

Budget estimates for the period from 1 July 2008 to 30 June 2009
15. Decides to appropriate to the Special Account for the United Nations Disengagement
Observer Force the amount of 47,859,100 dollars for the period from 1 July 2008 to 30 June 2009,
inclusive of 45,726,000 dollars for the maintenance of the Force, 1,859,500 dollars for the support
account for peacekeeping operations and 273,600 dollars for the United Nations Logistics Base;
Financing of the appropriation
16. Also decides to apportion among Member States the amount of 47,859,100 dollars at a
monthly rate of 3,988,258 dollars, in accordance with the levels updated in General Assembly
resolution 61/243 of 22 December 2006, and taking into account the scale of assessments for 2008
and 2009, as set out in its resolution 61/237 of 22 December 2006, subject to a decision of the
Security Council to extend the mandate of the Force;
17. Further decides that, in accordance with the provisions of its resolution 973 (X) of
15 December 1955, there shall be set off against the apportionment among Member States, as
provided for in paragraph 16 above, their respective share in the Tax Equalization Fund of
1,448,000 dollars, comprising the estimated staff assessment income of 1,247,700 dollars
approved for the Force for the period from 1 July 2008 to 30 June 2009, the prorated share of
178,700 dollars of the estimated staff assessment income approved for the support account and the
prorated share of 21,600 dollars of the estimated staff assessment income approved for the United
Nations Logistics Base;
18. Decides that, for Member States that have fulfilled their financial obligations to the
Force, there shall be set off against their apportionment, as provided for in paragraph 16 above,
their respective share of the unencumbered balance and other income in the total amount of
2,728,700 dollars in respect of the financial period ended 30 June 2007, in accordance with the
levels updated in resolution 61/243, and taking into account the scale of assessments for 2007, as
set out in resolution 61/237;
19. Also decides that, for Member States that have not fulfilled their financial obligations
to the Force, there shall be set off against their outstanding obligations their respective share of the
unencumbered balance and other income in the total amount of 2,728,700 dollars in respect of the
financial period ended 30 June 2007, in accordance with the scheme set out in paragraph 18
above;
20. Further decides that the increase of 72,600 dollars in the estimated staff assessment
income in respect of the financial period ended 30 June 2007 shall be added to the credits from the
amount of 2,728,700 dollars referred to in paragraphs 18 and 19 above;
21. Emphasizes that no peacekeeping mission shall be financed by borrowing funds from
other active peacekeeping missions;
22. Encourages the Secretary-General to continue to take additional measures to ensure
the safety and security of all personnel participating in the Force under the auspices of the United
Nations, bearing in mind paragraphs 5 and 6 of Security Council resolution 1502 (2003) of
26 August 2003;
23. Invites voluntary contributions to the Force in cash and in the form of services and
supplies acceptable to the Secretary-General, to be administered, as appropriate, in accordance
with the procedure and practices established by the General Assembly;
24. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its sixty-third session, under the item
entitled “Financing of the United Nations peacekeeping forces in the Middle East”, the sub-item
entitled “United Nations Disengagement Observer Force”.

80

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

RESOLUTION 62/265
Adopted at the 109th plenary meeting, on 20 June 2008, on the recommendation of the Committee
(A/62/878, para. 14),83 by a recorded vote of 142 to 2, with 1 abstention, as follows:
In favour: Afghanistan, Albania, Algeria, Andorra, Angola, Antigua and Barbuda, Argentina, Armenia,
Austria, Bahamas, Bahrain, Bangladesh, Barbados, Belarus, Belgium, Benin, Bolivia, Bosnia and
Herzegovina, Brazil, Brunei Darussalam, Bulgaria, Burkina Faso, Cambodia, Canada, Chile, China,
Colombia, Comoros, Congo, Costa Rica, Croatia, Cuba, Cyprus, Czech Republic, Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea, Denmark, Djibouti, Dominican Republic, Ecuador, Egypt, El Salvador, Estonia, Fiji,
Finland, France, Gabon, Germany, Ghana, Greece, Guatemala, Guyana, Haiti, Honduras, Hungary,
Iceland, India, Indonesia, Iran (Islamic Republic of), Iraq, Ireland, Italy, Jamaica, Japan, Jordan,
Kazakhstan, Kenya, Kuwait, Kyrgyzstan, Lao People’s Democratic Republic, Latvia, Lebanon, Lesotho,
Libyan Arab Jamahiriya, Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Malawi, Malaysia, Maldives, Mali,
Mauritania, Mauritius, Mexico, Moldova, Monaco, Mongolia, Morocco, Mozambique, Myanmar, Namibia,
Nepal, Netherlands, New Zealand, Nicaragua, Niger, Nigeria, Norway, Oman, Pakistan, Panama,
Paraguay, Peru, Philippines, Poland, Portugal, Qatar, Republic of Korea, Romania, Russian Federation,
Rwanda, San Marino, Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Serbia, Singapore, Slovakia, Slovenia, South Africa, Spain,
Sri Lanka, Sudan, Suriname, Sweden, Switzerland, Syrian Arab Republic, Tajikistan, Thailand, the former
Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Togo, Tunisia, Turkey, Uganda, Ukraine, United Arab Emirates, United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United Republic of Tanzania, Uruguay, Venezuela
(Bolivarian Republic of), Viet Nam, Yemen, Zambia, Zimbabwe
Against: Israel, United States of America
Abstaining: Australia

62/265. Financing of the United Nations Interim Force in Lebanon
The General Assembly,
Having considered the reports of the Secretary-General on the financing of the United
Nations Interim Force in Lebanon,84 the report of the Secretary-General on the comprehensive
review of the Strategic Military Cell85 and the related report of the Advisory Committee on
Administrative and Budgetary Questions,86
Recalling Security Council resolution 425 (1978) of 19 March 1978 regarding the
establishment of the United Nations Interim Force in Lebanon and the subsequent resolutions by
which the Council extended the mandate of the Force, the latest of which was resolution
1773 (2007) of 24 August 2007, by which the Council extended the mandate of the Force until
31 August 2008,
Recalling also its resolution S-8/2 of 21 April 1978 on the financing of the Force and its
subsequent resolutions thereon, the latest of which was resolution 61/250 C of 29 June 2007,
Reaffirming its resolutions 51/233 of 13 June 1997, 52/237 of 26 June 1998, 53/227 of
8 June 1999, 54/267 of 15 June 2000, 55/180 A of 19 December 2000, 55/180 B of 14 June 2001,
56/214 A of 21 December 2001, 56/214 B of 27 June 2002, 57/325 of 18 June 2003, 58/307 of
18 June 2004, 59/307 of 22 June 2005, 60/278 of 30 June 2006, 61/250 A of 22 December 2006,
61/250 B of 2 April 2007 and 61/250 C,
Reaffirming also the general principles underlying the financing of United Nations
peacekeeping operations, as stated in General Assembly resolutions 1874 (S-IV) of 27 June 1963,
3101 (XXVIII) of 11 December 1973 and 55/235 of 23 December 2000,
Noting with appreciation that voluntary contributions have been made to the Force,
_______________
83

The draft resolution recommended in the report was sponsored in the Committee by Antigua and Barbuda (on
behalf of the States Members of the United Nations that are members of the Group of 77 and China).
84
A/62/632 and A/62/751.
85
A/62/744.
86
A/62/781/Add.5.

81

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

Mindful of the fact that it is essential to provide the Force with the financial resources
necessary to enable it to fulfil its responsibilities under the relevant resolutions of the Security
Council,
1. Requests the Secretary-General to entrust the Head of the United Nations Interim
Force in Lebanon with the task of formulating future budget proposals in full accordance with the
provisions of General Assembly resolutions 59/296 of 22 June 2005, 60/266 of 30 June 2006 and
61/276 of 29 June 2007, as well as other relevant resolutions;
2. Takes note of the status of contributions to the Force as at 31 March 2008, including
the contributions outstanding in the amount of 144.9 million United States dollars, representing
some 3 per cent of the total assessed contributions, notes with concern that only seventy-four
Member States have paid their assessed contributions in full, and urges all other Member States, in
particular those in arrears, to ensure payment of their outstanding assessed contributions;
3. Expresses its appreciation to those Member States which have paid their assessed
contributions in full, and urges all other Member States to make every possible effort to ensure
payment of their assessed contributions to the Force in full;
4. Expresses deep concern that Israel did not comply with General Assembly resolutions
51/233, 52/237, 53/227, 54/267, 55/180 A, 55/180 B, 56/214 A, 56/214 B, 57/325, 58/307,
59/307, 60/278, 61/250 A, 61/250 B and 61/250 C;
5. Stresses once again that Israel should strictly abide by General Assembly resolutions
51/233, 52/237, 53/227, 54/267, 55/180 A, 55/180 B, 56/214 A, 56/214 B, 57/325, 58/307,
59/307, 60/278, 61/250 A, 61/250 B and 61/250 C;
6. Expresses concern at the financial situation with regard to peacekeeping activities, in
particular as regards the reimbursements to troop contributors that bear additional burdens owing
to overdue payments by Member States of their assessments;
7. Also expresses concern at the delay experienced by the Secretary-General in deploying
and providing adequate resources to some recent peacekeeping missions, in particular those in
Africa;
8. Emphasizes that all future and existing peacekeeping missions shall be given equal and
non-discriminatory treatment in respect of financial and administrative arrangements;
9. Also emphasizes that all peacekeeping missions shall be provided with adequate
resources for the effective and efficient discharge of their respective mandates;
10. Reiterates its request to the Secretary-General to make the fullest possible use of
facilities and equipment at the United Nations Logistics Base at Brindisi, Italy, in order to
minimize the costs of procurement for the Force;
11. Endorses the conclusions and recommendations contained in the report of the
Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions,86 subject to the provisions of
the present resolution, and requests the Secretary-General to ensure their full implementation;
12. Takes note of paragraph 38 of the report of the Advisory Committee;
13. Requests the Secretary-General to ensure the full implementation of the relevant
provisions of its resolutions 59/296, 60/266 and 61/276;
14. Also requests the Secretary-General to take all necessary action to ensure that the
Force is administered with a maximum of efficiency and economy;
15. Further requests the Secretary-General, in order to reduce the cost of employing
General Service staff, to continue efforts to recruit local staff for the Force against General Service
posts, commensurate with the requirements of the Force;

82

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

16. Notes the significant projected underexpenditure for the period from 1 July 2007 to
30 June 2008, as indicated in the report of the Advisory Committee, and requests the SecretaryGeneral, to the extent possible, to take measures to improve budget forecasting with respect to the
Force, bearing in mind the unpredictable nature of peacekeeping operations;
17. Recalls paragraph 1, section XXI, of resolution 61/276, and welcomes the cooperation
among the missions in the region and the efforts of the Secretary-General in this regard;
18. Notes with concern the high vacancy rate among international and national staff of the
Force, and decides to apply a vacancy factor of 14 per cent for international staff and 15 per cent
for national staff;
19. Notes paragraphs 16 and 17 of the report of the Advisory Committee, and decides to
apply a delayed deployment factor of 8 per cent to the cost estimates for military contingents;
20. Requests the Secretary General to keep the requirements for the Force under constant
review and to report thereon in the context of his future budget proposals;
21. Reiterates its request to the Secretary-General to take the necessary measures to ensure
the full implementation of paragraph 8 of its resolution 51/233, paragraph 5 of its resolution
52/237, paragraph 11 of its resolution 53/227, paragraph 14 of its resolution 54/267, paragraph 14
of its resolution 55/180 A, paragraph 15 of its resolution 55/180 B, paragraph 13 of its resolution
56/214 A, paragraph 13 of its resolution 56/214 B, paragraph 14 of its resolution 57/325,
paragraph 13 of its resolution 58/307, paragraph 13 of its resolution 59/307, paragraph 17 of its
resolution 60/278, paragraph 21 of its resolution 61/250 A, paragraph 20 of its resolution 61/250 B
and paragraph 20 of its resolution 61/250 C, stresses once again that Israel shall pay the amount of
1,117,005 dollars resulting from the incident at Qana on 18 April 1996, and requests the SecretaryGeneral to report on this matter to the General Assembly at its sixty-third session;
22. Decides to approve the post of Chief of the Joint Mission Analysis Cell (P-5) and the
post of Associate Political Affairs Officer (P-2) in the Office of Political and Civil Affairs;
23. Also decides to maintain a D-2 post for the leadership of the Strategic Military Cell
and a General Service post;
24. Further decides that the target date of the termination of the Strategic Military Cell
shall be no later than 30 June 2010;
25. Requests the Secretary-General to assess whether the strengthening of the Office of
Military Affairs approved in its resolution 62/250 of 20 June 2008 has provided sufficient capacity
and capability to meet the target date referred to above for the termination of the Strategic Military
Cell and to report thereon in the context of the comprehensive report requested in resolution 62/250;
Financial performance report for the period from 1 July 2006 to 30 June 2007
26. Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General on the financial performance of the
Force for the period from 1 July 2006 to 30 June 2007;87
Budget estimates for the period from 1 July 2008 to 30 June 2009
27. Decides to appropriate to the Special Account for the United Nations Interim Force in
Lebanon the amount of 680,932,600 dollars for the period from 1 July 2008 to 30 June 2009,
inclusive of 650,755,600 dollars for the maintenance of the Force, 26,306,200 dollars for the
support account for peacekeeping operations and 3,870,800 dollars for the United Nations
Logistics Base;

_______________
87

A/62/632.

83

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

Financing of the appropriation
28. Also decides to apportion among Member States the amount of 113,488,767 dollars
for the period from 1 July to 31 August 2008, in accordance with the levels updated in General
Assembly resolution 61/243 of 22 December 2006, and taking into account the scale of
assessments for 2008, as set out in its resolution 61/237 of 22 December 2006;
29. Further decides that, in accordance with the provisions of its resolution 973 (X) of
15 December 1955, there shall be set off against the apportionment among Member States, as
provided for in paragraph 28 above, their respective share in the Tax Equalization Fund of the
amount of 2,312,883 dollars, comprising the estimated staff assessment income of 1,840,633
dollars approved for the Force, the prorated share of 421,267 dollars of the estimated staff
assessment income approved for the support account and the prorated share of 50,983 dollars of
the estimated staff assessment income approved for the United Nations Logistics Base;
30. Decides to apportion among Member States the amount of 567,443,833 dollars for the
period from 1 September 2008 to 30 June 2009 at a monthly rate of 56,744,383 dollars, in
accordance with the levels updated in resolution 61/243, and taking into account the scale of
assessments for 2008 and 2009, as set out in resolution 61/237, subject to a decision of the
Security Council to extend the mandate of the Force;
31. Also decides that, in accordance with the provisions of its resolution 973 (X), there
shall be set off against the apportionment among Member States, as provided for in paragraph 30
above, their respective share in the Tax Equalization Fund of 11,564,417 dollars, comprising the
estimated staff assessment income of 9,203,167 dollars approved for the Force, the prorated share
of 2,106,333 dollars of the estimated staff assessment income approved for the support account
and the prorated share of 254,917 dollars of the estimated staff assessment income approved for
the United Nations Logistics Base;
32. Further decides that, for Member States that have fulfilled their financial obligations to
the Force, there shall be set off against their apportionment, as provided for in paragraph 28 above,
their respective share of the unencumbered balance and other income in the total amount of
8,252,700 dollars in respect of the financial period ended 30 June 2007, in accordance with the
levels updated in resolution 61/243, and taking into account the scale of assessments for 2007, as
set out in resolution 61/237;
33. Decides that, for Member States that have not fulfilled their financial obligations to the
Force, there shall be set off against their outstanding obligations their respective share of the
unencumbered balance and other income in the total amount of 8,252,700 dollars in respect of the
financial period ended 30 June 2007, in accordance with the scheme set out in paragraph 32
above;
34. Also decides that the decrease of 370,300 dollars in the estimated staff assessment
income in respect of the financial period ended 30 June 2007 shall be set off against the credits
from the amount of 8,252,700 dollars referred to in paragraphs 32 and 33 above;
35. Emphasizes that no peacekeeping mission shall be financed by borrowing funds from
other active peacekeeping missions;
36. Encourages the Secretary-General to continue to take additional measures to ensure
the safety and security of all personnel participating in the Force under the auspices of the United
Nations, bearing in mind paragraphs 5 and 6 of Security Council resolution 1502 (2003) of
26 August 2003;
37. Invites voluntary contributions to the Force in cash and in the form of services and
supplies acceptable to the Secretary-General, to be administered, as appropriate, in accordance
with the procedure and practices established by the General Assembly;

84

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

38. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its sixty-third session, under the item
entitled “Financing of the United Nations peacekeeping forces in the Middle East”, the sub-item
entitled “United Nations Interim Force in Lebanon”.
RESOLUTION 62/266
Adopted at the 109th plenary meeting, on 20 June 2008, without a vote, on the recommendation of the
Committee (A/62/879, para. 6)

62/266. Financing of the United Nations Mission in Sierra Leone
The General Assembly,
Having considered the report of the Secretary-General on the financing of the United
Nations Mission in Sierra Leone 88 and the related report of the Advisory Committee on
Administrative and Budgetary Questions,89
Bearing in mind Security Council resolution 1270 (1999) of 22 October 1999, by which the
Council established the United Nations Mission in Sierra Leone, and the subsequent resolutions
by which the Council revised and extended the mandate of the Mission, the latest of which was
resolution 1610 (2005) of 30 June 2005, by which the Council extended the mandate of the
Mission for a final period of six months until 31 December 2005,
Recalling its resolution 53/29 of 20 November 1998 on the financing of the United Nations
Observer Mission in Sierra Leone and subsequent resolutions on the financing of the United
Nations Mission in Sierra Leone, the latest of which was resolution 61/288 of 29 June 2007,
Reaffirming the general principles underlying the financing of United Nations peacekeeping
operations, as stated in General Assembly resolutions 1874 (S-IV) of 27 June 1963,
3101 (XXVIII) of 11 December 1973 and 55/235 of 23 December 2000,
Noting with appreciation that voluntary contributions have been made to the Mission,
1. Takes note of the status of contributions to the United Nations Observer Mission in
Sierra Leone and the United Nations Mission in Sierra Leone as at 31 March 2008, including the
credits in the amount of 89.5 million United States dollars;
2. Endorses the conclusions and recommendations contained in the report of the
Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions,89 and requests the SecretaryGeneral to ensure their full implementation;
Disposition of assets of the United Nations Mission in Sierra Leone
3.

Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General on the financing of the Mission;88

4. Encourages Member States that are owed credits for the closed peacekeeping mission
accounts to apply those credits to any accounts where the Member State concerned has
outstanding assessed contributions;
5. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its sixty-third session the item entitled
“Financing of the United Nations Mission in Sierra Leone”.
RESOLUTION 62/267
Adopted at the 109th plenary meeting, on 20 June 2008, without a vote, on the recommendation of the
Committee (A/62/880, para. 8)

_______________
88
89

A/62/756.
A/62/781/Add.4.

85

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

62/267. Financing of the United Nations Mission in the Sudan
The General Assembly,
Having considered the reports of the Secretary-General on the financing of the United
Nations Mission in the Sudan 90 and the related report of the Advisory Committee on
Administrative and Budgetary Questions,91
Recalling Security Council resolution 1590 (2005) of 24 March 2005, by which the Council
established the United Nations Mission in the Sudan for an initial period of six months as from
24 March 2005, and the subsequent resolutions by which the Council extended the mandate of the
Mission, the latest of which was resolution 1812 (2008) of 30 April 2008, by which the Council
extended the mandate of the Mission until 30 April 2009,
Recalling also its resolution 59/292 of 21 April 2005 on the financing of the Mission and its
subsequent resolutions thereon, the latest of which was resolution 61/289 of 29 June 2007,
Recalling further its resolution 58/315 of 1 July 2004,
Reaffirming the general principles underlying the financing of United Nations peacekeeping
operations, as stated in General Assembly resolutions 1874 (S-IV) of 27 June 1963,
3101 (XXVIII) of 11 December 1973 and 55/235 of 23 December 2000,
Noting with appreciation that voluntary contributions have been made to the trust fund in
support of the peace process in the Sudan,
Mindful of the fact that it is essential to provide the Mission with the financial resources
necessary to enable it to fulfil its responsibilities under the relevant resolutions of the Security
Council,
1. Requests the Secretary-General to entrust the Head of Mission with the task of
formulating future budget proposals in full accordance with the provisions of General Assembly
resolutions 59/296 of 22 June 2005, 60/266 of 30 June 2006 and 61/276 of 29 June 2007, as well
as other relevant resolutions;
2. Takes note of the status of contributions to the United Nations Mission in the Sudan as
at 30 April 2008, including the contributions outstanding in the amount of 167.3 million United
States dollars, representing some 5 per cent of the total assessed contributions, notes with concern
that only thirty Member States have paid their assessed contributions in full, and urges all other
Member States, in particular those in arrears, to ensure payment of their outstanding assessed
contributions;
3. Expresses its appreciation to those Member States which have paid their assessed
contributions in full, and urges all other Member States to make every possible effort to ensure
payment of their assessed contributions to the Mission in full;
4. Expresses concern at the financial situation with regard to peacekeeping activities, in
particular as regards the reimbursements to troop contributors that bear additional burdens owing
to overdue payments by Member States of their assessments;
5. Also expresses concern at the delay experienced by the Secretary-General in deploying
and providing adequate resources to some recent peacekeeping missions, in particular those in
Africa;
6. Emphasizes that all future and existing peacekeeping missions shall be given equal and
non-discriminatory treatment in respect of financial and administrative arrangements;
_______________
90
91

A/62/749 and A/62/785 and Corr.1.
A/62/781/Add.16.

86

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

7. Also emphasizes that all peacekeeping missions shall be provided with adequate
resources for the effective and efficient discharge of their respective mandates;
8. Reiterates its request to the Secretary-General to make the fullest possible use of
facilities and equipment at the United Nations Logistics Base at Brindisi, Italy, in order to
minimize the costs of procurement for the Mission;
9. Endorses the conclusions and recommendations contained in the report of the
Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions,91 subject to the provisions of
the present resolution, and requests the Secretary-General to ensure their full implementation;
10. Reaffirms section XX of resolution 61/276, and encourages the Secretary-General,
where feasible, to enhance regional and inter-mission cooperation with a view to achieving greater
synergies in the use of the resources of the Organization and the implementation of mandates of
the missions, while bearing in mind that individual missions are responsible for the preparation
and implementation of their own budgets and for controlling their own assets and logistical
operations;
11.

Also reaffirms paragraph 32 of its resolution 62/232 of 22 December 2007;

12. Requests the Secretary-General to ensure that future budget submissions contain
sufficient information, explanation and justification of the proposed resource requirements relating
to operational costs in order to allow Member States to take well-informed decisions;
13. Decides to approve 20 of the 28 United Nations Volunteers for property management
proposed by the Secretary-General in paragraph 101 of his report;92
14. Takes note of paragraphs 45 and 50 of the report of the Advisory Committee;
15. Requests the Secretary-General, in his next overview report, to include information on
the environmental policy, guidelines and pilot study as referred to in paragraph 174 of the report of
the Secretary-General;92
16. Also requests the Secretary-General to ensure the full implementation of the relevant
provisions of its resolutions 59/296, 60/266 and 61/276;
17. Further requests the Secretary-General to take all necessary action to ensure that the
Mission is administered with a maximum of efficiency and economy;
18. Requests the Secretary-General, in order to reduce the cost of employing General
Service staff, to continue efforts to recruit local staff for the Mission against General Service posts,
commensurate with the requirements of the Mission;
Financial performance report for the period from 1 July 2006 to 30 June 2007
19. Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General on the financial performance of the
Mission for the period from 1 July 2006 to 30 June 2007;93
Budget estimates for the period from 1 July 2008 to 30 June 2009
20. Decides to appropriate to the Special Account for the United Nations Mission in the
Sudan the amount of 858,771,200 dollars for the period from 1 July 2008 to 30 June 2009,
inclusive of 820,720,600 dollars for the maintenance of the Mission, 33,169,900 dollars for the
support account for peacekeeping operations and 4,880,700 dollars for the United Nations
Logistics Base;

_______________
92
93

A/62/785 and Corr.1.
A/62/749.

87

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

Financing of the appropriation
21. Also decides to apportion among Member States the amount of 715,642,666 dollars
for the period from 1 July 2008 to 30 April 2009, in accordance with the levels updated in General
Assembly resolution 61/243 of 22 December 2006, and taking into account the scale of
assessments for 2008, as set out in its resolution 61/237 of 22 December 2006;
22. Further decides that, in accordance with the provisions of its resolution 973 (X) of
15 December 1955, there shall be set off against the apportionment among Member States, as
provided for in paragraph 21 above, their respective share in the Tax Equalization Fund of
18,685,833 dollars, comprising the estimated staff assessment income of 15,708,583 dollars
approved for the Mission, the prorated share of 2,655,917 dollars of the estimated staff assessment
income approved for the support account and the prorated share of 321,333 dollars of the
estimated staff assessment income approved for the United Nations Logistics Base;
23. Decides to apportion among Member States the amount of 143,128,534 dollars for the
period from 1 May to 30 June 2009, at a monthly rate of 71,564,267 dollars, in accordance with
the levels updated in resolution 61/243, and taking into account the scale of assessments for 2008
and 2009, as set out in resolution 61/237, subject to a decision of the Security Council to extend
the mandate of the Mission;
24. Also decides that, in accordance with the provisions of its resolution 973 (X), there
shall be set off against the apportionment among Member States, as provided for in paragraph 23
above, their respective share in the Tax Equalization Fund of 3,737,167 dollars, comprising the
estimated staff assessment income of 3,141,717 dollars approved for the Mission, the prorated
share of 531,183 dollars of the estimated staff assessment income approved for the support
account and the prorated share of 64,267 dollars of the estimated staff assessment income
approved for the United Nations Logistics Base;
25. Further decides that, for Member States that have fulfilled their financial obligations to
the Mission, there shall be set off against their apportionment, as provided for in paragraph 21
above, their respective share of the unencumbered balance and other income in the total amount of
159,505,000 dollars in respect of the financial period ended 30 June 2007, in accordance with the
levels updated in resolution 61/243, and taking into account the scale of assessments for 2007, as
set out in resolution 61/237;
26. Decides that, for Member States that have not fulfilled their financial obligations to the
Mission, there shall be set off against their outstanding obligations their respective share of the
unencumbered balance and other income in the total amount of 159,505,000 dollars in respect of
the financial period ended 30 June 2007, in accordance with the scheme set out in paragraph 25
above;
27. Also decides that the decrease of 1,662,100 dollars in the estimated staff assessment
income in respect of the financial period ended 30 June 2007 shall be set off against the credits
from the amount of 159,505,000 dollars referred to in paragraphs 25 and 26 above;
28. Emphasizes that no peacekeeping mission shall be financed by borrowing funds from
other active peacekeeping missions;
29. Encourages the Secretary-General to continue to take additional measures to ensure
the safety and security of all personnel participating in the Mission under the auspices of the
United Nations, bearing in mind paragraphs 5 and 6 of Security Council resolution 1502 (2003) of
26 August 2003;
30. Invites voluntary contributions to the Mission in cash and in the form of services and
supplies acceptable to the Secretary-General, to be administered, as appropriate, in accordance
with the procedure and practices established by the General Assembly;
31. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its sixty-third session the item entitled
“Financing of the United Nations Mission in the Sudan”.
88

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

RESOLUTION 62/268
Adopted at the 109th plenary meeting, on 20 June 2008, without a vote, on the recommendation of the
Committee (A/62/881, para. 7)

62/268. Financing of the United Nations Mission for the Referendum in Western Sahara
The General Assembly,
Having considered the reports of the Secretary-General on the financing of the United
Nations Mission for the Referendum in Western Sahara,94 the related report of the Advisory
Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions,95 the note by the Secretary-General on
the financing arrangements for the Mission96 and the oral statement by the Chairman of the
Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions,97
Recalling Security Council resolution 690 (1991) of 29 April 1991, by which the Council
established the United Nations Mission for the Referendum in Western Sahara, and the subsequent
resolutions by which the Council extended the mandate of the Mission, the latest of which was
resolution 1813 (2008) of 30 April 2008, by which the Council extended the mandate of the
Mission until 30 April 2009,
Recalling also its resolution 45/266 of 17 May 1991 on the financing of the Mission and its
subsequent resolutions and decisions thereon, the latest of which was resolution 61/290 of 29 June
2007,
Reaffirming the general principles underlying the financing of United Nations peacekeeping
operations, as stated in General Assembly resolutions 1874 (S-IV) of 27 June 1963, 3101 (XXVIII)
of 11 December 1973 and 55/235 of 23 December 2000,
Noting with appreciation that voluntary contributions have been made to the Mission,
Mindful of the fact that it is essential to provide the Mission with the financial resources
necessary to enable it to fulfil its responsibilities under the relevant resolutions of the Security
Council,
1. Reiterates its request to the Secretary-General to entrust the Head of Mission with the
task of formulating future budget proposals in full accordance with the provisions of General
Assembly resolutions 59/296 of 22 June 2005, 60/266 of 30 June 2006 and 61/276 of 29 June
2007, as well as other relevant resolutions;
2. Takes note of the status of contributions to the United Nations Mission for the
Referendum in Western Sahara as at 31 March 2008, including the contributions outstanding in
the amount of 46.8 million United States dollars, representing some 7 per cent of the total assessed
contributions, notes with concern that only sixty-eight Member States have paid their assessed
contributions in full, and urges all other Member States, in particular those in arrears, to ensure
payment of their outstanding assessed contributions;
3. Expresses its appreciation to those Member States which have paid their assessed
contributions in full, and urges all other Member States to make every possible effort to ensure
payment of their assessed contributions to the Mission in full;
4. Expresses concern at the financial situation with regard to peacekeeping activities, in
particular as regards the reimbursements to troop contributors that bear additional burdens owing
to overdue payments by Member States of their assessments;
_______________
94

A/62/611 and A/62/679.
A/62/781/Add.3.
96
A/62/817.
97
See Official Records of the General Assembly, Sixty-second Session, Fifth Committee, 40th meeting
(A/C.5/62/SR.40), and corrigendum.
95

89

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

5. Also expresses concern at the delay experienced by the Secretary-General in deploying
and providing adequate resources to some recent peacekeeping missions, in particular those in
Africa;
6. Emphasizes that all future and existing peacekeeping missions shall be given equal and
non-discriminatory treatment in respect of financial and administrative arrangements;
7. Also emphasizes that all peacekeeping missions shall be provided with adequate
resources for the effective and efficient discharge of their respective mandates;
8. Reiterates its request to the Secretary-General to make the fullest possible use of
facilities and equipment at the United Nations Logistics Base at Brindisi, Italy, in order to
minimize the costs of procurement for the Mission;
9. Endorses the conclusions and recommendations contained in the report of the
Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions95 and in the oral statement by
the Chairman of the Advisory Committee,97 subject to the provisions of the present resolution, and
requests the Secretary-General to ensure their full implementation;
10. Decides not to approve the Field Service post in the Archiving Unit;
11. Decides to provide general temporary assistance for the national General Service post
in the Archiving Unit for one year, and requests the Secretary-General to rejustify its continuation
in the context of the next budget submission;
12. Requests the Secretary-General to ensure the full implementation of the relevant
provisions of its resolutions 59/296, 60/266 and 61/276;
13. Also requests the Secretary-General to take all necessary action to ensure that the
Mission is administered with a maximum of efficiency and economy;
14. Further requests the Secretary-General, in order to reduce the cost of employing
General Service staff, to continue efforts to recruit local staff for the Mission against General
Service posts, commensurate with the requirements of the Mission;
Financial performance report for the period from 1 July 2006 to 30 June 2007
15. Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General on the financial performance of the
Mission for the period from 1 July 2006 to 30 June 2007;98
Financing arrangements for the period from 1 July 2007 to 30 June 2008
16. Also takes note of the note by the Secretary-General on the financing arrangements for
the Mission for the period from 1 July 2007 to 30 June 2008;96
17. Decides to appropriate to the Special Account for the United Nations Mission for the
Referendum in Western Sahara the amount of 1,754,200 dollars for the maintenance of the
Mission for the period from 1 July 2007 to 30 June 2008, in addition to the amount of 46,471,700
dollars already appropriated for the Mission for the same period under the terms of resolution
61/290;
Financing of the additional appropriation for the period from 1 July 2007
to 30 June 2008
18. Also decides, taking into account the amount of 46,471,700 dollars already
apportioned under the terms of resolution 61/290, to apportion among Member States the
additional amount of 1,754,200 dollars for the maintenance of the Mission for the period from
1 July 2007 to 30 June 2008, in accordance with the levels updated in General Assembly
_______________
98

A/62/611.

90

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

resolution 61/243 of 22 December 2006, and taking into account the scale of assessments for 2007
and 2008, as set out in its resolution 61/237 of 22 December 2006;
19. Further decides that, in accordance with the provisions of its resolution 973 (X) of
15 December 1955, the decrease of 235,000 dollars in the estimated staff assessment income in
respect of the financial period from 1 July 2007 to 30 June 2008 shall be added to the
apportionment among Member States as provided for in paragraph 18 above;
Budget estimates for the period from 1 July 2008 to 30 June 2009
20. Decides to appropriate to the Special Account for the Mission the amount of
47,702,500 dollars for the period from 1 July 2008 to 30 June 2009, inclusive of 45,600,800
dollars for the maintenance of the Mission, 1,832,100 dollars for the support account for
peacekeeping operations and 269,600 dollars for the United Nations Logistics Base;
Financing of the appropriation for the period from 1 July 2008 to 30 June 2009
21. Also decides to apportion among Member States the amount of 39,752,080 dollars for
the period from 1 July 2008 to 30 April 2009, in accordance with the levels updated in resolution
61/243, and taking into account the scale of assessments for 2008 and 2009, as set out in
resolution 61/237;
22. Further decides that, in accordance with the provisions of its resolution 973 (X), there
shall be set off against the apportionment among Member States, as provided for in paragraph 21
above, their respective share in the Tax Equalization Fund of 1,909,500 dollars, comprising the
estimated staff assessment income of 1,745,080 dollars approved for the Mission, the prorated
share of 146,670 dollars of the estimated staff assessment income approved for the support
account and the prorated share of 17,750 dollars of the estimated staff assessment income
approved for the United Nations Logistics Base;
23. Decides to apportion among Member States the amount of 7,950,420 dollars for the
period from 1 May to 30 June 2009, at a monthly rate of 3,975,208 dollars, in accordance with the
levels updated in resolution 61/243, and taking into account the scale of assessments for 2009, as
set out in resolution 61/237, subject to a decision of the Security Council to extend the mandate of
the Mission;
24. Also decides that, in accordance with the provisions of its resolution 973 (X), there
shall be set off against the apportionment among Member States, as provided for in paragraph 23
above, their respective share in the Tax Equalization Fund of 381,900 dollars, comprising the
estimated staff assessment income of 349,020 dollars approved for the Mission, the prorated share
of 29,330 dollars of the estimated staff assessment income approved for the support account and
the prorated share of 3,550 dollars of the estimated staff assessment income approved for the
United Nations Logistics Base;
25. Further decides that, for Member States that have fulfilled their financial obligations to
the Mission, there shall be set off against their apportionment, as provided for in paragraph 21
above, their respective share of the unencumbered balance and other income in the total amount of
2,903,700 dollars in respect of the financial period ended 30 June 2007, in accordance with the
levels updated in resolution 61/243, and taking into account the scale of assessments for 2007, as
set out in resolution 61/237;
26. Decides that, for Member States that have not fulfilled their financial obligations to the
Mission, there shall be set off against their outstanding obligations their respective share of the
unencumbered balance and other income in the total amount of 2,903,700 dollars in respect of the
financial period ended 30 June 2007, in accordance with the scheme set out in paragraph 25 above;
27. Also decides that the decrease of 345,700 dollars in the estimated staff assessment
income in respect of the financial period ended 30 June 2007 shall be set off against the credits
from the amount of 2,903,700 referred to in paragraphs 25 and 26 above;
91

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

28. Emphasizes that no peacekeeping mission shall be financed by borrowing funds from
other active peacekeeping missions;
29. Encourages the Secretary-General to continue to take additional measures to ensure
the safety and security of all personnel participating in the Mission under the auspices of the
United Nations, bearing in mind paragraphs 5 and 6 of Security Council resolution 1502 (2003) of
26 August 2003;
30. Invites voluntary contributions to the Mission in cash and in the form of services and
supplies acceptable to the Secretary-General, to be administered, as appropriate, in accordance
with the procedure and practices established by the General Assembly;
31. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its sixty-third session the item entitled
“Financing of the United Nations Mission for the Referendum in Western Sahara”.
RESOLUTION 62/269
Adopted at the 109th plenary meeting, on 20 June 2008, without a vote, on the recommendation of the
Committee (A/62/604/Add.2, para. 14)

62/269. Procurement reform
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 54/14 of 29 October 1999, 55/247 of 12 April 2001, 57/279 of
20 December 2002, 58/276 and 58/277 of 23 December 2003, 59/288 of 13 April 2005, 60/1 of
16 September 2005, 60/260 of 8 May 2006, 60/266 of 30 June 2006, 60/283 of 7 July 2006,
61/246 of 22 December 2006 and 61/276 and 61/279 of 29 June 2007,
Reaffirming the Financial Regulations and Rules of the United Nations,99 in particular those
regarding the procurement process,
Having considered the comprehensive report of the Secretary-General on United Nations
procurement activities,100 the related report of the Advisory Committee on Administrative and
Budgetary Questions,101 the report of the Office of Internal Oversight Services on the audit of the
application of the best value for money principle in United Nations procurement 102 and the
comments of the Secretary-General thereon,103
1. Endorses the conclusions and recommendations contained in the report of the
Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions101 subject to the provisions of
the present resolution;
2. Reaffirms the need for the procurement system to be transparent, open, impartial and
cost-effective, based on competitive bidding and fully reflecting the international character of the
United Nations;
3. Notes the ongoing improvements made by the Secretary-General in procurement
reform at Headquarters and in the field missions, including those set out in paragraph 8 of the
report of the Advisory Committee;
4. Recalls its resolutions 52/226 A of 31 March 1998, 54/14, 55/247, and 62/232 of
22 December 2007, regarding the need for the Secretary-General to take steps to ensure that
_______________
99

ST/SGB/2003/7.
A/62/525.
101
A/62/721.
102
A/61/846.
103
See A/61/846/Add.1.
100

92

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

specifications are not deliberately tailored to predetermine the choice of supplier and that the
principle of separation of responsibilities of the requisitioning and approving officers is
maintained;
5. Requests the Secretary-General to implement all of the requests included in its
previous procurement reform resolutions, in particular resolution 61/246;
Governance
6. Reiterates its regret for the delay in the response of the Secretary-General to its
outstanding requests in its resolutions 59/288, 61/246 and 61/276, and urges him as a matter of
priority to submit a report on procurement governance and other issues as requested in resolutions
61/246 and 61/276, with full justification of the reasons for the delay;
Internal controls
7. Notes with concern the possible weaknesses in the internal control environment with
regard to procurement activities owing, inter alia, to the splitting of responsibilities between the
Department of Management, the Department of Peacekeeping Operations and the Department of
Field Support of the Secretariat, and requests the Secretary-General to take concrete steps to avoid
any such weaknesses and to report thereon in the context of the report on the governance of
United Nations procurement activities;
8. Encourages the Secretary-General to strengthen further the internal control framework
within the Procurement Division of the Department of Management by developing a more robust
regime for the oversight of vendors, including subcontractors, at the Secretariat, as well as
effectively addressing vendor misconduct and suspension;
Accountability
9. Reaffirms paragraph 3 of its resolution 61/246, and in this regard requests the
Secretary-General to continue to ensure proper accountability and training of all those involved in
the procurement process at Headquarters and in the field;
Ethics
10. Requests the Secretary-General to continue to consider a proper mechanism for
monitoring compliance of United Nations staff and vendors with ethical behaviour norms;
11. Also requests the Secretary-General to ensure that ethics guidelines for procurement
staff are issued as a matter of priority;
12. Notes that conflict of interest is not officially defined under current United Nations
regulations and rules, and reiterates its request contained in its resolutions 52/226 A, 54/14,
60/266, 61/246 and 61/276 that the Secretary-General submit proposals on possible amendments
to the Financial Regulations and Rules of the United Nations99 and the Staff Regulations and
Rules of the United Nations to address issues of potential conflict of interest, such as the
employment of former United Nations procurement officers by United Nations suppliers and vice
versa;
Vendors
13. Endorses paragraph 14 of the report of the Advisory Committee, and requests the
Secretary-General to report to the General Assembly at its sixty-fourth session, in the context of
the next comprehensive report on United Nations procurement activities, on the implementation
of the simplified vendor registration process;
14. Requests the Secretary-General to continue to simplify and streamline the vendor
registration process, to share responsibilities among the various United Nations organizations, to
take into account the different circumstances and varying levels of Internet access in countries and
93

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

to report to the General Assembly at its sixty-fourth session, in the context of the next
comprehensive report on United Nations procurement activities, on the results achieved;
15. Also requests the Secretary-General to restore on the website of the Procurement
Division without delay information on the Division’s focal points providing advice on the vendor
registration process in the six official languages of the United Nations and the Division’s brochure
in the six official languages on a cost-neutral basis;
Independent bid protest system
16. Regrets the lack of information in the report of the Secretary-General100 in response to
paragraph 13 of its resolution 61/246, and in this context requests the Secretary-General to launch
the pilot project for the independent bid protest system and to report to the General Assembly at its
sixty-fourth session, in the context of the next comprehensive report on United Nations
procurement activities, on the experience gained, as part of the comprehensive proposal
concerning the implementation of the system, which shall be subject to the prior consideration and
approval of the Assembly;
Procurement opportunities for vendors from developing countries and countries
with economies in transition
17. Reaffirms paragraphs 6 and 20 to 24 of its resolution 61/246;
18. Notes the efforts made by the Secretary-General to promote procurement opportunities
for vendors from developing countries and countries with economies in transition, including
business seminars, and also notes the increased participation of those countries in United Nations
procurement activities, reaching 53 per cent in 2006 as compared to an average of 45 per cent over
the preceding four years;
19. Encourages the Secretary-General to continue to promote and to conduct business
seminars and to follow up on their outcome as a means of sensitizing the business community in
developing countries to procurement opportunities in the United Nations;
20. Endorses paragraph 32 of the report of the Advisory Committee, and requests the
Secretary-General to continue and intensify the exploration of additional innovative ways to
promote procurement from developing countries and countries with economies in transition and to
report thereon to the General Assembly at its sixty-fourth session in the context of the next
comprehensive report on United Nations procurement activities;
21. Recalls section XIX, paragraph 4, of its resolution 61/276, in which it requested the
Secretary-General to identify obstacles preventing the participation of developing countries and
countries with economies in transition in United Nations procurement contracts, including through
seeking and analysing feedback from vendors who had attended United Nations business
seminars in recent years, and requests the Secretary-General to report fully on those obstacles to
the General Assembly at its sixty-fourth session in the context of the next comprehensive report on
United Nations procurement activities, including on proposals to obviate such obstacles;
22. Requests the Secretary-General to increase the number of business seminars in
developing countries and countries with economies in transition in order to increase procurement
opportunities in those countries;
23. Stresses the need for business seminars to be more results-oriented and tailored to
include adequate information on how to access business opportunities in the field of procurement
with the United Nations;
Best value for money
24. Takes note of the recommendations of the Office of Internal Oversight Services102 and
the comments of the Secretary-General thereon,103 and requests the Secretary-General to ensure
the full implementation of the recommendations and to report thereon to the General Assembly at
94

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

its sixty-fourth session in the context of the next comprehensive report on United Nations
procurement activities;
25. Reiterates its request to the Secretary-General contained in paragraph 33 of its
resolution 61/246, and requests the Secretary-General to report to the General Assembly at its
sixty-fourth session on clear guidelines for the implementation of the best value for money
methodology in United Nations procurement, including all specifics of the weighted evaluation
techniques;
Awarding of contracts and competitive bidding process
26. Requests the Secretary-General to entrust the Office of Internal Oversight Services to
include in its annual reports all cases of application of exigency it considered, as well as the highrisk cases referred to the Headquarters Committee on Contracts on which it decided to provide
comments;
27. Also requests the Secretary-General to continue to ensure that the utilization of
systems contracts is subject to prior full analysis of all costs, in accordance with current practice;
28. Further requests the Secretary-General to prepare a report on his proposal contained in
paragraph 129 of his report relating to bidding by joint ventures, inter alia, on its justification, its
legal regulation, the registration of joint ventures in the United Nations vendor roster and
safeguards against possible limitations of competition in United Nations procurement for
consideration by the General Assembly at its sixty-fourth session;
29. Decides that contract bundling shall not be used as a tool to restrict international
competition in United Nations procurement;
30. Requests the Secretary-General to ensure that requirements with regard to goods and
services being procured as set forth in the solicitation documents are formulated subject to
established limitations on the number of United Nations commodity codes per vendor;
31. Also requests the Secretary-General to ensure that in scheduling bidders’ conferences
and defining their venues, visa-processing timelines are taken fully into account and such
alternatives as videoconferences are fully explored to avoid any impact of visa-related policies of
different countries on the results of United Nations competitive bidding;
Performance and bid bonds
32. Further requests the Secretary-General to further enhance transparency in the
procurement decision-making process and, in this regard, to report to the General Assembly at its
sixty-fourth session, in the context of the next comprehensive report on United Nations
procurement activities, on clear guidelines and criteria for the request of bid bonds and
performance bonds by procurement officers in the United Nations, as well as on exploring
alternative means of ensuring the protection of the interests of the Organization throughout the
term of the contractual obligation without restricting access to United Nations procurement of
small and medium-sized enterprises, including those from developing countries and countries with
economies in transition;
Sustainable procurement
33. Recalls paragraphs 137 to 140 of the report of the Secretary-General, and also recalls
that the General Assembly has not considered for approval the concept of environmentally
friendly and sustainable procurement, and requests the Secretary-General to prepare a
comprehensive report on the content of and criteria for such a concept, including detailed
information on its possible impact on the diversification of the origin of vendors and on
international competition, including for developing countries and countries with economies in
transition, for consideration and decision by the Assembly at its sixty-fourth session;

95

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

Delegation of authority
34. Reiterates its request in paragraph 20 of its resolution 59/288, and requests the
Secretary-General to report on all the issues related to the levels of delegation of procurement
authority, including mechanisms used to strengthen effective monitoring, oversight and
accountability, in the context of his report on the governance of United Nations procurement
activities;
Outsourcing practices
35. Recalls its resolutions 55/232 of 23 December 2000 and 59/289 of 13 April 2005 on
outsourcing practices, and stresses that the procurement staff certification programme should be in
line with the provisions of those resolutions;
Subcontracting
36. Notes with concern the risks that may be presented by the lack of disclosure regarding
the issue of subcontracting;
37. Also notes with concern that subcontractors have not been required to comply with the
relevant rules of the Organization, and requests the Secretary-General to address this lacuna in
internal control associated with subcontractors as a matter of priority and to report thereon to the
General Assembly at its sixty-fourth session;
Human resources management
38. Reaffirms sections X and XI of its resolution 61/244 of 22 December 2006;
39. Also reaffirms paragraph 100 of its resolution 52/220 of 22 December 1997 and
paragraph 21 of resolution 52/226 A;
Training
40. Stresses the need for all procurement staff to receive the mandatory training in United
Nations procurement techniques and ethics, and requests the Secretary-General to continue his
efforts in this regard;
Enterprise resource planning
41. Requests the Secretary-General to develop requirements for procurement management
as a part of the new enterprise resource planning system, taking into account the need to allay
concern that the use of different procurement-related information technology support systems in
different departments is having a negative impact on the Organization’s ability to exercise
comprehensive procurement oversight;
42. Also requests the Secretary-General to ensure that the enterprise resource planning
requirements related to procurement reflect its decisions on procurement governance and to
provide a comprehensive and concrete explanation as to how the new enterprise resource planning
system will improve procurement-related internal control and oversight;
Other issues
43. Stresses the importance of efficiency in the acquisition process in the United Nations,
and requests the Secretary-General to continue to improve the efficiency of the procurement
process;
44. Recalls its request in its resolution 59/288 to review without delay options to better
safeguard the independence of the Headquarters Committee on Contracts, and encourages the
Secretary-General to develop further measures to mitigate higher exposure to financial risk;
45. Requests the Secretary-General to ensure that, on matters relating to procurement in
the field, the Department of Peacekeeping Operations and the Department of Field Support follow
the principles of objectivity and impartiality in advising the Procurement Division.
96

IV. Decisions
Contents
Decision
No.

Title

Page

A. Elections and appointments
62/406.

Election of twenty-nine members of the Governing Council of the United Nations Environment Programme............... 99
Decision B ............................................................................................................................................................. 99

62/415.

Election of fifteen members of the Human Rights Council ........................................................................................ 99

62/416.

Election of the President of the General Assembly at its sixty-third session............................................................... 100

62/417.

Election of the Chairmen of the Main Committees of the General Assembly at its sixty-third session......................... 100

62/418.

Election of the Vice-Presidents of the General Assembly at its sixty-third session ..................................................... 100

62/419.

Election by the General Assembly of five members of the Organizational Committee of the Peacebuilding
Commission......................................................................................................................................................... 101
Decision A ........................................................................................................................................................... 101
Decision B ........................................................................................................................................................... 101

62/420.

Approval of the appointment of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights...................................... 102

62/421.

Extension of the terms of the judges of the International Criminal Tribunal for the Prosecution of Persons
Responsible for Genocide and Other Serious Violations of International Humanitarian Law Committed
in the Territory of Rwanda and Rwandan Citizens Responsible for Genocide and Other Such Violations
Committed in the Territory of Neighbouring States between 1 January and 31 December 1994 ................................. 102
B. Other decisions
1. Decisions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

62/503.

Adoption of the agenda and allocation of agenda items ........................................................................................... 104
Decision B ........................................................................................................................................................... 104

62/548.

Participation of civil society representatives in the high-level meeting on a comprehensive review of the
progress achieved in realizing the Declaration of Commitment on HIV/AIDS and the Political Declaration
on HIV/AIDS, to be convened on 10 and 11 June 2008........................................................................................... 105

62/550.

Building a peaceful and better world through sport and the Olympic ideal................................................................ 105

62/551.

Ad Hoc Committee on the Administration of Justice at the United Nations............................................................... 105

62/552.

Convening of the fourth special session of the General Assembly devoted to disarmament........................................ 105

62/553.

Enlargement of the membership of the Committee on the Exercise of the Inalienable Rights of the
Palestinian People................................................................................................................................................. 105

62/554.

Prevention of armed conflict.................................................................................................................................. 106

62/555.

Follow-up to the recommendations on administrative management and internal oversight of the Independent
Inquiry Committee into the United Nations Oil-for-Food Programme ...................................................................... 106

62/556.

Financing of the United Nations Mission in East Timor........................................................................................... 106

62/557.

Question of equitable representation on and increase in the membership of the Security Council and
related matters ...................................................................................................................................................... 106

97

IV. Decisions
Decision
No.

Title

Page

2. Decisions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee
62/545.

Questions deferred for future consideration ............................................................................................................ 107
Decision B ........................................................................................................................................................... 107
Decision C ........................................................................................................................................................... 109

62/547.

Conditions of service and compensation for officials other than Secretariat officials: members of the
International Court of Justice and judges and ad litem judges of the International Tribunal for the
Former Yugoslavia and the International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda................................................................... 110

62/549.

Use of 300-series and 100-series appointments....................................................................................................... 110

98

IV. Decisions

A. Elections and appointments
62/406. Election of twenty-nine members of the Governing Council of the United Nations
Environment Programme
B1
At its 115th plenary meeting, on 23 July 2008, the General Assembly, in accordance with
paragraph 1 of its resolution 2997 (XXVII) of 15 December 1972, rule 92 of the rules of
procedure of the Assembly and paragraph 16 of its decision 34/401, declared SERBIA elected as a
member of the Governing Council of the United Nations Environment Programme for the
remaining term of office of HUNGARY,2 beginning on 1 January 2009 and expiring on
31 December 2011.
As a result, the Governing Council of the United Nations Environment Programme is
composed of the following fifty-eight members: ALGERIA,* ANGOLA,* ANTIGUA AND BARBUDA,*
ARGENTINA,* AUSTRALIA,* AUSTRIA,* BAHAMAS,** BANGLADESH,** BELARUS,**
BELGIUM,* BENIN,** BOTSWANA,* BURUNDI,* CANADA,* CHILE,* CHINA,* COLOMBIA,**
CONGO,** COSTA RICA,** CROATIA,** CUBA,** CZECH REPUBLIC,* DEMOCRATIC REPUBLIC
OF THE CONGO,* FIJI,** FINLAND,** FRANCE,* GERMANY,* GUINEA,** HAITI,* INDIA,**
INDONESIA,* IRAN (ISLAMIC REPUBLIC OF),** ISRAEL,** ITALY,** JAPAN,* KAZAKHSTAN,**
KENYA,* MALI,** MAURITIUS,** MEXICO,** MONACO,** NETHERLANDS,** NIGER,**
PAKISTAN,* REPUBLIC OF KOREA,* ROMANIA,* RUSSIAN FEDERATION,* SAUDI ARABIA,**
SERBIA,** SOMALIA,** SOUTH AFRICA,* SPAIN,** THAILAND,* TUNISIA,** TUVALU,**
UGANDA,* UNITED STATES OF AMERICA* and URUGUAY.*
___________________
*
**

Term of office expires on 31 December 2009.
Term of office expires on 31 December 2011.

62/415. Election of fifteen members of the Human Rights Council
At its 98th plenary meeting, on 21 May 2008, the General Assembly, pursuant to its
resolution 60/251 of 15 March 2006, elected as members of the Human Rights Council, for a
three-year term of office beginning on 19 June 2008, ARGENTINA, BAHRAIN, BRAZIL, BURKINA
FASO, CHILE, FRANCE, GABON, GHANA, JAPAN, PAKISTAN, the REPUBLIC OF KOREA, SLOVAKIA,
UKRAINE, the UNITED KINGDOM OF GREAT BRITAIN AND NORTHERN IRELAND and ZAMBIA to fill
the vacancies occurring on the expiration of the terms of office of BRAZIL, FRANCE, GABON,
GHANA, GUATEMALA, JAPAN, MALI, PAKISTAN, PERU, the REPUBLIC OF KOREA, ROMANIA,
SRI LANKA, UKRAINE, the UNITED KINGDOM OF GREAT BRITAIN AND NORTHERN IRELAND and
ZAMBIA.
As a result, the Human Rights Council is composed of the following forty-seven Member
States: ANGOLA,** ARGENTINA,*** AZERBAIJAN,* BAHRAIN,*** BANGLADESH,* BOLIVIA,**
BOSNIA AND HERZEGOVINA,** BRAZIL,*** BURKINA FASO,*** CAMEROON,* CANADA,*
CHILE,*** CHINA,* CUBA,* DJIBOUTI,* EGYPT,** FRANCE,*** GABON,*** GERMANY,*
GHANA,*** INDIA,** INDONESIA,** ITALY,** JAPAN,*** JORDAN,* MADAGASCAR,**
MALAYSIA,* MAURITIUS,* MEXICO,* NETHERLANDS,** NICARAGUA,** NIGERIA,*
PAKISTAN,*** PHILIPPINES,** QATAR,** REPUBLIC OF KOREA,*** RUSSIAN FEDERATION,*
SAUDI ARABIA,* SENEGAL,* SLOVAKIA,*** SLOVENIA,** SOUTH AFRICA,** SWITZERLAND,*

_______________
1
Decision 62/406, in section A of the Official Records of the General Assembly, Sixty-second Session, Supplement
No. 49 and corrigendum (A/62/49 and A/62/49 (Vol. II)/Corr.1), vol. II, becomes decision 62/406 A.
2
See A/62/905.

99

IV. Decisions

UKRAINE,*** UNITED KINGDOM OF GREAT BRITAIN AND NORTHERN IRELAND,*** URUGUAY*
and ZAMBIA.***
___________________
*
**
***

Term of office expires on 18 June 2009.
Term of office expires on 18 June 2010.
Term of office expires on 18 June 2011.

62/416. Election of the President of the General Assembly at its sixty-third session3
At its 99th plenary meeting, on 4 June 2008, the General Assembly, in accordance with
Article 21 of the Charter of the United Nations, rule 30 of the rules of procedure of the Assembly
and paragraph 1 of the annex to resolution 33/138 of 19 December 1978 elected by acclamation,
Mr. Miguel D’ESCOTO BROCKMANN of Nicaragua as President of the General Assembly at its
sixty-third session.
62/417. Election of the Chairmen of the Main Committees of the General Assembly at its
sixty-third session3
On 4 June 2008, the six Main Committees of the General Assembly held meetings in
accordance with rules 99 (a) and 103 of the rules of procedure of the Assembly for the purpose of
electing their Chairmen.
At the 100th plenary meeting, on 4 June 2008, the President of the General Assembly
announced that the following persons had been elected as Chairmen of the six Main Committees
of the General Assembly at its sixty-third session:
First Committee:

Mr. Marco Antonio SUAZO (Honduras)

Special Political and
Decolonization Committee
(Fourth Committee):

Mr. Jorge ARGÜELLO (Argentina)

Second Committee:

Mrs. U. Joy OGWU (Nigeria)

Third Committee:

Mr. Frank MAJOOR (Netherlands)

Fifth Committee:

Mr. Gábor BRÓDI (Hungary)

Sixth Committee:

Mr. Hamid AL BAYATI (Iraq)

62/418. Election of the Vice-Presidents of the General Assembly at its sixty-third session3
At its 100th plenary meeting, on 4 June 2008, the General Assembly, in accordance with
rule 30 of the rules of procedure of the Assembly and paragraphs 2 and 3 of the annex to
resolution 33/138 of 19 December 1978, elected by acclamation the following twenty-one
Member States as Vice-Presidents of the General Assembly at its sixty-third session:
AFGHANISTAN, BOLIVIA, CAMEROON, CHINA, EGYPT, FRANCE, JAMAICA, KYRGYZSTAN,
MOLDOVA, MONGOLIA, MYANMAR, NAMIBIA, NIGER, PORTUGAL, RUSSIAN FEDERATION,
RWANDA, SOLOMON ISLANDS, SPAIN, TOGO, UNITED KINGDOM OF GREAT BRITAIN AND
NORTHERN IRELAND and UNITED STATES OF AMERICA.

_______________
3

In accordance with rule 38 of the rules of procedure of the General Assembly, the General Committee consists of
the President of the Assembly, the twenty-one Vice-Presidents and the Chairmen of the six Main Committees.

100

IV. Decisions

62/419. Election by the General Assembly of five members of the Organizational
Committee of the Peacebuilding Commission
A
At its 109th plenary meeting, on 20 June 2008, the General Assembly was informed that the
term of office of the current members of the troop-contributing countries on the Organizational
Committee of the Peacebuilding Commission, which was due to expire on 22 June 2008, had
been extended until 11 July 2008. The Assembly was also informed that the Economic and Social
Council had decided also to extend the term of office of the members of the Council on the
Organizational Committee until 11 July 2008.4
At the same meeting, the General Assembly decided, as an interim measure, to extend the
term of office of the current members of the Assembly on the Organizational Committee, namely,
BURUNDI, CHILE, EGYPT, EL SALVADOR and FIJI, which was due to expire on 22 June 2008, until
11 July 2008.
B
At its 111th plenary meeting, on 11 July 2008, the General Assembly was informed, by a
letter dated 10 July 2008 to the President of the General Assembly, that the term of office of the
current members of the troop-contributing countries on the Organizational Committee had been
extended until 31 December 2008. The Assembly was also informed that the Economic and Social
Council had decided also to extend the term of office of the members of the Council on the
Organizational Committee until 31 December 2008.5
At the same meeting, the General Assembly decided, as an interim measure, to further
extend the term of office of the current members of the Assembly on the Organizational
Committee until 31 December 2008.
The Security Council, pursuant to paragraph 4 (a) of its resolution 1645 (2005) of
20 December 2005, selected BELGIUM and SOUTH AFRICA as members of the Organizational
Committee for a one-year term of office beginning on 1 January and ending on 31 December
2008, on the expiration of the term of office of PANAMA and SOUTH AFRICA.6
Pursuant to paragraph 4 (c) of General Assembly resolution 60/180 of 20 December
2005, CANADA, GERMANY, JAPAN, the NETHERLANDS and SWEDEN were selected by and from
among the top ten providers of assessed contributions to United Nations budgets and of voluntary
contributions to United Nations funds, programmes and agencies, including the standing
peacebuilding fund, for a two-year term of office beginning on 23 June 2008 and ending on
22 June 2010.7
As a result, the Organizational Committee of the Peacebuilding Commission is composed of
the following thirty-one Member States: ANGOLA,** BANGLADESH,** BELGIUM,** BRAZIL,**
BURUNDI,** CANADA,**** CHILE,** CHINA,* CZECH REPUBLIC,** EGYPT,** EL SALVADOR,**
FIJI,** FRANCE,* GEORGIA,*** GERMANY,**** GHANA,** GUINEA-BISSAU,** INDIA,**
INDONESIA,** JAMAICA,*** JAPAN,**** LUXEMBOURG,** NETHERLANDS,**** NIGERIA,**
PAKISTAN,** RUSSIAN FEDERATION,* SOUTH AFRICA,** SRI LANKA,** SWEDEN,**** UNITED
KINGDOM OF GREAT BRITAIN AND NORTHERN IRELAND* and UNITED STATES OF AMERICA.*
___________________
*
Permanent members of the Security Council.
**
Term of office expires on 31 December 2008.
*** Term of office expires on 22 June 2009.
**** Term of office expires on 22 June 2010.

_______________
4

See Economic and Social Council decision 2008/201 D.
See Economic and Social Council decision 2008/201 E.
6
See A/62/684-S/2008/84 and Corr.1.
7
See A/62/825.
5

101

IV. Decisions

62/420. Approval of the appointment of the United Nations High Commissioner
for Human Rights
At its 116th plenary meeting, on 28 July 2008, the General Assembly approved the
appointment by the Secretary-General8 of Ms. Navanethem PILLAY (South Africa) as United
Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights for a four-year term of office beginning on
1 September 2008 and expiring on 31 August 2012.
62/421. Extension of the terms of the judges of the International Criminal Tribunal
for the Prosecution of Persons Responsible for Genocide and Other Serious
Violations of International Humanitarian Law Committed in the Territory
of Rwanda and Rwandan Citizens Responsible for Genocide and Other Such
Violations Committed in the Territory of Neighbouring States between
1 January and 31 December 1994
At its 116th plenary meeting, on 28 July 2008, the General Assembly decided to endorse the
recommendation of the Secretary-General9 which was endorsed by the Security Council in its
resolution 1824 (2008) of 18 July 2008 that:
(a) The term of office of the following permanent judges at the International Criminal
Tribunal for the Prosecution of Persons Responsible for Genocide and Other Serious Violations of
International Humanitarian Law Committed in the Territory of Rwanda and Rwandan Citizens
Responsible for Genocide and Other Such Violations Committed in the Territory of Neighbouring
States between 1 January and 31 December 1994 who were members of the Appeals Chamber be
extended until 31 December 2010, or until the completion of the cases before the Appeals
Chamber if sooner:
Mr. Mehmet GÜNEY (Turkey)
Ms. Andrésia VAZ (Senegal)
(b) The term of office of the following permanent judges at the Tribunal who were
members of the Trial Chambers be extended until 31 December 2009, or until the completion of
the cases to which they were assigned if sooner:
Sir Charles Michael Dennis BYRON (Saint Kitts and Nevis)
Mr. Asoka DE SILVA (Sri Lanka)
Mr. Sergei Alekseevich EGOROV (Russian Federation)
Ms. Khalida Rachid KHAN (Pakistan)
Mr. Erik MØSE (Norway)
Ms. Arlette RAMAROSON (Madagascar)
Mr. William Hussein SEKULE (United Republic of Tanzania)
(c) The term of office of the following ad litem judges, currently serving at the Tribunal,
be extended until 31 December 2009, or until the completion of the cases to which they were
assigned if sooner:
Ms. Florence Rita ARREY (Cameroon)
Ms. Solomy Balungi BOSSA (Uganda)
Ms. Taghreed HIKMAT (Jordan)
Mr. Vagn JOENSEN (Denmark)
Mr. Gberdao Gustave KAM (Burkina Faso)
Mr. Lee Gacuiga MUTHOGA (Kenya)
Mr. Seon Ki PARK (Republic of Korea)
Mr. Emile Francis SHORT (Ghana)

_______________
8
9

See A/62/913.
See A/62/896-S/2008/436.

102

IV. Decisions

(d) The term of office of the following ad litem judges, who had not yet been appointed to
serve at the Tribunal, be extended until 31 December 2009, or until the completion of any cases to
which they might be assigned if sooner:
Mr. Aydin Sefa AKAY (Turkey)
Ms. Karin HÖKBORG (Sweden)
Ms. Flavia LATTANZI (Italy)
Mr. Kenneth MACHIN (United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland)
Mr. Joseph Edward Chiondo MASANCHE (United Republic of Tanzania)
Tan Sri Dato’ Hj. Mohd. Azmi Dato’ Hj. KAMARUDDIN (Malaysia)
Mr. Mparany Mamy Richard RAJOHNSON (Madagascar)
Mr. Albertus Henricus Johannes SWART (Netherlands)
Ms. Aura Emérita GUERRA DE VILLALAZ (Panama)
At the same meeting, the General Assembly also decided that the recommendation would
take effect as of 1 January 2009.

103

IV. Decisions

B. Other decisions
1. Decisions adopted without reference to a Main Committee
62/503. Adoption of the agenda and allocation of agenda items
B10
At its 111th plenary meeting, on 11 July 2008, the General Assembly, on the
recommendation of the General Committee as set forth in its fourth report,11 decided to include in
the agenda of its sixty-second session an additional item entitled “Extension of the terms of the
judges of the International Criminal Tribunal for the Prosecution of Persons Responsible for
Genocide and Other Serious Violations of International Humanitarian Law Committed in the
Territory of Rwanda and Rwandan Citizens Responsible for Genocide and Other Such Violations
Committed in the Territory of Neighbouring States between 1 January and 31 December 1994”,
under heading I (Organizational, administrative and other matters), and to consider it directly in
plenary meeting.
At its 115th plenary meeting, on 23 July 2008, the General Assembly decided to reopen
consideration of sub-item (b) of agenda item 113, entitled “Election of twenty-nine members of
the Governing Council of the United Nations Environment Programme”, under heading I
(Organizational, administrative and other matters), in order to consider a letter dated 2 July 2008
from the representative of Hungary to the President of the General Assembly.12 The Assembly
further agreed to proceed immediately to the consideration of the sub-item.
At its 116th plenary meeting, on 28 July 2008, the General Assembly decided to consider
directly in plenary meeting agenda item 137 entitled “Administration of justice at the United
Nations”, under heading I (Organizational, administrative and other matters), in order to consider a
letter dated 9 July 2008 from the representative of Germany to the President of the General
Assembly.13
At its 121st plenary meeting, on 11 September 2008, the General Assembly decided to
reopen consideration of agenda item 56 entitled “Globalization and interdependence” and to
consider it directly in plenary meeting, under heading B (Promotion of sustained economic growth
and sustainable development in accordance with the relevant resolutions of the General Assembly
and recent United Nations conferences). The Assembly also decided to proceed immediately to its
consideration in order to consider expeditiously a draft resolution.14
At the same meeting, the General Assembly decided to reopen consideration of sub-item (b)
of agenda item 64, entitled “Causes of conflict and the promotion of durable peace and sustainable
development in Africa”, under heading C (Development of Africa), in order to consider a draft
resolution.15
Also at the same meeting, the General Assembly decided to consider directly in plenary
meeting sub-item (g) of agenda item 98, entitled “Convening of the fourth special session of the
General Assembly devoted to disarmament”, under heading G (Disarmament). The Assembly also

_______________
10
Decision 62/503, in section B.1 of the Official Records of the General Assembly, Sixty-second Session, Supplement
No. 49 and corrigendum (A/62/49 and A/62/49 (Vol. II)/Corr.1), vol. II, becomes decision 62/503 A.
11
A/62/250/Add.3.
12
A/62/905.
13
A/62/914.
14
A/62/L.41/Rev.1.
15
A/62/L.47.

104

IV. Decisions

decided to proceed immediately to its consideration in order to consider expeditiously a draft
decision.16
62/548. Participation of civil society representatives in the high-level meeting on a
comprehensive review of the progress achieved in realizing the Declaration
of Commitment on HIV/AIDS and the Political Declaration on HIV/AIDS,
to be convened on 10 and 11 June 2008
At its 96th plenary meeting, on 29 April 2008, the General Assembly, on the proposal of the
President of the Assembly,17 decided to approve for participation in the high-level meeting on a
comprehensive review of the progress achieved in realizing the Declaration of Commitment on
HIV/AIDS and the Political Declaration on HIV/AIDS, to be convened on 10 and 11 June 2008,
the list of civil society representatives contained in document A/62/CRP.1, which was drawn up
by the President pursuant to paragraph 8 of Assembly resolution 62/178 of 19 December 2007.
62/550. Building a peaceful and better world through sport and the Olympic ideal
At its 116th plenary meeting, on 28 July 2008, the General Assembly took note of the
solemn appeal made by the President of the General Assembly in connection with the observance
of the Olympic Truce.18
62/551. Ad Hoc Committee on the Administration of Justice at the United Nations
At its 116th plenary meeting, on 28 July 2008, the General Assembly, on the proposal of
Germany,13 decided to re-establish the Ad Hoc Committee on the Administration of Justice at the
United Nations for one meeting, for the sole purpose of taking note of the oral report of the
coordinator on the informal intersessional consultations and to request the Secretary-General to
issue the coordinator’s summary entitled “Coordinator’s summary of the preliminary observations
made in the informal consultations on the draft statute of the United Nations Dispute Tribunal and
the United Nations Appeals Tribunal” as an addendum to the report of the Ad Hoc Committee.19
62/552. Convening of the fourth special session of the General Assembly devoted
to disarmament
At its 121st plenary meeting, on 11 September 2008, the General Assembly, on the proposal
of Indonesia,16 recalling paragraph 2 of its resolution 62/29 of 5 December 2007, and noting that
the Open-ended Working Group to consider the objectives and agenda, including the possible
establishment of the preparatory committee, for the fourth special session of the General
Assembly devoted to disarmament did not convene its organizational and substantive sessions
during the sixty-second session of the Assembly in 2008, decided to continue work on convening
those sessions of the Working Group as soon as possible.
62/553. Enlargement of the membership of the Committee on the Exercise of
the Inalienable Rights of the Palestinian People
At its 121st plenary meeting, on 11 September 2008, the General Assembly, in the light of
the decision of the Committee on the Exercise of the Inalienable Rights of the Palestinian People
conveyed by its Chairman to the President of the General Assembly,20 and in accordance with
Assembly resolution 3376 (XXX) of 10 November 1975, decided to enlarge the membership of
the Committee by appointing Nicaragua as a member.

_______________
16

A/62/L.49.
A/62/L.44.
18
A/62/912.
19
Official Records of the General Assembly, Sixty-third Session, Supplement No. 55, addendum (A/63/55/Add.1).
20
See A/62/951.
17

105

IV. Decisions

62/554. Prevention of armed conflict
At its 122nd plenary meeting, on 15 September 2008, the General Assembly decided to
defer consideration of the item entitled “Prevention of armed conflict” and to include it in the draft
agenda of its sixty-third session.
62/555. Follow-up to the recommendations on administrative management and
internal oversight of the Independent Inquiry Committee into the
United Nations Oil-for-Food Programme
At its 122nd plenary meeting, on 15 September 2008, the General Assembly, on the
proposal of Costa Rica,21 decided to defer consideration of the item entitled “Follow-up to the
recommendations on administrative management and internal oversight of the Independent
Inquiry Committee into the United Nations Oil-for-Food Programme” and to include it in the draft
agenda of its sixty-third session.
62/556. Financing of the United Nations Mission in East Timor
At its 122nd plenary meeting, on 15 September 2008, the General Assembly decided to
defer consideration of the item entitled “Financing of the United Nations Mission in East Timor”
and to include it in the draft agenda of its sixty-third session.
62/557. Question of equitable representation on and increase in the membership
of the Security Council and related matters
At its 122nd plenary meeting, on 15 September 2008, the General Assembly, recalling its
previous resolutions and decisions relevant to the question of equitable representation on and
increase in the membership of the Security Council and other matters related to the Council,
mindful of Chapter XVIII of the Charter of the United Nations and of the importance of reaching
general agreement as referred to in its resolutions 48/26 of 3 December 1993 and 53/30 of
23 November 1998 and in its decision 61/561 of 17 September 2007 on the question of equitable
representation on and increase in the membership of the Security Council and other matters
related to the Council, as well as the ratification process of any amendment to the Charter as
stipulated in its Article 108, and taking note of the seven principles presented by the President of
the General Assembly to serve as guiding principles for the advancement of the Security Council
reform:22
(a) Took note of the report of the Open-ended Working Group on the Question of
Equitable Representation on and Increase in the Membership of the Security Council and Other
Matters related to the Security Council on its work during the sixty-second session of the General
Assembly;23
(b) Noted with appreciation the Chairperson’s initiative and efforts in the process of a
comprehensive reform of the Security Council, as well as the work done by the ViceChairpersons;
(c) Decided, building on the progress achieved thus far, in particular during its sixty-first
and sixty-second sessions, as well as the positions of and proposals made by Member States, to
continue immediately to address, within the Open-ended Working Group, the framework and
modalities in order to prepare and facilitate intergovernmental negotiations on the question of
equitable representation on and increase in the membership of the Security Council and other
matters related to the Council. The Chairperson of the Open-ended Working Group would present

_______________
21

See Official Records of the General Assembly, Sixty-second Session, Plenary Meetings, 122nd meeting
(A/62/PV.122), and corrigendum.
22
Ibid., 51st meeting (A/62/PV.51), and corrigendum.
23
Official Records of the General Assembly, Sixty-second Session, Supplement No. 47 (A/62/47).

106

IV. Decisions

the results of those consultations to an informal plenary session of the General Assembly, no later
than 1 February 2009;
(d) Also decided, taking into consideration the results achieved so far in the Open-ended
Working Group, and building on the progress achieved thus far, in particular during its sixty-first
and sixty-second sessions, as well as the positions of and proposals made by Member States, to
commence intergovernmental negotiations in informal plenary of the General Assembly during its
sixty-third session, but not later than 28 February 2009, based on proposals by Member States, in
good faith, with mutual respect and in an open, inclusive and transparent manner, on the question
of equitable representation on and increase in the membership of the Security Council and other
matters related to the Council, seeking a solution that can garner the widest possible political
acceptance by Member States;
(e)
follows:

Further decided that the basis for the intergovernmental negotiations would be as

(i) The positions and proposals of Member States, regional groups and other groupings of
Member States;
(ii) The five key issues: categories of membership; the question of the veto; regional
representation; size of an enlarged Security Council and working methods of the Council;
and the relationship between the Council and the General Assembly;
(iii) The following documents: report of the Open-ended Working Group on its work
during the sixty-first session of the General Assembly;24 Assembly decision 61/561; and the
report of the Open-ended Working Group on its work during the sixty-second session of the
Assembly;23
(f) Decided that the Open-ended Working Group should continue to exert efforts during
the sixty-third session of the General Assembly aimed at achieving general agreement among
Member States in the consideration of all issues relevant to the question of equitable
representation on and increase in the membership of the Security Council and other matters
related to the Council, taking into account the progress achieved during the forty-eighth to sixtysecond sessions of the Assembly;
(g) Also decided that the Open-ended Working Group should submit a report to the
General Assembly before the end of its sixty-third session, including any agreed
recommendations.

2. Decisions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee
62/545. Questions deferred for future consideration
B25
At its 91st plenary meeting, on 3 April 2008, the General Assembly, on the recommendation
of the Fifth Committee:26
Section A
Decided to defer until the second part of its resumed sixty-second session consideration of
the following agenda item and related documents:

_______________
24

Ibid., Sixty-first Session, Supplement No. 47 (A/61/47).
Decision 62/545, in section B.6 of the Official Records of the General Assembly, Sixty-second Session, Supplement
No. 49 and corrigendum (A/62/49 and A/62/49 (Vol. II)/Corr.1), vol. II, becomes decision 62/545 A.
26
A/62/604/Add.1, para. 6.
25

107

IV. Decisions

Item 126
Review of the efficiency of the administrative and financial functioning of the United Nations
Comprehensive report of the Secretary-General on United Nations procurement activities27
Comprehensive report of the Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary
Questions on United Nations procurement activities28
Report of the Office of Internal Oversight Services on the audit of the application of the best
value for money principle in United Nations procurement, and note by the SecretaryGeneral transmitting his comments thereon29
Section B
Decided to defer until its sixty-third session consideration of the following agenda items and
related documents:
Item 128
Proposed programme budget for the biennium 2008–2009
Report of the Secretary-General on revised estimates relating to the proposed programme
budget for the biennium 2008–2009 under section 1, Overall policymaking, direction and
coordination, section 3, Political affairs, section 28D, Office of Central Support Services,
and section 35, Staff assessment, related to the strengthening of the Department of Political
Affairs30
Report of the Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions on revised
estimates relating to the proposed programme budget for the biennium 2008–2009 under
section 1, Overall policymaking, direction and coordination, section 3, Political affairs,
section 28D, Office of Central Support Services, and section 35, Staff assessment, related to
the strengthening of the Department of Political Affairs31
Report of the Office of Internal Oversight Services on the audit of the management of
special political missions by the Department of Political Affairs32
Letter dated 7 March 2008 from the Permanent Representatives of Antigua and Barbuda and
Cuba to the United Nations addressed to the Secretary-General33
Letter dated 12 March 2008 from the Secretary-General addressed to the Permanent
Representatives of Antigua and Barbuda and Cuba to the United Nations34
Item 133
Human resources management
Report of the Secretary-General on the staffing of field missions, including the use of 300and 100-series appointments35
Report of the Secretary-General on detailed proposals for streamlining United Nations
contractual arrangements36

_______________
27

A/62/525.
A/62/721.
29
A/61/846 and Add.1.
30
A/62/521 and Corr.1.
31
A/62/7/Add.32. For the final text, see Official Records of the General Assembly, Sixty-second Session, Supplement
No. 7A.
32
A/61/357.
33
A/C.5/62/24.
34
A/C.5/62/25.
35
A/61/732.
36
A/62/274.
28

108

IV. Decisions

Report of the Secretary-General on the harmonization of conditions of service37
Addendum to the report of the International Civil Service Commission for the year 200638
Report of the Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions on human
resources management39
Item 138
Financing of the International Criminal Tribunal for the Prosecution of Persons Responsible for
Genocide and Other Serious Violations of International Humanitarian Law Committed in the
Territory of Rwanda and Rwandan Citizens Responsible for Genocide and Other Such Violations
Committed in the Territory of Neighbouring States between 1 January and 31 December 1994
Item 139
Financing of the International Tribunal for the Prosecution of Persons Responsible for Serious
Violations of International Humanitarian Law Committed in the Territory of the Former
Yugoslavia since 1991
Report of the Secretary-General on a comprehensive proposal on appropriate incentives to
retain staff of the International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda and the International Tribunal
for the Former Yugoslavia40
Report of the International Civil Service Commission for the year 2007 41
Report of the Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions on a
comprehensive proposal on appropriate incentives to retain staff of the International
Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda and the International Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia42
C
At its 109th plenary meeting, on 20 June 2008, the General Assembly, on the
recommendation of the Fifth Committee,43 decided to defer until its sixty-third session
consideration of the following agenda item and related documents:
Item 140
Administrative and budgetary aspects of the financing of the United Nations peacekeeping
operations
Report of the Secretary-General on the overview of the financing of the United Nations
peacekeeping operations: budget performance for the period from 1 July 2006 to 30 June
2007 and budget for the period from 1 July 2008 to 30 June 200944
Comprehensive report of the Secretary-General on conduct and discipline, including full
justification of all posts45
Report of the Secretary-General on peacekeeping best practices46

_______________
37

A/61/861.
Official Records of the General Assembly, Sixty-first Session, Supplement No. 30, addendum (A/61/30/Add.1).
39
A/62/7/Add.14. For the final text, see Official Records of the General Assembly, Sixty-second Session, Supplement
No. 7A.
40
A/62/681.
41
Official Records of the General Assembly, Sixty-second Session, Supplement No. 30 and corrigendum (A/62/30 and
Corr.1), chap. II.
42
A/62/734.
43
A/62/604/Add.2, para. 15.
44
A/62/727.
45
A/62/758.
46
A/62/593 and Corr.1.
38

109

IV. Decisions

Note by the Secretary-General on the comprehensive report on training in peacekeeping47
Report of the Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions on
administrative and budgetary aspects of the financing of the United Nations peacekeeping
operations48
Report on the activities of the Office of Internal Oversight Services for the period from
1 January to 31 December 2007, and note by the Secretary-General transmitting his
comments thereon49
62/547. Conditions of service and compensation for officials other than Secretariat officials:
members of the International Court of Justice and judges and ad litem judges of
the International Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia and the International
Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda
At its 91st plenary meeting, on 3 April 2008, the General Assembly, on the recommendation
of the Fifth Committee,50 having considered the report of the Secretary-General51 and the related
report of the Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions:52
(a) Endorsed the conclusions and recommendations of the Advisory Committee contained
in paragraphs 8 and 9 of its report;52
(b) Decided to set, effective 1 April 2008, the annual net base salary of the members of the
International Court of Justice and judges and ad litem judges of the International Tribunal for the
Former Yugoslavia and the International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda at 158,000 United States
dollars, with the corresponding post adjustment per multiplier point equal to 1 per cent of the net
base salary, to which would be applied the post adjustment multiplier for the Netherlands or the
United Republic of Tanzania, as appropriate, taking into account the adjustment mechanism as
proposed by the Secretary-General in paragraph 77 of his report;53
(c) Recalled paragraph 11 of its resolution 61/262 of 4 April 2007 and decided to revert to
the issue of the pension scheme during the second part of its resumed sixty-second session.
62/549. Use of 300-series and 100-series appointments
At its 109th plenary meeting, on 20 June 2008, the General Assembly, on the
recommendation of the Fifth Committee:54
(a) Decided to continue to suspend the application of the four-year maximum limit for
appointments of limited duration until 31 December 2008;
(b) Authorized the Secretary-General, bearing in mind paragraph (a) above, to reappoint,
under the 100 series of the Staff Rules, those mission staff whose service under 300-series
contracts reached the four-year limit by 31 December 2008, provided that their functions were
reviewed and found necessary and their performance was confirmed as fully satisfactory;
(c) Requested the Secretary-General to continue the practice of using 300-series contracts
as the primary instrument for the appointment of new staff.

_______________
47

A/62/676.
A/62/781.
49
A/62/281 (Part II) and Add.1.
50
A/62/563/Add.3, para. 9.
51
A/62/538 and Add.1 and 2.
52
A/62/7/Add.36. For the final text, see Official Records of the General Assembly, Sixty-second Session, Supplement
No. 7A.
53
A/62/538.
54
A/62/600/Add.1, para. 14.
48

110

Annex I
Allocation of agenda items

a

a

1. The following item, which had been allocated to the Second Committee, was also
considered directly in plenary meeting during the resumed sixty-second session of the General
Assembly, under heading B (Promotion of sustained economic growth and sustainable
development in accordance with the relevant resolutions of the General Assembly and recent
United Nations conferences):b
56. Globalization and interdependence:
(a)

Globalization and interdependence;

(b)

Science and technology for development;

(c)

Preventing and combating corrupt practices and transfer of assets of illicit origin
and returning such assets, in particular to the countries of origin, consistent with
the United Nations Convention against Corruption.

2. The following item, which had been allocated to the First Committee, was also considered
directly in plenary meeting during the resumed sixty-second session, under heading G
(Disarmament):b
98. General and complete disarmament:
(g)

Convening of the fourth special session of the General Assembly devoted to
disarmament.

3. The following item, which had been allocated to the Fifth Committee and to the Sixth
Committee, was also considered directly in plenary meeting during the resumed sixty-second
session, under heading I (Organizational, administrative and other matters):b
137. Administration of justice at the United Nations.
4. The following additional item was considered directly in plenary meeting, under heading I
(Organizational, administrative and other matters), during the resumed sixty-second session:b
168. Extension of the terms of the judges of the International Criminal Tribunal for the
Prosecution of Persons Responsible for Genocide and Other Serious Violations of
International Humanitarian Law Committed in the Territory of Rwanda and Rwandan
Citizens Responsible for Genocide and Other Such Violations Committed in the
Territory of Neighbouring States between 1 January and 31 December 1994.c

_______________
a

Organized under headings corresponding to the priorities of the Organization.
See decision 62/503 B in section IV.B of the present volume.
c
A/62/250/Add.3.
b

111

Annex II
Checklist of resolutions and decisions
Resolutions
Resolution
No.

Item

Plenary
meeting

Date of adoption

Page

125

109th

20 June 2008

28

161

109th

20 June 2008

29

Resolution B

164

109th

20 June 2008

31

62/242.

Modalities, format and organization of the high-level
meeting on Africa’s development needs

64 (a)

85th

4 March 2008

2

62/243.

The situation in the occupied territories of Azerbaijan

20

86th

14 March 2008

3

62/244.

Improving global road safety

46

87th

31 March 2008

5

62/245.

Special subjects relating to the programme budget for
the biennium 2008–2009

128

91st

3 April 2008

34

62/246.

Report of the Joint Inspection Unit for 2007 and
programme of work for 2008

134

91st

3 April 2008

36

62/247.

Strengthening investigations

136, 126, 128
and 140

91st

3 April 2008

37

62/248.

Human resources management

133

91st

3 April 2008

40

62/249.

Status of internally displaced persons and refugees from
Abkhazia, Georgia

16

97th

15 May 2008

7

62/250.

Support account for peacekeeping operations

140

109th

20 June 2008

40

62/251.

Financing of the United Nations Logistics Base at
Brindisi, Italy

140

109th

20 June 2008

46

62/252.

Reformed procedures for determining reimbursement
to Member States for contingent-owned equipment

140

109th

20 June 2008

47

62/253.

Financing of the United Nations Operation in Burundi

141

109th

20 June 2008

48

62/254.

Financing of the United Nations Operation in Côte
d’Ivoire

142

109th

20 June 2008

49

62/255.

Financing of the United Nations Peacekeeping Force
in Cyprus

143

109th

20 June 2008

51

62/223.

Title

Financial reports and audited financial statements, and
reports of the Board of Auditors
Resolution B

62/232.

Financing of the African Union-United Nations Hybrid
Operation in Darfur
Resolution B

62/233.

Financing of the United Nations Mission in the Central
African Republic and Chad

113

Annex II – Checklist of resolutions and decisions

Resolution
No.

Title

Item

Plenary
meeting

Date of adoption

Page

62/256.

Financing of the United Nations Organization Mission
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo

144

109th

20 June 2008

55

62/257.

Financing of the United Nations Mission of Support
in East Timor

146

109th

20 June 2008

59

62/258.

Financing of the United Nations Integrated Mission
in Timor-Leste

147

109th

20 June 2008

60

62/259.

Financing of the United Nations Mission in Ethiopia
and Eritrea

148

109th

20 June 2008

63

62/260.

Financing of the United Nations Observer Mission
in Georgia

149

109th

20 June 2008

66

62/261.

Financing of the United Nations Stabilization Mission
in Haiti

150

109th

20 June 2008

69

62/262.

Financing of the United Nations Interim Administration
Mission in Kosovo

151

109th

20 June 2008

72

62/263.

Financing of the United Nations Mission in Liberia

152

109th

20 June 2008

75

62/264.

Financing of the United Nations Disengagement
Observer Force

153 (a)

109th

20 June 2008

78

62/265.

Financing of the United Nations Interim Force in Lebanon

153 (b)

109th

20 June 2008

81

62/266.

Financing of the United Nations Mission in Sierra Leone

154

109th

20 June 2008

85

62/267.

Financing of the United Nations Mission in the Sudan

155

109th

20 June 2008

85

62/268.

Financing of the United Nations Mission for the
Referendum in Western Sahara

156

109th

20 June 2008

89

62/269.

Procurement reform

126

109th

20 June 2008

92

62/270.

Global Forum on Migration and Development

116

109th

20 June 2008

8

62/271.

Sport as a means to promote education, health,
development and peace

45 (a)

115th

23 July 2008

10

62/272.

The United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy

118

120th

5 September 2008

11

62/273.

Comprehensive review of the whole question of
peacekeeping operations in all their aspects

34

121st

11 September 2008

26

62/274.

Strengthening transparency in industries

56

121st

11 September 2008

13

62/275.

Implementation of the recommendations contained in the
report of the Secretary-General on the causes of conflict
and the promotion of durable peace and sustainable
development in Africa

64 (b)

121st

11 September 2008

14

62/276.

Revitalization of the work of the General Assembly

121

122nd

15 September 2008

19

62/277.

System-wide coherence

116

122nd

15 September 2008

19

62/278.

Mandate review

116

122nd

15 September 2008

23

114

Annex II – Checklist of resolutions and decisions

Decisions
Decision
No.

Item

Plenary
meeting

Date of adoption

Page

Decision B

113 (b)

115th

23 July 2008

99

62/415.

Election of fifteen members of the Human Rights Council

113 (d)

98th

21 May 2008

99

62/416.

Election of the President of the General Assembly at its
sixty-third session

4

99th

4 June 2008

100

62/417.

Election of the Chairmen of the Main Committees of the
General Assembly at its sixty-third session

5

100th

4 June 2008

100

62/418.

Election of the Vice-Presidents of the General Assembly
at its sixty-third session

6

100th

4 June 2008

100

62/419.

Election by the General Assembly of five members of
the Organizational Committee of the Peacebuilding
Commission
Decision A

113 (c)

109th

20 June 2008

101

Decision B

113 (c)

111th

11 July 2008

101

62/420.

Approval of the appointment of the United Nations
High Commissioner for Human Rights

114 (i)

116th

28 July 2008

102

62/421.

Extension of the terms of the judges of the International
Criminal Tribunal for the Prosecution of Persons
Responsible for Genocide and Other Serious Violations
of International Humanitarian Law Committed in the
Territory of Rwanda and Rwandan Citizens Responsible
for Genocide and Other Such Violations Committed in
the Territory of Neighbouring States between 1 January
and 31 December 1994

168

116th

28 July 2008

102

62/503.

Adoption of the agenda and allocation of agenda items
7

111th
115th
116th
121st

11 July 2008
23 July 2008
28 July 2008
11 September 2008

104

Decision B

126

91st

3 April 2008

107

Decision C

126

109th

20 June 2008

109

Conditions of service and compensation for officials other
than Secretariat officials: members of the International
Court of Justice and judges and ad litem judges of the
International Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia and the
International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda

128

91st

3 April 2008

110

62/406.

Title

Election of twenty-nine members of the Governing
Council of the United Nations Environment Programme

Decision B

62/545.

62/547.

Questions deferred for future consideration

115

Annex II – Checklist of resolutions and decisions
Decision
No.

Title

Item

Plenary
meeting

Date of adoption

Page

62/548.

Participation of civil society representatives in the highlevel meeting on a comprehensive review of the progress
achieved in realizing the Declaration of Commitment on
HIV/AIDS and the Political Declaration on HIV/AIDS,
to be convened on 10 and 11 June 2008

44

96th

29 April 2008

105

62/549.

Use of 300-series and 100-series appointments

140

109th

20 June 2008

110

62/550.

Building a peaceful and better world through sport and
the Olympic ideal

45 (b)

116th

28 July 2008

105

62/551.

Ad Hoc Committee on the Administration of Justice at
the United Nations

137

116th

28 July 2008

105

62/552.

Convening of the fourth special session of the General
Assembly devoted to disarmament

98 (g)

121st

11 September 2008

105

62/553.

Enlargement of the membership of the Committee on
the Exercise of the Inalienable Rights of the Palestinian
People

18

121st

11 September 2008

105

62/554.

Prevention of armed conflict

14

122nd

15 September 2008

106

62/555.

Follow-up to the recommendations on administrative
management and internal oversight of the Independent
Inquiry Committee into the United Nations Oil-for-Food
Programme

124

122nd

15 September 2008

106

62/556.

Financing of the United Nations Mission in East Timor

145

122nd

15 September 2008

106

62/557.

Question of equitable representation on and increase in
the membership of the Security Council and related
matters

122

122nd

15 September 2008

106

116
