TIIIKTY-THIRD

YEAR
th
MEETING: 13 MARCH 1978

NEW

YORK

CONTENTS
Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/2066)
Adoption of the agenda

.. ,.... .. ..... ... ... . .,. ..... .

Page

1

,. .,.. .... ..... ,...... .,. ,. .. ... ... ...

1

Question concerning the situation in Southern Rhodesia:
Letter dated I March 1978 from the Chargd d’Affaires a.i. of the Permanent
Mission of the Upper Volta to the United Nations addressed to the President
of the Security Council (S/12578) , . . . . . . . . . , . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

1

S/PV.2066

NOTE
Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined with
figures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United Nations document.
Documents of the Security Council (symbol S/. . .) are normally published in quarterly
Supplements of the Official Records of the Security Council. The date of the document
indicates the supplement in which it appears or in which information about it is given.
The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a system
adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of Resolutions and Decisions of the
Security Council. The new system, which has been applied retroactively to resolutions
adopted before 1 January 1965, became fully operative on that date.

2066th MEETING
Held in New York on Monday,
President: Mr. Ivor RICHARD
(United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern IreIand).

13 March 1978, at 3.30 p.m.
representative of Liberia in which he requests to be invited
to participate in the discussion. In accordance with the
usual practice, I propose, with the consent of the Council,
to invite him to participate in the discussion without the
right to vote, in accordance with Article 31 of the Charter
and rule 37 of the provisional rules of procedure.

Present: The representatives of the following States:
Bolivia, Canada, China, Czechoslovakia, France, Gabon,
Germany, Federal Republic of, India, Kuwait, Mauritius,
Nigeria, Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, United King
dom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United States
of America, Venezuela.

3. In view of the limited number of places at the Council
table, I invite the representative of Liberia to take the place
reserved for him at the side of the Council chamber on the
usual understanding that he will be invited to take a place
at the Council table whenever he wishes to speak.

Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/2066)
1, Adoption of the agenda.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Thomas (Liberia)
took the place reserved for him at the side of the Council
chamber.

2. Question concerning the situation in Southern
Rhodesia:
Letter dated 1 March 1978 from the Charge d’Affaires a.i. of the Permanent Mission of the Upper
Volta to the United Nations addressed to the
President of the Security Council (S/12578)

4. Mr. BARTON (Canada): Mr. President, I should like
first of a.ll to convey to you my delegation’s pleasure at the
fact that you are presiding over our affairs at this particular
moment and our sympathy at the fact that you had the
tough luck to draw such a difficult issue during your
presidency, I should also like to acknowIedge with appreciation the contribution of the representative of the Soviet
Union, who served as our President last month and guided
us wisely during that time.

The meeting was called to order at 4.40 p.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Question concerning the situation in Southern Rhodesia:
Letter dated 1 March 1978 from the Chargh d’Affaires a.i.
of the Permanent Mission of the Upper Volta to the
United Nations addressed to the President of the
Security Council (S/12578)

5. The approach of the Canadian Government to the
Rhodesian problem is guided by the principle that Southern
Rhodesia must be returned to constitutional government, a
return that includes the transfer of effective power to a
government based on majority rule, Only such a settlement
can, in our view, bring about the conditions of political
stability which an independent Zimbabwe must have if it is
to take its place as a strong, multiracial member of the
African community.

1. The PRESIDENT: In accordance with the decisions
taken by the Council at previous meetings, I invite the
representatives of Angola, Benin, Botswana, Kenya,
Mozambique, Saudi Arabia, Sierra Leone, the Sudan, the
United Republic of Tanzania, the Upper Volta and Zambia
to take the places reserved for them at the side of the
Council chamber.

6. Over the years, Canada, like the other Members of the
United Nations, has joined in the collective efforts of the
Organization to end the domination of Rhodesia by a white
minority. The obligations that this has entailed for us have
of course been minimal compared to the hardships and
dangers endured by the black citizens of that country and
by those in the neighbouring front-line States. But we have
nevertheless shared their hopes during the past year that the
long ordeal was nearing its end.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. de Fig-ueiredo
(Angola), Mr. Houngavou (Benin), Mr. Tlou (Botswana),
Mr. Maina (Kenya), Mr. Lobo (Mozambique), Mr. Baroody
(Saudi Arabia), Mrs. Gbujama (Sierra Leone), Mr. Medani
(Sudan), Mr. Solim (United Republic of Tanzania),
Mr. Bamba (Upper Volta) and Miss Konie (Zambia) took
the places reserved for them at the side of the Council
chamber.

7. A year ago-on 10 March 1977-the
British and
American Governments took the decision to co-operate in
trying to bring about a negotiated settlement in Rhodesia
which would lead to majority rule in 1978. After consultations with the parties concerned, the two Governments

2. The PRESIDENT: I should like to inform members of
the Council that I have received a letter from the
1

published a Set of proposals that could form the haSis Of
such a settlement. Canada strongly supported this action
because, in our view, those propOSdS Were co&-tent with
the principles 1 have just enunciated. They contailed the
necessary elements for a peaceful transition to majority rule
and offered reasonable prospects for political stability. We
were further encouraged when, for the first time in over 10
yeas of searching for a peaceful settlement, all the parties
concerned seemed prepared to accept a single document as
a basis for negotiation. In his statement on 26 September
1977 to the General Assembly, the Canadian Secretary of
State for External Affairs commentedon the AngloAmericanproposals
in the followingterms:
“Canadafully supportsthe plan not only because
we
believe that it providesthe basisfor a fair and equitable
solution but &O because
we reject totally the alternative
of further bloodshed.Theremustbe no lessening
of our
resolve to seethe end of the presentillegal minority
Rhodesiar6gime,and for that reasonwe mustredouble
our efforts andour commitmentto peacefulmeans.“’

our

view,

the

key

to

it Settletlletlt

.

hs

*

111 the

arrangements

for a genuinetransfer of power and, in particular,
in tl,e
need to satisfy all parties that thesearrangements
arefair
and that their interestsare protected. WCthereforeurgeal,
partiesto enter into resumednegotiations.
11. The Council, f~)r its part, shuld makeeveryeffortto
pavethe Way fur tilC rCSlII~~[)tiotI
Of ~XgOtiations
to develop
m inter~~atjonallyiIcceptalh solution ilIld to ac]&qe gable
effective majority rUlc and, in Our View, shouldfocus,,d
measures
which will cnoouragc all Zimbabweans
to recag.
uize
the need for making
COIlltllOO
Cause
and participating
in the negotiations.It tllc Council, ils4 C0IlsequeuCe
ofthis
debate,can pave the WY for further IlegotiatiOnS
between
the parties concerned, it will
have
made
an important
contribution to the independence of Zimbabweunder
effective majority rule and to the peaceand security
,,f
Africa and the ~orltl.

12. Mr. I-IULINSKQ (Czechoslovakia)(intcrprerationf~~rorn
Russia/z):I shOuld
like first of til to congratulateyou,sir,
on your assumptionof the prcsidcncy of the Security
8, It wason that basisthat we supportedSecurityCouncil
of March. In you asPresident
we
resolution 415 (1977), which requestedthe Secretary- Council for the month
have
an
experienced
statesman
and
diplomat
who
has
won
Generalto appointa representative
to enterinto discussions
for himselfin New York the very well deserved
title of one
with Lord Carverand all the partiesconcerned.Wehaveno
of
the
most
popular
chiefs
of
mission.
doubt that the Anglo-Americaninitiative and the subsequentactionby the Council,buildingon the consensus
of
the Maputo Conference,2viewed againsta deteriorating
economicand securitysituation,addedto the pressures
on
the Smith regimeto take further stepson the road to
majority rule. The very fact that the Anglo-American
proposalsinitially commendedthemselves
in their entirety
to none of the competinginterestssuggests
that they may
well have struck a fairly goodbalance.Wehavenotedwith
considerablesatisfactionthat the front-line Statesandthe
Organization of African Unity have now indicated their
support for the proposalsas a basisfor a negotiated
settlement and that the leadersof the Patriotic Front are
alsomovingin the samedirection.
9. It is clearalsothat the agreement
signedat Salisburyon
3 March does not provide for the full transfer of the
instrumentsof authority to the African majority. The terms
of the agreementwill makeit possiblefor the minority to
retain control of the judiciary, the military, the policeand
the civil servicefor at leasta decade.Thereisno provision
for a cease-fireunderinternationalsupervision,nor isthere
provision for internationallysupervised
elections.All things
considered,therefore, we are of the opinion that this
agreementis inadequateand cannotcommandthe support
necessary
for a lastingsolution.It hasbeenrejectedbY the
leadersof the Patriotic Front, by the front-line States,and
by all the Statesmembersof the Organizationof African
Unity. There appearsto be no prospectof its leadingto the
cessationof the armedconflict andthe lifting of sanctions,
10. In examiningthe very seriousproblemwith whichthe
Security Council is confronted, we must take fully into
account the complexity of the situation.It isimportant,wc
believe,to avoid attemptingto identify heroesor villains.In
1 Official Records of the General Assembly,
sion, Plenary Meetings, 6th meeting,
pnra,,
72.

Thirty-second

Ses.

2 lntcrnationalConference in Support of the Peoples of Zimbnbwe.md
Namibia,
held at Maputd from 16 to 21 May 1977.

13.
A few days ago, the I’etmanent
Under-Secretary
of
State for Foreign and C0tlltll0~~WCill
th Affairs Of the United
Kingdom,Sir Michael I’alliscr, WCC againconfirmed,during
a visit to Prague,that relations
tlctwccn
Our two counlries
were extremely promising. That reflects the conclusions
containedin the ,joint communiyu~ signedat theendofthe
visit to the United Kingdom of the ForeignMinisterofthe
CzcchoslovakSocialist Republic. In that communiqa8
the
CzechoslovakMinister and his 13ritishcolleaguesaid,ifiler
&, that they welcomed the strengtheningof mutualties
and the continuing development of political andother
exchanges
on governmentaland other Icvels.

14. I should like also to express my gratitudeto the
representativeof the Union of Soviet SocialistRepublics,
AmbassadorTroynnovsky, who so skilfully andeffectively
conducted the proocedingsof the (‘ouncil last month,
1
would take this ol>portunity to express my ‘particular
pleasureat noting that between the C’zechoslovak
Socialist
Republicand the Union of Suvict SocialistRepublics
there
exist closetics of comprehcnsivc
Co-opera[ion,
friendslI@
and solidarity, and that the constant strengthening
aad
further devclopmcntof these tics is one of the foundations
of the foreignpolicy of socialistCzechoslovakia.
15. One of the questions which has long beenripefor
in Conncxion
with
the Cot~lpletion
of theW%le
againstcolonialismin southern Africa is the attainmeatofa
just solution to the problem of Southern Rhodesia
andhe
immediate,total and unconditional transferof allPowerto
the patriotic forces of Zimbabwe. The illegal JninoriV
rdgime continues, IN~WCV~I~, to ~wrsuc a racist POW Of
inhumanoppression,in its attempts to continuebYevery
meansin its power the colonial racist dominationoverthe
peopleof Zimbabweand to perl~ctuatcits ruthlesscxPloita
tion of the indigenousAfrican popul:1tionandthePl!Jader.
ing of the natural resourcesof’ that country.
solutim

16. Those are precisely the goals of the most recent
manoeuvres of Smith and his direct and indirect supporters
from outside in order to impose on the African population
plans for a so-called internal settlement. The minority
Ggime-long since obsolete-is
attempting to preserve
power in its own hands and is hoping that, by means of the
achievement of an agreement with the venal elements inside
the country and the subsequent creation of a puppet
regime, it will be able to keep the Patriotic Front outside
any decisions affecting the fate of their country. The
regime hopes in this new way to entrench its domination
over the indigenous African population and give itself the
appearance of legitimacy,

southern Africa can ensure peace and justice in that part of
the world.
21. In spite of all the calculations of Smith’s defenders
aimed at splitting the anti-colonial front of the African
States by appeals to recognize the so-called internal
settlement-which
they have recently been trying to represent as a “step in the right direction”-the OAU Co-ordinating Committee for the Liberation of Africa, at its recent
meeting at Tripoli adopted a resolution which
“Rejects any outcome of the fraudulent talks taking
place between the racist minority regime of Ian Smith
and certain unrepresentative elements.+

17. The agreement signed the other day at Salisbury does
not even formally provide for the transfer of power to the
African majority, although Smith and the so-called moderate African leaders who went along with him in this
shameful deal are trying to represent it as doing so. On the
contrary, it clearly banks on the further preservation of all
power in the hands of the racist minority, which will
continue to retain possession of all the machinery of
violence and oppression that has been created in Zimbabwe
during the 12 years of the existence of the illegal regime.
All the provisions of the deal are aimed at preserving the
privileges of this minority in the political and economic
fields. This so-called agreement is as illegal as the Smith
regime itself, and this illegality has been acknowledged by
the Security Council and all the Members of the United
Nations. By their conduct, the parties to this shameful deal
have excluded themselves from the ranks of genuine
fighters for the freedom and independence of the people of
Zimbabwe.

The resolution calls upon all Zimbabweans to support the
efforts of the Patriotic Front.
22. Thanks to the heroic struggle of the patriots of
Zimbabwe, led by the Patriotic Front, the defeat of the
illegal racist regime is inevitable. It is obvious, however, that
that regime is unwilling to leave the political stage of its
own free will and does not wish to transfer power
peacefully to the authentic and legitimate representatives of
the people of Zimbabwe. Clear evidence of this is to be
found in the intensification of the repression of the
peaceful African population, the expansion of military
activities against members of the national liberation movement, and fresh acts of aggression against neighbouring
sovereign African States. It suffices to recall in this
connexion the most recent instance of brutal aggression by
the Rhodesian racist army against neighbouring independent Zambia, from 6 to 8 March, and the murder of a large
number of peaceful inhabitants of that country, as well as
Zimbabwean freedom fighters.

18. Obviously the so-called internal settlement cannot
possibly become a basis for a just solution to the Southern
Rhodesian problem. At the same time, it must be evident to
everyone that the illegal racist regime is able to reject the
just demands for the unconditional transfer of power in its
totality in Zimbabwe to the authentic representatives of the
African majority simply because that mgime enjoys the
direct or indirect support of those Western countries which
have a stake in’ preserving their broad political and
economic interests in that part of Africa.

23. These provocative actions on the part of the minority
regime are the most eloquent reply to all the efforts of the
national liberation movement of Zimbabwe and the frontline African States to bring about a peaceful settlement in
the country. At the same time, these actions expose in the
best possible way the true aims of Smith’s most recent
manoeuvres in connexion with the so-called internal settlement of the problem. As is pointed out in Security Council
resolution 411 (19771, as a result of these criminal actions
the minority regime remains

19. The direct responsibility for the present situation in
Southern Rhodesia must be borne by those who, by their
policy of endless talks with the Smith regime and the
contriving of all kinds of compromise plans acceptable to
Smith, have in fact been promoting the virtual preservation
of that regime and its perpetuation and legalization in one
form or another. Using these talks as a pretext, they have
even held up the adoption by the United Nations of
effective measures against the illegal regime under Chapter
VII of the Charter.

“a source of insecurity and instability in the region and
constitutes a serious threat to international peace and
security”.
Furthermore,
its manoeuvrings in connexion with the
underhand deal on the so-called internal settlement are
making the situation in southern Africa even more difficult
and intensifying the threat there.
24. The Czechoslovak delegation shares the serious view
expressed on 9 March by the leaders of the Patriotic Front
of Zimbabwe, Joshua Nkomo and Robert Mugabe [206&h
meeting]. That is why it supports the demand of the Group
of African States that the Security Council should categorically reject the so-called Smith agreement and give its

20. In the circumstances, no one can be surprised, surely,
that the manoeuvres of Smith and his supporters have been
categorically repudiated by the Patriotic Front, which has
stated that the armed struggle will continue until total and
final victory. Only the earliest possible elimination of the
Smith regime-and also, incidentally, the Vorster regimeand the complete and total victory of the genuine fighters
for the freedom and independence of the countries of

3 Quoted

3

in English

by the speaker.

mined to develop relations based on friendship, mutual
respect and co-operation.

decisive support to the Patriotic Front, without which it is
impossible to bring about a just settlement in Zimbabwe.
By its actions the Council should promote the creation of
conditions that would ensure a just solution to this problem
in accordance with the will aad aspirations of the African
majority of Zimbabwe for freedom and independence. Such
a just solution should guarantee the earliest possible
transfer of State power to the genuine representatives
of
forces
the people of Zimbabwe, namely, the patriotic
headed by the Patriotic Front, the sole legitimate representative of the African majority which is honourably
fighting for the freedom and independence of its people. In
order to ensure such a settlement, all the means available to
the United Nations must be employed.

31. Since I have not had a chance to speak before the
Council since the beginning of this year, I have not been
able to bid welcome to the newly elected Member States
among us. We are pleased to welcome five new members in
the persons of the representatives of Bolivia, Czechoslovakia, Gabon, Kuwait and Nigeria. All are experts on the
United Nations and we are very pleased we shall be able to
benefit from their enlightened experience.
32. I should also like to say that for the past two years
we have enjoyed the co-operation
of the representatives of Benin, the Libyan Arab Jamahiriya, Pakistan,
Panama and Romania, I am pleased to stress that my
delegation has very fond memories of their contributions to
our work.

25. As I have already pointed out, my delegation supports
the demands of African States that the Security Council
should condemn all Smith’s manoeuvres, declare null and
void any so-called settlement in Southern Rhodesia brought
about under the sponsorship of the racist regime and oblige
all Member States to refuse recognition to any regime
created in Southern Rhodesia as a result of the talks on the
so-called internal settlement.

33. On 1 September last, the Security Council was
officially informed of the proposals regarding a settlement
in Southern Rhodesia drawn up by the Government of the
United Kingdom “with the full agreement of the United
States Government and after consulting all the parties
concerned” [S/12393];
on 29 September it adopted a
resolution requesting the Secretary-General to appoint a
representative to enter into discussions with the British
Resident Commissioner designate-Lord Carver-and with
all the parties concerning the military and associated
arrangements deemed necessary to ensure the transfer of
power to a majority government in Southern Rhodesia
[resolution 415 (1977)]. In accordance with that resolution, Mr. Waldheim, shortly thereafter, appointed Lieutenant-GeneralPrem Chandto representhim.

26. We also whole-heartedly share the view expressed in
the Council by a number of African and other countries
that the situation in Southern Rhodesia remains a serious
threat to international peace and security and that in the
circumstances existing sanctions against Southern Rhodesia
should not only be maintained but even expanded to
include all the measures provided for in Chapter VII of the
Charter.
27. In conclusion, I should like to stress that the CzechoSlovak Socialist Republic has always favoured the immediate elimination of the illegal racist rdgime in Southern
Rhodesia, It has been giving and will continue to give every
kind of political, diplomatic, moral and material support to
the African population of Zimbabwe
and its national
liberation movement led by the Patriotic
Front in its
struggle for freedom and national independence.

34. Five months have passedsince then. And now, having
seenfit to ignore the viewsof the international community
and pursuing his illegal course, Ian Smith has arranged a
so-calledinternal settlementwhich, ashe openly admits, he
hopeswill eventually be acceptedby the entire world.
35. We should like to say that there is no question of
France’s recognizing this arrangementas being capable of
settling the Rhodesianproblem. Were we to do that, we
should have to repudiate our vote of 29 September and
disavow the constant support we have sincethe beginning
given the Anglo-American proposalsfor an internationally
acceptablesettlement.

28. Mr, HUSSON (France) (interpretation .f?om French):
Mr, President, first I should like to offer you my congratulations on your assumption of the lofty duties you have
been discharging since the beginning of this month. France
is particularly pleased to see presiding over the Council’s
meetings the representative of a country with which we
have long-standing and friendly relations strengthened by
our membership in the European Economic Community.

36. It may be true that in the agreementachieved by Ian
Smith there are certain provisions which do create some
hopesfor his acceptanceof majority rule and the ultimate
transfer of power. However, according to United Nations
criteria, too many conditions remain unfulfilled for this
text to stand the slightest chance of actually creating a
genuinelysovereignand independentZimbabwe,

29. I should also like to thank the representative
of
Nigeria for the manner in which he conducted our workin
January and to express our gratitude to the Commissioner
for External Affairs of that country, Brigadier Garba, for
having honoured us with his presence and his experience. I
am very pleased with the relations our two countries enjoy
and with the results of the visit recently paid by Mr. de
Guiringaud to Lagos.

37. First of all, it should be recalled that the United
Kingdom still holds a major responsibility. To our way of
thinking, it and it alone can ensure the legal transfer of
power. It must therefore remain directly engagedin any
processleading to independence.It was with this in mind
that the Anglo-American proposals of 1 September provided for the appointment of a British Resident Commissionerwith the necessaryauthority.

30. Our congratulations also go to the representative of
the Soviet Union, who in February conducted our debate
on a difficult and delicate question with competence and
distinction. Needless to say, our two countries are deter4

38. Secondly, power can be given only to the authentic
representatives of the Zimbabwe people, and elections are
the only democratic way of establishing who those representatives are. For elections to be valid, they would have to
be conducted in a climate and according to procedures that
would allow for complete freedom of choice. In particular,
it is essential that the hostilities should cease and that
provisions should be adopted to ensure both the maintenance of law and order and respect for the rights of
citizens during the transition period, The United Nations
has an important role to play in the establishment of the
confidence which is necessary for this purpose. That is
precisely why it is part of the Anglo-American plan for the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General to ensure
that the elections will be conducted properly.
39. Finally, the restoration of peace necessarily presupposes an agreement among all those who have fought and
are fighting for independence. In this connexion, it is
regrettable that men sharing the same ideal of an independent Zimbabwe have not yet managed to define among
themselves the terms of an agreement which would put an
end to their quarrels. I should like to urge here and now the
chiefs of the various nationalist movements to join their
efforts with those of the United Kingdom Government in
order to prepare the foundation for the restoration of
peace.
40. The illegal regime at Salisbury must understand that
there can be no lasting peace without the participation and
support of all those who have a decisive role to play in the
tragedy of that country. Until it observes this elementary
principle it cannot hope that the international community
will endorse plans which by their very nature cannot lead to
a final settlement. Consequently, Ian Smith must expect his
isolation to continue and even to increase.
41. It is important that everything should be done to bring
about a settlement by peaceful means. Let us not forget
that peace is the very raison d’dtre of the Security Council.
The Council must play a constructive role in this particularly important matter.
42. My delegation therefore expresses the hope that the
Council will give its full support to the United Kingdom
and the United States in their efforts to reach with all the
parties concerned an internationally acceptable settlement

of the problem of Southern Rhodesia. France, for its part,
is prepared to give its assistance.
43. Mr, RAMPHUL (Mauritius): Members of the Council
wiI1 recall that near the end of our meeting last Friday I
gave advance notice that, on behalf of my African brothers
members of the Council, I intended to circulate a working
paper after it had been processed by the Secretariat. That
paper was actually circulated in all languages, as far as I
know, last Saturday morning. In addition, I invited comments on that paper. Since last Friday, consultations and
negotiations have been taking place intensively and extensively and we, the African members, have considered
whatever comments we have received. I wish to assure you,
Mr. President, that we gave special consideration to the
views expressed by the representative of the United
Kingdom.
44. We Africans have now reached a stage where we feel
that we should submit our paper, which is somewhat
revised and which now commands the sponsorship of al.1the
non-aligned countries represented in the Council. Therefore, on behalf of the delegations of Bolivia, Gabon, India,
Kuwait,
Mauritius, Nigeria and Venezuela, I formally
introduce the draft resolution which has been circulated as
document S/12597. The contents of the draft are well
known by now and require little if any comment by me, as
the spokesman of the seven sponsors. I shall therefore just
go through the draft as a matter of form.
4.5, The draft contains five totally non-controversial preambular paragraphs and seven very realistic and reasonable
operative paragraphs, which I feel certain will command the
full support of all members of the Council, thus leading to a
unanimous decision, The text of the draft resolution reads
as follows:
[The speaker read out the text of the draft resolution.]
46. I do not feel that I ought to take more time of the
Council, and I rest here.
47. The PRESIDENT: I am obliged to the representative
of Mauritius for telling me how carefully he and his
colleagues considered the views of the United Kingdom. I
can only say that it does not show.
The meeting rofe at 5.20 p.m.

HOW

TO OBTAIN

UNITED

NATlONS

Unite 1 Nations
publications
throughout
the world. Consult
Section, New York or Geneva.
COMMENT

SE PROCURER

PUBLICATIONS

may be obtained
your bookstore

LES

PUBLICATIONS

from bookstores
and distributors
or write to: United
Nations,
Sales

DES

NATIONS

UNIES

Les publications
des Nations
Unies sent on vente dans les librairies
et les agences
depositaires
du mondc entier. Informez-vous
aupr& de votre libraire ou ndressez-vous
B : Nations Unies. Section ties ventes. New York ou Gen&ve.

COMO

Litho

in United

Nations,

CONSEGUIR

PUBLICACIONES

DE

LAS

NACIONES

UNIDAS

Las publicaciones
de Ins Naciones
Unidas
estin
buidoras
en todas partes de1 mundo. Consulte
Unidas, Seccicin de Ventas, Nueva York o Ginebra.

en vcnta en librerias
y casas distria su librero
o dirijase
a: Naciones

New York

in other

Price: $US.

1.00

(or equivalent

currencies)

78-70005-September

1979--2,200
