UNITED
NATIONS

S
Security Council
Distr.
GENERAL
S/PRST/1997/12
11 March 1997
ENGLISH
ORIGINAL: ENGLISH, FRENCH
AND RUSSIAN

STATEMENT BY THE PRESIDENT OF THE SECURITY COUNCIL

At the 3749th meeting of the Security Council, held on 11 March 1997 in
connection with the Council's consideration of the item entitled "The situation
in Bosnia and Herzegovina", the President of the Security Council made the
following statement on behalf of the Council:
"The Security Council has considered the letter of 7 March 1997 and
its annex from the Secretary-General to the President of the Security
Council concerning the incident on 10 February 1997 involving a violent
assault against a group of civilians attempting to visit a graveyard in
West Mostar in the presence of the United Nations International Police Task
Force (UN-IPTF), in which one person died and others were wounded
(S/1997/201).
"The Security Council notes that the participants in the meeting on
12 February 1997 referred to in the letter from the Secretary-General
agreed inter alia to request the UN-IPTF to conduct an investigation into
that incident, to accept and endorse that report in full, and to draw the
necessary conclusions concerning the arrest, bringing to trial and
dismissal from office of those found responsible for instigating or
participating in violent acts.
"The Security Council fully supports the conclusions drawn from the
UN-IPTF report by the Office of the High Representative and fully supported
by the UN-IPTF, the Commander of the Stabilization Force in Bosnia and
Herzegovina and the members of the Contact Group.
"The Security Council strongly condemns the involvement by West Mostar
police officers in the violent assault on 10 February 1997 as referred to
in the UN-IPTF report annexed to the letter from the Secretary-General to
the President of the Security Council of 7 March 1997 (S/1997/204).
"The Security Council also condemns the failure of the local police to
provide protection to civilians subject to inter-ethnic attacks which
occurred throughout Mostar both before and after the incident on
10 February 1997, and stresses the importance it attaches to preventing
such incidents in the future.

97-06559 (E)

110397

/...

S/PRST/1997/12
English
Page 2

"The Security Council takes note of the announced suspension of some
of the police officers identified in the UN-IPTF report but remains deeply
concerned by the failure to date of the responsible authorities to take all
the necessary steps to implement the conclusions drawn from that report.
It strongly condemns attempts by those authorities to place conditions upon
the arrest and prosecution of the police officers identified in the UN-IPTF
report as having fired upon the group of civilians.
"The Security Council demands that the responsible authorities,
notably in West Mostar, immediately implement the conclusions drawn from
the UN-IPTF report, and in particular suspend all relevant police officers
and arrest and prosecute them without further delay. It also calls upon
the responsible authorities to investigate all police officers involved in
the incident.
"The Security Council requests the Secretary-General to keep it
informed of the situation. It will remain actively seized of the matter."

-----
