General Assembly-Forty-first Session

168

l. Takes note ofthe report ofthe Secretary-General on
the status of the International Convention on the Elimination of Ali Forms of Racial Discrimination; 44
2. Expresses its satisfaction at the number ofStates that
have ratified the Convention or acceded thereto;
3. Reaffirms once again its conviction that ratification
of or accession to the Convention on a universal basis and
implementation ofits provisions are necessary for the realization of the objectives of the Second Decade to Combat
Racism and Racial Discrimination; 45

4. Requests those States that have not yet become parties to the Convention to ratify it or accede thereto;
5. Calls upon the States parties to the Convention to
consider the possibility of making the declaration provided for in article 14 of the Convention;
6. Requests the Secretary-General to submit to the
General Assembly at its forty-third session a report concerning the status of the Convention, in accordance with
Assembly resolution 2106 A (XX) of 21 December 1965.
97th plenary meeting
4 December 1986

41/105.

Committee on the Elimination of Racial Discrimination

The General Assembly,
Recalling its previous resolutions concerning the reports
of the Committee on the Elimination of Racial Discrimination and resolution 41/104 of 4 December 1986 on the
status of the International Convention on the Elimination
of Ali Forms ofRacial Discrimination, 3 as well as its other
relevant resolutions on the implementation of the Programme of Action for the Second Decade to Combat Racism and Racial Discrimination,46
Mindful of the obligation of ali States parties to comply
fully with the provisions of the Convention,
Aware of the importance of the contribution of the Committee to the implementation of the Programme of Action
for the Second Decade to Combat Racism and Racial Discrimination and to the elimination of ali forms of discrimination based on race, colour, descent or national or ethnic
origin,
Further aware of the need to intensify the struggle for
the elimination of racism and racial discrimination
throughout the world, especially the elimination of apartheid in South Africa and Namibia,
Having considered the note by the Secretary-General
concerning the work ofthe Committee, 47 which states, inter alia, that the Committee was unable to hold its thirtyfourth session in August 1986 as planned because of the
lack of financia! means, as a consequence of the failure of
many States parties to the Convention to pay their contributions under article 8, paragraph 6, of the Convention,
Recalling the appeal made at the tenth meeting of the
States parties to the Convention 48 to States parties to honour their financia! obligations under the Convention, as
well as other appeals on the same subject,
1. Expresses its grave concern that, for the above reason, the Committee on the Elimination of Racial Dis-

44 A/41/508.
4 5 Resolution 38/14.
46 /bid., annex.
47 A/41/561 and Add.l.

48 See CERD/SP/24.

crimination was unable to hold its thirty-fourth session
and to carry out its obligations in the course of 1986 and
that, consequently, it could not submit an annual report to
the General Assembly at its forty-first session;
2. Commends the Committee for its work in the past
with regard to the implementation of the International
Convention on the Elimination of Ali Forms of Racial
Discrimination and the Programme of Action for the Second Decade to Combat Racism and Racial Discrimination;
3. Calls upon States parties to comply fully with their
obligation under article 9, paragraph 1, ofthe Convention
and to submit in due time their periodic reports on measures taken to implement the Convention;
4. Appeals urgently to States parties to fulfil their financia! obligations under article 8, paragraph 6, of the Convention so as to enable the Committee to resume its work;
5. Requests the Secretary-General:
(a) To consider making an urgent appeal, by telex, to
States parties to fulfil their financia) obligations with regard to the Committee in order to enable it to resume its
work;
(b) To transmit notices of assessment for 1987 to
States parties as soon as possible, urging them to pay their
contributions;
(e) To explore ali appropriate avenues to enable the
Committee to meet in 1987, even iffor a shorter duration
and at a reduced cost;
(d) To consider convoking, if necessary and within
available resources, a meeting of States parties during the
first regular session of 1987 of the Economic and Social
Council, so that they can take stock of the level of assessed
contributions and make recommendations on the future
work of the Committee;
(e) To report on the situation to the General Assembly
at its forty-second session.
97th plenary meeting
4 December 1986

41/106.

lmplementation of the World Programme of
Action concerning Disabled Persons and
United Nations Decade of Disabled Persons

The General Assembly,
Recalling all its pertinent resolutions, including resolution 37 /52 of 3 December 1982, by which it adopted the
World Programme of Action concerning Disabled Persons,49 and resolution 37/53 of 3 December 1982, by
which, inter alia, it proclaimed the period 1983-1992 the
United Nations Decade of Disabled Persons,
Recalling its resolution 40/31 of 29 November 1985 and
reaffirming ali of its relevant provisions,
Noting with satisfaction the concrete measures already
carried out by the Governments of Member States, the
bodies and organizations of the United Nations system
and non-governmental organizations to implement the objectives of the World Programme of Action within the
framework ofthe United Nations Decade ofDisabled Persons,
Noting with appreciation the steps taken by the United
Nations system and by non-governmental organizations

40
A/37/351/Add.l
recommendat1on 1 (IV)

and

Add.1/Corr.l,

annex.

sect. VIII,
