UNITED
NATIONS

S
Security Council
Distr.
GENERAL
S/PRST/1995/16
12 April 1995
ORIGINAL:

ENGLISH

STATEMENT BY THE PRESIDENT OF THE SECURITY COUNCIL

At the 3515th meeting of the Security Council, held on 12 April 1995, in
connection with the Council’s consideration of the item entitled "The situation
in Tajikistan and along the Tajik-Afghan border", the President of the Security
Council made the following statement on behalf of the Council:
"The Security Council expresses its deep concern at the escalation of
military activities on the Tajik-Afghan border which resulted in grave loss
of life. In this context, the Council reminds the parties of their
obligations to ensure the safety of the Secretary-General’s Special Envoy
and all other United Nations personnel.
"The Council strongly believes that armed activities by the Tajik
opposition in violation of the cease-fire Agreement of 17 September 1994
(S/1994/1102, annex I) jeopardize the inter-Tajik dialogue and the process
of national reconciliation as a whole. Noting also recent violations of
the 17 September 1994 Agreement by government forces, the Council calls on
the Tajik opposition and the Government of Tajikistan to comply strictly
with the obligations they have assumed under that Agreement and calls on
the Tajik opposition in particular to extend it for a substantial period
beyond 26 April 1995.
"The Council fully supports the appeal of the Secretary-General to the
Tajik parties and other countries concerned to exercise restraint, to do
their utmost to continue the political dialogue and to hold the next round
of talks as soon as possible. It welcomes the agreement by the Government
of Tajikistan and the Tajik opposition to the proposal of the SecretaryGeneral’s Special Envoy to hold an urgent high-level meeting of their
representatives in Moscow. It calls upon the countries of the region to
discourage any activities that could complicate or hinder the peace process
in Tajikistan.
"Reaffirming its resolution 968 (1994) of 16 December 1994, the
Council once again urges the parties to reconfirm through concrete steps
their commitment to resolve the conflict only through political means. The
Council reiterates its call on the parties to hold the fourth round of the
inter-Tajik talks without delay on the basis as agreed during the previous
rounds of consultations."
----95-10748 (E)

120495
