devotion to duty of Dr. Ralph J. Bunche, Acting United
Nations Mediator in Palestine, who has brought to a
successful conclusion the negotiation of armistice
agreements between Egypt, Jordan, Lebanon and Syria
on the one hand, and Israel on the other;
3. Desires also to associate in this expression of
appreciation the members of the staff of the United
Nations mission in Palestine, including both the members
of the United Nations Secretariat and the Belgian,
French, Swedish and United States officers who served
on the staff and as military observers in Palestine.

devoir de M. Ralph J. Bunche, mediateur par interim
des Nations Unies en Palestine, qui a mene a une heureuse
conclusion la negociation de conventions d'armistice
entre l'Egypte, la Jordanie, le Li ban et la Syrie, d 'une
part, et Israel, d'autre part;
3. Desire associer dans cette expression de reconnaissance le personnel de la mission des Nations Unies en
Palestine, y compris les membres du Secretariat de
!'Organisation des Nations Uoies et Jes officiers belges,
fran~ais, suedois et des Etats-Unis qui ont servi avec la
mission en qualite d'observateurs militaires en Palestine.

Adopted at the 437th meeting."

Adoptee a la 437• seance"·

73 (1949). Resolution of II August 1949

73 (1949). Resolution du II aofi.t 1949

[S/1376, II]

[S/1376, II]

The Security Council,
Le Consei/ de securite,
Ayant pris acte avec satisfaction des differents accords
Having noted with satisfaction the several Armistice
Agreements15 concluded by means of negotiations d'armistice 15 que les parties impliquees dans le conflit
between the parties involved in the conflict in Palestine de Palestine ont conclus par voie de negociations,
in pursuance of its resolution 62 (1948) of 16 November conformement a sa resolution 62 (1948) du 16 novembre
1948,
1948,
I. Expresses the hope that the Governments and
1. Exprime l'espoir que les gouvernements et autorites
authorities concerned, having undertaken, by means of i interesses, s'etant engages, au cours des negociations
the negotiations now being conducted by the Conciliation I que conduit actuellement la Commission de conciliation
Commission for Palestine, to fulfil the request of the pour la Palestine, a donner suite a la demande de I' AsGeneral Assembly in its resolution 194 (III) of 11 semblee generale qui, dans sa resolution 194 (III) du
December 1948 to extend the scope of the armistice ! 11 decembre 1948, les invitait a etendre le domaine des
negotiations and to seek agreement by negotiations negociations d'armistice et a rechercher un accord par
conducted either with the Conciliation Commission or voie de negociations, soit directes, soit avec la Commission
directly, will at an early date achieve agreement on the de conciliation, parviendront rapidement a un reglement
final settlement of all questions outstanding between definitif de toutes les questions sur lesquelles ils ne se
them;
sont pas encore mis d'accord;
2. Finds that the Armistice Agreements constitute an
2. Constate que les accords d'armistice constituent
important step toward the establishment of permanent une etape importante vers l 'instauration d 'une paix
peace in Palestine and considers that these agreements permanente en Palestine et estime qu'ils se substituent a
supersede the truce provided for in Security Council ! la treve etablie par les resolutions 50 (1948) et 54 (1948) du
resolutions 50 (1948) of 29 May and 54 (1948) of 15 Conseil de securite, en date des 29 mai et 15 juillet 1948;
July 1948;
3. Reaffirms, pending the final peace settlement, the
3. Confirme, jusqu'au reglement pacifique definitif,
order contained in its resolution 54 (1948) to the Govern- l'ordre donne, en vertu de !'Article 40 de la Charte des
ments and authorities concerned, pursuant to Article 40 Nations Unies, par la resolution 54 (1948) aux gouverof the Charter of the United Nations, to observe an nements et autorites interesses d'observer une suspension
unconditional cease-fire and, bearing in mind that the d 'armes inconditionnelle, et, tenant compte de ce que
several Armistice Agreements include firm pledges Jes divers accords d'armistice contiennent de fermes
against any further acts of hostility between the parties engagements d'eviter tous actes ulterieurs d'hostilite
and also provide for their supervision by the parties entre les parties et prevoient aussi le controle de ces
themselves, relies upon the parties to ensure the continued conventions par les parties elles-memes, fait confiance
application and observance of these Agreements;
a ces dernieres pour continuer a les appliquer et a les
respecter;
4. Decides that all functions assigned to the United
4. Decide que toutes les taches confiees au Mediateur
Nations Mediator in Palestine having been discharged, des Nations Unies en Palestine ayant ete accomplies, le
1

u Adopted without vote.
"See Official Records of the Security Council, Fourth Year,
Special Supplements Nos. 1, 2, 3 and 4.

" Le projet de resolution n 'a pas ete mis aUll voix.
"Voir Proces-verbaux officiels du Conseil de securite, quatrieme
annee, Supplements speciaux n°• 1, 2, 3 et 4.

8

Mediateur par interim est degage de toute responsabilite
ulterieure en ce qui concerne les resolutions du Conseil
de securite;
5. Note que les accords d 'armistice prevoient que
leur application sera controlee par des commissions
mixtes d'armistice dont le president, dans chaque cas,
sera le Chef d'etat-major de l'Organisme des Nations
Unies charge de la surveillance de la treve en Palestine,
ou un officier superieur qu'il designera parmi Jes observateurs de cet organisme, apres consultation des parties
en cause;
6. Demande au Secretaire general de prendre des
mesures pour garder en fonctions Jes membres du
present organisme de surveillance de la treve dont les
services seraient necessaires pour controler et maintenir
la suspension d'armes, de meme que pour aider les
parties aux conventions d'armistice a controler !'execution et !'observation des termes de ces conventions, en
tenant specialement compte des desirs exprimes par Jes
parties dans les articles pertinents desditcs conventions;
7. Demande au Chef d'etat-major mentionne ci-dessus
de faire rapport au Conseil de securite au sujet de
!'observation de la suspension d'armes en Palestine,
conformement aux dispositions de la presente resolution,
et de tenir la Commission de conciliation pour la Palestine
informee des questions ayant trait aux travaux de cette
commission en application de la resolution 194 (III) de
l'Assemblee generale, en date du 11 deccmbre 1948.

the Acting Mediator is relieved of any further responsibility under Security Council resolutions;
5. Notes that the Armistice Agreements provide that
the execution of those Agreements shall be supervised
by mixed armistice commissions whose chairman in
each case shall be the Chief of Staff of the United Nations
Truce Supervision Organization in Palestine or a senior
officer from the observer personnel of that organization
designated by him following consultation with the
parties to the Agreements;
6. Requests the Secretary-General to arrange for the
continued service of such of the personnel of the present
Truce Supervision Organization as may be required in
observing and maintaining the cease-fire, and as may
be necessary in assisting the parties to the Armistice
Agreements in the supervision of the application and
observance of the terms of those Agreements, with
particular regard to the desires of the parties as expressed
in the relevant articles of the Agreements;
7. Requests the Chief of Staff mentioned above to
report to the Security Council on the observance of the
cease-fire in Palestine in accordance with the terms of
this resolution, and to keep the Conciliation Commission
for Palestine informed of matters affecting the Commission's work under General Assembly resolution 194
(III) of 11 December 1948.

Adoplee a la 437e seance par
!I voix contre zero, avec 2
abstentions ( Republique socialiste sovietique d' Ukraine,
Union des Republiques socialistes sovietiques).

Adopted at the 437th meeting
by 9 votes to none, with 2
abstentions ( Ukrainian Soviet
Socialist Republic, Union of
Soviet Socialist Republics).

Decision

Decision

At its 453rd meeting, on 25 October 1949, the Council
decided to postpone indefinitely the discussion of the
item "Demilitarization of the Jerusalem area, with
special reference to General Assembly resolution 194
(III), dated 11 December 1948".

A sa 453° seance, le 25 octobrc 1949, le Conseil a
decide de remettre sine die la discussion de la question
intitulee cc Demilitarisation de la region de Jerusalem, eu
egard notamment a la resolution 194 (Ill) de l'Assemblee
generale, en date du 11 decem bre 1948 n.

9
