General Assembly ~ Thirty-eighth Session

136

38/168.

International Year of Shelter for the Homeless

programme for the Ycar mu,t he launched qu,c~I, and l'lkl'll\d,. "' that
mo~l of thc demonstration projccts can be compll'll'<L or he al a staRl'
whcrc rcsults can be naluall'd. h, late I Q86.

The General Assembly,
Recal/ing its resolution 37/221 of 20 Deccm ber 1982, in
which it proclaimed the year 1987 lntcrnational Ycar of
Shelter for the Homeless,
Taking note of the report of the Secretary-Gcneral 94
concerning measures and activities to be undcrtaken prior
to and during the International Year of Shelter for the
Homeless,
Taking note a/so of Economic and Social Council dccision 1983/169 of 25 July 1983,
Convinced that special efforts need to be made by States
and the international community in order to reverse the
chronic deterioration in shelter and living conditions suftered by the majority of thc poor in urban and rural settlements, especially in developing countries,
Convinced a/so that national programmes and demonstration projccts for the International Year of Shelter for
the Homeless should be launched as soon as possible,
since most of the action and resources for the Year will be
required at the national and local levels,
Noting with apprcciatio11 the voluntary contributions
and pledges that Governments have so far made for the
lnternational Year of Shclter for the Homcless,
1. Welcomes and endorses the overall plans for activities before, during and after thc lnternational Year of Shelter for the Homeless and the priorities for national and
international action during 1983-1984 containcd in the
report of the Executive Director of the United Nations
Centre for Human Settlements (Habitat) 9 ' to thc Commission on Human Settlements at its sixth session:
2. Ca/Is upon ali Govcrnments, cspccially thosc of
developing countries, to give renewed political commitment and priority to the improvement of thc shelter and
neighbourhoods of the poor and to allocatc the necessary
resources to meet the objecti ves of the lnternational Year
of Shelter for the Homeless:
3. Endorses the proposals contained in the annex to
the present resolution on national action needed before
April 1984 in order to launch the lnternational Year of
Shelter for the Homeless quickly and effectively:
4. Urges ali organizations and bodies of the United
Nations system and other interested intergovernmentaL
non-govemmental and national organizations to make
special efforts through existing and new programmes,
including those aimed at involving public-opinion leaders
and large groups of the population, to help achieve the
objectives of the International Year of Shelter for the
Homeless:
5. Appeals to ali Govemments, especially those of
developed countries and others in a position to do so, and
to international financia! institutions, intergovernmental
and non-governmental organizations, to provide effective
financia) and other support for the programme for the
lnternational Ycar of Shelter for the Homeless.

Thc following natwnal action should he undertakl'n hy countnc'.-1
heforc tht.· sevcnth sc~-.;ion nf thc Commi"s1on on Human Si..'tllcmcnts. tn
hchl'idmA¡ml 1984
(a) Establish national focal points lor thc lnternatinnal \ car ofShelte1
for the Homelcss:

(/,)

'\ssess the ex1st1ng situation and lüture nceds:

(()

Hegm implemtntallon of <ll'monstrat1011 projcch fo1 tite Year

:\

EsT~BLISIIMtl\T tll NI\IIO~I\I
YtAR

.1. Ali interested rnuntncs should dcsignate. as soon as possihk. a
national focal puint for the Internat,onal Year ofSheltcr for 1lw Hnmckss.
Although thcrc shnuld be a spccilie pcrson as a rontact ¡mini, the nat1onal
t(>eal poínt could he- an L'\lstmg agency ora new unit or natíonal comm1tkc. mcludmg rcprcscntativc"-. nf rckvant agencie~ and non-governmcntal
organÍlatíons. spccifically cstahlislwd to st1mulatc and ro-on.hnatc na11onal
and local actíon.

4. Although the funcllons of nat1onal focal pomts for thc lntcrnat1011al
Ycar of Shdtcr for tlw Homcil's~ wtll , a1v from countr! tP niuntry. thc\
muid include:
(a) Receivmg. producmg and exchangmg mformatlon un the programme and plans for the Year. on rcknHll actÍ\'Ít1e~ in otlwr Ct}Untnc~
and othcr programme support intórmat10n:
(h) Devcloping ;.1 11at1onal strateg~ and programnu· for tht· Yl~a1.
111cluding the ident1tl,,:.111011 and select1on of apprl'pnatt dl·monstrat1Pn
proJc-cts:
(e) Encouraging rlose working rclat,onships with and among 11011governmental and rommuml! organ11ations on their project .... plan-.; a11d
possihilities relevan! to the Year:
(d) Stimulating and ro-ordinating local and national aetivities and
projccts for thc Ycar:
(e)

Organizing rcle\ant meetings. semmar~ and traming course~:

(d) Reporting permdirall~ on !he progres~ and ach1e\Tnwnts ofacti\ 1
IIl'\ and projects for tlll' '\ car l1l the part1rular cmmtr~
B.

AssFSSMH..,, ,11- 1111 ,.,,...,,,.....,<, s111·Arn1,-,,; ,~1> 11 11 1 R1

AN!'IEX

National action needed before April 1984 for the
International Year of Shelter for the Homeless
1. Most of the act1on and re,ource, for the lnternat,onal Year of Shelter for thc Homeless will he required al the national ami local lnels. Thc
94 A/.181213-E, 198.1/74 and l 011 1

,,,n..,

In launchmg a natwnal programme fi.n thl' lntcrnat1onal Yl'al of
Shelter for the Homckss and before the actual sekction of spe,·11ic demnnstration projects. countries should undertakc at least a prclimmary asscssmcnt ofthc cxisting s1tuat1on. taking mio an:ount thl' follo\\Ít1g que"itJOn"i:
i.

(a) What are thl' :-.1Ec, d1stnhut1011 and charartcnstJC~ or thc taq:?.cl
group in quantitativc (for cxarnpit'. thosc hclO\\ thl' pnn·rty hnc m urhan
and rural areas) and qualitatívc terms (fr>r cxampk, acc,,:~s to drink111g
water. "ianitation scrv,ces. transportat10n. food. l'ducation. cncrgy r.'
(/,) What prenou, and existing programmes. or parts or programme,.
have successfully pro, 1ded affordahk improvemcnts 111 the sheltcr and
nc,ghbourhoods of thc poor. ami how can thn hest he extended'' WI\\
have other programmes failcd to do so'!
(e) What national and lornl resources (moncy, land. lahour, materials)
are availablc and needed to ,mprove thc shclter and nt'ighhourhood, of thc
target group'! Art' there ohstaclcs to the ful! use of local rcsourees''

(d) What changc, are needed 111 existing prngrammes, polines and
kgal, institut1onal ami financing arrangcnwnh, m ordcr to anl'icratc tlll'
provision of atfordable shdter for thc poor'!
(el

What, based on thc answers to thc ahove questions. are the prio11-

t1c-, within thc national progrnmmc for dnr1011stratwn proin·h durmg tht·

Year?
(.

HHrll\.!',..:l~l, 01

1111· IMl'll·Ml·'-H·\J"IO\J 01 IHMON\IRAIIU\J 1-'ROJl('f.",

H)R 1111- l"llHtr,A.1"1or,,..A.1

102nd plenary meeling
/9 Dccemher /983

FOC,\l l'Ol'll\ IOR TIU ('\llR'-1\IJO',;,-\I

º' SHJ·l I l·R I OR 1111· HOMI I l·S~

YtAR 1>1• S1u-1 ll·R 10K n11

Hn\HI 1-s..,

6. Demonstration pro_jects for the lnternational Year of Shelter for the
Homeless should test and demonstratc new approaehes to hasic prohlcms
111 urban and rural areas. such as providing or improving shelter: providing
an improvcd dnnking water suppl), sanitation and waste disposal: gcncratmg jobs in the formal or mformal construction ~cclor; impnn mg environmcntal and health conditions and St'rvires: upgrading inlrastrurturc ami
services for the poor. mcluding roads, public transportation. energ, and
nll'dicaL social, educat1onal and rerrcational focilitíc~: and providing lowrost building techniqlll'S and materia Is. cspcriall) through tlhffL' \'- 1tk
spread use of indigrnous llll'll1nd~. -.;k11ls and 1 ,,,L-lructínn tr,,:!,·nal-..

V

Resolutions adopted on the reports oí the Second Committee

7. In addition to proJects of a phys,cal ,·haractcr. thc nat1onal programme and project for thc lntcrnational 't car of Shl"ltcr for thc Homclcss
should includc thc rcvicw and ,trengthcning ofpolicy. lcgislativc. organm1tional and fi.nant:ial mcasurcs to assi~l thc poor m nnpro\'mg thc1r shclter
and ncighbourhoods. Arcas of special conn·n• m1ght he legislation on land
and tenure; building codcs ami regulations: linannng. including rrcd11 and
loans for shelter lor the poor; and institutional arrangcrnrnts within and
between national and local authoritics.
8. In order to mee\ the objcctivcs for thc lntcrnat1onal Year ofShclter
for the Homeless. countrics should takc thc following gu1dclim·s into
account in the design. sclcct1on. 1rnpkmcn1ation and nwn1tonng of dcmonstration projects for the Year:
(a) Projccts must explore. test and dcmonstratc esisting or ncw ways
and means of improving the shcltcr and neighhourhoods of thc poor and
disadvantaged. particularly th<>st' helow the povcrty \i~c in urhan and rural
settlerncnts:
(b) Pro1ects must contribute to or result in a dcar and ,isihle 1mprovement in the shelter or neighbourhoods of a1 leas\ sorne of thc poor ami disadvantaged befare 1987;
(e) Projects must he rcplicable. in or<ler for them to rcach many more
of the poor and disadvantagcd. lcading to affordabk improvement, for
many rather than major impruvemcnts for a fcw:
(d) Projccts mus\ scek a pract1cal balance hctwcen wha1 is dcsirahk (in
terms, for example. of hasic health requ1rcmcnts ami s1ruc\ural safety).
attainable (lechnically and adminis1ratively. and using local skills. mcthods
and materials), and affordablc hy the poor themschcs and the nation as a
whole.
D. PRO(,R .. SS RI POR 1
9. In order that ali countnes may he informcd on thc existrng situat1on.
priority concems and activities and plans líir thc lnternational Ycar of
Shelter for the Homeless in other countries. prior to thc scvcnth session of
the Commission on Human Settlements. 111 April 1984. the national focal
points for the Year should suhmi1 to thc l lnited Nations Centre lúr Human
Settlements (Hahitat):
(a) A brief ovcrvicw (maximum two pages in lcngth) of their national
plans. priorities and activitics for the Year. indudrng 111formation rcsponding to the questions in paragraph 5 above:
(b) A one-page summary lur cach or the nat1onal dcmonstration
projects for the Year launched to dale, using a rnmmon format to he prepared by t he Cen trc

38/169.

Immediate implementation of the Nairobi
Programme of Action for the Development
and Utilization of New and Renewable
Sources of Energy

The General Assemhly,
Recallingits resolutions 3201 (S-Vl) and 3202 (S-VI) of
May 1974, containing the Declaration and the Programme of Action on the Establishment of a New International Economic Order, 3281 (XXIX) of 12 December
1974, containing the Charter of Economic Rights and
Duties ofStates, and 3362 (S-VII) of 16 September 1975
on development and international economic co-operation.
Recalling a/so its resolution 35/56 of 5 December 1980,
the annex to which contains the lnternational Development Strategy for the Third United Nations Development
Decade,
Recalling further its resolution 36/ l 93 of 17 December
1981, in which it endorsed thc Nairobi Programme of
Action for the Development and Utilization of New and
Renewable Sources of Energy 96 and, in particular, its resolution 37 /250 of 21 December 1982 on the immediate
implementation of the Nairobi Programme of Action,
Convinced of the importancc of developing new and
renewable sources of energy in order to contribute to meeting the requirements for continued cconomic and social
development, particularlv in thc devcloping countries,
96 Repon rd the c:nilcd 1Vatwns ( ·o,~/cn'nd' on \('H' and Rencwahlc .\'ources
,,(l:"nergy. Na,rohi. IO<'I l11g11.,1 /98/ (linited Nalions puhlirnlion. Sales

No. F.81.1.24). chap. l. sect •\.

IJ7

through, inler afia, thc transition from the prcscnt intcmational cconomy based primarily on hydrocarbons to one
based inneasingl:- on ncw and rcnewable sourccs of
cnergy.
Rcat!imung that, whik thc primary responsibility lúr
promoting the developmcnt and utilitation of new and
rencwablc sources of cncrgy rests with individual countries, international co-operation is indispensable and
should be directcd to assisling and supporting thc national
cfforts or developing countries, that developed countries
should play a special role in contributing actively to this
end and that other countries in a position to do so should
also continue to promotc dforts in this regard,
. livare that thc prcsent world energy situation should not
reverse or halt the efforts of the intemational community
to implement the Nairobi Programmc of Action,
Rccogni::ing the need to takc urgent and conccrted
measurcs for the mobili1ation of additional and adequate
resources necessary for thc implcmentation of the Nairohi
Programme of Action,
Recalling that special11ed intergovemmental organÍlations and institutions in thc li.eld of new and renewable
sources of energy are inv itcd to cxtcnd their co-operation
in ordcr to strengthcn thc co-operativc action of the international communitv and to cnsure that further resourccs
are madc available íor thc developmcnt ofncw and rcnewable sourccs of encrgy, that national public and priva1e
cntitics in interested countrics, as appropriate, havc a role
to play and that, in certain countrics, non-governmental
entities will also havc a significant role to play,
Rccogni:::ing a/so that thc Unitcd Nations system has
initiated the necessary steps towards its full participation
in and support of thc implementation of the Nairobi Programmc of Action and that it is imperative to increasc thc
responsiveness ofthe system in this respect, through, inter
afia. thc provision of additional and adequate resources
and increased co-ordination of thc activities of thc organs,
organizations and bodies of the United Nations systcm,
Emphasizing thc importancc ofthc subrcgional, regional
and intcrregional cfforts for implementing the Nairohi
Programme of Action,
1/aring considcrcd thc rcport of thr Committee on the
Dcvelopment and Utilization of Ncw and Renewahlc
Sources of Encrgy on its tirst session, 97 hcld at Unitcd
Nations Headquarters from 18 to 29 April 1983,

NA!ROBI PROGRAMMI-. OF ACTION FOR THI' DFVl'IOPMFNT AND lJTIUZATION OF NFW AND RFNl'WABU
Sm1Rn-s 01 ENcR<-'

1. Rcatfirms the signiti.cance and importance of thc
Nairobi Programme of Action for the Developmcnt and
Utilization of New and Rencwable Sourccs of Energy as
the basic framework of rcfcrencc for action by the intemational community and rcnews its call for the early and
eflective implementation of the Programme:
2. Emphasizcs the importance of the areas for priority
action designated in section 111.A of the Nairobi Programme of Action 96 and in scction V.B of the report of
the Committee on the Dcvelopmcnt and Utilization of
New and Rencwable Sources of Energy, 97 and calls upon
the Committcr, at its sccond session, to makc recommendations whcrever urgcnt initiatives are requircd:
9 '0{/1011/ Re,·ord, i(f thl' (;n,( r1J/ L,1·mNr. U1nrr--u1;h1h .\'n\loH. Su¡,{lli·
/!/("!'{

,·,,

./4 (,\

18 4.1\.
