4.9

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

(iii) In respect of one representative of each Member
State participating in the Commission on N arcotic Drugs ;
(b) Travel and subsistence expenses shall be paid
in respect of the following persons :
(i) The chairman or the rapporteur of a subsidiary
organ who is called upon to present the report
of such subsidiary organ to a parent organ;
(ii) One member of an organ or subsidiary organ
serving as its designated representative at meetings of a second organ or subsidiary organ;
(iii) One representative of a Member State or one
alternate participating in a subsidiary organ
instituted hy the General Assembly or the Security Council and which is required, by a decision
of the parent organ, to work away from United
Nations Headquarters in the performance of a
special task; payments under this sub-paragraph
shall be subject to the conditions laid down in
paragraph 3 of the annex to the present resolution;
4. Decides that the principles set forth in paragraph
2 above shall also apply to any organ or subsidiary
organ that may be established in the future, unless the
resolution establishing the organ or subsidiary organ
provides otherwise ;
5. Decides that the application of these principles
shall be in accordance with the provisions contained in
the annex to the present resolution ;
6. Authorizes the Secretary-General to establish such
administrative rules and procedures as may be necessary
for the implementation of the present resolution.
1191st plenary meeting,
11 December 1962.
ANNEX
APPLICATION OF PRINCIPLES GOVERNING THE PAYMENT OUT OF
UNITED NATIONS FUNDS OF TRAVEL AND SUBSISTENCE EXPENSES
TO MEMBERS OF ORGANS AND SUBSIDIARY ORGANS OF THE
UNITED NATIONS

Travel expenses
1. In the case of the payment, in terms of operative paragraph 3 (a) (i) of the above resolution, of the travel expenses
of a maximum of five representatives or alternate representatives per Member State to regular sessions of the General
Assembly and of one representative or alternate representative
per Member State to special and special emergency sessions,
such payment shall be limited to the cost, per individual, of one
round trip between the capital city of the Member State and the
place of meeting, or to the actual cost of travel undertaken by
an individual if it represents the lesser amount. Within the
maximum number of payments so allowed may be included the
travel to his capital city and return, for purposes of consultation or report, of a member of a permanent mission in New
York who is designated as a representative or alternate representative to a session of the General Assembly, provided such
travel is certified by the permanent representative to be in
connexion with the work of the particular session and provided
it takes place either during or within three months before or
after such a session. The entitlement in respect of a session shall
not be increased by reason of the recessing and resuming of
that session.
2. In the case of such representatives of Governments to
meetings of organs other than the General Assembly as may
be eligible in terms of the resolution, the payment of travel
expenses shall similarly be limited to the cost of round-trip
travel between the capital city of the Member State and the
place of meeting, or to the cost of travel actually incurred, if
this represents a lesser amount; however, in the case of repre•

sentatives serving on the subsidiary organs dealt with in paragraph 3 (b) (iii) of the resolution, payment shall be limited to
the cost of travel between United Nations Headquarters and
points visited in the field and return, or, in the event that no
meetings at Headquarters are involved, to travel from the duty
station to points visited in the field and return, or to travel
actually undertaken, whichever represents the lesser amount.
3. In respect of all persons dealt with in the resolution who
serve in their individual capacities, as distinct from those serving as representatives of Governments, payment of travel expenses shall be limited to the actual cost of round-trip travel
between the place of residence or duty station and the place of
meeting.
4. Payment of travel expenses shall in all cases be limited
to the cost of first-class accommodation by air or its equivalent
by recognized public transport via a direct route.
5. The United Nations shall not be liable for the payment of
any claim for reimbursement of travel expenses which is submitted later than 31 December of the year which follows the
closing date of the session of the organ or subsidiary organ
to which the claim relates.

Subsistence payments
6. Subsistence payments are intended to provide for additional expenses which an individual normally incurs in attending
an official meeting or session and shall not include any element
of fee or remuneration for services rendered.
7. In accordance with the provisions of General Assembly
resolution 1588 (XV) of 20 December 1960, the following daily
amounts shall be payable to eligible members of organs and
subsidiary organs of the United Nations:
(a) While attending meetings at United Nations
Headquarters, New York........
(b) While attending meetings at Geneva, the
equivalent in Swiss francs of. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
(c) While attending meetings at other places, a
rate to be fixed by the Secretary-General, taking into account the possible provisions of
board and lodging by a host Government, and
not to exceed the equivalent in local currency of
(d) While attending meetings, at the place of
residence or duty station, the equivalent in
local currency of.. . . . . . . . . .
(e) While travelling, by a direct route, aboard
vessels, planes and trains. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

US dollars

30
23

23
10

8

8. Subsistence allowance at the above rates shall be limited
to the period during which a member's presence is required at
the place of meeting, except that a member receiving the $10
allowance shall receive the allowance only for the days during
which he actually attends meetings.
9. In the case of representatives on the subsidiary organs
provided for in paragraph 3 (b) (iii) of the resolution, subsistence shall be payable only during the period of work away
from United Nations Headquarters.
10. The subsistence rates specified. in paragraph 7 above are
subject to any change the General Assembly may subsequently
approve.

1799 (XVII). United Nations Joint Staff Pension
Fund
The General Assembly
I
OPERATION OF THE FUND

1. Takes note of the report of the United Nations
Joint Staff Pension Board on the operation of the United
Nations Joint Staff Pension Fund for the year ended
30 September 1961 ;11
11 Ibid., Seventeenth Session, Supplement No. 8 (A/5208).

50

General Auembly-SeTenteenth Se11ion

2. Concurs in the observations thereon of the Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary
Questions as set forth in its tenth report to the General
Assembly at its seventeenth session ;12

II
AMENDMENTS

TO THE REGULATIONS

OF

THE

FUND

Adopts the texts annexed to the present resolution as
amendments to the Regulations of the United Nations
Joint Staff Pension Fund, with effect from 1 January
1963;
III
ADJUSTMENT OF PENSIONS

Recallinq section TIT. paragraph 6, of its resolution 1561 (XV) of 18 December 1960 in which it
requested the United Nations Joint Staff Pension Board
to study, at its next session, methods by which any
future adjustments in benefits, after their award, might
be made,
Havin.rr noted that the United Nations Joint Staff
Pension Board, after further considering the matter at
its eleventh session, concluded that:
(a) The formulation of a permanent system of adjustment required further detailed study,
(b) Pending the adoption of such a system, an interim adjustment was desirable,
Resolves that, as a temporary measure, pensions and
annuities in payment and deferred annnities awarded as
at 31 December 1961, 1962 and 1963 shall be increased
by 1 per cent on 1 January 1962, 1963 and 1964, this
increase not to apply to the minimum amount of retirement benefits under article IV.1 (b) (i), of widows'
( or disabled widowers') benefits under article VH .4 (a),
or to the minimum and maximum amounts of children's
benefits under article VIII.2 and 3.
1191st plenary mcetinq,
11 Decembrr 1962.
ANNEX
AMENDMENTS TO THE REGULATIONS OF THE UNITED NATIONS
JOINT STAFF PENSION FUND, EFFECTIVE 1 JANUARY 1963

Article II
(Participation)
Replace the present text by the following:
"1. Every full-time member of the staff of each member
organization shall become a participant in the United Nations
Joint Staff Pension Fund if:
"(a) ·His initial appointment is a permanent appointment or
an appointment certified by the member organization to lead
normally to a permanent appointment ; or
"(b) His initial appointment is for five years or more; or
"(c) Having been initially appointed for less than five
years, he subsequently receives :
"(i) A permanent appointment, or an appointment certified
by the member organization to lead normally to a
permanent appointment; or
"(ii) An appointment which will extend his period of employment to or beyond five years ; or
"(d) Having formerly been a participant by virtue of the
present article,
'
"(i) He is reappointed for at least one year, or has completed one year's service since re-employment; and
12 Ibid., Seventeenth Session, Annexes, agenda item 71, document A/5252.

"(ii) He undertakes to restore his prior contributory service credit under the provisions of article XII ;
provided that he is under sixty years of age at the time of
entry or re-entry into the Fund and that his participation is
not excluded by the terms of his appointment.
"2. For the purposes of paragraph 1 (c) (ii) above, separate periods of employment may be added together provided
they are not broken by an interval or intervals totalling more
than one year.
"3. For the purposes of paragraph 1 (d) (i) above, the
period of completed service since re-employment must not
have been broken by an interval or intervals any one of which
exceeded thirty days.
"4. Participation shall cease when the payment of a benefit under these Regulations becomes due to a participant or
on his account.
"5. The foregoing provisions shall apply to the Registrar
and every full-time officer of the Registry of the International
Court of Justice."

A rticlt II bis
(Associate participation)
Add the following new article:
"l. Every full-time member of the staff of each member
organization who is not eligible to become a participant under
article II shall become an associate participant in the United
Nations Joint Staff Pension Fund if:
"(a) His appointment is for one year or more; or
"(b) Having been appointed for less than one year,
"(i) He subsequently receives an appointment for one year
or more; or
"(ii) He has completed one year of employment,
provided that he is under sixty years of age and that his associate participation is not excluded by the terms of his
appointment.
"2. For the purposes of paragraph 1 (b) (ii) above, the
period of completed employment must not have been broken
by an interval or intervals any one of which exceeded thirty
days_
"3. Participation shall cease when an associate participant
is separated from his organization, or when a benefit under
these Regulations becomes payable to him or on his account, or
when he reaches the age of sixty.
"4. An associate participant shall, subject to article IX,
be eligible for a disability benefit under article V, his children
for a child's benefit under article VIII and his survivors for
a death benefit under articles VII and VII /Jis. He shall not
be entitled to a retirement benefit under article IV nor to a
withdrawal settlement under article X, and his survivors shall
not be entitled to a death benefit under article VII t/!1'.
"S. Each member organization shall pay monthly into the
Fund, in respect of each associate participant, a contribution
equal to 4½ per cent of his pensionable remuneration or
such percentage contribution, not to exceed 6 per cent: as
shall be determined from , time to time by the Joint Staff
Pension Board on the basis o~ actuarial valuation of the Fund.
"6. All other provisions of these Regulations consistent
with the present article shall be applicable to associate
participants, mutatis mutandis, in the same manner as to
participants."

Article III
(Validation of non-pensionable service)
Replace the present text by the following :
"l. \Vhen an associate participant or former associate
participant becomes a participant under article II, he may,
subject to the conditions set forth in paragraphs 4, S and 6
below, elect within one year to have included in his contributory service :
"(a) The period of service -during which he was an associate participant, provided it was not interrupted by an interval or intervals totalling more than one year ;
