United Nations

A/RES/59/167

General Assembly

Distr.: General
22 February 2005

Fifty-ninth session
Agenda item 99

Resolution adopted by the General Assembly on 20 December 2004
[on the report of the Third Committee (A/59/497)]

59/167. Elimination of all forms of violence against women,
including crimes identified in the outcome document of
the twenty-third special session of the General Assembly,
entitled “Women 2000: gender equality, development and
peace for the twenty-first century”
The General Assembly,
Recalling the purposes and principles of the Charter of the United Nations,
which, inter alia, calls for international cooperation in promoting and encouraging
respect for human rights and fundamental freedoms for all without distinction as to
race, sex, language or religion,
Recalling also the Universal Declaration of Human Rights, 1 the Declaration on
the Elimination of Discrimination against Women, 2 the Declaration on the
Elimination of Violence against Women, 3 the United Nations Declaration on the
Elimination of All Forms of Racial Discrimination, 4 the Beijing Declaration 5 and
Platform for Action 6 adopted by the Fourth World Conference on Women, the
Vienna Declaration and Programme of Action, adopted on 25 June 1993 by the
World Conference on Human Rights 7 and the United Nations Millennium
Declaration, 8
Recalling further its resolution 57/181 of 18 December 2002 and the agreed
conclusions adopted by the Commission on the Status of Women at its forty-eighth
session on 12 March 2004, 9
_______________
1

Resolution 217 A (III).
See resolution 2263 (XXII).
3
See resolution 48/104.
4
See resolution 1904 (XVIII).
5
Report of the Fourth World Conference on Women, Beijing, 4–15 September 1995 (United Nations
publication, Sales No. E.96.IV.13), chap. I, resolution 1, annex I.
6
Ibid., annex II.
7
A/CONF.157/24 (Part I), chap. III.
8
See resolution 55/2.
9
See Official Records of the Economic and Social Council, 2004, Supplement No. 7 (E/2004/27), chap. I,
sect. A; see also Economic and Social Council resolutions 2004/11 and 2004/12.
2

04-48628

A/RES/59/167

Reaffirming the obligations of all States to promote and protect human rights
and fundamental freedoms, as enunciated in the Charter, and reaffirming also the
obligations of States parties under international human rights instruments, in
particular the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights, 10 the
International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights,10 the Convention
on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination against Women, 11 the
International Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Racial
Discrimination, 12 the Convention on the Rights of the Child, 13 the Convention
against Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment 14
and the International Convention on the Protection of the Rights of All Migrant
Workers and Members of Their Families, 15
Reaffirming also the outcome document of the twenty-third special session of
the General Assembly, entitled “Women 2000: gender equality, development and
peace for the twenty-first century”, 16
Reaffirming further the call for the elimination of violence against women and
girls, especially all forms of commercial sexual exploitation as well as economic
exploitation, including trafficking in women and children, female infanticide, crimes
committed in the name of honour, crimes committed in the name of passion, racially
motivated crimes, the abduction and sale of children, dowry-related violence and
deaths, acid attacks and harmful traditional or customary practices, such as female
genital mutilation and early and forced marriage,
Stressing the importance of the empowerment of women as a tool to eliminate
all forms of violence against women, including crimes identified in the outcome
document of the twenty-third special session,
1.

Welcomes the report of the Secretary-General; 17

2.
Expresses deep concern at the persistence of various forms of violence
and crimes against women in all parts of the world, especially all forms of
commercial sexual exploitation as well as economic exploitation, including
trafficking in women and children, female infanticide, crimes committed in the
name of honour, crimes committed in the name of passion, racially motivated
crimes, the abduction and sale of children, dowry-related violence and deaths, acid
attacks and harmful traditional or customary practices, such as female genital
mutilation and early and forced marriage;
Stresses that all forms of violence against women, including crimes
3.
identified in the outcome document of the twenty-third special session of the
General Assembly,16 are obstacles to the advancement and empowerment of women,
and reaffirms that violence against women both violates and impairs or nullifies the
enjoyment by women of their human rights and fundamental freedoms;

_______________
10

See resolution 2200 A (XXI), annex.
United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 1249, No. 20378.
12
Resolution 2106 A (XX), annex.
13
United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 1577, No. 27531.
14
Ibid., vol. 1465, No. 24841.
15
Resolution 45/158, annex.
16
Resolution S-23/3, annex.
17
A/59/281.
11

2

A/RES/59/167

4.
Also stresses the need to treat all forms of violence against women and
girls of all ages as a criminal offence punishable by law, including violence based
on all forms of discrimination;
Welcomes specific legal and comprehensive legislative measures being
5.
enacted or contemplated, in particular with regard to various forms of violence
against women and girls;
Also welcomes in this regard the launching of various initiatives,
6.
strategies and action plans aimed at, among other things, eradication, prevention,
promotion, information, legislation, protection and welfare, education and research,
enhancement of the economic capacity of women and the monitoring of the various
forms of violence against women;
Reaffirms that there is increased awareness of and commitment to
7.
preventing and combating violence against women, including crimes identified in
the outcome document of the twenty-third special session, welcomes in this context
various legal, administrative and other measures taken by Governments for their
prevention and elimination, and calls for high priority to be attached to the further
strengthening of such measures;
Urges Member States to strengthen awareness and preventive measures
8.
for the elimination of all forms of violence against women, whether occurring in
public or private life, by encouraging and supporting public campaigns to enhance
awareness about the unacceptability and the social costs of violence against women,
inter alia, through educational and media campaigns in cooperation with educators,
community leaders and the electronic and print media;
Calls upon States to encourage and support the active participation of
9.
men and boys in the prevention and elimination of all forms of violence, especially
gender-based violence, and to increase the awareness of men and boys of their
responsibility in ending violence against women;
10. Expresses its appreciation of the work being done by non-governmental
organizations, including women’s organizations, community-based organizations
and individuals, in raising awareness about the economic, social and psychological
costs of all forms of violence against women, including crimes identified in the
outcome document of the twenty-third special session, and in this regard encourages
Governments to continue their support for the work of the non-governmental
organizations in addressing this issue;
11. Calls upon States to fulfil their obligations under the relevant human
rights instruments and to implement the Beijing Platform for Action6 as well as the
outcome document of the twenty-third special session;
12. Encourages States parties to include in their reports to the Committee on
the Elimination of Discrimination against Women and other relevant treaty bodies,
wherever possible, sex-disaggregated data and information on measures taken or
initiated to eliminate all forms of violence against women, including crimes
identified in the outcome document of the twenty-third special session;
13. Urges relevant entities of the United Nations system, within their
mandates, to assist countries, upon their request, in their efforts to prevent and
eliminate all forms of violence against women, including crimes identified in the
outcome document of the twenty-third special session, and in this regard expresses
its appreciation of the work being done by the United Nations Population Fund, the
United Nations Children’s Fund and the United Nations Development Fund for

3

A/RES/59/167

Women and other relevant funds and programmes aimed at preventing and
eliminating violence against women and girls;
14. Invites the Special Rapporteur of the Commission on Human Rights on
violence against women, its causes and consequences to further devote equal
attention to all forms of violence against women, including crimes identified in the
outcome document of the twenty-third special session, in her work and her reports,
within her mandate, to the Commission on Human Rights and the General
Assembly;
15. Requests the Secretary-General to submit a comprehensive report on this
matter to the General Assembly at its sixtieth session.
74th plenary meeting
20 December 2004

4
