United Nations

S/PV.4118 (Resumption 1)

Security Council

Provisional

Fifty-fifth Year

4118th Meeting
Thursday, 23 March 2000, 3.15 p.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Chowdhury . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Bangladesh)

Members:

Argentina . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Cappagli
Canada . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Fowler
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Shen Guofang
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Levitte
Jamaica . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Ward
Malaysia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Hasmy
Mali . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Ouane
Namibia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mrs. Ashipala-Musavyi
Netherlands . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Hamer
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Gatilov
Tunisia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Ben Mustapha
Ukraine . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Yel’chenko
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . . . . . . Mr. Harrison
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Ms. Soderberg

Agenda
Maintenance of peace and security and post-conflict peace-building
Report of the Secretary-General on the role of United Nations peacekeeping in disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration (S/2000/101)

00-35648 (E)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of speeches
delivered in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records of the Security
Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They should be
incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the delegation
concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room C-178.

Security Council
Fifty-fifth year
The meeting was resumed at 3.15 p.m.
The President: I should like to inform the Council
that I have received a letter from the representative of
Indonesia in which he requests to be invited to participate
in the discussion of the item on the Council’s agenda. In
conformity with the usual practice, I propose, with the
consent of the Council, to invite that representative to
participate in the discussion without the right to vote, in
accordance with the relevant provisions of the Charter and
rule 37 of the Council’s provisional rules of procedure.
There being no objection, it is so decided.
At the invitation of the President, Mr. Wibisono
(Indonesia) took the seat reserved for him at the side
of the Council Chamber.
The President: The next speaker inscribed on my list
is the representative of New Zealand. I invite him to take
a seat at the Council table and to make his statement.
Mr. Powles (New Zealand): I should like to say at the
outset, Sir, how pleased my delegation is to participate
under your presidency in a debate of the Security Council
on this crucially important subject. We believe that the
complexities of post-conflict peace-building and the
challenges posed to the United Nations and the international
community generally deserve thorough consideration.
New Zealand has had recent experience of the
challenges of post-conflict peace-building during the current
operation in East Timor, as well as during our ongoing
substantial role in Bougainville, Papua New Guinea, and
elsewhere.
An important point to be made, we believe, is that
obviously no two post-conflict peace-building situations are
the same. It would not be helpful for the Council to seek to
define very detailed policy approaches which would be
applicable in all situations. Nevertheless, my delegation
believes that there are some key principles which do have
general application and deserve greater recognition.
Most important of all, we would place timeliness of
response at the top of any list of key principles.
In the case of East Timor, New Zealand and others
moved quickly, under effective Australian leadership, to
provide the military force necessary to re-establish security,
as mandated by the Council. United Nations agencies, led
by the Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs

2

4118th meeting (Resumption 1)
23 March 2000
(OCHA), responded reasonably promptly with
humanitarian relief. The World Bank and other major
donors also responded at an early stage with the
implementation of a donor coordination programme.
These responses were delivered in a reasonably timely
manner.
There has also been an urgent need to re-establish a
basic civil administration, a legal system, and the
foundation for a functioning economy. This has been done
with greater difficulty. Bureaucratic procedures such as
those used for recruitment for the United Nations
Transitional Administration in East Timor (UNTAET)
seem to underlie some of the unfortunate delays.
While it would not be realistic to expect the
international community to rebuild East Timor’s shattered
economy overnight, we have already seen many signs of
the social stresses inevitable in the period before
employment-generating projects get under way. We
believe this is recognized by UNTAET, the World Bank
and other international donors, but we would emphasize
the important contribution that timely responses in this
field, going beyond emergency humanitarian aid, make to
the peace-building effort.
One practical area that my delegation believes
requires more attention relates to the provision of civilian
police. Inevitably, appropriate numbers of civilian police
cannot be found as quickly as can military forces;
countries simply do not keep civilian police detachments
available for rapid deployment overseas. But the process
of disarmament, demobilization and reintegration of excombatants can be fatally impaired if sufficient numbers
of civilian police cannot be deployed rapidly. We believe
that options for improving the availability of police to the
United Nations need to be urgently explored. However, a
timely response is possible only if good quick-response
systems for deploying key personnel, such as civilian
police, and for delivering the means to rebuild basic
civilian administration are already in place. Such
arrangements do not yet exist across the United Nations
system. This is the challenge that the United Nations
needs to address as a priority.
Identifying appropriate post-conflict roles for former
combatants is inevitably one of the most challenging tasks
in peace-building. Obviously, each situation will require
its own unique solutions. Our experience in both East
Timor and Bougainville underlines, however, the
importance of the early involvement of the local
population in the reconstruction process. Community

Security Council
Fifty-fifth year
development can be instrumental in providing an
atmosphere in which hostile factions can work together. Of
course, women and men must participate equally in that
process.
In Bougainville, New Zealand has been pleased to
provide, by means of our Development Cooperation
Programme, support for the peace process, including the
restoration of civil authority and a variety of vocational
training programmes with a focus on reintegration. We have
found it possible to offer various training programmes in
which former antagonists learn new skills side by side. But
even so, in Bougainville the former combatants retain their
arms although, to their credit, those arms have not been
used against the uniquely unarmed peacekeeping force, the
Peace Monitoring Group. In this situation, further political
progress is clearly necessary to encourage complete
disarmament.
We have studied the comprehensive report the
Secretary-General has provided on this important subject.
Inevitably, his report focused on the subject from a global
perspective, while my comments today have been from the
perspective of my country’s ongoing involvement on the
ground in East Timor and Bougainville. But I would like to
take this opportunity to particularly endorse the SecretaryGeneral’s recommendations regarding the dreadful use of
child soldiers, and we would also emphasize the need to
address the specific situation of girl soldiers.
I would like to conclude by strongly endorsing the
final comment of the Secretary-General in his report:
“The international community’s key role in this
process is to provide clear, consistent and determined
support to an overall peace process and to offer longterm assistance with development.” [S/2000/101, para.
119]
If there is one point we would add to that, it is the
crucial importance of timeliness of response.
The President: The next speaker inscribed on my list
is the representative of Mongolia. I invite him to take a seat
at the Council table and to make his statement.
Mr. Enkhsaikhan (Mongolia): It is a great honour for
me to have the opportunity to participate in this open
debate of the Council on this item. At the outset, I would
like to express my delegation’s appreciation to you,
Mr. President, for this timely initiative to follow-up last
year’s open debate of the Council on this important issue

4118th meeting (Resumption 1)
23 March 2000
with the participation of the wider membership of the
Organization.
My delegation’s thanks and appreciation also go to
the Secretary-General for his report to the Council in
response to last year’s open debate held under Malaysia’s
presidency. My delegation welcomes the
recommendations contained in the Secretary-General’s
report on the question of increasing the role of United
Nations peacekeeping in the disarmament, demobilization
and reintegration of ex-combatants as an integral part of
overall United Nations peacekeeping operations and postconflict peace-building.
My delegation fully agrees with the view that
effective disarmament, demobilization and reintegration
are instrumental in building lasting peace and security in
post-conflict societies. In this respect, the set of
recommendations proposed by the Secretary-General in
his report are crucial in identifying the appropriate
principles and guidelines for a practical disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration programme in a
peacekeeping environment. Therefore we hope that
today’s consideration of this item will prove useful for
future peacekeeping operations and post-conflict peacebuilding activities.
My delegation has on numerous occasions made
statements in the Council’s open debates on the issues
related to the maintenance of international peace and
security, as well as on post-conflict peace-building.
Today, I would like to touch upon some elements that
seem to be essential, from Mongolia’s perspective, to
effective disarmament, demobilization and reintegration
measures in post-conflict situations.
First, any post-conflict peace-building programme
should include short-term measures, such as the
disarmament and demobilization of ex-combatants and the
social integration of political rivals into post-war society
on the basis, of course, of their goodwill and mutual
confidence. Furthermore, these short-term measures need
to be followed-up by long-term programmes and
strategies aimed at strengthening national institutions,
good governance and civil society; promoting democracy
and human rights; eradicating poverty; and, of course,
ensuring sustainable development.
Secondly, disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration, in our view, should form an interrelated and
integrated programme within the mandate of a specific
peacekeeping mission that is supported by sufficient

3

Security Council
Fifty-fifth year
financial and human resources and other necessary
facilities. It is our belief that only such a peacekeeping
mission would be able to fully cope with the tasks assigned.
Thirdly, overall disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration programmes should lay the foundation for a
comprehensive peace agreement that is to end the conflict.
In our view, the plan of measures to be taken, both
nationally and internationally, to implement the tasks of
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration should be
clearly reflected in that peace agreement.
Fourthly, ensuring the participation of international
organizations and Member States and the coordination of
their activities are very important factors in tailoring those
specific peace-building measures and programmes. In our
view, the international community and regional
organizations should play an important role in addressing
the problems of various post-conflict groups on the basis of
new power-sharing or other agreed arrangements. We
believe that, bearing in mind their nature, obligations and
interests, regional organizations have a special stake and
role to play in post-conflict peace-building — a role that no
other international body can effectively fulfil. We hope that
this will be borne in mind.
Fifthly, as far as disarmament is concerned, we attach
great importance to the United Nations conference on the
illicit trade in small arms and light weapons in all its
aspects that is to be convened in June and July 2001. In
this respect, my delegation agrees with others in urging the
international community to spare no effort in bringing the
conference on this crucial issue to a positive outcome.
Sixthly, my delegation would like to support the
Secretary-General’s special focus on the problem of child
soldiers and their integration into society.
Today, about 300,000 children under the age of 18 are
involved in armed conflicts around the world. This is a
truly challenging problem facing the international
community at the dawn of this new century. Therefore,
Mongolia strongly endorses the Secretary-General’s
proposal that the question of child soldiers’ disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration be fully included in overall
peace-building programmes. In this connection, we also
welcome the agreement recently reached in the Working
Group on a draft optional protocol to the Convention on the
Rights of the Child on the involvement of children in armed
conflict, raising the minimum age for participation in
conflict from 15 to 18, and setting the age limit for

4

4118th meeting (Resumption 1)
23 March 2000
compulsory recruitment to 18 and the minimum age for
voluntary enlistment to at least 16.
Lastly, my delegation would like to underline that,
while the United Nations undertakes peacekeeping and
peace-building activities, the principles of political
independence, sovereignty and territorial integrity are to
be fully respected and all States should comply with their
obligations under international law, as is rightly noted in
the draft presidential statement on this issue. My
delegation finds this draft document useful and practical
and hopes it will be adopted soon.
In conclusion, allow me to reiterate once again my
delegation’s support for United Nations efforts aimed at
conflict prevention and resolution, peacekeeping and postconflict peace-building in different regions affected by
armed conflicts. We expect concrete input from today’s
discussion of this important issue.
The President: The next speaker inscribed on my
list is the representative of Croatia. I invite him to take a
seat at the Council table and to make his statement.
Mr. Šimonović (Croatia): I am pleased to greet you,
Sir, as the President of the Security Council for the month
of March and welcome your initiative to hold an open
debate on the centrality of the disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration (DDR) of ex-combatants
to the restoration of stability and sustainable peace.
Croatia understands well the importance of the role
United Nations peacekeeping has played in the past and
could play in the future in this regard. Hence, we wish to
thank and commend the Secretary-General for his
thorough, systematic and comprehensive report on the
topic under our consideration.
The report represents a major contribution to
furthering the awareness of the importance of DDR to the
cause of consolidating peace in post-conflict societies in
several ways. First, it offers useful definitions of
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration in a
peacekeeping environment and a reminder that the success
of these activities depends on their comprehensive, mutual
and continuous reinforcement. Secondly, the report
contains a very useful compendium and critical
assessment of the ways and means in which the various
United Nations, regional and other actors have dealt with
DDR in the past within the context of some peacekeeping
operations and follow-on missions. Thirdly, the SecretaryGeneral identifies a number of challenges for future
implementation of DDR in all segments of the peace-

Security Council
Fifty-fifth year
setting, peacekeeping and peace-building agendas. Fourthly,
he puts forward a number of innovative proposals for
further pioneering action or refinement by the Security
Council and other institutional actors with a vested interest
in assuring irreversible peace.
Croatia has hosted five distinct United Nations
peacekeeping operations in the last nine years. We have
gained experience that entitles us to reflect upon the lessons
learned in peacekeeping and peace-building. I wish to
briefly restate three points from the lessons learned from
the successful United Nations Transitional Administration
for Eastern Slavonia, Baranja and Western Sirmium
(UNTAES). These three points are: the disarmament model
that was used during the UNTAES mission; follow-on
security assistance and political missions that ensued upon
the successful completion of this United Nations Mission;
and national strategy and policy measures regarding the
rehabilitation and reintegration of former combatants.
UNTAES was created in an environment favourable to
its ultimate goal of the peaceful reintegration of the
formerly occupied Croatian territory. There was agreement
of the parties to the conflict. Recourse to the military option
was unattractive to all interested parties and the political
goal of peaceful reintegration was clearly set and known, as
well as supported by the political will of the host
Government, the international community and the skilled
United Nations leadership in the field. And yet, the process
of reintegration was, of course, more than politically
challenging. It represented major technical and bureaucratic
difficulties for the civilian aspects of reintegration.
Critical to the orderly implementation of the civilian
timetable for reintegration, however, was the process of the
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration of former
combatants. Importantly, this process was not only launched
early on in the operation, but also completed swiftly and in
parallel with an innovative manner of a weapons buy-back
scheme.
The firearms buy-back programme lasted approximately 10
months and was jointly conducted by the Croatian
Government and UNTAES. Under the programme, almost
10,000 firearms were collected, for which approximately
$1.6 million were paid. Since August 1999, any further
illegal possession of arms has been penalized. We do
recognize that, in some other environments, similar
weapons buy-back programmes produced undesired
consequences, but I wish to stress that in Croatia such a
programme worked quite well.

4118th meeting (Resumption 1)
23 March 2000
Another important element in UNTAES was the role
played by the Transitional Police Force, which was made
up of 40 per cent Croats, 40 per cent Serbs and 20 per
cent other ethnic groups present in the region. The
international community provided training assistance for
a number of the Transitional Police Force members,
which proved crucial for establishing a high level of
professionalism. This building of local capacity was vital
to the proper reintegration of former combatants and the
maintenance of law and order.
The critical importance of economic and social
policy measures to speeding up reconciliation and the
overall post-conflict recovery cannot be overemphasized.
In Croatia, we tried to stimulate the reintegration of excombatants in several ways, including by adopting an
amnesty law that exonerated former rebels, except for
those who had committed war crimes. Other measures
included priority access by veterans to higher education
and employment in the public sector; preferential lines of
credit for new business ventures or agricultural leases;
special unemployment benefits, including health care; and
early retirement benefits.
Such economic, social and development policy
measures have proven taxing on the national budget of an
economy burdened with reconstruction, low investment
and real growth rates and high unemployment, as is
always the case in a post-conflict society. The new
Croatian Government, which has also recently mounted a
major refugee return programme, has recognized the
challenges of the practical implementation of a
comprehensive reintegration policy. While offering its
unwavering commitment to implementing such a policy,
it has called for much needed international assistance in
resurrecting an economy that could sustain development
needs. At the same time, we recognize that the
contribution of institutional donors might be limited, as it
is also urgently needed elsewhere. Hence, we are placing
particular emphasis on the potential of the private sector
and direct business-to-business cooperation.
In this regard, we wholeheartedly support the
Secretary-General’s emphasis on the potential role to be
played by the business community and his call on the
Security Council
“to explore the creation of mechanisms through
which it could enhance its capacity to enter into
dialogue with business”. (S/2000/101. para. 111)

5

Security Council
Fifty-fifth year
Of equal and timely relevance is his call issued to
Member States to re-examine bilaterally the various
development and trade policies that favour employment
within post-conflict economies.
Although reconciliation is not emphasized in the
Secretary-General’s report, we continue to hold that it
constitutes one of the cornerstones of a successful
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration programme.
Above all, establishing the truth about what happened
during a conflict — particularly establishing responsibility
for war crimes that have been committed — is critical to
healing and reconciliation. The goal of the reintegration of
former combatants thus cannot be attained without this
element of justice. Croatia is aware of its own
responsibilities and obligations in this regard.
It is therefore Croatia’s intention to fully implement a
policy of responsible cooperation with the International
Criminal Tribunal for the former Yugoslavia. For the sake
of justice, the historical record, reconciliation, and peace
and stability in the area, it is vital that the Security Council
use all its power and influence to ensure that all those
indicted, including those from the Republika Srpska and
from the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia, are finally
brought to trial.
The President: The next speaker is the representative
of Bahrain. I invite him to take a seat at the Council table
and to make his statement.
Mr. Buallay (Bahrain) (spoke in Arabic): I wish, Sir,
to congratulate you and your delegation on your election to
membership of the Security Council, and on the excellent
and wise way in which you are presiding over the work of
the Council this month. Our thanks go to you also for
having organized this meeting.
During its tenure as a member of the Security Council,
Bahrain contributed to the consultations on post-conflict
peace-building; we welcomed the outcome of those
consultations. That is what has prompted us to participate
in today’s meeting, in the hope that we would be able to
contribute further to the debate.
Post-conflict disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration operations are of great importance in
stabilizing situations, reducing the probability of new
violence, and facilitating the transition of societies from
conflict to normal life and development. For that reason, it
is very important that disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration programmes be included in any post-conflict

6

4118th meeting (Resumption 1)
23 March 2000
peace agreements. Such agreements must specify the
responsibilities of leading national institutions and other
actors, along with the measures that they need to take
with respect to this issue; they must define both the
strategies and the timetables for these programmes.
We endorse the definitions contained in the report of
the Secretary-General on disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration, but we stress that if such post-conflict
operations are to succeed, we must focus on the following
nine elements.
First, the parties to the conflict must provide precise
information about the size, staffing, location, nature,
number and location of stockpiles of weapons.
Second, the framework for disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration must be defined in the
peace agreement marking the end of a conflict.
Third, the States Members of the United Nations
must provide the political momentum necessary to
encourage negotiators to take the difficult, but necessary,
decisions.
Fourth, ex-combatants must be reassured that their
safety and security will be fully guaranteed prior to and
during the disarmament phase.
Fifth, the expertise and resources necessary for
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration must be
provided, with a view to implementing the peace
agreement.
Sixth, illicit arms flows must be halted.
Seventh, all parties must be persuaded of the futility
of a resumption of hostilities.
Eighth, civil society must be prepared to accept the
reintegration of ex-combatants; this includes the need to
find appropriate jobs for them once they have been
rehabilitated.
And ninth, international efforts to promote
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration must be
coordinated and fostered.
Most of the elements of the disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration of ex-combatants, of
course, are quite clear. But certain issues must be given
more careful consideration. These include the deployment

Security Council
Fifty-fifth year
of United Nations personnel to neighbouring countries with
a view to forging links with their national counterparts, and
to monitoring arms flows in the region. But this must not
compromise the principles of State sovereignty and of noninterference in the internal affairs of States.
There is an inextricable link between the maintenance
and the building of peace. Areas in which conflict had
taken place must not experience the resumption of conflict.
There must be cooperation and coordination between
tow organs of the United Nations: the Security Council,
which is responsible for the maintenance of peace and
security, and the Economic and Social Council, which is
responsible for the building and consolidation of peace,
along with the related specialized agencies. In that
connection, we are pleased to see that there have been signs
of such cooperation and coordination between the two
organs, as in Haiti for example. We would like these links
to be strengthened, as they were when the Presidents of the
two Councils met recently. Why, then, should there not be
a joint meeting of members of the Security Council and of
the Economic and Social Council to consider strategies that
would clearly define the activities of each organ with
respect to the maintenance of international peace and
security.
I cannot fail in conclusion to stress that peace is an
integral whole, no component of which must be neglected.
Peace requires cooperation among all members of the
international community, whether it is a matter of the
maintenance of peace or of post-conflict peace-building.
The President: I thank the representative of Bahrain
for the kind words he addressed to me.
The next speaker is the representative of Costa Rica.
I invite him to take a seat at the Council table and to make
his statement.
Mr. Niehaus (Costa Rica) (spoke in Spanish): I wish
at the outset to congratulate you, Sir, on your assumption
of the presidency of the Security Council and to thank you
for convening this meeting.
Peace is not merely the absence of armed conflict;
peace is harmony among the various sectors of society,
equitable relations among individuals and peoples, and the
rejection of violence and hatred in human relations.
War often leads to other wars. Armed conflicts fuel
deep-rooted hatreds and provoke reprisals. Armed violence

4118th meeting (Resumption 1)
23 March 2000
is an ongoing offence against the dignity and the rights of
individuals. Genuine peace requires the commitment of
all, ex-combatants and civilians alike, in the task of
rebuilding and restoring normalcy to society. Peace
requires active brotherhood among all men. In short,
peace can exist only to the extent that we all recognize
that, as human beings, we are part of the same family.
This goal is not easy to attain. Normalizing human
and international relations after armed conflict phase is an
arduous undertaking. A ceasefire does not halt the
dynamic of violence; hatred and the lust for vengeance
still remain. The temptation to use weapons and military
contingents remains latent. The logic of violence and
military strategy persists. Unless the combatants are
disarmed and demobilized, the prospects of peace will be
darkened by the ever-present threat of the resumption of
hostilities and violent crime.
In Central America we have witnessed first-hand the
importance of the tasks of disarmament, demobilization
and reintegration. On the one hand, we have seen the
achievements of the United Nations Observer Mission in
El Salvador (ONUSAL) and the United Nations
Verification Mission in Guatemala (MINUGUA).
Unquestionably, these missions were key actors in
restoring normalcy and peace to those societies.
On the other hand, in Central America we have also
witnessed failed processes of demobilization and
disarmament. We have seen cycles of revolutionary and
counter-revolutionary groups that continue to cause
suffering for innocent people. We have also seen the
overabundant supply of weapons that, at the end of an
armed conflict, like an epidemic, infects neighbouring
countries with violence, crime and destruction. In Costa
Rica we are well aware of the vital need to disarm
combatants and to destroy their weapons.
The stockpiling of arms and ammunition is a real
obstacle to peace processes and a direct threat to all
countries neighbouring a conflict zone. Costa Rica calls
for the destruction of these weapons and a ban on the
transfer of weapons to anyone who does not comply with
a set of strict international standards of conduct. In this
regard, my Government firmly supports the draft
international code of conduct on arms transfers, prepared
by the former President of Costa Rica, Mr. Oscar Arías
Sanchez, and endorsed by 19 other Nobel Peace Prize
laureates, both individuals and institutions. At the request
of my delegation, this draft code of conduct has been
distributed in document S/2000/146.

7

Security Council
Fifty-fifth year
In addition, while peacekeeping operations can and
must provide valuable support to the tasks of disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration, Governments and groups
involved in the conflicts must assume the primary
responsibility. Political and military leaders of the warring
parties must show their commitment to peace by taking
concrete measures to demobilize and disband their military
contingents. If these tasks are carried out simultaneously on
both sides, they will help reduce tension, promote stability
and build confidence.
My delegation is particularly pleased to welcome the
emphasis placed in the report on the plight of children. It
is alarming that 300,000 boys and girls are now taking part
in armed conflicts. We believe that the participation of
minors under the age of 18 in armed conflicts, be they
combatants or support staff for armed forces, is in all
circumstances unacceptable. Children are the first and the
most defenceless victims of war. All Governments need to
demobilize those minors immediately, whether they are
members of the armed forces or support staff. Similarly,
Governments must actively promote the reintegration of
boys and girls who have been demobilized from opposition
armed forces. It is essential to provide psychological and
social help to these children in order to enable them to
make a full physical and emotional recovery and to be
reintegrated into society.
In particular, we believe that it is necessary to give
greater help to the families of demobilized children so that
they have an emotional support network and a structure of
ethical and moral values that will enable them to become
constructive members of their communities. In short, we
call for a society where families take precedence — not
barracks.
Finally, we cannot ignore the economic aspect of
peace processes. The reintegration of combatants requires
the establishment of employment opportunities and
development. If no alternatives are offered to war and crime
as economic activities, then military personnel will not have
a real incentives to demobilize. Extreme poverty, hunger
and discrimination are often sources of hatred and violence.
Equity, justice and solidarity are essential, fundamental
elements for the building of real and lasting peace.
The President: The next speaker is the representative
of Singapore. I invite him to take a seat at the Council table
and to make his statement.
Mr. Mahbubani (Singapore): We congratulate you,
Mr. President, on your initiative to have a second debate on

8

4118th meeting (Resumption 1)
23 March 2000
the role of United Nations peacekeeping in disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration (DDR). We would also
like to thank Malaysia for introducing this item in the
Council last July. We hope that over time, with the
discussion of disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration, when United Nations delegates see the term
“UN-DDR” they will no longer associate it solely with
the United Nations Delegates’ Dining Room.
The fact that we are talking about DDR today as a
normal aspect of peacekeeping operations shows how far
peacekeeping has evolved. In the early days of
peacekeeping, the sole purpose of a peacekeeping
operation was to provide a buffer between two combating
countries after they had decided to make peace. If these
combatants attempted to breach the peace, the United
Nations peacekeeping operation would merely report the
breach without seeking to enforce the ceasefire. Indeed,
the pride of traditional United Nations peacekeeping
forces was that they could do their job without using
force and, often, without arms. The Blue Helmets served
as a true symbol of peace.
It is truly amazing how much things have changed
since those halcyon days. Indeed, United Nations
peacekeepers have been deployed in such a variety of
roles that it may be legitimate to ask whether the term
“peacekeeping” has a distinct or singular meaning. The
Secretary-General’s initiative in creating a new panel
under the leadership of Mr. Lakhdar Brahimi to study all
aspects of peacekeeping is therefore timely. Significantly,
this project is called “peace operations”. The use of this
term implicitly acknowledges that the concept of
peacekeeping may no longer be adequate to cover all the
work that the United Nations is doing now under the
umbrella of peacekeeping. We would like to note here
that peacekeeping operations are traditionally launched
under Chapter VI of the United Nations Charter, but
sometimes under Chapter VII or in between. It may be
useful for Mr. Brahimi’s panel to assess the criteria for
creating peacekeeping operations under Chapter VI or
Chapter VII, because at this stage we are not clear as to
what the criteria are.
DDR is, therefore, clearly a new dimension of
peacekeeping. However, when we compare this new
dimension with the traditional work done by the Blue
Helmets in the past, we must acknowledge that
disarmament and demobilization are inherently difficult
and dangerous operations. Most people who have been
carrying guns for years have either been shot at or have
been shooting at others. Guns have become an essential

Security Council
Fifty-fifth year

4118th meeting (Resumption 1)
23 March 2000

part of their existence. Indeed, many feel naked without
them. They will not part with their guns easily. One clear
example of this can be found in Sierra Leone. In his new
book, Deliver Us From Evil, William Shawcross writes:

“Disarmament and demobilization of soldiers did not
take place. This was a major reason why the ability
to implement the other aspects of the mandate was
eroded.”

“The RUF [Revolutionary United Front] was part of
a post-cold-war phenomenon — a non-ideological
guerrilla movement. As elsewhere in Africa, AK-47s
gave dispossessed young men more money and more
raison d’être — even if it was only senseless
violence — than peace.”

Clearly, even in relatively successful peacekeeping
operations, DDR can be a problematic element.

But it is not only the United Nations that has had problems
with disarmament. Even peace processes outside the United
Nations framework — for example, the Northern Ireland
peace process — have had similar difficulties with
disarmament.
In reviewing these problems, we asked ourselves one
simple question: which United Nations operations have
successfully carried out disarmament or demobilization?
The failures are of course, well known. Somalia is the best
example, although there the United Nations has been
unfairly blamed for serious errors in judgement by a major
Power acting independently of United Nations control.
Cambodia has rightfully been hailed as a peacekeeping
success story. In an article entitled “The Nightmare is
Over”, which appeared in the New York Times on 12
October 1993, William Shawcross wrote: “Let there be no
doubt about it. Success is the right word” to describe the
United Nations operation in Cambodia.
And indeed, a recent conference on peacekeeping in
Singapore made the following observations:
“From the start, UNTAC [United Nations Transitional
Authority in Cambodia] was conceived as a
comprehensive and ambitious operation, with a good
mix of both peacekeeping and peace-building
elements, including human rights, the return and
rehabilitation of refugees, civil administration, civilian
police and electoral assistance.”
However, the same conference in Singapore also observed
that
“UNTAC was, however, not a complete success.
Ceasefire was not fully realized.”
And these are the crucial words:

Indeed, if one reads the report of the SecretaryGeneral carefully, the only clear example of success that
is frequently mentioned is Mozambique, although in some
aspects this, too, was seen or described as a qualified
success. There may be other success stories, but we must
confess that we did not find them in the report. What we
did find in the report, however, was sound
commonsensical advice on the key factors that could lead
to success in disarmament and demobilization. These
included the political will of parties to the conflict to
abide by the peace agreement; full cooperation of the
whole affected population, including both combatants and
non-combatants; a clear and robust mandate for DDR in
the peacekeeping operation; strong political support from
the Security Council and the international community; the
swift provision of ample resources for DDR; and the swift
deployment and considerable deterrent capacity of the
peacekeeping operation.
There is one particular paragraph of the SecretaryGeneral’s report is worth reading in full:
“The ability of an operation to reassure
demobilizing combatants of their security may
require considerable deterrent capacity; this should
be available as swiftly as possible with deployment
of an operation. If an operation arrives in the field
without the necessary capacity, this not only hobbles
its practical effectiveness, but undermines its
political viability. Credibility becomes a wasting
asset unless support is forthcoming to sustain it, and
where an operation is called upon to discharge a
robust role in ensuring security, it is particularly
important that well-equipped elements be deployed
quickly. A mission that has been perceived as strong
from the beginning of its deployment is far less
likely to be tested than one which is perceived as
initially vulnerable or ineffective.” (S/2000/101,
para. 67)
Therefore, the Secretary-General’s report essentially
indicates that a long list of factors are required for a
successful DDR process. The logical conclusion that
emerges from the report is that the success of DDR

9

Security Council
Fifty-fifth year
depends on the overall conceptual soundness and viability
of the peacekeeping operation that is launched. DDR on its
own cannot be the crucial variable to determine a
peacekeeping operation’s success. A conceptually unsound
peacekeeping operation cannot be rescued by good DDR,
but a conceptually sound peacekeeping operation can be
assisted by DDR.
A simple analogy may help explain this point. Each
time the Council launches a new peacekeeping operation,
we should compare it to the launch of a new sailing boat.
Preferably, of course, it should be launched in propitious or
favourable weather, but we are sure that the Council is
aware of this. Whether the boat sinks or sails after the
launch will depend on the conceptual and practical
soundness of its construction. Poorly designed boats are
more likely to sink. They are handicapped even before they
are launched.
The elements of DDR serve as three additional sails
on such a boat. On a well-designed boat, with favourable
winds, they can help. On a poorly designed boat, even the
best sails will make no difference. Hence, one key point
that we hope to put across today is that each time we
discuss DDR, we should do so in a holistic manner: look at
the total picture of the boat and not just the sails.

4118th meeting (Resumption 1)
23 March 2000
Given the nature of the problems that they have to deal
with, they are inevitably launched in messy and often
difficult situations. But these obvious difficulties make it
even more imperative for the Council to identify the
critical factors that will create success stories rather than
failures out of new peacekeeping operations.
Peacekeeping operations, as we indeed noted in our
previous statement to the Council, are once again
becoming a growth industry. The number of peacekeepers
reached a high of about 80,000 in 1994, but then declined
to around 10,000 in 1998-99. The number is now on the
verge of going up significantly again. In the mid-1990s,
we went through one wave of disillusionment that led to
a sharp cutback in peacekeeping operations. How do we
prevent another wave of disillusionment? This is the
underlying concern that explains the remarks we are
making to the Council today.

We make this point here because the record of the
Security Council in launching peacekeeping operations has
been a little mixed. Many successful operations have been
launched. The success stories are well known and lauded,
but there have also been failures. This is normal. The
Security Council is a human institution. Like all human
creations, it has also erred, but, unlike other human
institutions, it does not freely or frankly discuss its failures.

Hence, we applaud the greater attention that the
Council is paying to many key dimensions of
peacekeeping operations, including DDR. We also value
the attention that the Council is paying to the
demobilization of child soldiers in this context. In this
regard, we welcome the progress made in child protection
and note that senior child protection advisers have been
included in two recent peacekeeping operations in Africa
to help ensure that protection of children’s rights remains
a priority throughout. We hope that the Secretariat and
other key United Nations agencies, like the United
Nations Development Programme and the United Nations
Children’s Fund, will provide greater support to the office
of Under-Secretary-General Olara Otunnu, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for Children and
Armed Conflict.

Take the two most recent peacekeeping operations that
have been launched: in Kosovo and East Timor. The
operation launched in Kosovo clearly appears to be
conceptually unsound. The reasons are obvious. No
explanation is needed. The daily reports we read of the
trials and travails of United Nations and other peacekeepers
in Kosovo confirm that all is not well. The current phase of
the East Timor operations, by contrast, appears to be a
conceptually sound operation, even though we have to
concede that the initial phase under the United Nations
Mission in East Timor had flaws. We hope that the rest of
the East Timor operation will continue to do well.

We believe that all this attention needs to be woven
into a holistic approach that the Council should take
towards new peacekeeping operations. Political realities
often dictate both the location and nature of the new
peacekeeping operations that are created. But these
political realities have to be balanced with a careful,
professional evaluation of the soundness of the operations
that are to be launched. Most of us would be alarmed if
sailing boats were built and launched without professional
advice having been heeded. We should be equally
alarmed if new peacekeeping operations are launched in
a similar manner.

Our role here is not to be negative. We are acutely
aware, as are most in this Chamber, that most peacekeeping
operations are not launched under perfect circumstances.

The President: The next speaker inscribed on my
list is the representative of Colombia. I invite him to take
a seat at the Council table and to make his statement.

10

Security Council
Fifty-fifth year

4118th meeting (Resumption 1)
23 March 2000

Mr. Valdivieso (Colombia) (spoke in Spanish): I
should like to thank you, Mr. President, for allowing me to
participate in this debate. At the same time, I should like to
acknowledge the report of the Secretary-General and to
thank him for it, as well as for the introductory comments
that he made this morning.

continuous and uninterrupted support for post-conflict
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration activities.
Peacekeeping missions are important instruments for that
purpose, but we must not lose sight of the real causes of
conflict, which may be many and may require a long-term
response.

I should like to begin by highlighting the important
role of the Security Council in the process of disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration (DDR) through its
peacekeeping operations. It is clear from the statements
made during this debate that there are two essential
prerequisites for such a process to be successful in a peacebuilding environment. On the one hand, the conditions for
the DDR process must be set out in the peace agreements
signed by the parties to a conflict, while, on the other, the
financial means required for the implementation of the
process must be assured. These two prerequisites are
essential for any DDR process, but they are not sufficient
to ensure its success. It is worthwhile to point out, however,
that there have been some successful cases of DDR in
which neither the Security Council nor any peacekeeping
operation has been involved.

One area of great concern for Colombia is the wide
availability of weapons in conflict zones and the illegal
traffic in weapons. We believe that the international
community has now become aware of the need to
exercise stricter control over the trade in small arms. The
upcoming Conference on the Illicit Trade in Small Arms
and Light Weapons will provide a great opportunity for
us to respond to this factor, which destabilizes peace.

In his report, the Secretary-General clearly presents the
experience of peacekeeping operations in the processes of
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration. We share in
particular his suggestions about the need for the United
Nations to have at its disposal sufficient information about
experts who could provide assistance to the Organization
when the United Nations is called upon to participate in
DDR activities. Furthermore, we consider his comments
about the need to provide training to participants in
peacekeeping missions on practical aspects of the DDR
process to be relevant. However, we should like to make
our own assessment with regard to the involvement of the
United Nations in this area.
The signing of a peace agreement putting an end to an
armed conflict should be seen as an achievement deserving
the broadest support of the international community.
However, the stage of managing peace is much more
difficult and tends to take place without much fanfare and
without making great headlines in the press. Hence, there
is a risk of losing the initial international support that was
generated for peace. When this happens and the support of
the international community falls off, or when the
international community is slow to react to a post-conflict
situation, the risk of a return to conflict increases.
We therefore recognize the importance of giving the
United Nations effective tools to enable it to provide

The disarmament, demobilization and reintegration
process requires great trust to be established between the
parties. Post-conflict reintegration, in particular, can call
for economic rehabilitation or the establishment of new
governmental institutions, which might exceed the limits
of a peacekeeping operation. In such cases, we need to
turn to the modalities of cooperation for development of
other United Nations bodies, and we must respect their
mandates.
In this context, we wish to highlight the work carried
out by other bodies of the United Nations system in the
process of reintegration, and we welcome the evergrowing participation of the World Bank. This is a stage
that requires considerable investment to generate
permanent sources of employment, rebuild the social
fabric and establish new institutions. The broad
participation of various international actors is therefore
required at this peace-building stage. The calamities
caused by war have worsened the living conditions of
millions of people throughout the world. Let us ensure
that indifference or an improvisational approach on the
part of the international community to disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration programmes does not
reverse progress on the road to peace.
The President:The next speaker inscribed on my list
is the representative of Guatemala. I invite him to take a
seat at the Council table and to make his statement.
Mr. Rosenthal (Guatemala) (spoke in Spanish):
Guatemala could not fail to take part in this debate in the
Security Council on the role of the United Nations in
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration. Ours is
one of the countries that is fortunate enough to be a

11

Security Council
Fifty-fifth year
success story in this regard, a success that unfolded under
the auspices of the United Nations.
We are grateful for the lucid report introduced by the
Secretary-General. We believe that it highlights some of the
issues that have been part of our own experience since
December 1996, when an internal conflict that had lasted
for almost 40 year was brought to an end. In the case of
Guatemala, the three elements that form the subject of
today’s debate — disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration — have received distinct, but interrelated
treatment, in my country’s Peace Accords. I am happy to
report today on considerable progress in all three areas:
total compliance in disarmament and demobilization and
significant progress with regard to reintegration.
Since I am one of the last speakers, I can add little of
a conceptual nature to what has already been said. I can,
however, contribute concrete, real-life experiences. In that
respect, there are two aspects to which I would draw
attention.
The first concerns the way in which domestic actors
interact with the international community, and the second
the link between peace-building operations and
humanitarian assistance on the one hand, and development
on the other.
Let me turn to the first aspect. The international
presence, in particular that of the United Nations, was
noteworthy both during the negotiation of the Peace
Accords and during their implementation. But at no time
did that international presence replace the domestic actors
as a determining force. Indeed, we believe that one of the
lessons of the Guatemala peace process relates to the key
importance of the domestic actors being in the proverbial
driver’s seat. When I speak of domestic actors, I am not
referring only to the Government and the ex-insurgents but
to civil society as a whole, since the peace process in
Guatemala has been quite participatory. The fact that the
international presence was not perceived to be excessively
intrusive is due to a large degree to the respect that the
United Nations engenders thanks to its impartiality and
neutrality. In fact, it was the United Nations that
coordinated, at least partially, the presence of other
international actors — the so-called Group of Friends of the
Guatemalan Peace Process — in the areas of the
consolidation of peace and of external cooperation.
That brings me to my second point. Activities to
consolidate peace in Guatemala are intimately connected to
the development effort. Indeed, the bulk of the specific

12

4118th meeting (Resumption 1)
23 March 2000
commitments contained in the Peace Accords involves
economic and social development. The United Nations
Verification Mission in Guatemala monitors development
and humanitarian aspects, and it maintains very close ties
with the United Nations Development Programme and the
rest of the United Nations system. All parties understand
that for demobilization and reintegration to be successful,
the economic environment must be favourable.
Finally, many of the issues raised in the SecretaryGeneral’s report have found concrete expression in
Guatemala’s experience, be it in the area of addressing
the needs of children who are victims of conflict, in the
area of disarmament or in that of promoting respect for
human rights. The activities of the Organization in the
field are providing many lessons that can facilitate our
collective actions in other parts of the world, in
compliance with the overarching objectives of the Charter
of the United Nations. For this reason, my country is truly
grateful to the United Nations.
The President: The next speaker inscribed on my
list is the representative of Indonesia. I invite him to take
a seat at the Council table and to make his statement.
Mr. Wibisono (Indonesia): Sir, my delegation
wishes to extend its congratulations on your assumption
of the presidency of the Security Council for the month
of March. We have full confidence that under your wise
guidance, progress will be made in dealing with the issues
on its agenda. Let me also extend felicitations to your
predecessor, Ambassador Arnoldo Listre of Argentina, for
his skilful stewardship of the Council’s activities last
month.
Indonesia wishes to commend the delegation of
Bangladesh for its initiative to have the Council consider
the agenda item before us. We believe that it is both
timely and appropriate and that it will be beneficial not
only to the international community but also to the
countries directly concerned.
The report of the Secretary-General has rightly
focused our attention on the complexities of the
interrelated issues involved and on the role of
peacekeeping in disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration. The report also makes clear the crucial role
of international assistance in ensuring the effective
implementation of the agreements reached and the
marshalling of resources needed to advance the peace
process.

Security Council
Fifty-fifth year
The international dimension of these activities should
focus on the role of the United Nations and of regional
organizations in their respective spheres of competence.
Their involvement within a framework for cooperation will
have a salutary impact by bringing a measure of stability,
which, as experience has shown, has led in some instances
to the restoration of normalcy in troubled areas. But first
and foremost, the success of these endeavours depends
ultimately on the willingness of the parties involved to
abide by the terms of the peace agreements and to give up
the use of force, which is a sine qua non for launching the
three-pronged approach of disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration.
Moreover, the handing over of weapons to competent
authorities and the ensuing demobilization have positive
implications for security in post-conflict situations,
especially in ensuring and promoting the peace process. We
recognize the importance of creating an atmosphere
conducive to security by disarming the combatants and
collecting armaments from civilians within the framework
of an overall weapon-collection programme, so as to
promote an environment in which weapons are no longer
perceived to be necessary.
It is poignant to note that 300,000 children under the
age of 18 have been used as soldiers in conflicts around the
world. It is alarming to note that such activities are on the
increase, which calls attention to the need for their
demobilization and reintegration into society. Their future
is in jeopardy due to limited educational opportunities,
which alone can prepare them for productive careers. It is
self-evident that more needs to be done to ensure them a
rightful place in society through adequate support
programmes.
Special attention should be paid to child soldiers in
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration activities.
Bearing in mind the vulnerability of children, the
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration of child
soldiers should be pursued in a specific manner. As
conflicts are resolved, their rights, as stipulated in the
Convention on the Rights of the Child, should immediately
be restored, protected and promoted. Their reintegration
into their family and society is crucial. First priority should
be given to school education for them.
Another important issue is curbing the flow of arms
across national borders through clandestine means after
disarmament is achieved, as it would have a profoundly
negative impact on security and portend a potentially
explosive situation. Determined and coordinated efforts at

4118th meeting (Resumption 1)
23 March 2000
the national, regional and international levels can stem the
cross-border flow of weapons.
Finally, the question of adequate financing needs to
be addressed to ensure the implementation of programmes
for the reintegration and reconstruction of a damaged
economy. This calls for the distribution of financial
assistance on a fair and equitable basis between the excombatants and the civilian population, many of whom
also face extreme economic hardship.
The complexity and multidimensional nature of
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration of excombatants call for political will, which is of the utmost
importance in bolstering the role of the United Nations
through the modality of peacekeeping. We believe that,
based on the Organization’s experience in various
conflicts, it is time to approach these issues on the basis
of guidelines to be drawn from the Secretary-General’s
report.
The President: I thank the representative of
Indonesia for his kind words addressed to me and my
country.
The next speaker inscribed on my list is the
representative of Egypt. I invite him to take a seat at the
Council table and to make his statement.
Mr. Aboul Gheit (Egypt) (spoke in Arabic): The
delegation of Egypt has read the report of the SecretaryGeneral on the role of peacekeeping in disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration of ex-combatants,
contained in document S/2000/101, which was submitted
at the request of the Council pursuant to the presidential
statement of 8 July 1999 on this subject. We would like
to extend our thanks to the Secretary-General for
preparing the report and to offer some observations on the
handling of this question in the Security Council.
First, the delegation of Egypt takes note of the
enhanced mandates given to peacekeeping operations by
the Council in the area of the disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration of ex-combatants. In this
respect, we would like to state that any mandate of this
kind should be carried out with the full cooperation and
agreement of the parties to the conflict, as their agreement
is the sole basis on which the implementation of these
activities can begin. Such agreement is an indication of
the necessary political will to proceed with the
implementation of these activities. We cannot impose the

13

Security Council
Fifty-fifth year
implementation of these activities without the agreement of
the parties concerned.
Secondly, my delegation believes that in cases where
the Security Council gives special mandates to
peacekeeping operations to carry out these activities, it
should ensure the adequacy of the resources provided to the
Members of the United Nations and their forces who are
asked to implement the mandate and supervise such
activities. This is particularly necessary with regard to the
disarmament and demobilization component if we are to
avoid any dangerous problems that may arise from a lack
or insufficiency of resources. In this connection, I cannot
fail to mention the reference in paragraph 64 of the
Secretary-General’s report to the failure to demobilize
combatants in Angola during the United Nations Angola
Verification Missions because of the inadequacy of human
and material resources at the time.
Thirdly, we recognize the danger by small arms,
which are widely used in internal conflicts and civil wars.
We are also aware that the Security Council sometimes
faces cases in which it must tackle the spread of these
weapons in conflict zones. However, we believe that this
question should primarily be dealt with in the relevant
forums, particularly the General Assembly. Addressing the
issue of small arms in the Security Council should therefore
be limited to the operational aspects related to the
disarmament of combatants within the framework of
peacekeeping operations; it should not extend into other
aspects arising from central and conceptual aspects of the
problem of small arms.
Along these lines, I would also like to point out that
the disarmament, demobilization and reintegration of excombatants are long-term programmes that are part of a
continuum, as the Secretary-General’s report indicates.
Many United Nations bodies and agencies working in the
post-conflict peace-building process also deal with these
matters, including the General Assembly and the Economic
and Social Council. The peace-building process should be
tackled comprehensively, given the interrelated nature of its
elements. In this regard, I must refer to the importance of
coordination between all United Nations bodies and
agencies working in this field in avoiding any conflict
where negative results might affect the successful
implementation of a mission’s mandate.
Fourthly, it is important to pay tribute to the important
role played by some non-governmental organizations in
carrying out the demobilization and reintegration of excombatants in some States. Egypt welcomes that role as

14

4118th meeting (Resumption 1)
23 March 2000
long as those organizations abide by the basic conditions
of their work in this sensitive area, seeking the agreement
of the Government concerned and respecting its national
rules and regulations.
I would now like to move from general points to
two more specific examples: the cases of Congo and
Sierra Leone. I would like to point out that the problem
of armed groups in eastern Congo that are not parties to
the Lusaka Agreement represents a great source of
destabilization in the Congo and neighbouring countries.
They add a dangerous dimension to the already
complicated, difficult and multifaceted conflict in that
country. The international community cannot support the
implementation of the Lusaka Ceasefire Agreement
without reaching a permanent solution to the problem of
these armed groups. The United Nations cannot establish
and deploy an entire peacekeeping operation without
drawing up and implementing a general and
comprehensive programme to disarm, demobilize and
reintegrate these groups into civilian life.
It is our hope that the Joint Military Commission
will be able to set up a plan in cooperation and
coordination with the United Nations to proceed with the
implementation of this part of the Ceasefire Agreement in
the near future, so as to help pave the way for the other
military aspects of the Lusaka Agreement. Agreeing on an
ambitious plan to disarm, demobilize and reintegrate the
so-called negative forces in eastern Congo will not
contribute in itself to solving the dangerous problem
posed by those armed groups. What is required is the
coordination of the efforts of the United Nations, the
Organization of African Unity, the Joint Military
Commission and the parties to the conflict themselves to
ensure the successful implementation of such a plan after
its drafting and ratification. Undoubtedly, the World Bank
can play a pivotal role in preparing and implementing
such a programme in cooperation with the United Nations
and other parties concerned. This will, of course, require
vast financial resources, which we hope the donor
countries will provide.
Finally, we would like to say that the peacekeeping
operation in Sierra Leone, which will be the largest
peacekeeping operation in the world once it is fully
deployed, is a clear example of the pivotal role that the
international Organization could carry out in the field of
the disarmament, demobilization and reintegration of
combatants, particularly child soldiers. The successful
implementation of this programme in Sierra Leone will
undoubtedly contribute to a great extent to laying the

Security Council
Fifty-fifth year
security, political, economic and social basis that is
necessary to achieving peace and stability in that country,
which has suffered the scourge of civil war since 1991.
While we call upon all parties to participate in the
disarmament and demobilization of combatants and upon
the leaders of the Revolutionary United Front and the
former military regime to cooperate fully with the efforts of
the United Nations and the Secretary-General’s Special
Representative on Sierra Leone in this respect, we hope
that the donor countries will start providing the financial

4118th meeting (Resumption 1)
23 March 2000
resources necessary to implement this programme,
particularly through their contribution to the Trust Fund
established by the World Bank for that purpose. We hope
that the international conference to be held in London on
27 March will lead to positive results in this respect.
The President: There are no further speakers
inscribed on my list.
In accordance with the agreement reached, the next
meeting of the Security Council to continue the
consideration of this item on the agenda will take place
immediately following the adjournment of this meeting.
The meeting rose at 4.45 p.m.

15
