60

General Asaemhly-'11drteenth Session

4. Deplores the continuing repression in Hungary of
fundamental rights of the Hungarian people and of their
freedom of political expression under the shadow of the
continuing presence of Soviet armed forces ;

1344 (XIII). Report of the Secretary-General on
the Second United Nations International
Conference on the Peaceful Uses of Atomic
Energy

5. Denounces the execution of Mr. Imre Nagy,
General Pal Maleter and other Hungarian patriots;

The General Assembly,

6. Condemns this continued defiance of the resolutions of the General Assembly;
7. Again calls upon the Union of Soviet Socialist
Republics and the present authorities in Hungary to
desist from repressive ,measures against the Hungarian
people and to respect the liberty and political independence of Hungary and the Hungarian people's
enjoyment of fundamental human rights and freedoms;

8. Declares that the United Nations will continue to
be seized of the situation in Hungary in view of the fact
that the Government of the Union of Soviet Socialist
Republics and the present authorities in Hungary are
disregarding the above-mentioned resolutions of the
General Assembly;
9. Decides to appoint Sir Leslie Munro to represent
the United Nations for the purpose of reporting to
Member States or to the General Assembly on significant developments relating to the implementation of the
Assembly resolutions on Hungary ;
10. Requests the Secretary-General to provide the
necessary facilities to assist Sir Leslie Munro in the
performance of his duties.
787th plenary meeting,
12 December 1958.

1325 (XIII). Admission of the Republic of
Guinea to membership in the United Nations
The General Assembly,
Having received the recommendation of the Security
Council of 9 December 19586 that the Republic of
Guinea should be admitted to membership in the United
Nations,
Having considered the application for membership of
the Republic of Guinea,7
Decides to admit the Republic of Guinea to membership in the United Nations.
789th plenary meeting,
12 December 1958.

• Ibid., Thirteenth Session, Annexes, agenda item 73, document A/4049.
• Ibid., document A/4048.

Recalling its resolutions 810 (IX) of 4 December
1954 and 912 (X) of 3 December 1955 relating to the
two international conferences on the peaceful uses of
atomic energy, to the International Atomic Energy
Agency and to the Secretary-General's Advisory Committee in this field,
Having considered the report of the Secretary-General8 on the Second United Nations International Conference on the Peaceful Uses of Atomic Energy held in
Geneva from 1 to 13 September 1958,
N o.t,i,ng therein the need stated by the Secretary-General for the continuing expert assistance of the Advisory
Committee with broader terms of reference,
Recognizing the helpfulness of a thorough evaluation
of the Second Conference in considering the need, nature and timing of similar conferences in this field,
1. Records its satisfaction with the contribution made
by the Second United Nations International Conference on the Peaceful Uses of Atomic Energy to the free
international exchange of' scientific and technical information and to expanded international co-operation in
the field of peaceful uses of atomic energy ;

2. Expresses its appreciation to the Secretary-General, the Advisory Committee, the Secretary-General of
the Conference and the participants in the Conference
for their co-operation in the planning, organizing and
successful conduct of the Conference ;

3. Decides that the Advisory Committee established
in paragraph 5 of section B of resolution 810 (IX) and
continued under paragraph 7 of section I of resolution
912 (X), as now constituted, shall be extended as the
United Nations Scientific Advisory Committee, and
that henceforth it shall advise and assist the SecretaryGeneral, at his request, on all matters relating to the
peaceful uses of atomic energy with which the United
Nations may be concerned ;
4., Requests the Secretary-General and the United
Nations Sciehtific Advisory Committee, in consultation
with the International Atomic Energy Agency and the
interested specialized agencies, to undertake a thorough
evaluation of the Second Conference in relation to the
need, nature and timing of similar conferences in this
field;
5. Requests the Secretary-General to submit an interim report to the General Assembly at its fourteenth
session and a report on the results of such study at the
fifteenth session.
791st plenary meeting,
13 December 1958.
• Ibid., agenda item 66, document A/3949.
