A/64/PV.57

United Nations

General Assembly

Official Records

Sixty-fourth session

57

th plenary meeting
Friday, 4 December 2009, 3 p.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Ali Abdussalam Treki . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (Libyan Arab Jamahiriya)

In the absence of the President, Mr. Mohamed
(Maldives), Vice-President, took the Chair.
The meeting was called to order at 3.10 p.m.
Agenda item 76 (continued)
Oceans and the law of the sea
(a) Oceans and the law of the sea
Reports of the Secretary-General (A/64/66 and
A/64/66/Add.1 and Add.2)
Report on the results of the assessment of
assessments (A/64/88)
Report on the work of the United Nations
Open-ended Informal Consultative Process on
Oceans and the Law of the Sea at its tenth
meeting (A/64/131)
Report on the work of the Ad Hoc Working
Group of the Whole to recommend a course of
action to the General Assembly on the regular
process for global reporting and assessment of
the state of the marine environment, including
socio-economic aspects (A/64/347)
Draft resolution (A/64/L.18 and Corr.1)

(b) Sustainable fisheries, including through the
1995 Agreement for the Implementation of the
Provisions of the United Nations Convention on
the Law of the Sea of 10 December 1982
relating to the Conservation and Management
of Straddling Fish Stocks and Highly Migratory
Fish Stocks, and related instruments
Report of the Secretary-General (A/64/305)
Draft resolution (A/64/L.29)
Mr. Limeres (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish):
Allow me at the outset to congratulate and thank both
coordinators, Ms. Holly Koehler of the United States
and Ambassador Henrique Valle of Brazil, for having
led with remarkable professionalism the negotiations
on the draft resolutions before the General Assembly
today. We also welcome the presence among us of the
President of the International Tribunal on the Law of
the Sea, Judge José Luis Jesus, and the SecretaryGeneral of the International Seabed Authority, Mr. Nii
Allotey Odunton.
The United Nations Convention on the Law of
the Sea is one of the clearest contributions to the
strengthening of peace, security, cooperation and
friendly relations among all nations. At the same time,
it is one of the international instruments with the
greatest economic, strategic and political ramifications.
The goal of the negotiators of the Convention was
to settle all issues relating to the law of the sea in one
single instrument. Its provisions, therefore, strike a
delicate balance between the rights and duties of

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. Corrections should be submitted to the original
languages only. They should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature
of a member of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room
U-506. Corrections will be issued after the end of the session in a consolidated corrigendum.

09-63459 (E)

*0963459*

A/64/PV.57

States. That balance took shape over nine years of
negotiation and must be preserved by all States, both
individually and as members of international
organizations with competence in ocean affairs and of
organizations of any kind.
The time elapsed since the Convention’s adoption
in 1982 has proven that it is a true “constitution of the
oceans”, with a clearly universal character. In that
regard, we welcome its ratification by Chad, the
Dominican Republic and Switzerland.
The Argentine delegation will, at the appropriate
time, make a statement in explanation of our position
on the draft resolution on sustainable fisheries
(A/64/L.29) to be adopted by consensus today.
Nevertheless, we would like to take this opportunity to
refer to some of the issues dealt with in that draft
resolution and in the draft resolution on oceans and the
law of the sea (A/64/L.18).
The question of biodiversity beyond the limits of
national jurisdiction is one of the emerging issues of
the law of the sea. In February 2010, the second next
meeting of the Ad Hoc Open-ended Informal Working
Group established by resolution 59/24 will be held. In
that regard, Argentina is concerned about certain
proposals put forward during the negotiations of the
draft resolution on oceans and the law of the sea the
result of which could have overburdened the Working
Group at a time when it has not yet concluded an
extremely important debate, that on the legal regime
applicable, under the Convention, to genetic marine
resources in areas beyond national jurisdiction.
In addition, in that connection my delegation
wishes to highlight that in recent years the use of the
ambiguous term “areas beyond national jurisdiction”
has led to a certain level of confusion on how to deal
with the conservation and use of those resources in the
two maritime areas beyond national jurisdiction in
question, namely, the high seas and the Area.
We would therefore like to recall once again that
the question of the legal regime is still outstanding, as
reflected in paragraph 142 of the draft resolution that
we are about to adopt (A/64/L.18). This issue should
be addressed within the context of the mandate of the
Working Group, with a view to making progress. My
country expects that in the course of that work,
Member States will take into account the fact that one
of the purposes of the Convention was to develop the
principles embodied in resolution 2749 (XXV) of 17

2

December 1970. In that resolution, the General
Assembly solemnly declared, inter alia, that the area of
the seabed and ocean floor, and the subsoil thereof,
beyond the limits of national jurisdiction, as well as its
resources “are the common heritage of mankind”, the
exploration and exploitation of which “shall be carried
out for the benefit of mankind as a whole”.
This year, at the nineteenth Meeting of States
Parties to the Convention, the possibility of addressing
a substantive issue was discussed. Regardless of the
merit of each issue, my country has consistently
maintained that the Meeting of States Parties is the
competent forum, under article 319, in which to
address any issue relating to the interpretation and
application of the Convention. This is also consistent
with the general rule of the law of treaties, namely, that
the authentic interpreters of any treaty are its parties.
My country believes that special consideration
should be given to the question of the outer limit of the
continental shelf beyond 200 miles. Argentina made its
complete submission to the Commission on the Limits
of the Continental Shelf on 21 April 2009. On
26 August, during the twenty-fourth session of the
Commission, my country made its oral presentation.
The Commission has received 51 submissions
and more than 40 preliminary informational
presentations to date. More are to come in the future.
Its workload is a matter of the outmost importance, in
particular in the light of the future timeline the
President of the Commission presented at the most
recent Meeting of States Parties. The picture he painted
for us is frustrating for most of the coastal States that
have made submissions, as we will have to wait a long
time for the Commission’s recommendations.
My delegation would therefore like to highlight
two aspects of this matter. On the one hand, it is urgent
that parties to the Convention consciously address the
question of the Commission’s workload so that it can
fulfil its duties in an expeditious, efficient and effective
manner. On the other hand, it is now more important
than ever to remind all States that the work of the
Commission has to do with drawing the limit, not with
the rights of coastal States, and that article 77
paragraph 3 of the Convention provides that:
“The rights of the coastal State over the
continental shelf do not depend on occupation,
effective or notional, or on any express
proclamation.”

09-63459

A/64/PV.57

That reminder is reflected in paragraph 40 of the draft
resolution on oceans and the law of the sea
(A/64/L.18).
As regards the regular process for global
reporting and assessment of the state of the marine
environment, including socio-economic aspects, my
country participated actively in the Ad Hoc Working
Group that considered, in August 2009, the assessment
of assessments (A/64/88, annex) and made
recommendations to the General Assembly in that
regard. Argentina is of the view that all of those
recommendations are pertinent and should be
implemented by the Assembly. In particular, I would
like to highlight that the follow-up to the regular
process should be carried out by an intergovernmental
forum, that equitable geographic distribution in the
constitution of the panel of experts should be respected
and that capacity-building should be ensured for the
effective participation of developing countries. Besides
that, the essential legal framework of the regular
process is the Convention. With that in mind, the
Working Group also recommended that secretariat
services for the regular process be provided by the
Office for Ocean Affairs and the Law of the Sea of the
Secretariat in New York.
Another aspect of the draft resolutions that we
will adopt to which my country attaches particular
importance is the United Nations Open-ended Informal
Consultative Process on Oceans and the Law of the Sea
established by resolution 54/33. Argentina supported
the review of the Process, which took place this year at
its tenth meeting, in the understanding that its
continuation depends on its being redirected back its
original objectives, which are closely linked to
sustainable development.
During the discussions at the tenth meeting, it
was clear that many delegations considered that the
Consultative Process should not be a negotiating
forum, but one for coordination and exchange of views,
and also that the Consultative Process is not a forum
for the interpretation of the law of the sea that is
already in force. My country believes that those issues
should be duly taken into account when the General
Assembly considers, at its sixty-fifth session, the
renewal of the Consultative Process.
Another issue that was insistently stressed during
the review of the Consultative Process was the need to
adequately incorporate the development prospective in

09-63459

the consideration of every topic. Thus we welcome the
fact that, on the basis of a proposal made by the Group
of 77 and China, the General Assembly decided that
the next meeting of the Consultative Process will be
devoted to the topic of capacity-building in oceans and
the law of the sea, including marine science. We
believe that the consideration of the topic should be
broad and should include the transfer of technology.
That issue, to which a whole part of the Convention —
Part XIV — is devoted, is possibly the one in which
there is the greatest gap in the application of the
Convention and is, at the same time, the main vehicle
for capacity-building in the field of marine sciences.
As regards the draft resolution on sustainable
fisheries (A/64/L.29), the first review of the
implementation of resolution 61/105 took place this
year.
Already in the sixty-fourth session, my country
has recalled that the sedentary resources of the
continental shelf are subject to the sovereignty rights
of the coastal States in the whole extension of that
maritime
area.
Therefore,
conservation
and
management of such resources is under the exclusive
authority of coastal States, which have the
responsibility of adopting the necessary measures
regarding such resources and their associated
ecosystems that could be affected by fishing practices
that can have a destructive impact. We also stated at
that time that Argentina was taking the necessary steps
to adopt that type of measures for the conservation of
sedentary resources throughout its continental shelf
and called on other coastal States to exercise the same
responsibility.
Without prejudice to that, Argentina considered it
appropriate, at that moment, to propose the inclusion of
operative paragraph 104 of resolution 63/112, in order
to prevent any interpretation that could suppose
ignorance of the exclusiveness of the rights of the
coastal State over the areas of its continental shelf
situated beyond 200 miles.
However, the report of the Secretary-General
(A/64/305), in its section III.B.5, on actions taken by
States for areas where no competent regional fisheries
management organizations and arrangement exists,
shows that in some States and in one regional
organization there can be confusion as to the measures
that should be adopted with respect to high seas fishing
undertaken under the responsibility of the flag State, on

3

A/64/PV.57

the one hand, and, on the other, the measures related to
conservation of resources and vulnerable marine
ecosystems in the seabed and subsoil that are subject to
the jurisdiction of the coastal State when such seabed
and subsoil are part of its continental shelf beyond 200
miles.
In that context, the Argentine delegation makes
express reservation regarding what is expressed in
paragraphs 178, 179, 180 and 181 of the report in
document A/64/305 and expects that future
contributions of States or international organizations to
the reports of the Secretary-General regarding this
issue will include all the information needed to
examine whether the activities that were undertaken
are in conformity with international law in force.
The application of conservation measures or the
carrying out of research recommended in the
resolutions of the General Assembly, in particular
resolution 61/105 and concurrent resolutions, have as
their unavoidable legal framework the international
law of the sea in force, as reflected in the Convention.
Thus it is not conceivable that implementation of such
resolutions could be cited as justification for denying
or ignoring the rights established in the Convention.
Alert to that type of situation, the General
Assembly, in paragraph 115 of its draft resolution on
sustainable fisheries (A/64/L.29), would remind all
States that
“nothing in the paragraphs of its resolution
61/105 and the present resolution addressing the
impacts of bottom fishing on vulnerable marine
ecosystems prejudices the sovereign rights of
coastal States over their continental shelf or the
exercise of the jurisdiction of coastal States with
respect to their continental shelf under
international law as reflected in the Convention,
in particular article 77”.
In the same vein, the Assembly, in paragraph 123
of the same draft resolution, when encouraging States
and international regional fisheries organizations to
develop and strengthen procedures and research
programmes for identification of vulnerable marine
ecosystems, assessment of impacts and assessment of
fishing activities on target and non-target species,
would recall that those activities must conform to the
Convention, including Part XII. Part XIII of the
Convention, which contains the regime for marine

4

scientific research, provides, in article 246, paragraph 2,
that
“(m)arine scientific research in the exclusive
economic zone and on the continental shelf shall
be conducted with the consent of the coastal
State.”
Also in relation to fisheries, my country wishes to
highlight its concern about an incipient trend of some
States to try to interpret passages in Assembly
resolutions as providing for the possibility of regional
fisheries management organizations adopting some
type of measure with respect to vessels whose flag
States neither are members of such organizations nor
have expressly consented the application of such
measures to their vessels. My country is convinced that
such interpretations are not in conformity with
international law in force and that nothing in the
resolutions of the General Assembly can be construed
as to support such interpretations.
Finally, as every year when the report of the
Secretary-General on oceans and the law of the sea is
considered, Argentina wishes to acknowledge the team
in the Division for Ocean Affairs and the Law of the
Sea for its professional and devoted work and for the
assistance that it spontaneously provides to Member
States in the matters of its competence.
Mr. Sinhaseni (Thailand): I have the honour to
share Thailand’s views on agenda item 76, on oceans
and the law of the sea.
Thailand shares the growing concern of the
international community over the threat posed by
illegal, unreported and unregulated (IUU) fishing,
particularly to the sustainable management of fish
stocks. We therefore welcome the recent adoption by
the Food and Agriculture Organization Conference of
the Agreement on Port State Measures to Prevent,
Deter and Eliminate Illegal, Unreported and
Unregulated Fishing.
Thailand respects the right of coastal States to
enact laws and regulations in exercise of their
sovereign rights to explore, exploit, conserve and
manage living resources in their Exclusive Economic
Zones (EEZ). At the same time, measures taken by a
coastal State to ensure compliance with those laws and
regulations should be proportionate to and in line with
the provisions of Article 73 of the United Nations
Convention on the Law of the Sea, relating to

09-63459

A/64/PV.57

enforcement of laws and regulations of the coastal
State, including the fundamental principle of due
process of law.
Furthermore, we attach great importance to wellestablished rules of customary international law as
recognized and codified by the Convention, namely,
the right of innocent passage in territorial seas, the
right of transit passage in straits used for international
navigation, and freedom of navigation in the EEZ of
another State. Therefore we would like to reaffirm our
position as stated in the letter dated 18 February 1993
from the Permanent Representative of Thailand
addressed to the Secretary-General as reproduced in
document A/48/90, dated 22 February 1993.
With respect to maritime safety and security,
Thailand has always supported international efforts and
initiatives against piracy and armed robbery, both at
the regional and international levels. In that regard, we
note with appreciation the adoption of Security Council
resolution 1897 (2009) on 30 November, which
constitutes a renewed basis for international action
against piracy and armed robbery at sea off the coast of
Somalia, with particular attention to the investigation
and prosecution process.
We note with concern that a growing number of
hijacked vessels are fishing boats. Such vessels are
particularly prone to attack, since pirates perceive
economic value in them, for which the vessel owners
would be willing to pay. Accordingly, special attention
should be paid to that matter, as well as to the safety
and security of the fishermen. Here, Thailand
commends the work of the International Maritime
Organization in combating piracy by adopting a
number of documents which provide guidance to the
individuals and sectors concerned.
Mr. Okuda (Japan): Let me first join other
delegates in thanking the facilitators of the two draft
resolutions, Ambassador Henrique Valle of Brazil and
Ms. Holly Koehler of the United States, for their
tremendous work. I also wish to thank all Member
States that worked together during informal
consultations on the draft resolutions in the spirit of
cooperation. My appreciation also goes to the
Secretariat for its assistance.
Japan is pleased to sponsor draft resolution
A/64/L.18, on oceans and the law of the sea. Japan is a
maritime country surrounded by sea and depends on
maritime transport for nearly all imports of energy

09-63459

resources, including oil and minerals. As an island
country with few natural resources, living marine
resources and other natural resources located on the
continental shelf and the deep seabed under its
surrounding waters are crucial to Japan from an
economic perspective. Consequently, we have a strong
interest in the two agenda items and have been actively
taking part in the discussions on the draft resolutions.
It is Japan’s continuing concern that acts of
piracy are still a serious threat off the coast of Somalia
and in the Gulf of Aden. Japan takes the view that a
multifaceted approach that includes assistance for
maritime enforcement capacity-building and other
medium- to long-term efforts in addition to operations
by naval vessels must be pursued in order to effectively
suppress piracy.
Japan has dispatched two destroyers and two
P-3C patrol aircraft in the Gulf of Aden and off the
Coast of Somalia. In June this year Japan enacted the
Anti-Piracy Measures Law, which ensures domestic
implementation of the provisions on piracy stipulated
in the United Nations Convention on the Law of the
Sea. In addition, Japan has contributed $13.6 million to
the International Maritime Organization Djibouti Code
Trust Fund in an effort to assist the development of
maritime enforcement capacity in coastal countries.
Through that contribution, we will support
implementation of the Djibouti Code of Conduct,
including the launching of the regional centres for
information sharing in Kenya, Tanzania and Yemen and
a training centre in Djibouti.
Japan intends to maintain its commitment to
cooperate in the activities based on the Regional
Cooperation Agreement on Combating Piracy and
Armed Robbery against Ships in Asia.
Regarding the Commission on the Limits of the
Continental Shelf beyond 200 nautical miles, Japan
fully recognizes the need to improve the situation
concerning the Commission’s workload, in view of the
large number of submissions made by coastal States.
Japan, as a State party to the Convention, will work
together with other States parties in the process of the
Informal Working Group on the workload of the
Commission by participating actively in the efforts to
find practical and effective solutions to this issue.
As regards the International Tribunal for the Law
of the Sea, Japan highly appreciates the important role
it has played in the peaceful settlement of disputes as

5

A/64/PV.57

well as in the maintenance and development of the
legal order of the sea. Japan will continue to support
the Tribunal’s valuable work.
Turning to the conservation of marine
biodiversity beyond areas of national jurisdiction, the
promotion of global conservation of biodiversity has
become more important than ever, as the world will
commemorate the International Year of Biodiversity in
2010. Japan recognizes the challenges facing the
General Assembly in facilitating the protection of
marine biodiversity beyond national jurisdictions and
will continue to participate in a constructive way in the
work of the Ad Hoc Open-ended Informal Working
Group to study issues relating to the conservation and
sustainable use of marine biodiversity in that area.
As a responsible fishing State and a State party to
the Convention on the Law of the Sea and the 1995
Fish Stocks Agreement, Japan is dedicated to
addressing the promotion of sustainable use through
the conservation and management of living marine
resources and appropriate conservation of the marine
ecosystem in cooperation with the parties concerned,
through bilateral fisheries agreements, the Food and
Agriculture Organization (FAO) and regional fisheries
management organizations.
The problems of illegal, unreported and
unregulated fishing activities and over-capacity are so
serious for the sustainable use of living marine
resources that it is urgent to tackle those problems on a
global scale. Regarding the discussions in FAO on the
Agreement on Port State Measures to Prevent, Deter
and Eliminate Illegal, Unreported and Unregulated
Fishing, Japan would like to express its appreciation to
FAO and the relevant States for their efforts that
brought about the adoption of the draft Agreement by
the FAO Conference after only one year of negotiation.
Japan continues to participate in consultations
with the States and regions concerned regarding the
establishment of an international mechanism for the
management of high seas fisheries in the North Pacific
Ocean and will take responsible actions based on this
resolution. In May 2010, the Review Conference on the
1995 Fish Stocks Agreement will take place, with the
participation of all Contracting Parties to the
Agreement. Japan will continue its efforts towards
strengthening the effectiveness of the Agreement in
cooperation with other Contracting Parties.

6

In concluding, Japan expresses its hope that the
draft resolutions before us, which resulted from
intensive negotiations and a spirit of cooperation
among Member States during the informal
consultations, will be duly adopted at this session of
the General Assembly.
Mr. Sullivan (Canada): It gives me great pleasure
to be here today to talk about Canada’s support for the
resolutions on sustainable fisheries (A/64/L.29) and
oceans and the law of the sea (A/64/L.18) and to
discuss some of the issues of importance to Canada.
I should like to begin by thanking Ms. Koehler of
the United States and Ambassador Valle of Brazil,
coordinators of the sustainable fisheries and law of the
sea resolutions, for having helped develop the
resolutions we are considering today.
(spoke in French)
I should like to thank the United Nations Division
for Ocean Affairs and the Law of the Sea for its
support and excellent work. We also express our thanks
to those delegates that ensured that the resolutions give
priority to oceans and fisheries governance.
In my capacity as Canada’s Ambassador for
Fisheries Conservation, I have the privilege of working
closely with our partners across the world towards the
aim of creating more sustainable fisheries and looking
after the health of ocean ecosystems.
(spoke in English)
The resolutions on sustainable fisheries and on
oceans and the law of the sea are important to Canada,
and we are pleased to be sponsoring them again this
year. They acknowledge both the important work the
international community has accomplished and the
challenges that lie ahead.
Today, I should like to talk about Canada’s three
key priorities for international fisheries and oceans
governance. They include ensuring that Member States
implement their commitments, working together to
identify gaps in implementation and working
collectively to remedy those gaps.
We all acknowledge the United Nations
Convention on the Law of the Sea as the legal
framework that governs all oceans activities. The
effective implementation and enforcement of the
Convention and other relevant instruments must guide
all our actions. Canada takes this seriously. To that end,

09-63459

A/64/PV.57

as acknowledged in these resolutions, the international
community
needs
to
effectively
implement
commitments already made and be prepared to
establish new mechanisms where appropriate. We also
need to ensure that information and scientific
knowledge are effectively shared and that the particular
challenges of developing States are considered.
Over the past few years, the global community
has worked together and has achieved significant
progress in making our oceans and fisheries healthier
and more sustainable. But we must continue our efforts
with added resolve as new information is developed
and new approaches identified. As we strive to fulfil
our obligations, it is important to recognize the
challenges we face and work together to find solutions.
Canada believes that individual States and
Regional
Fisheries
Management
Organizations
(RFMOs) play a critical role in implementing the
United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea and
the United Nations Fish Stocks Agreement. We are
pleased that States, both individually and within
RFMOs, have taken up the challenge to implement
modern fisheries management principles. We will
continue to encourage the use of the best scientific
information available in their decision-making, as
RFMOs continue to reform and improve.
Canada is encouraged by the actions agreed to at
the second joint meeting of tuna RFMOs for improving
their management. We want to continue our efforts to
strengthen coordination and cooperation among all
tuna RFMOs. At its recent annual meeting, the
International Commission for the Conservation of
Atlantic Tunas (ICCAT) adopted stronger measures to
protect and rebuild Eastern Atlantic and Mediterranean
Bluefin Tuna stocks, in keeping with sound scientific
advice. Now it will be a question of effective
implementation and compliance.
In the past, Canada has been disappointed that
scientific advice was not followed by ICCAT members
and that overfishing continued. Canada will continue to
press for sustainable management of tuna and tuna-like
species within ICCAT and other RFMOs. We want to
ensure that those organizations continue to move in
that positive direction. We see this as a pivotal example
of management bodies playing their role — a role that
needs to be continuously assessed and improved, as
with any management process.

09-63459

Our efforts to close the gaps in fisheries
governance are exemplified by the recent adoption by
the members of the Food and Agriculture Organization
(FAO) of the Agreement on Port State Measures to
Prevent, Deter and Eliminate Illegal, Unreported and
Unregulated (IUU) Fishing. In our view, that
Agreement will be an important new tool to tackle the
problem of IUU fishing globally, and we hope for its
early entry into force. We also call on FAO members to
conclude work on improving flag State performance.
Canada is eager to work with our international partners
to strengthen sustainable fisheries and oceans
management. We want to work with other countries to
achieve our shared goal of reducing IUU fishing.
Now that the review of the implementation of
elements of resolution 61/105 has been concluded, we
note that significant progress has also been made to
implement our commitments to protect vulnerable
marine ecosystems while allowing responsible fishing
to continue. We have identified gaps in some areas and
recognize that urgent action is needed where those
particular gaps exist. Canada was instrumental in
providing leadership on this issue. Further discussions
of technical aspects are planned at the FAO, and a
further review at the United Nations is slated for 2011.
We believe our commitments in resolution 61/105
provide an effective framework for management. We
hope that challenges can continue to be identified and
addressed in the technical discussions.
An example of how we put this into practice in
Canada was to work closely with our partners in the
Northwest Atlantic Fisheries Organization (NAFO) to
ensure their cooperation in managing fisheries in order
to protect vulnerable marine ecosystems in the NAFO
Regulatory Area.
As the Assembly knows, the United Nations Fish
Stocks Agreement is at the heart of modern governance
of high seas fisheries. It includes precautionary and
ecosystem approaches and gives a predominant role to
RFMOs. We are pleased that, since we met last year,
another five States have become parties, namely,
Mozambique, Panama, Tuvalu, Indonesia and Nigeria.
The Agreement now has 77 States parties, 19 more
States parties than at the time of the Review
Conference in 2006.
Canada looks forward to the resumption of the
Review Conference in May 2010. At the Conference,
participants will examine the effectiveness of the

7

A/64/PV.57

Agreement and seek new ways to strengthen its
implementation. They will also review the progress
made on the recommendations made at the 2006
Review Conference.
Around the world, scientists are making great
strides to help us understand our ocean environment.
Sound science must underpin all of our decisionmaking, from our fisheries decisions to ocean
management. Science-based decision-making will not
only enhance our understanding of complex ocean
processes, but will also allow us to build a better
picture of the state of our oceans. That is why we must
continue our work to develop a global mechanism, a
regular process, to deliver science-based information to
the public and key decision makers.
Turning to the law of the sea, we note the current
efforts of coastal States, including Canada, to delineate
their continental shelves. Canada is concerned that the
demands now placed on the Commission on the Limits
of the Continental Shelf will result in lengthy delays
between the filing of a submission and its
consideration by the Commission. We share the
concern of other States Parties that something must be
done to ensure that the Commission can continue to
perform its work effectively. Achieving this will likely
mean difficult choices and testing new ideas.
With respect to piracy, Canada has demonstrated
its commitment to international efforts to combat
piracy off the coast of East Africa. We have sent
Canadian warships to the region three times to take
part in counter-piracy missions and to escort ships
carrying humanitarian assistance to Somalia. Canada
views the Contact Group on Piracy off the Coast of
Somalia as the primary mechanism for the coordination
of counter-piracy activities. In that respect, we must be
careful not to propose projects or initiatives that would
duplicate work already being conducted by the Contact
Group or in other forums. Canada strongly supports
international efforts to find long-lasting solutions to
this issue.
Regarding the Informal Consultative Process,
Canada was pleased with the open and frank
discussions held this year. The Process provides a
valuable platform for debate among experts,
practitioners, decision makers and other stakeholders.
We feel that that dialogue should continue. We look
forward to our discussions next year on capacity-

8

building in ocean affairs and the law of the sea,
including marine science.
On the world stage, Canada is demonstrating
leadership in the areas of ocean conservation,
protection and sustainability, domestically and
internationally. We are influencing international
priorities, decisions and processes. But no State can
work in isolation when it comes to our oceans.
(spoke in French)
We are encouraged by the recent progress made
to improve fisheries and ocean governance — whether
through adopting the Agreement on Port State
Measures to Prevent, Deter and Eliminate Illegal,
Unreported and Unregulated Fishing, the work done to
implement General Assembly resolution 61/105, or
recent efforts to establish the regular process on the
assessment of the state of the marine environment. We
must now build on this momentum and focus on the
challenges ahead.
(spoke in English)
We must seize this opportunity to turn our words
into concrete action — to protect our oceans and
marine environments for future generations. It is our
global responsibility.
Mr. Liu Zhenmin (China) (spoke in Chinese):
With the advance of science and technology and the
deepening of mankind’s knowledge of the oceans, the
interaction between mankind and the oceans has
increased both in scope and in depth. Over the past
several years, we have consistently advocated
establishing and maintaining a harmonious marine
order through action by the international community,
with the aim of promoting sustainable, long-term
development of the oceans.
In support of the importance of a harmonious
marine order, the Chinese delegation has taken an
active part in this year’s informal consultations on the
draft resolution under this item (A/64/L.18 and Corr.1).
Here I would like to express my sincere gratitude to
Ambassador Valle of Brazil and Ms. Holly Koehler of
the United States for their contribution as coordinators
in this area.
The Chinese delegation has noted the hard work
of the members of the Commission on the Limits of the
Continental Shelf. Since the United Nations
Convention on the Law of the Sea (UNCLOS) took

09-63459

A/64/PV.57

effect, the work of the Commission has attracted
increasing attention from the international community.
To date, the Commission has received 51 submissions
and 44 preliminary information submissions. It has
been the consistent view of the Chinese Government
that the division of rights and interests in ocean areas
within and beyond national jurisdictions should be
carried out in a scientific and reasonable manner, so as
to enable coastal States, on the one hand, to fully
exercise their sovereign rights and jurisdiction over
continental shelves that constitute the natural
prolongation of their land territories, and, on the other
hand, to prevent the international seabed, which is the
common heritage of mankind, from possible
encroachment.
The Commission should fulfil its responsibilities
in an impartial manner and abide strictly by the
Convention on the Law of the Sea as a whole, so as to
ensure that its work is consistent with the letter and
spirit of the Convention and can stand the tests of
science, law and time. My Government believes that
the consideration by the Commission of submissions in
accordance with article 76 and Annex II of the
Convention should not prejudice the application by
States of other parts of the Convention. We note that
the draft resolution also confirms this point.
The work of the Commission and its results bear
on the implementation of the Convention as an
integrated whole, and thus deserve the serious attention
of States and the relevant international organizations.
At the same time, the international community should
also focus on the difficulties that complex legal issues
create for the work of the Commission, in order to
explore ways to solve such issues. The Chinese
Government will, as always, support the work of the
Commission.
The Chinese delegation congratulates the
International Seabed Authority on its achievements
over the past year. Substantive progress has been made
in formulating regulations on prospecting and
exploration for polymetallic sulphides and cobalt-rich
crust. Although the knowledge of the international
community about such new seabed resources is still
very limited, the finalization of relevant regulations
will definitely be helpful in building a framework for
the development and utilization of new resources,
facilitating the dynamic work of the Authority and
promoting effective management by the international
community of the seabed area and its resources, as well

09-63459

as ensuring that all countries, including developing
countries, can share in the results derived from them.
We hope that all parties will work actively to seek
solutions to outstanding issues and move for the
adoption of the regulation on polymetallic sulphides at
the Authority’s sixteenth session.
The International Tribunal for the Law of the Sea
is one of the judicial organs that, in accordance with
the Convention, can be used to solve disputes
concerning interpretation and application of the
Convention. My Government has always valued and
supported the important role of the Tribunal in the
peaceful settlement of maritime disputes and the
maintenance of international marine order.
As a responsible fishing country, China has made
its contribution to sustainable fisheries development by
committing to strengthening conservation and
management measures, as well as by participating
actively in the work of regional fisheries management
organizations. I wish to reiterate here that the aim of
international fisheries management should be to
regulate fishing activities in order to achieve rational
and sustainable utilization of fisheries resources, and at
the same time to maintain a marine ecological balance
and ensure the equitable distribution of fisheries
resources among all countries.
The Chinese Government pays great attention to
greenhouse gas emissions from vessels and has noted
the work of the International Maritime Organization in
that regard. We believe that the key to addressing that
issue lies in upholding the principle of common but
differentiated responsibilities, enshrined in the United
Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change,
and that emphasis should be put on increasing the
energy efficiency of ships and vessels by using
advanced technology.
Safeguarding maritime security and freedom of
navigation is in the common interests of the
international community and is given importance in the
Convention. At present, rampant piracy in some areas
has threatened daily maritime trade and the safety and
security of ships and sailors. Together with other
countries, China has taken vigorous measures to
address such threats. In our view, effectively
combating piracy calls for action to address both the
symptoms and the root causes. While the international
community needs to take concerted actions, greater
attention should be paid to enhancing the capacity-

9

A/64/PV.57

building of coastal States so as to help them to
eliminate the economic, social and other problems that
give rise to piracy.

seas and other no less important provisions of the
Convention. We call on the States that have not yet
done so to become parties to the Convention.

In addition, the international community should
respect the sovereignty of coastal States and the
concerns of States in the region. China will continue to
cooperate fully with the international community,
including coastal States, in a joint response to the
threat of piracy. We will actively participate in
international actions in that regard and make our
contribution to the peace, security and stability of the
oceans.

The Russian Federation positively views the work
of the bodies established in accordance with the 1982
Convention: the International Tribunal for the Law of
the Sea, the International Seabed Authority and the
Commission on the Limits of the Continental Shelf. We
note the importance of making fuller use of their
potential.

Ocean affairs are sensitive and complex. The
issues of the oceans are closely interrelated. Only
through increased coordination and cooperation among
States and international organizations will it be
possible to effectively protect the integrity of the
Convention, strike a reasonable balance among the
interests of all parties and meet the various challenges
in utilizing and protecting the oceans. We are pleased
to note that the draft resolution has explicitly called for
improved coordination and cooperation among States
and international organizations.
Developing human society has always been
closely related to the oceans. In a twenty-first century
characterized by the pursuit of cooperation, win-win
results and common development, the oceans represent
a source of strength and hope for human development
and progress. We call on the international community
to make common efforts to build a harmonious marine
order so that we can continue sustainable ocean
development and mankind can benefit from oceans
forever.
Mr. Kuzmin (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): At the outset, I would like to express
appreciation to the Secretary-General for submitting
the reports on ocean affairs to the General Assembly.
The Russian delegation advocates preserving the
integrity and comprehensively strengthening the
provisions of the United Nations Convention on the
Law of the Sea of 1982, which should be implemented
in the appropriate manner. The activities of States on
the world’s oceans should be carried out in strict
compliance with the norms of the Convention. In
particular, that applies to the freedom of the high seas,
the right of States to transit passage through straits
used for international navigation, the right of innocent
archipelagic passage, the right of fishing on the high

10

We would like to note in particular the role of the
Commission on the Limits of the Continental Shelf. We
emphasize the importance of full compliance by
coastal States with the requirements of article 76 of the
Convention, as well as with other relevant norms of
international law, when making their submissions
related to delineating the outer limits of the continental
shelf beyond 200 nautical miles to the Commission.
The Commission should strive for full and
non-discriminatory compliance with the requirements
of the Convention when considering those submissions.
The Commission, being a body comprised of
experts in geology, geophysics and hydrography, does
not have the authority to resolve the complex legal
issues that it sometimes faces in the course of its work.
That problem requires reflection and an appropriate
solution. The Russian Federation recalls its proposal
that the Commission submit a list of such legal issues
to the States Parties to the Convention.
Another challenge is the significant increase in
the Commission’s workload. We support efforts to
identify measures to optimize its work that would be
feasible in practice and realistic and would not require
changes to the Convention. We also call for more
active cooperation between the Commission and States
that have made submissions to establish the outer
limits of the continental shelf beyond 200 nautical
miles.
The Russian Federation attributes to the General
Assembly and the Meeting of States Parties to the
Convention a central role in discussing ocean affairs
within the United Nations. One clear example of
successful work by the General Assembly in that area
is its contribution to the consideration of the problem
of piracy. We support further strengthening the role of
the United Nations in that area.

09-63459

A/64/PV.57

We believe that the discussion that took place at
the tenth meeting of the United Nations Open-ended
Informal Consultative Process on Oceans and the Law
of the Sea was valuable, including the consideration of
improving
working
methods
and
enhancing
coordination of activity among the various
international bodies dealing with ocean issues. That
reaffirmed once again the paramount importance of
that forum and its valuable practical contribution to a
deeper understanding of issues related to the world’s
oceans. We continue to believe that the Informal
Consultative Process is a useful format for discussing
ocean issues, including in relation to the issue of
sustainable development. We believe that the practice
of holding informal consultative processes regularly
should continue.
With respect to marine biodiversity in areas
beyond national jurisdictions, we note that the regime
governing the Area’s deep sea resources, provided for
in the Convention, applies to the solid, liquid and gas
mineral resources, including polymetallic nodules, in
the Area, on the seabed or within its subsoil, as set out
in the Convention. It does not apply to living
resources. In that connection, we consider it
unnecessary for the International Seabed Authority to
take on additional functions to protect biological
resources.
The Russian Federation has always held the
position that it is not advisable to introduce excessive
limitations on fishing on the high seas. The basic
mechanisms in that area should, in our view, be
established by relevant regional fisheries management
organizations, based on comprehensive scientific data,
including the results of both current and past scientific
marine research.
We consider useful the discussion that took place
on progress in implementing the provisions of
resolution 61/105 with respect to bottom fishing. The
Russian Federation takes an active part in developing
measures to protect vulnerable marine ecosystems, in
accordance with the provisions of that resolution and
the international recommendations of the Food and
Agriculture Organization of the United Nations and in
the context of the relevant regional fisheries
management organizations, such as the International
Council for the Exploration of the Sea, the Northwest
Atlantic Fisheries Organization, the North-East
Atlantic Fisheries Commission and the Commission for

09-63459

the Conservation of
Resources, inter alia.

Antarctic

Marine

Living

We are paying particular attention to this issue as
the process of developing new international
conventions on fishing in the southern and northern
parts of the Pacific Ocean proceeds. We support the
development of effective measures for combating
illegal, unreported and unregulated fishing. These
measures should be adopted on a strong legal basis,
taking into account the views of all concerned parties.
They should not be discriminatory or protectionist.
We once again draw attention to the exclusive
importance of the Agreement for the Implementation of
the Provisions of the United Nations Convention on the
Law of the Sea of 10 December 1982 relating to the
Conservation and Management of Straddling Fish
Stocks and Highly Migratory Fish Stocks and we call
on States that have not yet done so to consider the
possibility of acceding to the Agreement.
The Russian Federation supports the draft
resolutions on oceans affairs that have been prepared
for approval at the sixty-fourth session of the General
Assembly (A/64/L.18 and Corr.1, A/64/L.29). Many of
their provisions are the result of difficult compromises.
However, we would like to note that we have a
few criticisms to make: we, like many other
delegations, have several times expressed concern
about the steady extension of the scope of and the
increase in the number of themes covered by the
resolutions on ocean affairs and the law of the sea. One
of the negative consequences of this trend is that the
negotiation of resolutions has become a long and tense
process. In our view, the time has come to think about
what can be done to improve the situation in this area.
In conclusion, we express appreciation to the
coordinators of the informal consultations in the
preparation of the draft resolutions on sustainable
fishing (A/64/L.29) and the law of the sea (A/64/L.18
and Corr.1), Ms. Holly Koehler and Ambassador
Henrique Rodrigues Valle, as well as the Director of
the Division for Ocean Affairs and the Law of the Sea,
Mr. Sergei Tarassenko, and his staff for the their highly
skilled assistance in the work on these drafts.
Mr. Sergeyev (Ukraine): At the outset, I would
like to thank the Secretary-General and the Secretariat,
in particular the Division for Ocean Affairs and the
Law of the Sea for their comprehensive reports on

11

A/64/PV.57

oceans and the law of the sea. I also wish to express
gratitude to the coordinators of the draft resolutions on
the law of the sea and sustainable fisheries,
Ambassador Henrique Valle of Brazil and Ms. Holly
Koehler of the United States of America. Fully aligning
itself with the statement of the European Union, my
delegation, in its national capacity, would nevertheless
like to touch upon some issues.
Ukraine has the honour to be a sponsor of both
annual General Assembly resolutions. We reaffirm our
commitment to due implementation and strict
compliance with the 1982 United Nations Convention
on the Law of the Sea. Given its comprehensive role in
the legal regime of the world’s oceans, universal
acceptance of the Convention and of all related
agreements is highly important.
We believe that the ability of international
community to effectively address the manifold
challenges it faces in ocean affairs is substantially
enhanced when international and regional cooperation
arrangements are in place. One such challenge relates
to piracy and armed robbery at sea.
Ukraine welcomes actions taken by the Security
Council to date in order to combat piracy, including
adoption of resolutions 1846 (2008) and 1897 (2009),
which my country had the honour of co-sponsoring.
We also commend the activity of the Contact
Group on Piracy off the Coast of Somalia, as well as
the valuable efforts undertaken by individual States
Members of the United Nations aimed at suppressing
piracy and armed robbery against ships off that
country’s coast by conducting maritime military
operations. Ukraine acknowledges that those measures
have greatly contributed to reducing the number of
successful hijackings in the region.

from its own sad experience. That is why we urge
relevant organizations and States to continue to give
priority to this issue in order to enhance the safety of
seafarers and of trade in general in affected areas.
In this respect, we call upon States that have not
yet done so to become parties to the Convention for the
Suppression of Unlawful Acts against the Safety of
Maritime Navigation and its Protocol, as well as the
Convention against Organized Transnational Crime and
its Protocol against the Smuggling of Migrants by
Land, Sea and Air.
There is also a crucial need to promote the
development of effective national criminal justice
systems that are able to ensure that any person
involved in the financing, planning, preparation or
perpetration of acts of piracy or in support of such acts
is brought to justice. It is clear that acts of piracy
should be treated as serious criminal offences in
domestic legislation and State regulations. However,
while we cannot deny that the elimination of the roots
of piracy on land and the suppression of its
manifestations at sea are important, we still strongly
believe that the efforts of the international community
in this field should also include addressing the impacts
of piracy, especially with respect to its victims.
Ranking fifth on the list of countries with the
most citizens working in the international maritime
fleet, Ukraine is among the States most affected by the
ramifications of piracy. As this meeting is unfolding,
Somali pirates continue to hold 24 Ukrainians hostage —
the crew of the Ariana, a vessel captured on 2 May this
year. Over all, in the last 5 years, 15 vessels with
Ukrainians on board have been held hostage by pirates.
Indeed, Somali pirates have captured 67 Ukrainians,
one of whom was shot dead and one seriously injured.

We appreciate the significant decrease in the
number of attacks by pirates and armed robbers in the
Asian region today and emphasize that that success has
emanated from national and multilateral initiatives as
well as regional mechanisms of cooperation in
combating and preventing piracy and armed robbery at
sea.

In this dismal context, we regret to report one of
the most recent cases of pirate attacks, one which led
to the death of another Ukrainian seafarer. On
24 November, pirates attacked the Monrovia-flagged
oil tanker Cancale Star 18 nautical miles off the Benin
coast, killing a Ukrainian seaman. Four other crew
members were wounded. This fact confirms once again
that the geography of piracy has expanded alarmingly.

Similarly, Ukraine welcomes the work of the
International Maritime Organization (IMO) and other
international organizations engaged in combating such
illicit acts and ensuring safety at sea. Still, much
remains to be done in this area, and Ukraine knows it

We believe that effective anti-piracy measures
and the protection of human rights are not conflicting
goals, but complementary and mutually reinforcing.
Protecting the rights of victims of piracy attacks should

12

09-63459

A/64/PV.57

be a matter of the utmost concern for States and
international institutions.
Fully convinced of that, Ukraine took the
initiative to press for inclusion in the draft resolution
on oceans and the law of the sea (A/64/L.18 and
Corr.1) of a provision that invites States and
international organizations, namely, the International
Maritime Organization and the International Labour
Organization (ILO), to consider possible solutions for
seafarers and fishermen who are victims of piracy.
We would like to express our sincere gratitude to
the delegations involved in drafting that proposal. We
are looking forward to practical implementation of that
initiative in the framework of the IMO and the ILO, as
well as on the national level. In our view, possible
solutions for the victims of pirate attacks and their
families could include such short-term and long-term
measures as adequate compensation, rehabilitation for
survivors of attacks and the comprehensive review of
standards, including those related to the rights,
livelihoods and social security of maritime workers.
Strongly convinced of the necessity to strengthen
the role of the United Nations in countering and
preventing piracy, Ukraine convened an interactive
discussion on 1 December 2009 on strengthening the
contribution of the United Nations to countering
maritime piracy, in connection with General Assembly
agenda item 76 (a) entitled Oceans and the law of the
sea. That event brought together the delegations of the
more than 30 Member States and regional
organizations that play a key role in international
anti-piracy efforts, as well as senior representatives and
experts of the organizations of the United Nations
family, the United Nations Secretariat and
non-governmental organizations dealing with this
challenge.
The issue of protecting seafarers before, during
and after pirate attacks was high on the agenda of the
meeting, probably for the first time within these walls.
Furthermore, one of the conclusions of the discussion
was that the General Assembly does have a role to play
in dealing with piracy. In our view, one of its areas of
involvement could be promoting the protection of and
compensation for seafarers and fishers who are
survivors of pirate attacks. We look forward to
concrete follow-up to this idea in the General
Assembly. It should not be allowed to go unnoticed
while piracy continues taking a human toll.

09-63459

The interactive discussion of 1 December proved
to be a useful exercise and merited, in the view of its
participants, a relevant follow-up. Given the scope and
magnitude of the piracy problem, it was suggested that
the General Assembly hold a thematic, expert and
result-oriented debate on the topic. I invite all
delegations to carefully consider this idea.
Piracy on the high seas cannot be fought by any
one country alone. Universal cooperation is urgently
needed to tackle it effectively. Ukraine stands ready to
do its part.
Mr. Shin Boonam (Republic of Korea): First of
all, my delegation thanks the Secretary-General for his
comprehensive report on oceans and the law of the sea
(A/64/66 and Add.1 and Add.2). We also commend
Mr. Serguei Tarassenko, Director of the Division for
Ocean Affairs and the Law of the Sea, and his staff for
their dedicated work and invaluable assistance to
Member States. In addition, we would like to thank
Ambassador Henrique Valle of Brazil and Ms. Holly
Koehler of the United States for their excellent work in
coordinating the two draft resolutions before us.
This year marks the fifteenth anniversary of the
entry into force of the United Nations Convention on
the Law of the Sea (UNCLOS). We extend our heartfelt
appreciation to those who have endeavoured to realize
the ideals of UNCLOS over the past 15 years. Given
the centrality of UNCLOS as the global legal
framework for the governance of the oceans and seas,
it is important that all activities in the oceans and seas
be carried out within that framework and that the
integrity of the Convention be maintained.
The implementing mechanisms of the Convention —
the International Seabed Authority, the International
Tribunal for the Law of the Sea and the Commission on
the Limits of the Continental Shelf — have all played
important roles. The concerted efforts and
contributions of Member States are required to address
the difficulties that these implementing bodies might
encounter in carrying out their work. The Republic of
Korea has been actively participating in their work and
will do its utmost to continue contributing to these
entities.
We cannot adequately stress the importance of the
oceans and seas as a source of marine living and
non-living resources and a vital avenue for
transportation. However, it is regrettable to witness the
ongoing prevalence of piracy and the degradation of

13

A/64/PV.57

marine resources. Collaborative efforts at subregional,
regional and international levels are necessary to
adequately address those problems. In this regard, the
Government of the Republic of Korea hosted the Seoul
High-Level Meeting on Piracy off the Coast of Somalia
in June.
More attention must be focused on the oceans and
seas as invaluable assets for the welfare of humanity.
The Republic of Korea is pleased to note that the tenth
meeting of the United Nations Open-ended Informal
Consultative Process on Oceans and the Law of the Sea
this year was timely in reviewing the achievements and
shortcomings of its first nine meetings.
Marine science and technology are pivotal to the
fulfilment of our common objectives in all aspects of
the oceans and seas. A variety of cooperative scientific
and technical endeavours in ocean affairs, a healthy
exchange of information and the design of joint
research activities are needed to achieve the
conservation and sustainable development of marine
resources. The Republic of Korea is doing its part to
enhance international cooperation by transferring
marine technology to developing countries through the
Korea International Cooperation Agency’s funding and
internship programmes.
According to the report of the Secretary-General,
research continues to show that marine life and
biodiversity are important for maintaining a healthy
global ecosystem and climate and for sustaining
socio-economic development. The Republic of Korea
also attaches great importance to the conservation and
sustainability of marine biodiversity. We are pleased to
note that in the coming year the international
community will have a valuable opportunity to
contemplate the importance of marine biodiversity as
the General Assembly, in resolution 61/203, declared
2010 the International Year of Biodiversity.
As a responsible fishing State and a State party to
UNCLOS, the Republic of Korea is deeply concerned
about illegal, unreported and unregulated (IUU)
fishing. Preventing, deterring and eliminating IUU
fishing activities is essential to achieving the
conservation, management and sustainable use of
marine living resources. Our Government has put in
place a framework to prevent the operation of
sub-standard vessels and to exercise effective control
over vessels flying its flag in order to prevent and deter
them from engaging in IUU fishing. The Republic of

14

Korea will also continue to work with other States
parties to take effective measures in combating IUU
fishing activities.
Mrs. Gallardo Hernández (El
Vice-President, took the Chair.

Salvador),

In conclusion, we reiterate the willingness of our
Government to extend its full cooperation for the
effective implementation of the United Nations
Convention on the Law of the Sea. We also wish to
assure the Assembly of our Government’s commitment
to the promotion of an orderly and stable oceans
regime in the spirit of mutual understanding and
cooperation enshrined in the Convention.
Ms. Rovirosa (Mexico) (spoke in Spanish):
Mexico wishes to thank the coordinators of draft
resolutions A/64/L.18 and A/64/L.29, Ambassador
Henrique Valle of Brazil and Ms. Holly Koehler of the
United States, respectively, for their work during the
current session. We would also like to thank the
Division for Ocean Affairs and the Law of the Sea for
preparing the meetings and reports throughout the year.
The reports of the Secretary-General identify
certain advances that have been made in protecting the
marine environment as well as the ongoing signs of its
deterioration. Mexico therefore appeals to all States to
redouble their efforts to comply with their
commitments under the international maritime law
regime.
Through cooperation and coordination at all
levels,
the
establishment
of
interdisciplinary
approaches to ocean policy and the recognition of the
judicial bodies competent to resolve disputes, we can
guarantee the efficiency of the tools at the disposal of
the international community, particularly the 1982
United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea.
I should like to comment on some aspects of draft
resolution A/64/L.18, “Oceans and the law of the sea”.
With regard to the work of the Commission on the
Limits of the Continental Shelf, designing and
implementing concrete measures to allow the
Commission to better address its heavy workload is a
matter of urgency. With the adoption of this draft
resolution, the General Assembly will have made a first
step to that end, but it will be the informal working
group established by the Meeting of States Parties to
the Convention that will provide substantive and longterm solutions to this issue.

09-63459

A/64/PV.57

On the subject of climate change, we must
acknowledge that this phenomenon affects the vast
majority of human activities and our environment.
Mexico therefore considers of particular importance
the paragraphs in draft resolution A/64/L.18 on ocean
acidification, as well as the call for increased scientific
research to achieve a better understanding of the
effects of climate change on the marine environment
and marine biodiversity.
Regarding marine biodiversity beyond areas of
national jurisdiction, we welcome the course of action
drafted by the Ad Hoc Open-ended Informal Working
Group. We hope that, at its next meeting in February
2010, it will make specific recommendations to the
General Assembly that will allow it in future to better
frame the subject of the conservation and sustainable
use of marine biodiversity beyond areas of national
jurisdiction.
As for the Open-ended Informal Consultative
Process on Oceans and the Law of the Sea, we hope
that the eleventh meeting will allow us to strengthen
and make it more effective following the
comprehensive review undertaken this year. We also
welcome the fact that the discussions of the next
meeting will focus on capacity-building in ocean
affairs and law of the sea, including marine science.
This issue is of special interest and relevance to
developing countries.
With regard to the “assessment of assessments”,
my delegation welcomes the fact that the General
Assembly endorses the recommendations of the Ad
Hoc Working Group of the Whole at its last meeting in
September,
especially
those
regarding
the
establishment of a framework for the Regular Process
beginning with the sixty-fifth session of the Assembly.
Moving on to draft resolution A/64/L.29, we wish
to highlight the following aspects.
Mexico is fully committed to sustainable fisheries
and is in compliance with all the substantive provisions
of the 1995 Agreement. This issue is of great
importance to my country, and we therefore participate
in the search for mechanisms aimed at achieving
universal participation. One such mechanism is
genuine dialogue that takes into consideration the
concerns of States that are not parties to the
Agreement, as recognized by the 2006 Review
Conference. Mexico hopes that such dialogue, in
addition to promoting wider ratification of the

09-63459

Agreement, will serve to promote cooperation in
implementing conservation and management measures
at the national level that will in turn ensure the
conservation and sustainable use of straddling and
highly migratory fish stocks. We will give special
attention to the two events to be held next year in New
York, in particular the Review Conference.
Furthermore, we would like to reiterate that
responsible international trade is an essential factor in
ensuring that fishing contributes to sustainable
development. A key mechanism for guaranteeing this is
the use of certification and ecolabelling plans, provided
that they are consistent with international law.
Effective market access must be managed in a
non-discriminatory manner, without unnecessary
barriers or trade distortions, and must adhere to the
principles of the Code of Conduct for Responsible
Fisheries.
As regards the effects of fishing on vulnerable
marine ecosystems, Mexico recognizes the need to
continue implementing the measures agreed to in 2006
in order to address this issue effectively, particularly
with regard to deep-sea fishing. The application of the
precautionary approach is aimed at avoiding
irreversible damage to ecosystems and preventing
losses that may require long-term and difficult
recovery efforts, and must therefore be applied to deepsea fishing. The fact that technological developments
now allow for the exploitation of seabed resources by
other, less destructive methods, should also be taken
into consideration.
For these reasons, we call for the series of
measures proposed in the draft resolution to be
implemented on a priority basis and in the manner
established therein, in recognition of the special
circumstances and challenges that developing States
face in this connection.
Concerning illegal fishing and its possible
connections to transnational organized crime, as
reflected in paragraph 61 of the draft resolution, the
Assembly has proposed a cautious approach. In our
view, such a connection can be made only once States
have launched a serious dialogue on the subject, using
as reference points solid and comprehensive studies
that facilitate an understanding of the issues. It is also
essential to bear in mind the variety of legal regimes
applicable to both activities, in accordance with
international law. This is a subject on which we must

15

A/64/PV.57

move forward firmly but gradually, without jumping to
conclusions.
The wide range of topics covered by the two draft
resolutions is clear evidence of the strategic
importance of ocean affairs worldwide. The
productivity of the oceans depends on their being used
in a sustainable manner, and on recognition by the
international community that the problems of the
oceans are closely interlinked and should be considered
as a whole. Mexico supports the draft resolutions and
hopes to continue working in a committed and
responsible manner with the Members of the
Organization to meet the challenges faced by the
international community with regard to the oceans.
Mr. Borg (Malta): Malta wishes to align itself
with the statement delivered by the representative of
Sweden on behalf of the European Union.
My delegation notes with appreciation the report
on oceans and the law of the sea submitted to this
Assembly by the Secretary-General (A/64/66), which
provides a comprehensive overview of the latest
developments and issues relating to ocean affairs and
the law of the sea. Malta particularly welcomes the
large number of wide-ranging topics covered by the
report, ranging from maritime space to climate change.
It will be recalled that 42 years ago, Malta called
upon United Nations Member States in this Assembly
Hall to undertake a reform of the law of the sea, which
culminated in the adoption of the United Nations
Convention on the Law of the Sea on 10 December
1982. On 16 November of this year, we celebrated the
fifteenth anniversary of the entry into force of the
Convention, described as the constitution for regulating
humankind’s activities in the oceans.
As stated by the Prime Minister of Malta in his
address to the General Assembly on 24 September
2009, Malta feels that “[i]t is… necessary to see the
1982 Convention in the light of some pressing
contemporary problems which are either being
addressed inadequately or not being addressed at all”
(A/64/PV.6). Malta therefore feels that the time has
come for the General Assembly to examine possible
approaches to a review of the 1982 law of the sea
Convention. For example, among its limitations, one
could note the provisions dealing with piracy, the illicit
traffic in narcotic drugs or psychotropic substances, the
rules relating to the protection and preservation of the
marine environment, and the rules dealing with

16

submarine cables and pipelines. A number of issues are
also not dealt with in the Convention, such as the
trafficking of human beings, the safety and security of
navigation, the transportation of weapons of mass
destruction, and climate change.
For all those reasons, the Prime Minister of Malta
has proposed that the General Assembly, through its
relevant bodies, undertake appropriate consultations
among its member States to revise the Convention in
view of the passage of time and the emergence of new
and critical issues over the years. In that context, Malta
intends to continue its consultations with other
interested Member States in order to consider how to
advance that proposal further.
For centuries, pirates have been considered the
enemies of mankind. International law has recognized
that characteristic by covering piracy through the
doctrine of universal jurisdiction. To a large extent,
that is reflected in articles 100 to 107 of the 1982
United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea.
However, since the adoption of those articles, the
international community has seen the re-emergence of
a problem that threatens vital sea routes. In the light of
experiences in certain regions of the oceans, it has
become apparent that the provisions require revision,
particularly with respect to the definition of piracy in
article 101, the issue of seizing a pirate ship or aircraft,
which is currently limited to the high seas, and the
prosecution of pirates, particularly as problems of
evidence and jurisdiction are encountered once the
pirates are arrested.
Another issue of concern to Malta is the question
of illegal fishing, especially in the Mediterranean. In
that regard, Malta welcomes the Agreement on Port
State Measures to Prevent, Deter and Eliminate Illegal,
Unreported and Unregulated Fishing, which was
adopted by the Food and Agriculture Organization of
the United Nations (FAO) on 25 November this year
and which aims to close fishing ports to ships involved
in illegal, unreported and unregulated fishing. Malta
participated actively in the technical discussions on the
port State measures held at FAO headquarters in Rome.
In that context, it is relevant to note that the European
Union, on behalf of its member States, was among the
first signatories to sign the Agreement.
With reference to paragraphs 117 and 118 of draft
resolution
A/64/L.18,
which
Malta
supports
wholeheartedly, my delegation wishes to encourage

09-63459

A/64/PV.57

States to join the regional agreements and support their
work to ensure a better protection of the marine and
coastal environments. Indeed, Malta is proud to be the
host country of the Regional Marine Pollution
Emergency Response Centre for the Mediterranean Sea
(REMPEC), a Regional Activity Centre of the
Mediterranean Action Plan and the first Regional Seas
Programme, established by the United Nations
Environment Programme in 1976.
Such Centres and regional cooperation schemes
have proved to be very useful tools for assisting
countries by enhancing at the regional level the
enforcement of multilateral treaties on the protection of
the marine environment. Since its establishment,
REMPEC has assisted more than 13 Mediterranean
coastal States in drafting their national contingency
plans and has also facilitated the conclusion of
subregional response agreements. In such a politically
diverse geographical area, Regional Seas Programmes
and technical cooperation assist in achieving the main
goals of the Organization, namely, to maintain peace
and ensure better livelihoods for our citizens.
As the Secretary-General points out in his report,
the perilous journeys by sea undertaken by people to
clandestinely cross borders continue to result in the
loss of life. In the Mediterranean, the sinking of small
boats crowded beyond their capacity with illegal
immigrants has become an all too frequent occurrence
resulting in the considerable loss of lives of women,
children and men. That is a human tragedy that we
must all, without exception, try to avoid and resolve.
The number of those who risk their lives crossing the
Mediterranean, with grave consequences, requires
urgent regional and international attention.
Last year, a record number of 2,775 irregular
migrants were rescued by the Armed Forces of Malta
or landed in Malta. The number so far recorded this
year is 1,475. For an island State with a surface area of
316 square kilometres and one of the highest
population densities in the world, the magnitude of the
problem takes on a completely different dimension.
Notwithstanding those severe difficulties, Malta has
continued to honour its international obligations vis-àvis genuine refugees and persons qualifying for
humanitarian protection and, indeed, is cited as one of
the countries, in proportion to its size and population,
that has awarded asylum to the highest number of
asylum-seekers.

09-63459

My delegation is pleased to place on record in
this Assembly the fact that this year the International
Maritime Law Institute (IMLI) is commemorating its
twentieth anniversary in the service of the rule of
international maritime law. IMLI was established in
Malta to provide States, particularly developing States,
with the facility to train their legal officials in the field
of international maritime law. As pointed out by the
Secretary-General of the International Maritime
Organization (IMO), IMLI has become an
indispensable part of IMO for it allows Governments to
have at their disposal experts in the field of
international maritime law whom Governments can
consult on compliance with international maritime
treaties.
Another important and unique aspect of training
at IMLI is the emphasis given to the drafting of
legislation. Government legal officials are trained to
draft domestic laws that incorporate the international
obligations found in international maritime treaties.
This enables Governments to enforce treaty provisions
through their courts, thereby ensuring that international
treaties are implemented and enforced.
To date, IMLI has trained 517 lawyers from 115
States. Given this valuable training, States are advised
to communicate with the Institute if they wish to send
their judicial officials to attend the academic
programmes. IMLI’s main course is the Master of
Laws degree in international maritime law, and each
year 35 participants undertake an intensive course for
one academic year. The activities of IMLI have been
recognized as a valid and resourceful contribution to
capacity-building. As noted in the Secretary-General’s
report,
“Capacity-building is particularly vital in order to
assist States in need to efficiently and effectively
implement their obligations under the Convention
and other relevant instruments and receive
benefits from the regime contained therein”.
(A/64/66/Add.1, para. 400).
Malta endorses the statement made by the
Secretary-General in his report that “[t]he international
community has a collective duty to constructively
address the multifaceted challenges facing the world’s
oceans and seas” (ibid., para. 398). Malta’s initiative
in 1967 was precisely to bring to the fore and initiate a
process which then saw its vision of an international
regime for the oceans and the seabed become a reality

17

A/64/PV.57

15 years later. This universal treaty of law and order
pertaining to the common heritage of mankind has and
will continue to have far-reaching implications for the
preservation and management of the oceans.
Furthermore, its strengthening would enhance its
relevance to present-day needs and the needs of future
generations.
Finally, my delegation would like to indicate that
again this year, Malta is one of the sponsors of the two
draft resolutions under this agenda item, which are
before the Assembly for consideration and approval.
Mr. Al-Sheikh (Yemen) (spoke in Arabic): Allow
me on behalf of the Republic of Yemen to thank the
President for his excellent stewardship of this meeting
of the Assembly devoted to the discussion of the
United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea
(UNCLOS). I would be remiss if I neglected to thank
Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon for his reports on this
issue (A/64/66 and Add.1 and Add.2).
Given its geographic location, the Republic of
Yemen considers all issues related to oceans and seas
of particular importance. We have been working to
implement UNCLOS provisions in a coordinated and
effective manner despite the dire economic difficulties
we face. We are convinced that the Convention has
established a comprehensive system for all of the
oceans and seas worldwide. In that connection, we pay
tribute to all of the important mechanisms established
to implement UNCLOS — the International Seabed
Authority, the Commission on the Limits of the
Continental Shelf and the International Tribunal for the
Law of the Sea.
As a coastal and least developed country, Yemen
is plagued by limited financial and technical resources
and illegal, unreported and unregulated fishing
activities that have caused harm to our coast. We also
suffer from the effects of bottom trawling and stress in
that connection that those practices have depleted the
fish stocks in our exclusive economic zone and
devastated the livelihoods of our fishermen, thus
exacerbating the food security crisis and poverty in my
country. These practices have also damaged our marine
ecosystems and their biodiversity. We therefore call on
all States to implement effective measures to manage
sustainable fisheries and control all fishing vessels in
order to protect living marine resources and the marine
environment.

18

We believe that the work of the Commission on
the Limits of the Continental Shelf is of primary
importance in facilitating the exercise by coastal
countries of full sovereignty over their continental
shelf. For that reason, we welcome the draft resolution
on oceans and the law of the sea (A/64/L.18). We have
submitted our report on the limitation of our
continental shelf beyond 200 nautical miles south-east
of Socotra Island, in implementation of paragraph 8 of
article 76 of UNCLOS, thus meeting the deadline of
13 May 2009.
My country notes the statement delivered by the
Chairman of the Commission at the nineteenth Meeting
of States Parties to UNCLOS, at which he informed my
delegation that the Commission will consider Yemen’s
submission in 2012 and will issue its recommendation
on our continental shelf in 2015, according to its
programme of work.
Yemen shares the concern of other States with
regard to the Commission’s workload and funding. In
this context, we stress the importance of providing
funding to the Commission in order enhance its ability
to handle the increasing number of submissions and to
overcome its limitations, as well as to enable it to study
in a serious, practical and precise manner all of the
submissions and to present its recommendations in a
time manner.
We are confident that the Contact Group on the
Commission’s work will achieve satisfactory results
and we pay tribute to the support given to the
Commission, its subsidiary bodies and the Division for
Ocean Affairs and the Law of the Sea.
My country is increasingly concerned by the
growing phenomenon of piracy in the territorial waters
and high seas off the coast of Somalia. We stress the
importance of safety for fishing and navigation in all
international waters and call for the vigorous
condemnation of all acts of piracy and armed robbery
wherever they occur.
Yemen, itself a victim of piracy, has contributed
to all international efforts to combat that scourge.
Pirates have constantly attacked our fishing vessels,
and many Yemeni fishermen whose livelihoods depend
on fishing have been exposed to attacks by naval forces
patrolling international waters, in the course of which
some have been killed or injured.

09-63459

A/64/PV.57

We welcome paragraph 74 of the draft resolution
on oceans and the law of the sea, which invites all
States, the International Maritime Organization and the
International Labour Organization to consider possible
solutions for the seafarers and fishers who are victims
of pirates. We call upon all international maritime
forces to unify their activities in order to protect the
fishermen and their livelihoods.
We stress the importance of cooperation and
coordination of efforts at the international and regional
levels to combat piracy. All efforts to combat piracy
should be in line with relevant international rules and
should respect the sovereignty of the State over its
territorial waters. We also stress that we stand ready to
cooperate with all stakeholders in order to bring about
security and stability in the Arabian Sea, the Red Sea
and the Gulf of Aden.
We support the efforts being made by the United
Nations and the International Maritime Organization in
order to combat piracy and armed robbery off the coast
of Somalia. We welcome the adoption of the Djibouti
Code of Conduct to combat piracy and armed robbery
of vessels in the Western Indian Ocean and the Gulf of
Aden. We also welcome its entry into force in January
of this year.
We are also appreciative of the establishment of
three regional centres in Yemen, Kenya and Tanzania
to share relevant information on piracy and armed
robbery. We also believe that the four working groups
on piracy are an effective means of international
cooperation to combat piracy. We wish to stress that
piracy is a natural outcome of the deterioration of the
political situation in Somalia and the lack of stability in
that country for two decades. It will only be overcome
if the international community succeeds in finding a
comprehensive political solution to all the problems of
Somalia and assist all Somali factions to form a
national unity government so as to bring about security
and stability in its land, sea and air.
Ms. Medina-Carrasco (Bolivarian Republic of
Venezuela) (spoke in Spanish): The Bolivarian
Republic of Venezuela wishes to take this opportunity
to reaffirm the importance it attaches to the subject of
the oceans and the law of the sea. We cannot ignore the
role played by the oceans and seas in meeting our food
needs. Nor can we ignore the fact that they constitute a
central component in the world system for sustaining

09-63459

life and a valuable resource that contributes to
achieving sustainable development.
For that reason, the use of the oceans and seas is
dealt with as a matter of public policy in our country
and given priority attention, as is amply reflected in
our national legislation and the plans and programmes
designed and implemented in accordance with criteria
and principles regarding the conservation and use of
marine resources.
In that connection, the Republic has been
attentive to developments and events at the
international level during the course of this year
regarding the subject of the oceans and the seas. We
attach particular importance to the tenth meeting of the
United Nations Open-ended Informal Consultative
Process on Oceans and the Law of the Sea, held from
17 to 19 June 2009 here at the United Nations
headquarters.
Venezuela believes, as it stated during those
discussions, that the Consultative Process is a forum
for political and technical consultation that involves all
States and other parties interested in assessing the
condition of the marine environment worldwide. We
believe that it is essential to maintain the Process as a
permanent forum within the United Nations, since it
allows for synergy among the major international
instruments related to the environment, which will, in
turn, eventually lead to consistency in matters related
to the oceans and seas and will make it possible to
remedy the legal gaps in the law of the sea.
Moreover, it should be pointed out that
approaches to the oceans and the seas should stay
within the conceptual framework of sustainable
development. In that regard, it is necessary, for
example, to examine further the role of the oceans in
matters relating to the eradication of poverty, food
security and the interrelationship between oceans and
climate change.
On that subject, we share the concern about and
the interest expressed in gaining further knowledge of
the scope of that interrelationship and, in particular, the
importance of promoting at the international level an
awareness regarding the impact of climate change on
marine ecosystems and, in particular, on low-lying
coastal areas and coastal States, with full respect for
the standards and principles laid down in the United
Nations Framework Convention of Climate Change
and its Kyoto Protocol.

19

A/64/PV.57

It is timely and necessary to point out in the
context of our debate on the oceans and the law of the
sea that we continue to be concerned at the existing
deficiencies in the implementation of the international
legal framework on the management and conservation
of genetic resources beyond national jurisdiction.
Therefore, in my delegation’s view, this forum should
also deal on a permanent basis with all the conventions
relating to the subject, in particular the United Nations
Convention on Biological Diversity.
In that regard, I would like to state that the
Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela does not accept that
the management of such resources should be decided
through a legal regime that seeks to exclude some
parties. My delegation also believes it is necessary to
engage in further research with a view to arriving at the
scientific certainty needed to guide the international
community in adopting the best possible decisions in
that connection.
The complex reality we face today convincingly
demonstrates that the United Nations Convention on
the Law of the Sea of 10 December 1982 does not
incorporate, neither in its text nor in its additional
Agreement, any full treatment of all aspects and
subjects to be dealt with by the international
community with regard to the oceans and seas.
On that basis, the Bolivarian Republic of
Venezuela draws attention to the key role of other
international instruments in dealing with marine and
coastal
biological
diversity
beyond
national
jurisdiction, as reflected in decision IX/20 of the ninth
meeting of the Conference of the Parties to the
Convention on Biological Diversity, which was held
from 19 to 30 May 2008 in Bonn, Germany.
Regarding the draft resolution on sustainable
fisheries and the Agreement for the Implementation of
the Provisions of the United Nations Convention on the
Law of the Sea of 10 December 1982 relating to the
Conservation and the Management of Straddling Fish
Stocks and Highly Migratory Fish Stocks and
associated instruments, my delegation would also like
to emphasize that that is a highly sensitive matter and
constitutes an area of priority importance for our
country. Hence, we have undertaken significant and
far-reaching initiatives to promote and implement
programmes for the conservation, protection and
management of marine biological resources.

20

In our legislation on fisheries and aquaculture,
penalties have been established for imposition on
vessels flying the national flag that engage in illegal
activities relating to the extraction of resources without
due authorization by the State and also for incursions
into waters under the State’s jurisdiction without the
submission of the requisite documentation. Such
situations are then reported to the flag State of the
vessel. With respect to highly migratory fish stocks, we
maintain a register of vessels, which is regularly
transmitted to regional fisheries management
organizations for follow-up in accordance with
regulations on enhancing transparency. At the
international level, the Bolivarian Republic of
Venezuela has implemented the principles of the Code
of Conduct for Responsible Fisheries of the Food and
Agriculture Organization of the United Nations (FAO),
and of chapter 17 of Agenda 21 adopted at the United
Nations Conference on Environment and Development,
which was held in Rio de Janeiro in 1992. Likewise,
we actively participate in regional and other fisheries
organizations, such as the FAO Committee on Fisheries
and its subsidiary bodies, the Western Central Atlantic
Fishery Commission, the Latin American Fisheries
Development Organization, the Commission for Inland
Fisheries of Latin America, the International
Commission for the Conservation of Atlantic Tunas
and the Inter-American Tropical Tuna Commission.
The Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela considers
it vital to participate in initiatives to combat illegal,
unreported and unregulated fishing. Our Government
has adopted the measures necessary to tackle that
problem through ongoing reporting of the position and
legal status of vessels flying the Venezuelan flag on the
high seas to the regional fisheries management
organizations of which we are a part. Moreover,
Venezuelan law provides for the installation of global
positioning satellite equipment and devices in fishing
vessels of over ten gross register tons. Also, it made
significant contributions, in its national capacity, to the
legally binding Agreement on Port State Measures to
Prevent, Deter and Eliminate Illegal, Unreported and
Unregulated Fishing, adopted in the framework of
technical consultations by FAO.
Our delegation demonstrated the commitment of
the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela to cooperate with
multilateral efforts and initiatives seeking to promote
the sustainable development of oceans and seas. Since
the oceans and the seas are a universal heritage, we

09-63459

A/64/PV.57

advocate applying an international judicial framework
that would incorporate all regional and international
agreements that regulate the conservation and
sustainable use of marine resources.
Lastly, Venezuela reiterates its historic position,
which it has maintained in various international
forums, namely that the United Nations Convention on
the Law of the Sea is not the only source of the law of
the sea. For that reason, we object to the proposition
that it is the sole source. It should be recalled that it
does not enjoy global acceptance, inasmuch as a
significant number of States are not parties to it.
Mr. Mohamed (Maldives): The ocean is integral
to all aspects of Maldivian life. There are few nations
in the world whose well-being and future development
are so intricately linked to their marine and coastal
ecosystems. While this interrelationship has enhanced
our culture and lifestyle for centuries, it has also made
us particularly vulnerable to the ocean’s fragility. We
recognize that within our borders we have primary
responsibility for protecting this vital resource and all
that flows from it, and we continue in our efforts to
meet these obligations. Many of the challenges,
however, require international cooperation before one
State can make a difference.
Because of that, I
would like to take this opportunity to applaud the
efforts of those Member States working towards
implementing and refining the law of the sea. My
delegation also welcomes the report by the Secretary
General, submitted pursuant to General Assembly
resolution 63/111, detailing the developments and
issues relating to ocean affairs and the law of the sea
(A/64/66).
The precarious state of the world’s oceans is
unmistakable, and the Maldives experiences the
consequences of the problem through economic, social
and ecological signals. The last few decades have seen
the continued overexploitation of fisheries, with only
20 per cent of stocks considered moderately exploited
or underexploited. Sustainable fisheries management is
a key concern of the Maldivian community. Fisheries,
along with tourism, are the two mainstays of our
economy, accounting for 90 per cent of gross domestic
product and three quarters of all jobs. Dependence,
however, on transboundary stocks such as the tuna,
which constitutes 90 per cent of our commercial catch,
represents a key vulnerability. Our efforts alone cannot
protect this species; further international cooperation,

09-63459

research and management efforts are required to ensure
that fishery’s lasting viability.
Illegal, unreported and unregulated fishing in our
waters remains a pressing concern. Despite
considerable efforts, which include creating additional
reserves and introducing new legislative measures, the
Maldives’ struggles to make significant headway.
Policing an exclusive economic zone of 859,000 square
kilometres and over 1,100 islands, of which just 194
are inhabited, would present challenges even to the
more developed countries, but is particularly
problematic given the Maldives’ development status
and limited capacity. Illegal fishing jeopardizes food
security for our people and undermines our efforts to
manage our fisheries so that we can sustainably exploit
their economic potential and protect them from
degradation.
All efforts taken by the Secretary-General to
assist small island developing States and other
developing countries to develop sound marine
ecosystem
management
practices
are
greatly
appreciated. We also note the need to continue
increasing international cooperation on policing and
prosecuting illegal fishing. Again, these are global
issues, and we are bound together in the search for
lasting solutions.
Any threat to the biodiversity of our marine
ecosystems is a threat to our sustainable development.
Healthy fisheries aside, the genetic material contained
in that biodiversity is a potential and unexplored source
of economic opportunity: our atolls form by far the
largest group of coral reefs in the Indian Ocean, with
over 250 species of coral and over 1,100 species of reef
fishes. Our tourism industry is dependent on healthy
and flourishing reef ecosystems. A functioning reef
system also provides a very necessary buffer from
extreme weather events, in which the erosive power of
the sea reduces our land area. This has unimaginable
consequences to island States such as the Maldives, as
a shrinking land area affects the limits of our exclusive
economic zone, thereby impacting on our territory as
an independent and sovereign nation.
The catastrophic impact of climate change on
marine
ecosystem
resilience
cannot
be
overemphasized. Coral reefs are considered amongst
the most vulnerable ecosystems. Their susceptibility to
the consequences of climate change, including rising
ocean temperatures and acidity and rising sea levels,

21

A/64/PV.57

has led to projections that such reefs will be wiped out
within 50 to 100 years. We cannot begin to describe the
tragedy that that would represent for our country. One
need only look at the 1998 El Niño episode alone, in
which certain species of coral saw a 99 per cent
decline, with an economic loss estimated at
$91 million, to grasp the consequences of a more
sustained warming.
Combating such impacts will place an enormous
burden on small island developing States and threaten
to undermine ongoing development efforts. We are
proud that the Maldives is taking an active leadership
role in this area, with President Mohamed Nasheed
announcing earlier this year that the Maldives will
strive to be carbon neutral by 2020. Pursuing
innovative approaches to adaptation options for reefs
and developing ways to decrease other environmental
stresses to maximize reef resilience are key issues for
small island developing States such as the Maldives.
However, such efforts need broader international
support, through capacity building and technology
transfer. We also emphasize the need for more stringent
emissions abatement by all large emitters for the
benefit of oceans globally and given the limits to
possible adaptation at the social, biophysical and
economic levels. This underscores the need for greater
integration between a new international climate regime
and the law of the sea, given that the success of one is
inexorably linked to the other.
Our geographic isolation, along with our narrow
economic base, requires us to import nearly all our
supplies. Thus, the Maldives is extremely vulnerable to
all the external shocks impacting the global economy.
We refer here particularly to the devastating impact on
our domestic economy of any rise in oil prices, the
recent global financial crisis and the terrorist attacks of
11 September 2001. Other threats to shipping, such as
the recent increase in piracy off the coast of East
Africa, are also of particular concern. Our ability to
combat the rising cost of living for our people and to
assist them in satisfying even their basic needs, let
alone improving their quality of life through
sustainable development, is intricately tied to shocks
over which we have little or no control.
The issues we have raised need to be tackled at
multiple levels. As for many of the global problems we
face, truly international responses are required and
must be supported by regional and local action. The
small island developing States, through their own

22

domestic legal frameworks and cooperatively through
instruments such as the Barbados Programme of
Action, are directing considerable time and resources
to discharging our responsibilities to the best of our
abilities. However, we do not have the capacity to
succeed in this work alone.
Recognizing this fact, we applaud the continued
efforts of the General Assembly to secure international
cooperation and coordination on these matters and are
truly grateful for the assistance that has already been so
generously provided. But we call upon the
international community to redouble its efforts to
support, promote and strengthen capacity-building
activities associated with the sustainable development
of our ocean resources, including the building of
scientific research capacity and enhanced technologies
and capacities for responding to threats to maritime
security and safety, the conservation and sustainable
development and use of marine resources, and
ecosystem and fisheries management approaches as a
whole.
We must also be prepared to think creatively
about how we tackle these problems and how we
integrate existing law of the sea obligations with other
multilateral environmental agreements. Importantly, as
scientific understanding evolves and we enter the
uncertain world of climate change, we must also be
flexible enough in our legal frameworks to respond
quickly and decisively to new challenges as they
emerge.
Mr. Goledzinowski (Australia): Australia has the
honour this afternoon to co-sponsor both of the draft
resolutions before us today (A/64/L.18 and A/64/L.29).
These drafts resolutions continue to raise issues of key
importance to Australia, including bottom fisheries,
high seas governance and the workload of the
Commission on the Limits of the Continental Shelf. I
will briefly touch upon each of these issues.
Australia supports the outcomes of this year’s
sustainable fisheries draft resolution and was pleased
to participate in the informal consultations on it,
particularly the review of the implementation of the
bottom fishing provisions in resolution 61/105. This
draft resolution recognizes the immense importance
and value of deep-sea ecosystems and the biodiversity
they contain, and was an important step forward in
regulating bottom fishing and managing the impacts of
fishing on vulnerable marine ecosystems. Australia

09-63459

A/64/PV.57

reaffirms its strong commitment to regulating bottom
fisheries in accordance with resolution 61/105 and
welcomes all efforts made thus far to adopt and
implement such measures. We encourage further efforts
to meet the objectives of resolution 61/105.
Australia encourages all States and regional
fisheries management organizations (RFMOs) to
ensure that areas where vulnerable marine ecosystems
are known to occur or likely to occur are closed to
bottom fishing activities, and that activities are
authorized to proceed only if management measures
are in place to prevent significant adverse impacts in
accordance with resolution 61/105.
We are also pleased to see the 2008 International
Guidelines on the Management of Deep-sea Fisheries
in the High Seas, issued by the Food and Agriculture
Organization (FAO), recognized for the guidance they
provide in implementing measures in accordance with
resolution 61/105. We note that the FAO Guidelines
provide a minimum standard of response to the need to
improve the conservation and management of deep-sea
fisheries, and in this respect should complement and
further inform existing efforts and measures adopted
by RFMOs, such as the standards already agreed
through the Commission for the Conservation of
Antarctic Marine Living Resources.
We are pleased that this year’s draft resolution
welcomes the adoption of the Convention on the
Conservation and Management of High Seas Fishery
Resources in the South Pacific Ocean, which
establishes a South Pacific RFMO. When the
Convention enters into force, the gap that exists in the
international conservation and management of
non-highly migratory fisheries and the protection of
biodiversity in areas beyond national jurisdiction
extending from the most easterly part of the southern
Indian Ocean through the Pacific towards the exclusive
economic zones of South America will be closed. We
look forward to the entry into force of the Convention
and to working with others in this important new
RFMO.
Australia also continues to implore all States that
have yet to do so to ratify the 1995 Fish Stocks
Agreement and to join each regional fisheries
management organization or arrangement where they
have an interest.
Australia is a strong supporter of the United
Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea. We have

09-63459

adopted measures on the safety of navigation and the
protection of the marine environment in a manner that
is consistent with international law, including the
Convention.
Australia
acknowledges
the
considerable
workload faced by the Commission on the Limits of
the Continental Shelf and notes the importance of
submissions being examined within a reasonable time
frame, including to ensure the continued engagement
of relevant expertise. Australia supports the informal
working group and encourages States to actively
contribute to its work.
Finally, Australia welcomes the reconvening of
the Ad Hoc Open-ended Informal Working Group to
study issues relating to the conservation and
sustainable use of marine biological diversity beyond
areas of national jurisdiction. We understand that the
Working Group will convene in February 2010. It is
important that adequate arrangements and governance
structures be in place to ensure the conservation and
sustainable use of marine biodiversity beyond national
jurisdiction. Australia looks forward to further progress
on these issues in February.
Mr. Pramanik (Bangladesh): At the outset, I
congratulate President Ali Abdussalam Treki and other
members of the Bureau on their election to their high
posts in the General Assembly at its sixty-fourth
session. My delegation is confident that, under his able
leadership, the session will be a great success. My
delegation is always ready to extend its full
cooperation to him. I thank the President, the
Secretary-General and the Secretariat, and in particular
the Division for Ocean Affairs and the Law of the Sea
for its reports on oceans and the law of the sea
(A/64/66 and Add.1 and 2) which have been submitted
to this Assembly for consideration. We express our
deep appreciation to the coordinators for their hard
work in conducting the negotiations on the two draft
resolutions (A/64/L.18 and A/64/L.29).
The United Nations Convention on the Law of
the Sea is the fundamental document that provides the
legal framework for States’ rights and obligations
relating to the use of ocean space. The Convention
further regulates the exploration and exploitation of the
resources therein.
The resources of the oceans and seas can make
significant contributions to the achievement of
sustainable development. In this regard, we strongly

23

A/64/PV.57

emphasize the essential need for cooperation, including
through capacity-building and the transfer of marine
technology, to ensure that all States, especially
developing countries and in particular the leastdeveloped countries and small island developing
States, are able to benefit from the sustainable
development of the oceans and seas.
Bangladesh recognizes that the Informal
Consultative Process, a unique forum for the
comprehensive discussion of issues related to oceans
and the law of the sea, must take into consideration the
true perspective of the three pillars of sustainable
development. In this regard, we welcome the decision
contained in draft resolution A/64/L.18 that the
Consultative Process at its eleventh meeting will focus
its discussions on capacity-building in ocean affairs
and the law of the sea, including marine science.
The proven impacts of climate change are being
seen with greater severity and frequency, and new
estimates are being established. One such estimate is
that by 2100, the rise in sea level could be more than
one metre, which would inundate some 15 to 17 per
cent of the low-lying costal areas of Bangladesh,
displacing
approximately
20
million
people.
Bangladesh is thus deeply concerned over the current
and projected adverse effects of climate change on the
costal population of millions worldwide, including on
their livelihoods. We will need to find appropriate
ways and means to identify adaptation measures
required to redress the sea-level rise. We therefore
emphasize the urgency of addressing the climate
change issue under the agenda item “Oceans and the
law of the sea”.
The Commission on the Limits of the Continental
Shelf is now overloaded with submissions. There are
potentially 99 submissions — 50 actual submissions
plus 49 filings of preliminary information — in the
Commission’s queue. Assuming the current rate of
progress, as outlined by the Chairman of the
Commission before the nineteenth Meeting of States
Parties, it could be 50 years or more before the
Commission will have examined all the submissions.
This implies that all sorts of continental shelf
delimitation issues, at least for areas beyond 200
nautical miles, will effectively have to be put on hold
until the Commission has dealt with the submissions of
affected areas and States.

24

Bangladesh is deeply concerned by the workload
of the Commission. We need to find creative and
practical solutions to redress this problem. States
parties to the Convention need to address this situation
with the utmost urgency and take the necessary
measures, including interim measures, to enable the
Commission to discharge its functions in a timely
manner by holding lengthier and more frequent
sessions. In this regard, we welcome the
recommendations contained in paragraphs 52 and 53 of
the draft resolution encouraging States to participate
actively and contribute constructively to the ongoing
work of the informal working group of the Bureau. We
further call upon States to make voluntary
contributions to the Trust Fund established for
payments of emoluments of the Commission members,
particularly those from developing States.
Bangladesh should like to reaffirm its strong
position that, in accordance with article 77, paragraph
3, of the Convention, “the rights of the coastal State
over the continental shelf do not depend on occupation,
effective or notional, or any express proclamation”. In
this regard, Bangladesh strongly endorses the inclusion
of this fundamental continental shelf doctrine in the
draft resolution on oceans and law of the sea that the
Assembly will consider later today in order to clarify
ambiguities that might exist concerning costal States’
entitlements and rights over the continental shelf
beyond 200 nautical miles, based on natural
prolongation.
In essence, article 76 and the Statement of
Understanding prescribe procedures whereby qualified
coastal States must define the extents of their exclusive
continental shelf entitlements beyond 200 nautical
miles. With individual States seeking to define their
perceived entitlements, it is to be expected that
differing interpretations will arise concerning the areas
where these entitlements apply, leading inevitably to
situations in which adjacent or opposite States will
claim entitlements to the same portions of the seabed.
Such overlaps could be bilateral and involve just two
States, or they could be multilateral and involve three
or more States. A good example of the latter case is the
Bay of Bengal, where Bangladesh, India, Sri Lanka and
Myanmar claim jurisdiction over overlapping
continental shelf areas.
In this regard, Bangladesh recalls with
satisfaction that States parties to the Convention may
submit to, inter alia, the International Tribunal for the

09-63459

A/64/PV.57

Law of the Sea or the International Court of Justice any
dispute concerning matters relating to maritime affairs,
including boundary delimitation. Bearing that in mind,
Bangladesh has recently submitted its maritime
boundary dispute matters to an arbitral tribunal
pursuant to Annex VII of the United Nations
Convention on the Law of the Sea.
There can be little doubt that the partitioning of
outer continental shelves offers coastal States a
tremendous opportunity for engaging in substantive
dialogue that leads ultimately to cooperation and
harmonious relations. The Commission on the Limits
of the Continental Shelf will not intervene in situations
where coastal States object to the proposed outer shelf
limits of their neighbours, leaving it to the affected
States to seek a solution through direct negotiation or
through established mechanisms for arbitration. To
achieve success in this arena, my delegation is of the
view that it is essential to develop early on a positive
relationship with neighbour States that fosters a climate
of trust and good will and facilitates increasing levels
of collaboration in activities aimed at achieving an
equitable solution.
Mr. Mahiga (United Republic of Tanzania): My
delegation would like to thank the Secretary-General
for his comprehensive report on oceans and the law of
the sea, contained in document A/64/66 and
Addendums 1 and 2. The report provides us with a
useful basis for the consideration of this agenda item.
We commend the Secretariat for its continued hard
work in following up various matters relating to the
law of the sea, which continues to be the subject of
growing attention in the General Assembly. We further
congratulate the coordinators, Ms. Holly Koehler of the
United States and Ambassador Henrique Valle of
Brazil, for their professional conduct of the informal
consultations on the two draft resolutions before the
Assembly (A/64/L.18 and A/64/L.29). We also thank
the delegations that made valuable contributions to the
consultations.
My delegation would like to focus on some
specific aspects of the report before the Assembly.
First, on the subject of maritime safety and
security, it is not arguable that piracy and armed
robbery against ships are among the major menacing
problems threatening the international regime of
maritime trade and security of navigation. The number
of reported incidents — not even including unreported

09-63459

ones — as indicated in the report is alarming. Figures
indicate that the number of incidents of piracy and
armed robbery, especially in the Indian Ocean, is on
the increase despite the current international efforts to
check it. We believe that this is a time to translate our
collective concern into tangible efforts to contain the
problem and to ensure that it is progressively dealt
with.
The statistics indicated in the report of the
Secretary-General clearly break with the assumption
that this problem is limited to a specific region.
Although statistics show that incidents of piracy are
high in specific areas, it is also evident that they are
not uncommon in other parts of the world. To my
delegation, this is yet another reason why the
international community should be urged to come up
with mechanisms to combat this crisis wherever in the
world it strikes. We must continue to enhance
cooperation among States to ensure the safety and
security of navigation and improve prevention and
response capabilities in responding to new and
emerging threats to maritime security. States should be
highly encouraged in particular to patrol and ensure the
safety of maritime waters for navigational purposes in
a concerted manner.
Concerted efforts should also be extended to
fighting impunity. My delegation strongly urges
Member States to continue exploring the available
means of prosecuting suspected pirates, particularly by
exercising jurisdiction as provided for in article 105 of
the United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea.
We further recommend that, in the future, we open a
debate to explore the possibility of expanding the
jurisdiction of the International Criminal Court to
include the crime of piracy.
There may also be a need for an urgent
international conference under the auspices of the
United Nations to re-examine the resurgence of this
age-old problem of piracy, and to review the efficacy
and relevance of existing conventions in responding to
the new challenge. The conference would also rally
international political will and obligations in dealing
with the problem of piracy under the leadership of the
United Nations, in partnership with regional
organizations and other stakeholders in the
international community.
Secondly, regarding the Commission on the
Limits of the Continental Shelf, my delegation is

25

A/64/PV.57

pleased by the many States that have complied with
their obligation under the Charter to complete their
submissions in accordance with article 4 of annex II of
the Convention and preliminary information in
accordance with paragraph 1 (a) of document
SPLOS/183.
However, we wish to join other delegations that
have expressed their concern on the challenge that the
Commission is now facing in examining the large
number of submissions. My delegation is concerned
with the timeline for examining such submissions. In
this respect, we request the General Assembly to
consider the proposals of Member States to facilitate
the prompt examination of these submissions,
particularly by increasing the capacity of the
Commission in order to enable it examine the
submissions in the shortest possible time frame so that
we do not defeat the spirit of the United Nations
Convention on the Law of the Sea.
Thirdly, regarding the conservation of marine
fisheries resources, my delegation is deeply concerned
about reckless illegal fishing activities, which have
adverse effects and lead to the overexploitation of fish
species and the marine environment, particularly for
developing coastal States. We strongly urge the
international community to continue its efforts to
provide the necessary assistance to build the capacities
of and equip developing coastal States to monitor and
protect their marine resources. Regional cooperation
and efforts to develop joint patrol programmes are also
very effective ways of curbing this problem. We
welcome the efforts to develop a comprehensive global
record on fishing vessels and refrigerated transport and
supply vessels. While addressing this problem, related
security problems in the high seas can also be met or at
least better understood.
Fourthly, the adverse impact of climate change is
throwing up new challenges to marine ecology, from
threats to the very existence of some island States and
the displacement of coastal populations to the possible
extinction of some marine animal and plant species in
various parts of the world due to the destruction of
their habitat and ecosystems. The legal and socioeconomic implications of these changes will now be far
better understood and responded to in a manner
proportionate to the threat. As already mentioned, at
the forthcoming Copenhagen Conference on Climate
Change, the legal dimensions of such future changes
need to be recognized, addressed or at least flagged for

26

follow-up action after the Conference. Again, on this
issue, we continue to count on the leadership of the
United Nations.
In conclusion, we welcome the ratification of the
Convention by Switzerland, the Dominican Republic
and, recently, Chad, and urge those States that still
have not ratified the Convention to consider doing so
in order to achieve the ultimate goal of universal
participation.
Mr. Manjeev Singh Puri (India): First of all, I
would like to take this opportunity to thank the
President of the Assembly for convening this debate.
My delegation would like to thank the SecretaryGeneral for his excellent report (A/64/66 and Add.1
and Add.2) on issues relating to oceans and the law of
the sea.
We appreciate the presentation of the report
(A/64/347) on the work of the Ad Hoc Working Group
of the Whole, established pursuant to paragraph 157 of
resolution 63/111, on the regular process for global
reporting and assessment of the state of the marine
environment, including socio-economic aspects. We
are happy to note that the regular process would be
guided by international law, including the United
Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea (UNCLOS)
and other applicable international instruments, and that
capacity-building, sharing of data, information and the
transfer of technology would be crucial elements of the
framework for the regular process.
The United Nations Convention on the Law of
the Sea provides the basic framework for carrying out
any activity in the oceans and seas, for the use of their
resources and for national, regional and international
action and cooperation to counter threats and
challenges to the marine environment. We need to take
concerted action and to adopt integrated approaches to
preserve oceans for future generations. The draft
omnibus resolution (A/64/L.18) rightly recognizes that
the problems of ocean space are closely interrelated
and need to be considered as a whole through an
integrated, interdisciplinary and intersectoral approach.
We thank the coordinator, Ambassador Henrique Valle,
for his efforts in coordinating this year’s draft omnibus
resolution.
India attaches high priority to the effective
functioning of the institutions established under the
United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea,
namely, the International Seabed Authority, the

09-63459

A/64/PV.57

International Tribunal for the Law of the Sea and the
Commission on the Limits of the Continental Shelf.
These institutions have made considerable progress in
their respective areas of work over the past year. We
closely follow the work of all these subsidiary
institutions.
We congratulate the Chairman of the Commission
on the Limits of Continental Shelf for the considerable
progress made by the Commission in undertaking its
consideration of the submissions. However, we note
that since a considerable number of States have made
their submissions, it will take a long time for the
Commission to consider those submissions.
We fully share the concerns expressed in the draft
omnibus resolution regarding the projected timetable
of the work of the Commission on the submissions
already received by it and those yet to be received and
the significant inequities and difficulties that may arise
for States as a result of the projected timetable,
including with respect to retaining expertise when there
is a considerable delay between the preparation of a
submission and its consideration by the Commission.
We hope that the informal working group
engaged in examining this issue will consider and
suggest short-, medium- and long-term measures to
address this problem with a view to shortening this
time frame in a practical and realistic manner. This
would enable the forthcoming Meeting of the States
Parties to consider this issue in a holistic manner and
suggest practical solutions to address this important
issue.
We support the efforts made by the Secretariat to
strengthen the capacity of the Division for Ocean
Affairs and the Law of the Sea, which serves as the
secretariat of the Commission, in order to ensure
enhanced support and assistance to the Commission in
its consideration of submissions.
We are committed to the goal of the protection
and preservation of marine biodiversity, in particular in
areas beyond national jurisdiction. Marine biodiversity
in areas beyond national jurisdiction is threatened by a
number of causes such as destructive fishing activities,
overexploitation in vulnerable marine environments,
open, unregulated access to fisheries, bottom trawling,
biological prospecting, geo-engineering activities and
pollution of the marine environment from various
sources, just to name a few. Coordinated and combined

09-63459

efforts are required to minimize the harmful effects of
those activities on the marine environment.
We recognize the need to consider new
approaches within the overall framework of the
Convention on the Law of the Sea to promote
international cooperation aimed at conservation,
sustainable use of the living resources of the high seas
and benefit-sharing of seabed resources located in
areas beyond national jurisdiction. However, the
participation of developing countries in devising and
adopting such approaches greatly depends on the
scientific information and technical know-how
available to them. Promoting the flow of scientific data
and information and the transfer of technology that
results from marine scientific research, especially to
developing States, is therefore essential to achieve that
objective.
Marine scientific research can lead to better
understanding and utilization of almost all aspects of
the oceans and their resources. The research that aims
at exploring the biodiversity of the deep seabed for
commercially valuable genetic and biochemical
resources should be carried out in accordance with the
general principles of marine scientific research,
namely, those set out in articles 140, paragraph 1, and
241 of the Convention.
In the area of maritime navigation, we would like
to express our serious concern over piracy and armed
robbery at sea, particularly off the coast of Somalia.
Piracy not only threatens freedom of the seas, maritime
trade and maritime shipping security, but also
endangers the lives of seafarers, affects national
security and territorial integrity and hampers the
economic development of countries in the region.
India is actively cooperating in international
efforts to combat piracy and armed robbery at sea. We
support joint and concerted efforts taken by the
international community in that regard. As past
incidents have shown, that threat persists, especially
off the coast of Somalia. There is a growing need for a
well-considered, coordinated course of action in
accordance with international law. There is also a
continuing need to assist developing coastal States
through capacity-building, including training of law
enforcement officials, transfer of equipment, et cetera,
to enhance their capacities, thus enabling them take
effective action against the threats to maritime security.

27

A/64/PV.57

We also emphasize the importance of the
principle of the freedom of navigation, including the
right of innocent passage and transit passage through
straits used for international navigation. We reaffirm
our view that States bordering straits may adopt laws
or regulations relating to transit passage through the
straits, but such laws should be enforced in a
non-discriminatory manner that is fully consistent with
article 42 of the Convention on the Law of the Sea.
Speaking of fisheries, we take this opportunity to
thank Ms. Holly Koehler of the United States of
America for her skilful and professional coordination
of the informal consultations on the draft resolution on
sustainable fisheries (A/64/L.29). The fisheries sector
occupies an important place in the socio-economic
development of India. We support increased adherence
to and stronger implementation of the 1995 Fish Stocks
Agreement.
The effective implementation of measures
proposed in resolution 61/105 to combat adverse
impacts of bottom fishing on vulnerable marine
ecosystems was an area of particular interest during the
negotiations on the fisheries resolution this year. We
hope that the additional measures agreed to — which
include, inter alia, identification of vulnerable
ecosystems, assessment of the impact of bottom fishing
on such ecosystems, exchange of best scientific
information and adoption of conservation and
management measures to prevent adverse impacts on
such ecosystems — will help towards regulating
bottom fishing in areas beyond national jurisdiction.
Mr. Tommo Monthe (Cameroon), Vice-President,
took the Chair.
We are pleased to note that the draft resolution on
sustainable fisheries duly recognizes the special
circumstances and requirements of developing States
and the specific challenges they may face in giving full
effect to their obligations under that resolution.

28

The most important task before the developing
countries in the development of their fisheries sector is
to develop and enhance their capacity-building. For
that purpose they require access to and sharing of
scientific knowledge, resources, technology transfer
and development of skills. In that context we
particularly support operative paragraph 27 of the
sustainable fisheries resolution, which invites States
and
international
financial
institutions
and
organizations to, inter-alia, provide assistance to
developing States to enable them to develop their
national capacity to exploit fisheries resources,
including developing their domestically flagged fishing
fleets, value-added processing and the expansion of
their economic bases within the fishing industry.
The Acting President: We have heard the last
speaker in the debate on agenda item 76 and its
sub-items (a) and (b) for this meeting. The next plenary
meeting will begin immediately following adjournment
of this one.
Programme of work
The Acting President: Before concluding the
meeting, I should like to consult members regarding an
extension for the work of the Second Committee.
Members will recall that at its 49th plenary
meeting, held on 20 November 2009, the General
Assembly agreed to extend the work of the Second
Committee until Friday, 4 December 2009. However, I
have been informed by the Chairperson of the Second
Committee that due to ongoing negotiations, the
Bureau would like to request an additional extension of
the Committee’s work until Wednesday, 9 December.
May I therefore take it that the Assembly agrees to
extend the work of the Second Committee until
Wednesday, 9 December 2009?
It was so decided.
The meeting rose at 6.10 p.m.

09-63459
