General Assembly-Thirty-sixth Session

170

seventh session, through the Advisory Committee, a progress report on the implementation of the Specific Programme of Measures and Activities;
7. Requests the Secretary-General to convene the second session of the Advisory Committee during the second
half of 1982, prior to the thirty-seventh session of the General Assembly, to provide it with all necessary assistance
and to submit to it a progress report on the implementation
of the Specific Programme of Measures and Activities;
8. Invites the Advisory Committee to pay particular
attention to the implementation of the Specific Programme
of Measures and Activities and, to this end, to submit adequate recommendations to the General Assembly;
9'. Requests the Secretary-General to continue to take
concrete measures, through all the communications media
at his disposal, to give widespread publicity to the activities
of the United Nations system in the field of youth and to
increase the dissemination of information on youth;
10. Further requests the Secretary-General to take all
necessary measures in order to enable the Centre for Social
Development and Humanitarian Affairs of the Secretariat
to perform its tasks and responsibilities for the adequate
preparation and observance of the International Youth Year;
11. Again appeals to all States, to international governmental and non-governmental organizations and to the
public to make in due time generous voluntary contributions
to supplement funds provided under the regular budget of
the United Nations for the costs of the Specific Programme
of Measures and Activities and requests the SecretaryGeneral to take all appropriate measures for obtaining
such voluntary contributions;
12. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its
thirty-seventh session the item entitled "International Youth
Year: Participation, Development, Peace" and to grant it
high priority.
57th plenary meeting
13 November 1981

36/29.

Efforts and measures for securing the implementation and the enjoyment by youth of human rights, particularly the right to education
and to work

The General Assembly,
Mindful of the provisions of the Universal Declaration
of Human Rights, 50 the International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights, 51 and the International
Covenant on Civil and Political Rights, 51
Recalling its resolution 34/151 of l7 December 1979, by
which it decided to designate 1985 as International Youth
Year: Participation, Development, Peace,
Recognizing the profound importance of the role of youth
for the all-round development of each country,
Convinced of the need for further action aimed at the
codification and implementation, whenever possible, of the
rights of youth with special regard for the right to work,
stipulated in article 6 of the International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights as one of the fundamental
human rights,
Aware of the fact that the unemployment of youth is a
hindrance to the full participation of young people in the
socio-economic life of their country, limits their ability to
participate in the development process and is, furthermore.
a source of increased social ills, and in this regard empha>0 Resolution 217 A (III).
" Resolution 2200 A (XXI), annex

sizing the importance of secondary and higher education of
youth as well as of its access to appropriate technical, vocational guidance and training programmes,
Considering it necessary that States and also international
organizations and their bodies should examine in a more
comprehensive, systematic and effective manner ways and
means to secure the implementation of human rights and
their enjoyment by youth, particularly the right to education
and to work, aimed at solving the problem of youth
unemployment,
I. Calls upon all States, in view of the forthcoming
International Youth Year, to adopt appropriate legislative,
administrative and other measures, for the implementation
and the enjoyment by youth of human rights, particularly
the right to education and to work, aimed at solving the
problem of youth unemployment;
2. Appeals to the respective governmental and nongovernmental organizations to pay, during the preparation
and observance of the International Youth Year, increased
attention to the securing and realization of the basic right
of young people to education and vocational training and
to work;
3. Requests the Economic and Social Council, the Commission for Social Development and the Commission on
Human Rights, as well as other relevant bodies of the United
Nations and specialized agencies, to give continuous attention to the problems of the unemployment of youth and to
resolving them;
4. Requests the Advisory Committee for the International Youth Year to ensure that, in the context of the preparations for the Year, systematic and continuous attention
is given to the efforts aimed at the promotion of human
rights and their enjoyment by youth, particularly the right
to education and vocational training and to work, with a
view to resolving the problem of youth unemployment.
57th plenary meeting
13 November 1981

36/30.

World Assembly on Aging

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 33/52 of 14 December 1978, in
which it decided to convene a World Assembly on Aging
in 1982, and 35/129 of 11 December 1980,
Bearing in mind that the number of older people in the
world, in both the developed and developing countries, will
increase dramatically during the next two decades,
Recognizing that the aging are a valuable human resource
as much in the economic and social fields as in the transmission of the cultural heritage,
Emphasizing the great importance of the World Assembly
on Aging in addressing the broad spectrum of questions
concerning the aging and in helping to formulate policies
to deal with these questions,
Taking note with appreciation of the report of the Advisory Committee for the World Assembly on Aging on its
first session, held at Vienna from 17 to 21 August 1981, 52
I. Welcomes the offer of the Government of Austria to
act as host to the World Assembly on Aging; 53
2. Decides that the World Assembly on Aging will be
held at Vienna from 26 July to 6 August 1982;
3. Decides further that, subject to the conditions in paragraph 8 below, two days of pre-conference meetings should
be held at Vienna immediately before the World Assembly
" A/361472, annex.
" See A/361357.

Vl.

Resolutions adopted on the reports or the Third Committee

on Aging in order to reach agreement on all procedural and
organizational matters to be dealt with on the opening day
of the Assembly;
4. Approves, subject to the conditions in paragraph 8
below, the holding of three simultaneous meetings-plenary
meetings and meetings of two Main Committees-for the
whole duration of the World Assembly on Aging;
5. Requests the Secretary-General, subject to the conditions in paragraph 8 below, to convene at Vienna two
sessions of the Advisory Committee for the World Assembly
on Aging, if possible from 1 to 5 February and from 3 to
7 May 1982, in order to finalize the preparations and documentation for the Assembly;
6. Urges those countries in a position to do so to make
generous voluntary contributions to the Fund for the World
Assembly on Aging;
7. Invites the United Nations Fund for Population Activities to continue to provide financial support to the preparatory work for the World Assembly on Aging;
8. Notes that paragraphs 3, 4 and 5 above will be implemented only to the extent that they can be financed by
economies within the direct and apportioned resources requested by the Secretary-General, in section 4 B of the
proposed programme budget for the biennium 1982-1983, 54
or by voluntary contributions which may be or may become
available from the Fund for the World Assembly on Aging.
57th plenary meeting
13 November 1981

36/55.

Declaration on the Elimination of All Forms of
Intolerance and of Discrimination Based on
Religion or Belief55

The General Assembly,
Considering that one of the basic principles of the Charter
of the United Nations is that of the dignity and equality
inherent in all human beings, and that all Member States
have pledged themselves to take joint and separate action
in co-operation with the United Nations to promote and
encourage universal respect for and observance of human
rights and fundamental freedoms for all, without distinction
as to race, sex, language or religion,
Considering that the Universal Declaration of Human
Rights 56 and the International Covenants on Human Rights 57
proclaim the principles of non-discrimination and equality
before the law and the right to freedom of thought, conscience, religion or belief,
Considering that the disregard and infringement of human
rights and fundamental freedoms, in particular of the right
to freedom of thought, conscience, religion or whatever
belief, have brought, directly or indirectly, wars and great
suffering to mankind, especially where they serve as a means
of foreign interference in the internal affairs of other States
and amount to kindling hatred between peoples and nations,
Considering that religion or belief, for anyone who professes either, is one of the fundamental elements in his
conception of life and that freedom of religion or belief
should be fully respected and guaranteed,
Considering that it is essential to promote understanding,
tolerance and respect in matters relating to freedom of re-

171

ligion or belief and to ensure that the use of religion or
belief for ends inconsistent with the Charter, other relevant
instruments of the United Nations and the purposes and
principles of the present Declaration is inadmissible,
Convinced that freedom of religion or belief should also
contribute to the attainment of the goals of world peace,
social justice and friendship among peoples and to the elimination of ideologies or practices of colonialism and racial
discrimination,
Noting with satisfaction the adoption of several, and the
coming into force of some, conventions, under the aegis of
the United Nations and of the specialized agencies, for the
elimination of various forms of discrimination,
Concerned by manifestations of intolerance and by the
existence of discrimination in matters of religion or belief
still in evidence in some areas of the world,
Resolved to adopt all necessary measures for the speedy
elimination of such intolerance in all its forms and manifestations and to prevent and combat discrimination on the
grounds of religion or belief,
Proclaims this Declaration on the Elimination of All
Forms of Intolerance and of Discrimination Based on Religion or Belief:
Article 1

Everyone shall have the right to freedom of thought,
conscience and religion. This right shall include freedom
to have a religion or whatever belief of his choice, and
freedom, either individually or in community with others
and in public or private, to manifest his religion or belief
in worship, observance, practice and teaching.
2. No one shall be subject to coercion which would
impair his freedom to have a religion or belief of his choice.
3. Freedom to manifest one's religion or belief may be
subject only to such limitations as are prescribed by law and
are necessary to protect public safety, order, health or morals
or the fundamental rights and freedoms of others.
l.

Article 2

No one shall be subject to discrimination by any
State, institution, group of persons or person on the grounds
of religion or belief.
2. For the purposes of the present Declaration, the
expression "intolerance and discrimination based on religion or belief'' means any distinction, exclusion, restriction
or preference based on religion or belief and having as its
purpose or as its effect nullification or impairment of the
recognition, enjoyment or exercise of human rights and
fundamental freedoms on an equal basis.
I.

Article 3

Discrimination between human beings on the grounds of
religion or belief constitutes an affront to human dignity
and a disavowal of the principles of the Charter of the United
Nations, and shall be condemned as a violation of the human
rights and fundamental freedoms proclaimed in the Universal Declaration of Human Rights and enunciated in detail
in the International Covenants on Human Rights, and as an
obstacle to friendly and peaceful relations between nations.
Article 4

54
Official Records of the General Assembly, Thirty-sixth Session. Supplement No. 6 (A/36/6 and Corr.I).
55
See also sect. X.8.4, decision 36/412.
56
Resolution 217 A (III).
57
Resolution 2200 A (XXI), annex.

I. All States shall take effective measures to prevent
and eliminate discrimination on the grounds of religion or
belief in the recognition, exercise and enjoyment of human
rights and fundamental freedoms in all fields of civil, economic, political, social and cultural life.
