U..ITED

NATIONS

I

THIRTY-THIRD

, j

YEAR

, ,I.
th

(‘1 I ‘: ,lj’‘d

MEETING: 17 FEBRUARY 1978 :)
i-ii
NEW

YORK

CONTENTS
Page

Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/2060)

1

, . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . , . , . . . . . ..*.,.

Expression of thanks to the retiring President . . , . . . . . , . , . . . . . . . . . * . . .

1

Adoption of the agenda . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . , . . . . , . . . . , . . . . . .‘I.

1

Complaint by Chad:
Letter dated 8 February 1978 from the Permanent Representative of Chad to
the United Nations addressed to the President of the Security Council
. . . . , .
(S/12553) ..,...,....,.........................e.

1

S/PV.2060

NOTE
Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined with
figures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United Nations document.
Documents of the Security Council (symbol S/. . .) are normally published in quarterly
Supplements of the Official Records of the Security Council. The date of the document
indicates the supplement in which it appears or in which information about it is given.
The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a system
adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of Resolutions and Decisions of the
Securi@ Council. The new system,which has been applied retroactively to resolutions
adopted before 1 January 1965, becamefully operative on that date.

2060th MEETING
Held in New York on Friday, 17 February
President: Mr. Oleg A. TROYANOVSKY
(Union of Soviet Socialist Republics).

1978, at 3.30 pm.

Council, to invite those representatives to participate in the
discussion, without the right to vote, in accordance with
the relevant provisions of the Charter and rule 37 of the
provisional rules of procedure.

Present: The representatives of the following States:
Bolivia, Canada, China, Czechoslovakia, France, Gabon,
Germany, Federal Republic of, India, Kuwait, Mauritius,
Nigeria, Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United
States of America, Venezuela.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Kamougue (Chad)
and Mr. Kikhia (Libyan Arab Jamahiriya) took places at the
Council table.
3. The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Russian): The
Council will now take up the item inscribed on the agenda
at the request of the Government of Chad as contained in a
letter dated 8 February 1978 from the representative of
Chad to the President of the Council [S/12553].

Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/2060)
1. Adoption of the agenda
2. Complaint by Chad:
Letter dated 8 February 1978 from the Permanent
Representative of Chad to the United Nations
addressed to the President of the Security Council
(S/12553)

4. I should also like to draw the attention of members of
the Council to the following documents: the letter dated
6 February 1978 from the representative of Chad to the
President of the Council [S/125.54]; the letter dated
8 February 1978 from the representative of Chad to the
President of the Council [S/12555/; the letter dated 13
February 1978 from the representative of Chad to the
President of the Council (S/I25.58/; the letter dated 14
February 1978 from the representative of the Libyan Arab
Jamahiriya to the President of the Council [S/12560]. I
have, furthermore, just received a letter dated 17 February
1978 from the representative of the Libyan Arab Jamahiriya [S/12565/, which will be circulated to the members of
the Council in the course of the meeting,

The meeting was called to order at 4.05 p.m.
Expression of thanks to the retiring President
1. The PRESIDENT (interpretation ji-om Russian): Since
today we are holding our first official meeting of the
Security Council in February, I should like to take this
opportunity, on behalf of the members of the Council, to
pay a tribute to the Commissioner for External Affairs of
Nigeria, His Excellency Mr. Joseph Garba, and the Permanent Representative of Nigeria, Mr. Leslie Harriman, for
their services in the post of President of the Council for the
month of January. I am sure that I am expressing the
feelings of the whole Council when I say that they have
earned our unreserved gratitude for the great skill with
which they conducted the work of the Council last month.

5. The first speaker is the Minister for Foreign Affairs and
Co-operation of Chad. I welcome him and give him the
floor.
6. Mr. KAMOUCUE (Chad) (interpretation from French):
Mr. President, before I deal with the question before us, I
should like to express on behalf of the people of Chad as a
whole our gratitude for you diligence in convening this
meeting of the Council.

Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.

7. We should also like to thank all the members of the
Council who responded promptly to the appeal made by
my country. In particular, we wish to take this opportunity
to express our appreciation to President Omar Bongo of
Gabon, the current President of OAU, President Gaafar
Mohamed Nimeiri of the Sudan, President Seyni Kountche
of the Niger and President Obasanjo of Nigeria, who have
spared no effort to find a peaceful settlement to the dispute
before the Council today and who, furthermore, have
effectively contributed to the positive results that we have
obtained in terms of national reconciliation.

Complaint by Chad:
Letter dated 8 February 1978 from the Permanent
Representative of Chad to the United Nations addressed
to the President of the Security Council (S/l 2553)
2. The PRESIDENT
(interpretation from Russian): I
should like to inform members of the Council that letters
have been received from the representatives of Chad and
the Libyan Arab Jamahiriya in which they request to be
invited to participate in the discussion. In accordance with
the usual practice, I propose, with the consent of the
1

8. We felt compelled to ask for a meeting of the Council a~
a matter of urgency-the Council which, under the Charter,
is the main body entrusted with the maintenance of
international peace and security-because
we believe that
the situation currently prevailing in our country is extremely dangerous and is one which is likely to endanger
that peace and security of which the international cornmunity has such need.

Tropic of Cancer with the 15th meridian east of Greenwich;
it reaches Chad only in the north when it intersects with
t]le hder
with the Niger; (b) the second begins at the
point of intersection of the Tropic of Cancer and the 16th
meridian east of Greenwich and goes to the point of
intersection of the 24th meridian east and the parallel at
19’ 30’ north; it is at this latter point that the three
frontiers of Chad, Libya and the Sudan meet.

9. The situation which obtains in Chad, as I have said, is
serious and causes us concern because of the aggression
committed by a neighbouring country, that is, the Socialist
People’s Libyan Arab Jamahiriya. That country, carried
away by its own power, the result of the enormous
resources it obtains from oil which enable it to acquire
more arms than it needs, has in fact deemed itself entitled,
in disregard of the provisions of the Charter of the United
Nations and of the Charter of the Organization of African
Unity as well as of the relevant resolutions of those
organizations and of the principles of international law, to
commit aggression against Chad by occupying a part of its
territory, Aouzou, in the northern part of the country and
by openly fighting on the side of the rebels.

13. In conclusion, the Treaty: first, established indisputably the invalidity of the Lava&Mussolini treaty of
7 January I935 on which Libya bases its claims; secondly,
it also confirmed the definition of the borders laid down by
the additional declaration of 21 March 1899, the let.ters
exchanged between Bar&e and Prinetti on 1 November
1902 and the FrancoMBritish convention of 8 September
1919, all of which are international documents that up to
the time of our independence bound two permanent
members of the Council, namely, France and Great Britain,
14. Furthermore, during the debates on the ratification by
France of the Treaty of 10 August 1955, Mr. Maurice
Faure, the then Secretary of State for Foreign Affairs made
the following statement before the Council of the Republic
on 29 November 1956:

10. It was in implementation of the Treaty of friendship
and good-neighbourliness between France and Libya, COP
eluded at Tripoli on 10 August 1955,i that the present
border between Chad and Libya was defined. That Treaty
clearly provides in article 3 that:

“This Treaty provides for the definitive surrender by
Libya of claims which at the time of Mussolini, and by
virtue of the agreements signed with Pierre Laval, ‘Italy
had been able to make to the region of Tibesti.”

“The two High Contracting Parties recognize that the
borders which separate the territories of Tunisia, Algeria,
French West Africa and French Equatorial Africa, on the
one hand, from the territory of Libya, on the other hand,
are those which stem from the following international
instruments in force on the date of the constitution of
the United Kingdom of Libya. . . .”

It is therefore unthinkable today that Libya should invoke
such a document to justify its claim to Aouzou.
15. Furthermore,
Libya voted without reservatio:n in
favour of resolution AHG/16 (I), adopted at the Assembly
of Heads of State and Government of the Organization of
African Unity, held at Cairo from 17 to 21 July 1964. By
that resolution, “all Member States pledge themselves to
respect the borders existing on their achievement of
national independence”.

The instruments in question are the following: the FrancoBritish convention of 14 June 1898; the declaration of 21
March 1899 additional to the preceding convention; the
France-Italian
agreements of 1 November 1902; the
France-British
convention of 8 September 1919; the
France-Italian settlement of 12 September 1919.

16. Since 1960, Chad has never disputed the border
separating it from Libya. It is, to say the least, surprising
that, after 22 years of independence for Libya and 13 years
of independence for Chad, Libya should dispute its frontier
with Chad and should have sent troops since 1973 to
occupy Aouzou, an integral part of the territory of Chad.

11. That Treaty was approved by the French National
Assembly on 22 November 1956. Law No. 56-1235 of 12
December I956 authorized the President of the French
Republic to ratify it. The exchange of instruments of
ratification took place on 20 February 1957. The Treaty
was published and came into force through decree
NO. 57-436 dated 26 March 1957, signed by the President
of the French Republic, Mr. Rem? Coty, and countersigned
by the President of the Council of Ministers, Mr. Guy
Mollet, as well as by the Minister for Foreign Affairs,
Mr, Christian Pineau.

17. Despite this clear case of aggression by Libya, Chad
has, since the establishment of the new regime on 13 April
1975, shown unusual patience in seeking to resolve this
unfortunate affair through peaceful means. We therefore
deem it necessary to recall the steps we have taken. At the
bilaterallevel, meetings took place at Tripoli and N'Djamena
between the authorities of the two countries with a view to
finding common ground of agreement in obedience to the
higher interests of our two peoples. However, they all failed
because the Libyan Arab Jamahiriya, carried away by its
expansionist policy and its desire to treat only with 3
Government of Chad that would be subservient to it, 1Lls
always refused to deal with the substance of the problenr,
preferring rather to speak of a seductive “co-operation”=
Now, Chad is not ready to trade its sovereignty or its
territory in exchange for subsidies of any kind.

12. We should make clear that the letters exchanged on
the day of the signing of the Treaty constitute the annexes
and comprise detailed and indisputable provisions concerning the definition of the border between Chad and Libya.
Thus the border is defined by two straight lines: (a) the
first begins at Toummo and goes to the intersection of the
,
:
!

1 See Journal officiel de la Rt$ubliqre
eighty-ninth year, No. 83.

frangaise,

Lois

et dkrets,

2

of Libyan nationals and their goods in the Republic of
Chad. That Ordinance has the following provisions:

18. In this connexion I should like to stress an interesting
aspect of the method adopted by Tripoli in opening
negotiations with us. At the time when the delegations of
Chad and Libya began the talks at N’Djamena on 23 June
1977, unprecedented attacks were launched by the rebels,
on orders from Tripoli and with the support of Libyans,
against the Chad military posts at Bardai’, Ounianga KBbir
and Zouar, areas close to Aouzou. Weapons of mass
destruction were US,,J and many persons were killed or
wounded. The towns of Bardai’ and Zouar were taken by a
detachment of the Libyan Army which was commanded by
Captain Ali Hireimi and included a section of foreign
specialists armed with heavy weapons. Those towns are
today jointly administered by Libyan forces and their
mercenaries. Al1 the civilian and military inhabitants of
these localities were sent to Libya, where they are living in
deplorable conditions. Libyan radio itself confirmed this
when it announced the deaths which had occurred among
the prisoners of war and appealed to the International Red
Cross to take an interest in their fate.

“Article 1. Any movement outside the place of residence is forbidden to Libyan nationals residing in Chad,
until further notice.
“Article 2. All Libyan nationals residing in Chad are
forbidden to engage in any lucrative activities, to sell,
cede or rent their movable and immovable goods, Their
assets in accounts with local banks, the CCP and the
Cuissc d’ipargne are frozen.
“Article 3. The activities of the Chad-Libyan Arab Joint
Bank, of the Libyan Cultural Centre and of schools are
suspended.”
These restrictive measures have been taken in the interest of
the Libyan nationals and for their security.
23. Continuing his diversionary manoeuvres, the Libyan
head of State, during his recent official visit to the Niger,
stated on 22 January that he was prepared to open his
frontiers with Chad and to follow a policy of co-operation
with that country. He added, in effect, that there was no
dispute between his country and Chad. We are, then,
entitled to wonder what he is seeking in Aouzou and for
what purpose he is giving assistance to the Chad rebellion.

19. Faced with that situation, the Government of Chad
deemed it appropriate to place the question before OAU
during the Assembly of Heads of State and Government
held at Libreville, Gabon, at the beginning of July 1977. A
unanimous decision was taken there to establish a mediation committee of six members: Algeria, Cameroon, Gabon,
Mozambique, Nigeria and Senegal. That Committee was
given the task of finding a solution to the problem and
reporting thereon to the Assembly.

24. At the very time when the delegation of Chad, led by
the Minister for Foreign Affairs and Co-operation, was
getting ready to go to Niamey for the meeting scheduled to
take place on 7 February 1978, the situation in the north
of Chad suddenly worsened. Military operations more
violent than any that had taken place for the past 12 years
were unleashed in the area of Faya-Largeau, the administrative seat of the BET (Borkou-Ennedi-Tibesti)
Prefecture,
and in the area of Fada, the administrative seat of the
Ennedi Sub-Prefecture. This was done on the orders of
Tripoli; eloquent proof is furnished by radio broadcasts. It
was obvious that there were Libyan troops with the Chad
rebels. The attacks were waged with sophisticated weapons,
including rockets, which shot down two aircraft of the
Chad squadron that were engagedin normal airlifts of food
and supplies. Many people, above all civilians, lost their
lives.

20. The Committee met at Libreville on 10 August 1977
and adopted a recommendation counselling moderation by
the two parties. But, ignoring that resolution, the Libyan
Arab Jamahiriya has, since 21 October 1977, been allowing
the Chad rebels to use part of the daily schedule of its
national radio, from 1800 to 1900 hours, for hysterical
campaigns to denigrate Chad. These broadcasts are specially
prepared by the Director of Chad Affairs recently established in the Libyan Ministry of Foreign Affairs. All that
has been done for the sole purpose of discrediting the Chad
Government, taking attention away from the military
occupation of Aouzou and torpedoing the national reconcihation under way in the country. At this very hour, that
pernicious campaign is being waged by Radio Tripoli with
renewed vigour. These are medium-wave broadcasts on a
frequency of 828 kilocycles, or 352 metres, with 300
kilowatts of power.

2.5. Such military operations obviously require enormous
means, both in men and mate’riel, and persons using this
technical equipment must be highly qualified. Certainly,
the Chad rebels operating in a vast region covering half of
the country do not have such qualifications.

21. Moreover, the Libyan Arab Jamahiriya, in midJanuary 1978, refused to take part in a meeting of the
Sub-Committee of Experts, made up of jurists and cartographers, that the current President of the Council of
Ministers -of OAU, Mr, Martin Bongo, Minister for Foreign
Affairs
and Co-operation of the Republic of Gabon,
convened at Libreville, The Libyan Arab Jamahiriya tried
to justify that arrogant and scornful attitude towards OAU
by alleging that it could never participate in a meeting at
which representatives of the Chad Government were present, and it cited as the reason for this the so-called acts of
provocation committed by the Chad authorities against
Libyan nationals and interests.

26. There can be no doubt but that the intensity of the
fighting taking place. at this very moment in the BET is the
result of the presence of Libyan troops in the area. Hence,
no one can be fooled by the so-called determination of the
Libyan President to reach a peaceful settIement of the
situation.
27. It is evident that the limit of Libyan interference in
Chad’s internal affairs has long since been exceeded. Thus,
no one can claim that something positive could result from
the envisaged meeting at Niamey, nor that it is still

22. The fact is that there is only an ordinance-Ordinance
No. lS/P.CSM of 19 July 1977-governing the movement
3

32. Whom does the Libyan Government think it is
deceiving? Certainly not the people of Chad, wh.ich would
by no means cede an inch of its national territory. We
cannot agree to Libyan presence on our soil, nor to Libyan
intervention in our internal affairs that causes the death of
nationals of Chad and pits them one against the other to
achieve imperialist ambitions.

necessary for Chad to have normal diplomatic relations
with a country whose annexationist ambitions are SO
obvious.
28. Yesterday, it was Bardai’, Zouar and Ounianga Kkbir;
today Faya and Fada are being attacked. Tomorrow,
perhaps, it will be Kanem and other regions already marked
on the Libyan map of expansion. Mr. Hisseine Habre,
President of the Command Council of the Armed Forces of
the North, who has just concluded an agreement with the
Supreme Military Council and who is perfectly familiar
with this region, pointed out the following in a communique published on 15 February:

33, The statement I have just made fully proves, if proof
were necessary, the seriousness of the situation at present
prevailing in my country. As the Council is aware, Chad is
one of the countries least favoured by nature in the whole
world. Its poverty is well known to international public
. *
It is enduring the darkest hours of its history
~~%?of
the expansionist designs of its neighbour to the
north, the Libyan Arab Jamahiriya. This situation not only
endangers the very existence of Chad as a sovereign State
and a member of the international community but could
seriously jeopardize peace and security in that part of the
African continent, which is already troubled by the
existence of other hotbeds of tension.

“The stateless traitors Goukouni Oueiddei and his
followers have agreed that the BET and Kanem should be
attached to Libya as provisionally autonomous Libyan
provinces.”
29. These sombre prospects for the future of Chad require
urgent action on the part of all peace-loving countries and
in particular the permanent members of the Security
Council.

34. That is why, moved by the desire to settle the problem
through peaceful means, Chad today addresses the Security
Council, seeking its assistance so that it may regain. its
territorial integrity and live in peace within the borders it
inherited from colonial times. As its leaders have repeatedly
stated, Chad has no belligerent designs against anyonle. It
has given sufficient proof of its will to live in peace and
harmony not only with its immediate neighbours but &O
with all nations that love peace and justice. This determination to coexist peacefully has always been demonstrated by
Chad in the positions it has taken on the major problems of
our times, particularly within the Organization of African
Unity, the movement of non-aligned countries and the
United Nations. Once again the people of Chad, a peaceful
people, asks nothing more than to live in peace within its
borders, because it knows as well as anyone else that peace
is a sine qua non for its development.

30. In addition, I would draw it to the Council’s attention
that Chad asks nothing more than the restoration of all its
legitimate rights as a sovereign and independent State and
that, at this very moment, it is acting towards that end by
sending to Khartoum a delegation to consult with President
Nimeiri, who has played and continues to play a very
positive role in the process of national reconciliation and
peace. But Libya, secure in its power and wealth, does not
wish to hear this. It sticks to an ultimatum in which its
head of State demands: first, an end to foreign intervention
in Chad; secondly, a prohibition against Chad’s receiving
military aid from any country, and from Egypt in particular; thirdly, an indication of the good intentions of the
Chad Government in pursuit of its efforts at reconciliation;
fourthly, the reopening of embassies, and a warning to the
Government of Chad to desist forthwith from harassment
or hostile statements. If the Government of Chad does not
comply with these Libyan demands, no hope should be
entertained and there will be open war.

35. Consequently, Chad asks the Security Council to
adopt all necessary measures so that: first, Chad’s SOVereignty and territorial integrity, won on accession to
independence on 11 August 1960, may be scrupul’ously
respected; secondly, the Government of the Libyan Arab
Jamahiriya immediately and unconditionally withdraws its
troops from the territory of Chad, and in particular from
the Aouzou region, halts all assistance of any kind,
particularly
military, financial, political and radipbroadcasting assistance to the Chad rebels, ends Its
interference in the internal affairs of Chad, and relea;ses all
military and civilian prisoners now detained in Libya;
thirdly, urgent action is taken by the Security Council to
ensure that the fierce fighting which began on 1 February
1978, thanks to foreign support for the rebels, ceases
immediately and that the necessary conditions are created
for the OAU Ad Hoc Committee to carry out the mission
entrusted to it by the Assembly of Heads of State or
Government of Africa at the fourteenth summitmeeting at
Libreville; fourthly, both parties participate effectively in
the efforts of OAU to find a just and equitable settlement
of the dispute betweenthem without recourseto violence.

3 1, The Members of the Council are in a position to assess
the gravity of those intentions. Nevertheless, I wish to stress
that, as regards national reconciliation, the efforts of the
Supreme Military Council, which has given that matter top
priority in its political programme of action, have never
been to the taste of Tripoli. In effect, contrary to some
allegations by Libyan authorities in this regard, Radio
Tripoli dail$ denounces those of its opponents who have
agreed to respond to the call for national reconciliation.
Furthermore, the r6gime of Colonel Al-Qadhafi has committed itself to making available to the rebels all the
assistance necessary to fight the nation of Chad and the
Libyan army is entirely in charge of the training of recruits.
The Tripoli regime has even opened a special fund for the
recruitment of Chad nationals living abroad, who are taken
to the training camps at Benghazi and Tarhouna, near
Tripoli in Libya, and Gouro and Aouzou in Chad. Lastly,
the Tripoli regime has decided to stir up trouble again in
the centre and the south of the country in order to
facilitate the mission of the Libyan mercenaries in the BET.

36. As I have just pointed out, it is the seriousness
of tile
situation in my country, more and more of whoseinnocerl t
4

“17 February, Colonel Al-Qadhafi received on Friday
morning the special envoy of President Nimeiri of the
Sudan, Abu Bakr Othman Salah, who handed him a
message from the Sudanese President. The message is
described as fraternal and cordial. The delegation of the
Republic of Chad then joined the talks. The delegation is
composed of Mr. Gouara Lassou and Mr. Mahamoud
Abderamane, Members of the Supreme Military Council.
The delegation of Chad transmitted to Colonel Al-Qadhafi
a verbal message from President Felix Malloum of the
Republic of Chad. These direct contacts between President Al-Qadhafi and the Presidents of the Sudan and Chad
are the result of their concern at the foreign interference
in the internal affairs of Chad. JANA learns that a
communique will be issued at the conclusion of the talks
among the three countries setting out the principal results
achieved. JANA also learns that these talks make possible
a direct meeting between Colonel Al-Qadhafi and President Malloum and that there is no obstacle to its taking
place very soon. We remind you that the delegations from
Chad and the Sudan arrived at Tripoli yesterday evening.”

sons are falling on a battlefield of foreign creation, which
has led us to come before this important body.
37. Just as I conclude my presentation of the facts, a most
disturbing message had reached us from N’Djamena to the
effect that missile-carrying tanks and armoured vehicles
have appeared on the rebel side and are proceeding in the
direction of Faya. Clearly it is no longer the Chad rebels
who are employing this equipment against their compatriots-equipment
that is far beyond their resources from
the human as well as the technical and financial point of
view-but foreign elements.
38. This is extremely serious. It seems to me that the
Council must speedily face its responsibilities otherwise
there is a danger of seeing a people, a State Member of the
United Nations, ann.ihilated. We repeat with the firmest
conviction that the people of Chad will not accept the fait
accompli of a war imposed upon it and which does not bear
a name. It has already made clear its determination to
preserve its independence and its territorial integrity and to
defend them to the last drop of its blood.

43. I have also sent a letter to the President of the
Security Council, which he mentioned, drawing the attention of the members of the Council ,io the efforts made by
a number of presidents, friendly and fraternal heads of
State, in an attempt to resolve the dispute between Libya
and Chad. Since that letter has not yet been circulated, I
shall read it:

39. I would add that arrangements have been made for the
International Red Cross, in co-operation with the Chad Red
Cross, to’ carry out the evacuation and return to their
homes of persons taken prisoner during the Bardai’ attack
last June. We now learn that the Libyan Arab Jamahiriya
refuses to grant transit visas through Tripoli to these
members of the Red Cross so that they can get to the areas
concerned. That is a message which I have just received
from N’Djamena and which it was necessary to read to you
on completing my presentation of the complaint which the
Government of Chad has brought before the Council.

[The speaker read out the letter subsequently circulated
as document S/12565.]
44. We are expecting a communiquewhich is to be issued
any moment on the discussions
between the delegationsof
Libya and Chadat Tripoli.

40. The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Russian): The
next speaker is the representative of the Libyan Arab
Jamahiriya, on whom I now call.

45. As I said,it wasnot too clear to us why the Foreign
Minister of Chad insistedon a meeting of the Security
Council or why he shouldbegin by attacking Libya and
making &.srgesagainstusthat he knowsarenot true.

41. Mr. KIKHIA (Libyan Arab Jamahiriya) (interpretation
from French): First of all, Mr. President, I should like to
extend to you the congratulations of my delegation on
your assumption of the task of President of the Council for
the month of February. I should like also, since this is the
first time I have addressed the Council since my country
left it, to extend my congratulations to my colleagues who
have been elected non-permanent members of the Council
with effect from January 1978. I take this opportunity aho
to express my personal thanks and those of my delegation
to my colleagues on the Council for the co-operation
shown us by them during the two years in which we Were a
member of the Council, representing the African Group.

46. The problem is really unfortunate, becauseit pits two
fraternal countries of Africa againsteach other, and it is
particularly distressingfor us in Libya becauseChad is a
very important country for the whole of Africa owing to its
situation at the geographicalcentre of the continent. It is of
great importance for communications and relations between all African countries to the north, south, east and
west. It is a cross-roads
andit is perhapsfor that reasonthat
there has been no peaceor stability in Chad for 20 years.
There are forces which do not want to see peace and
stability in Chad, forces with which Foreign Minister
Kamougd is perhapsfamiliar.

42. I have not prepared a statement because I did not
know what our brother from Chad, Mr. Kamougue, was
going to say in his statement. It is difficult to understand
the situation because, at the same time as the Foreign
Minister of Chad is attacking my country, my regime, my
President and my Government, at the same time as he is
accusing Libya of being expansionist and Libyans of being
arrogant, there is a delegation from Chad at Tripoli that has
been there since yesterday and that came to our capital as a
result of the intervention of our brother President Nimeiri
of the Sudan. I will read the dispatch from the Libyan press
agency, JANA, which I have just received:

47. The presentGovernmentof ChadhasaccusedLibya of
fomenting disturbancesand encouragingrebels. The Minister even said that those rebelswere in Libya’s pay. I am
not sure whom he is addressinghere-members of the
Security Council, Membersof the United Nations or even
the public at large? Everyone knows that the revolution in
Chad is somethingthat hasexisted for 20 years andthat it
already existed under the colonial administration. Our
friends, the French, could tell us about that. It existed
5

before Libya became independent and even before the
Libyan revolution. I do not think, in view of the purely
formal independence of the former royalist regime, the
foreign bases-in particular British and American-in
its
territory and the foreign influence to which King Idris was
subject, that the Foreign Minister of Chad can accuse that
r&ime of helping or financing the rebellion or of sending
Liby’an troops in Chad. It was not possible politically, nor
was it possible financially, because Libya had not yet
discovered the oil, whose revenue the Minister of Chad
accuses us of using to foment trouble in that country,

Sudan in 1966, 1967 or 1968. I shallquote from Keesi&s
Contemporary Archives of 1968:
“Relations between Chad and the Sudan, which lhad
improved following a crisisin mid-1965, when President
Tombalbaye accused the Khartoum Government of
harbouring an ‘Islamic Government-in-exile’ allegedto be
plotting against the Chad Government . . ., once again
deteriorated in August 1966, but a settlement was
reachedat the end of September.“z, 3
I do not want to read out the whole article, but you heave
been accusingyour neighboursone after the other.

48. We have heard that kind of accusation elsewhere-even
in the United States Congress it is being said that Libya is
using its oil revenues to encourage terrorism in the world.
That is an old refrain. We have been hearing it for a long
time now and we are very familiar with it. Libya is attacked
because it is a progressive country. It is a country which
tries, in so far as it can, to help the struggle for liberation in
Africa and elsewhere. We have never attempted to conceal
our intention of helping people who are fighting against
Zionism in Palestine, against racism in South Africa and
against colonialism.

51. Furthermore, the revolution in Chad is not something
that is just happeningin the north, which is a sparsely
populated areawith about 100,000 inhabitants, but alsoin
the east and the west. Negotiations are at present taking
place in Nigeria. A man claiming to be the leader of the
western army is supposedto have kidnapped a Frenchman
and a Swiss. This did not take place near the Libyan
frontier, but near Lake Chad, near the frontier with
Cameroon, Nigeria and the Niger. Then there is the
so-called secondarmy at Ouaddai’in the west, which also
hasnothing to do with Libya or with the Libyan frontier. It
is quite far from Libya.

49. I do not want to dwell too long on this matter, which
is an internal affair of Chad’s. I can assure you, Mr, Foreign
Minister, that you cannot force the Security Council to
focus on one aspect of this problem-an aspect which is
only a small part of the dispute between Libya and
Chad-and forget about what is happening in Chad. The
essential problem above all is that of the revolution of the
people of Chad against its regime, a revolution which has
been going on continuously for 20 years. No one can stop it
except the people of Chad themselves, that is, the Government of Chad. If you are unable to come to terms with
your people, no one can help you. It is not a question of
frontiers. There may be a frontier problem, but we have
scores of frontier problems in Africa. That is not the point
here. I do not want to dwell too long on this internal
problem of Chad’s, because we know the position of Chad
and we know that its situation as a crossroads country
creates problems. We know that when the European
countries carved up Africa and divided the African cake
they drew frontier lines and created provinces and colonies
without taking into account geographical,historical, human
or tribal realities. There are internal problems in most of
our countries becauseof that. But most of our countries,
thank God and thanks to the courage of the people and
their leaders, have been able to overcome those problems.
We all had them after independence-regional problems,
ethnic problems and problems of languageand religion. We
in Libya also had them and all African countries had the
sameproblems. Most were able to solve them, somewith
great difficulty, but they did solve them.

52. I do not think it is wiseright now, when we aredoing
everything in our power to resolvedifferences, for you to
come here and attempt to make Libya a scapegoatfor your
internal problems. I could quote hundredsof sourcesthat
would shed some light on what is happening in Chad.
Perhapsthere are many people who do not know what is
happening there. I shall quote from Europa Publications
Ltd. of London, which will give Council memberssome
basicinformation on what is happeningin Chad:
“The Saharanterritories of Borkou, Ennedi and Tibesti
were traditionally ungovernable and they therefore remained under French military administration until 1’965.
Then tension between senior Chad officials and the
French army resultedin the recall of the troops at Chad’s
insistence. In their place, the Sarh civil and military
regime was autocratic, corrupt and , . . cruel, and aroused
intenselocal bitterness,
“In imposing his exclusive authority through the
single-party system and by expelling his French advisers
from the north, Tombalbaye stifled every form of legal
opposition and drove opponents underground or into
exile. Shortly after the institution of the PPT (,parti
progressistetchadien] as the singleauthorized political
party, Tombalbaye ordered the arrest of a number of
prominent politicians on chargesof plotting to raisethe
Muslim north against the Christian south, Riots in
Fort-Lamy (now N’Djamena)in September 1963 ca.used
about twenty fatalities and led to the arrestsof a former
mayor of Fort-Lamy and a former Prime Minister. Rut
dissidencecontinued, breaking out in October 1965 into
rebellion with a tax riot at Mangalme,500 kilometres,east
of Fort-Lamy, in which several thousand people are

50. What is happening now in Chad is that the minority
which inherited the colonial administration is still clinging
to power and it has a problem with the majority. If the
people in Chad have taken up armsit is obviously because
there are difficulties. But do not blame the Libyans. We
know
that this is not the first time that you have attacked
Libya. You are alwayslooking for a scapegoat.You accused
Libya in 1971 and even before then. You accused the
Sudan and you suspendeddiplomatic relations with the

2 See Keesing’s

Contemporary

Archives,

p. 23073.
3 Quoted in English by the speaker.

6

vol.

XVI,

1967-1968,

estimated to have been killed, There were local clashes in
the Ouaddai’ region, which caused serious border tension
with the Sudan. Terrorism and banditry were renewed in
the Salamat region in 1967, and moved into the Saharan
regions of the north in August 1968. . . .

Chad and shedslight on the roots of the problem, I shall
quote somepassages.
On page9, it says:
“There were arrestsin March and April 1963, bloodshedin September1963 at N’Djamenaand there were the
events of Mangalme,in the east central region of the
country, from which originatedthe troubles which we are
still experiencing.This wasa crying injustice which had to
be redressed:taxes had indeed been levied twice in the
same year. Tombalbaye replied to the protests by
repressionand arrests.

“Substantial pockets of rebellion also existed near the
borders with the Central African Republic and Cameroon.
“Banditry, which had long been prevalent in eastern
Chad’ even under the French, ‘had clearly evolved into
guerrilla warfare, Many of the dissidents were controlled
by the Chad liberation front (FROLINAT),
founded in
1966 by exiled politicians and led by Dr. Abba Siddick, a
former Minister of Education and a founder member of
the PPT. FROLINAT claimed that it opposed secession
but insisted on a specific identity for the north, the
promotion of the teaching of Arabic and a bilingual
educational system.

“The dissidenceand the troubles extended to other
parts of the country: Quaddai; Batha, GuBra, Salamat,
BET and Chari-Baguirmi,whosepopulations alsosuffered
from harassmentand injustice at the hands of the
administration and the political apparatus of Tombalbaye.
“It shouldbe pointed out that the people of theseareas
are largely Arabic-speakingand Muslim and were seeking
relief from the troubles that had been inflicted upon
them by the Tombalbayeadministration.”

“Anti-guerrilla
operations were supported by a substantial French military force-1,600~strong, according to
French official sources-between
1968 and 1971. A
contingent of 1,000 men had been permanently stationed
at Fort-Lamy, but in August 1968 Chad invoked the
1960 France-Chad Defence Pact in requesting additional
French assistance. . . .

I shall quote anotherpassage
from the White Paperissued
by Chad in 1975, from page15:
“After the liquidation of the uninitiated, the exPresidentwantedto createan army of fanaticswhich was
to attack by force, conquer the Muslims and proclaim
Chad a kingdom,”

“Throughout
1972 clashes between FROLTNAT guerrillas and French and Chad armed forces continued,
FROLINAT’s
active membership seemed to have increased and its weaponry to have become more sophisticated. In June 1972 guerrillas staged a commando attack
on the capital. About 1,000 people were subsequently
arrested by security forces.“3

56. Those are the roots of the problem, which the Chad
Government should have the courage to face up to and
solve as other African countrieshave resolved their problems without looking for scapegoatsabroad-the Sudanese
at one time andnow the Libyans.

53. This information proves that it was not the Libyans
who invented the Chad rebellion. We are suffering from the
consequences of this state of affairs in Chad.
54. The following is from The Africa Guide 1977, edited
by the Economist IntelligenceUnit Ltd., page103:
“The northern two thirds of Chadis desertencroaching
on Savannah; stock-breeding provides a living for a
nomadic, Muslim population, The southern third, which
has a population equal to that of the north, is cottongrowing country; the people there mainly follow traditional beliefs with a large Christianminority (20 per cent)
and some Muslims; of a number of ethnic groups, the
Sarh, Tombalbaye’sown, is the largest.
“Tombalbaye followed a policy of favouring the Sarh,
who gradually came to dominate the civil service,army
and gendarmerie.Sarh tax collectors in the north levied
three or four times the correct amount from the people.
The army behavedlike the occupiersof a foreign country.
Acts of rebellion were harshly repressedin 1966 only to
re.emergeand gathermomentum.“3

“In 1966 somewherein Africa”-not in Libya-“the
National Liberation Front of Chad (FROLINAT) wasset
up. This organization brought together various leaders
and others who sympathized with the Chad political
parties that hadbeendissolvedfor their opposition to the
Tombalbaye r@me. The eight-point programme of
FROLINAT, drafted on 22 June 1966 and publishedby
the red L’Hummitk, a.political newspaperin Francewith
left-wing sympathies,was:
“I. To struggleby all means to overthrow the neocolonialist regime, the dictatorship which France has
imposed on our people since 11 August 1960, after
having brought to power and maintained a clique of
docile puppetswho carry out its new policy designedto
perpetuate the extremist domination, oppressionand
exploitation of our peoplein a new form more subtleand
more dangerousand more barbarous, but which is
neverthelessneo-colonialist, in order to reconquer the
national and total independenceof our country,

55. Those were foreign sources. The White Paper of
1963.1975, issuedby the Second Republic of Chad after
the coup d’etat which brought the presentregimein Chad
to power gives someidea of what has been happeningin
7

i
h

57. The Chad Minister for Foreign Affairs spoke of the
rebellion, but the Governmentof Chad has recognizedthe
rebels,They have had severalcontacts and haveeven asked
us to act as mediatorsbetween them and the so-called
rebels,The White Paperitself, on page 52, givesus anidea
of theseso-calledrebels:

“II. To evacuate all foreign bases and troops that have
been estabIished on our country’s soil, which are a great
permanent danger to the internal and external security of
our people and an abrogation of our sovereignty, as well
as a permanent threat and danger to the other fraternal
African countries-as
was so clearly shown by the
dispatch of these troops from Chad during the events in
Cameroon and elsewhere.
“III, To establish a national democratic people’s coalition government. To bring about a large measure of
progressive democracy by promulgating freedom of the
press, of speech, of association, of religion, of movement,
and so forth. To amnesty all political detainees.

country. Perhaps they thought that we were in a weak
position and that we could therefore be attacked at the
international level.

/:

60. Once again they claim that Libya has become a Soviet
base, very dangerous for peace in Africa. The Foreign
Minister of Chad spoke of “foreign elements”. I should like
to know who these foreign elements are which allegedly are
fighting at our side in Chad, Are they mercenaries? I
believe that our friends from Chad are experts in recruiting
mercenaries. I do not know whether he has in mind
European mercenaries. I do not know whether he Was
alluding to other Powers.

I

61. All this is propaganda. I think that those who perhaps
encouraged Chad to attack us at the international level were
not very good advisers. We know full well why they are
attacking us. We have no problems as Libyans. We are a
small country, but we remain at the side of our brothers
who are fighting all over the world against imperialism,
colonialism and racism. We ourselves were the victims of
colonialism and racism. We fought, and we lost more than
40 per cent of our population, It is our turn to help our
struggling friends and brothers.

“IV. To pursue a consistent agricultural policy. TO
carry out radical agrarian reform. On the basis of the
principle of ‘the land to those who work it’, to distribute
land to poor peasants without cost. To give effective aid
and support to the peasants in all spheres: political,
economic, social and cultural. To increase, ensure and
stabilize the prices and the marketing of agricultural
produce.
“V. To increase by one third the salaries of workers,
to raise the salaries and wages of civil servants and
soldiers, to eliminate all arbitrary taxes and fines, to
reduce personal taxes, to ensure work for the unemployed. To bring about equality of the sexes, to ensure
free care for the sick, To ensure a constant improvement
in the people’s living conditions.

62, Perhaps Chad is looking for a scapegoat, to involve the
Security Council in Chad’s internal affairs. I do not know
whether the Council could do something to stop this
genocidal war against certain peoples in Chad. If it could
establish a precedent for intervening in a country’s internal
affairs in order to do something, we would be most pleased,
because we know what is happening in Chad.

“VI. To encourage small businesses and protect them
from large foreign firms, to eliminate the economic
monopoly of the imperialist countries and particularly of
the EEC, to nationalize the key sectors of the national
economy. To build an independent national economy. TO
pursue a policy of reasonable and equitable taxation.

63. The Minister of Chad put forward some preci!je
charges against us. Unfortunately, I cannot reply to his
statement point by point because I do not have the text.
But he did say that Libyan troops were taking part in
fighting near Largeau, which is mentioned in various
newspapers.

“VII. To build a democratic, progressive, national
system of culture and education. To adopt Arabic and
French as official languages, to struggle effectively against
illiteracy until it is completely eradicated.

64. He spoke of machine-gun carriers, rocket carriersheavy equipment, in other words. In the French newspaper
Le Figaro I read that the authoritiesin Chad saidthere were
a thousand Libyans fighting in Chad. Unfortunately, there
is no map here to show the Council and our friends and
brothers here the distancesinvolved. Largeau and Fada,
which have just been mentioned, are about 800 or 1,000
kilometres from the Libyan frontier, and one must travel
through the worst kind of desert in the world, There are
more than another 1,000 kilometres between the Libyan
frontier and inhabited regionson the coast. In other words,
one must transport a thousandmen through suchcountry.
Commandant Kamougubis a soldier.A thousandmen: that
is a battalion, four companies. Can you imagine the
logistical problems involved in moving a thousand men
across desert, the cruelest desert in the world, with the
resources at our disposal? It would be impossible to
conceal them. The satelliteswhich spy on our desert and
our continent can even detect the camels.Our friends who
have satellites say they can photograph the desert and
establishwhether there is any movement in a given regioa.
You could ask them-you know who they are-whether we
have transported a battalion of Libyan soldiersmore th,an
1,000 kilometres insideChad: What you say doesnot make
sense.It is not true.

“VIII.
To establish diplomatic relations with all countries except Israel and South Africa, on the basis of the
10 principles of the Bandung Conference and the five
principles of peaceful coexistence, To pursue a foreign
policy of positive neutrality, to support the national
liberation movements, to defend world peace actively.”
58. I have just cited the White Paper edited and published
by the Government for the present r@ime at N’Djamena.
So the Foreign Minister of Chad should not come here and
say that it is Libya which is fomenting trouble in Chad and
that it is Libya which created the so-called rebellion. A
revolution has been going on for 20 years, a real revolution,
whose consequences we have suffered in our countries.
59. One wonders, then, why our brothers have come here
to the Security Council. Perhaps they think that this is a
good time for them, since Libya is being attacked from all
sides: in the Western press, in the Western mass media, in
the United States Congress it is being called a terrorist
8

i
B
!

i
i

Government took measures against the Libyan community
in Chad. This is not the first time that has happened. I
personally have been following relations between my
country and Chad for a long time now, and whenever we
are almost at the point of getting somewhere, Chad creates
another problem at the last minute. There is now a Chad
delegation at Tripoli, yet Chad has insisted upon having this
meeting here. If they think this meeting will facilitate what
is happening at Tripoli, that is their business, We do not
think it will help. But since we are in the dock here, we
have to defend ourselves and try to enlighten world public
opinion and the members of the Security Council.

65. The Foreign Minister of Chad talked about the
frontier question and gave us some of the background to
the international agreements on that matter. He drew up a
list of such agreements. In Africa we are very well aware of
frontier problems. But they are problems that are discussed
between neighbours and friends. It is not enough to say
that certain places are not Libyan and that the Libyan
administration should withdraw from them and expect us
to say, “Yes, you are right. We shall leave.” This is true for
all the countries represented around this table. We do not
think there is a serious frontier problem. These frontier
problems are mere pretexts. Our friends from Chad tell US
that, since 1973, Libyans have been occupying Aouzou. We
had the same problem before 1973: Chad accused us, and
broke off dipIomatic relations. Even after our revolution,
under the presidency of Mr. Tombalbaye, Chad encouraged
Libyan dissidents of the old regime to organize a mercenary
attack against Libya from Chad. This happened between
1970 and 1971. And Mr. Tombalbaye said, “I am ready to
provide a base for all Libyans who want to attack Libya
from Chad”. The representative of Chad accused us of
having occupied Aouzou in 1973, but that is not true. We
did not occupy anything. It is just a pretext.

70. We agreed to co-operate with Chad, and then it took
measures against our community in Chad. And you,
Mr. Kamougue, conceded this when you said that Chad had
confiscated their belongings, prevented them moving and
stopped them selling, but that, apart from that, it had done
nothing to them!
71. Then our Chad brothers said that a better atmosphere
must be established so that we could discuss the differences
between us. Frontier problems are not easy to resolve.
Nobody, be it Colonel Al-Qadhafi or anyone else, can sign a
paper saying that Chad is right. It is impossible. And we
well understand that General Malloum cannot do that for
Chad. And that is true for all countries. But those are things
that must be examined and discussed.

66. If there is a Libyan administration now in AOUZOU, or
anywhere else in Libya, there is a simple explanation. After
the revolution people began to take an interest in the
interior and to construct hospitals, schools, administrative
centres and police buildings throughout the country’s
interior and in the regions on the frontiers between us and
Chad and other neighbouring countries. Those are among
the areas in which we began to build roads and create an
infrastructure in our country.

72. I do not know if there will be other opportunities for
me to speak, but I am going to study the text of the speech
by the Minister for Foreign Affairs of Chad and try to reply
to it point by point either before the Council or in a
document to be circulated to members of the Council.
However, before concluding, I should like to say to our
brothers from Chad and to the international community
that we must be logical. It is not possible for Libya to
foment trouble in Chad because the stability, peace and
prosperity of Chad are the prosperity and peace of our own
regions in the south and the east. The Libyan oases depend
upon trade, the movement of men and goods; these are our
ties with the whole of Africa. Chad is the bridge between us
and the rest of Africa. It is we who suffer if there is trouble
in Chad.

67. If there is a frontier problem, we would be very
pleased to discuss it with you. We say we are in our
country, you say we are in yours. You say it is Chad. We
say it is Libya. This is a classic frontier problem. You say
there is aggression and occupation by Libya. But this kind
of problem exists on frontiers throughout the world,
particularly in regions that are underpopulated.
68. In the literature of the Western world, people talk of
vast wealth in these regions. But this is just to add fuel to
the flames. People talk of wealth, of riches, but let them
remember Fezzan. In order to convince the French public
and persuade it to support the French occupation, the then
French Government began to make a big fuss about the
mineral and oil riches of the area. At the time, very
responsible newspapers said it had more oil than the entire
oil reserves of the Middle East. Now, we have found
oil-not in Fezzan but in other parts of Libya. So this is an
old song. We know it. It is very old. But this propaganda in
capitalist countries and in the Western mass media should
not be believed. What they want is that we should feud.

73. You know quite well, Mr. Kamougut, that as far as
trade between the Mediterranean and Africa is concerned it
is the Libyan merchants who have lost through this war
because everything is paralyzed, beginning with the ports of
Benghazi and Tripoli. Everything that we import from
Europe we re-export to Africa because of the infrastructure
we have as an oil-producing country. It would be illogical
for us to ruin our own chances by war and disturbances.
Our trade with the Sudan across the Sahara Desert has been
paralyzed because of the troubles in Chad. Bandits have
been attacking the caravans that are largely composed of
Libyan merchants.

69. If we have a frontier problem, we have agreed to
discuss it within the context of the Organization of African
Unity. Chad brought the problem to Libreville and then
suddenly attacked us. We were not even aware that the
problem was going to be raised in that forum. In an attempt
to solve the problem and bring the two parties together, a
Committee was set up. We recognized that Ad Not
Committee. We co-operated with it. But then the Chad

74. Therefore it would not be logical for us to create
problems in those areas. But it is we who pay the price, we
who receive the refugees. We have not created a problem;
we do not come to the United Nations to see the Higll
Commissioner for Refugees and say to him: “We have a
refugee problem; come and help us.” For 20 years now we
9

Mr. Tombalbaye was at the root of it, but it seems to me
that, since the people have not laid down their arms and are
still fighting, even if Tombalbaye has disappeared, that is
not the case for “Tombalbayism”. Nevertheless, some of
the people of Chad themselves say that there is “Tombalbayism” without Tombalbaye. It is not enough to change
the person; the policy must be changed, And, in saying
that, we do not intend to interfere in the internal affairs of
Chad. We assure Chad that we want peace and prosperity in
the area and good relations with that country. As regards
frontiers, we are ready to accept the decision of the
Organization of African Unity. But we ask Chad to
establish a good atmosphere between us and to stop
accusing Libya of fomenting the revolution, helping the
revolutionaries and taking part in the fighting. I can assure
Chad that no one really believes this because everybody
knows very well that this war has been going on for 20
years and has nothing to do with us. And when it comes to
getting arms anywhere in the world, it is not difficult; there
are plenty of good addresses.

have been receiving refugees. Fortunately, in recent years
we have been able to absorb some of them because we have
needed manpower. And we have provided them with
schooling.
75. I well remember that just before I left my job in the
Government I received a telephone call after midnight
advising me that 800 children had arrived at an oasis.
Members of the Council can understand what a problem
800 children present for an oasis such as Arknu a Ouenat,
situated in the triangle formed by the Sudan, Libya and
Chad. These communities called “oases” are made ug of 15
or 20 families, that is to say about 60 persons. One can
imagine what it is like when refugees arrive in this way,
particularly if they are children. And then, among them,
there are wounded people who have been tortured. We
welcome them and we try to help them; we make a
humanitarian effort.
76. We have refrained from embarrassing the Government
of Chad or our friends the people of Chad, under both the
former and the present regime. We will be told that

The meeting raze at 6.00 p.m.

10
Litho

in United

Nations,

New York

Price:

$U.S. 1.00 (or equivalent

in other

currencies)

78-700054anuary

1980-2,200
