S/PRST/2008/37

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
15 October 2008
Original: English

Statement by the President of the Security Council
At the 5995th meeting of the Security Council, held on 15 October 2008, in
connection with the Council’s consideration of the item entitled “The situation in
Guinea-Bissau”, the President of the Security Council made the following statement
on behalf of the Council:
“The Security Council recalls its previous statements on Guinea-Bissau
and notes the latest report of the Secretary-General on developments in
Guinea-Bissau and on the activities of the United Nations Peacebuilding
Support Office in Guinea-Bissau (UNOGBIS) (S/2008/628). The Council
reaffirms its support for the continuing efforts to consolidate peace in that
country.
“The Security Council welcomes the commitment of the Government of
Guinea-Bissau to hold legislative elections on 16 November 2008, as well as
the technical and financial support provided by the international community
towards the elections, including by Angola, Brazil, Portugal, the Economic
Community of West African States (ECOWAS), the European Union, the
United Nations Peacebuilding Fund and the United Nations Development
Programme. It calls on donors to continue to provide financial resources to
support the electoral process.
“The Security Council calls on the Government and all actors, including
political parties, the security forces and civil society, to ensure an environment
conducive to transparent, free and fair elections, and to respect the results of
the polls.
“The Security Council notes with satisfaction the adoption of the
Strategic Framework for Peacebuilding in Guinea-Bissau by the Guinea-Bissau
configuration of the Peacebuilding Commission on 1 October 2008, and notes
the importance of rapid and effective implementation of quick-impact projects
financed by the United Nations Peacebuilding Fund. The Council looks
forward to the establishment of the monitoring and tracking mechanism of the
Strategic Framework.
“The Security Council reiterates the importance of security sector reform
in Guinea-Bissau, encourages the Government to sustain its efforts in
implementing the national security sector reform programme, and underscores
the need for the international community to provide further coordinated
assistance for its implementation.

08-55178 (E) 151008

*0855178*

S/PRST/2008/37

“The Security Council remains seriously concerned by the continued
growth in drug trafficking as well as organized crime, which threatens peace
and security in Guinea-Bissau and in the subregion. The Council underlines
the responsibility that the Government of Guinea-Bissau has for tackling this
issue and calls upon the international community to cooperate actively with
Guinea-Bissau in this regard, particularly in providing continued support for
building the capacity of national law enforcement and judicial authorities. The
Council requests that the Secretary-General provide in his next report further
details of what measures are required to deal with these challenges.
“The Security Council welcomes the initiative of ECOWAS to convene a
regional conference on combating drug trafficking on 28-29 October 2008 in
Praia (Cape Verde), and looks forward to the resulting regional plan of action.
“The Security Council expresses its concern about the consequences of
rising food and fuel prices and welcomes the World Bank’s support to address
this crisis. The Council encourages the Government of Guinea-Bissau to
continue its dialogue and cooperation with the international financial
institutions. The Council is also concerned about the cholera epidemic and
calls on the Government of Guinea-Bissau and its partners to continue and
strengthen the efforts to secure its eradication.
“The Security Council recognizes and commends the important role
played by the Representative of the Secretary-General and the staff of
UNOGBIS, as well as by the United Nations country team, towards helping
consolidate peace, democracy, the rule of law and development, and expresses
its appreciation for their activities. The Council looks forward to receiving
recommendations from the Secretary General on how the United Nations
presence in Guinea-Bissau should be reconfigured to support peacebuilding
more effectively.”

2

08-55178
