S/2014/771

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
29 October 2014
Original: English

Letter dated 29 October 2014 from the Secretary-General
addressed to the President of the Security Council
In her briefing to the Security Council on 17 June 2014, given pursuant to
paragraph 8 of Security Council resolution 1593 (2005), the Prosec utor of the
International Criminal Court expressed concern about recent allegations that
reporting from the African Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur
(UNAMID) had been subject to manipulation, with the intentional effect of covering
up crimes committed against civilians and peacekeepers, in particular those
committed by the forces of the Government of the Sudan. Those allegations had
been brought to the attention of the Prosecutor by the former spokesperson of
UNAMID, who had served in the Mission from August 2012 to April 2013. In her
briefing, the Prosecutor called on me to establish the facts of the allegations.
On 2 July 2014, I issued a statement announcing my intention to conduct a
review of the allegations. In its resolution 2173 (2014) , the Security Council
welcomed my announcement, looked forward to the swift and thorough
implementation of the review and stressed the importance of prompt and effective
action on its results, if necessary.
The review team, which was headed by an experienced former senior United
Nations official, closely examined the way in which 16 incidents documented by the
former spokesperson were reported officially, as well as the way in which six of
them were reported to the public. With the assistance of the forme r spokesperson,
and with the cooperation of UNAMID and the Department of Peacekeeping
Operations, the review team followed the reporting of each incident through the
chain of command in the Mission to the Department and looked into reports of the
Secretary-General and the weekly briefing notes on field operations to the Security
Council prepared by the Departments of Peacekeeping Operations and of Political
Affairs. Hundreds of documents, e-mails, reports and briefing notes were examined.
Contact was made with former and current senior staff in UNAMID and the
Department of Peacekeeping Operations to gather their views on the allegations
made against the Mission and to provide context where the paper and electronic
records lacked clarity. A planned visit by the review team to UNAMID was
cancelled as visas were received late and it was judged that all relevant information
could be collected by video- and teleconference or by e-mail.
The review team did not find any evidence to support the allegation that
UNAMID had intentionally sought to cover up crimes against civilians and
peacekeepers. The review did reveal, however, that, in 5 of the 16 incidents
examined, the Mission did not provide United Nations Headquarters with full
14-63587 (E)

311014

*1463587*

S/2014/771

reports on the circumstances surrounding those incidents. The review team also
found that the Mission had taken an unduly conservative approach to the media,
maintaining silence when it could have developed a press line, even in the absence
of all the facts. This reflected a tendency on the part of the Mission not to report
anything if it was not absolutely certain of the facts, even when there was enough
evidence to make an informed judgement about the circumstances surrounding an
incident. In the five allegations of concern, all involved c ulpability on the part of
government or pro-government forces.
I recognize the unique challenges facing UNAMID, which has not always
received the consent and cooperation needed from the Government of the Sudan to
implement its mandate effectively. Nevertheless, the lapses in the reporting
standards of the Mission and its tendency not to report fully on incidents involving
attacks on civilians and United Nations peacekeepers are very troubling.
I am committed to taking all steps necessary to ensure that the Mission reports
fully and accurately. Every effort will be made to ensure that sensitive information is
systematically brought to the attention of United Nations Headquarters and the
Security Council in a timely fashion. The media policy of UNAMID will b e
re-examined to ensure greater openness and transparency. The Mission will be
expected to follow up formally and report on government investigations into
incidents in which peacekeepers have been killed or injured.
The findings of the review raise broader questions about the impact of a
peacekeeping mission that, from its inception, has been systematically prevented
from operating freely by government and rebel forces on the ground. Over the years,
the Secretariat has reported regularly on the lack of support given to the Mission by
the Government of the Sudan. In my special report on the review of UNAMID of
25 February 2014 (S/2014/138), I identified the cooperation of the Government as
one of the three main challenges facing the Mission, in addition to issues related to
its internal management and the capabilities of its troop - and police-contributing
countries. I remain committed to addressing the shortfalls identified in the special
report. We owe it to the people of Darfur, and to our personnel on the ground, to
ensure that the basic conditions are in place for UNAMID to successfully implement
its mandate.
UNAMID is clearly not the only mission faced with the challenge of
maintaining the consent and goodwill of the host Government, while fulfilling its
obligation to report accurately and candidly, including on acts of violence
committed against civilians or its own personnel. As I noted in my statement of
21 November 2013 on renewing our commitment to the p eoples and purposes of the
United Nations, every day, in zones of conflict, humanitarian emergency and
insecurity, United Nations staff try to meet their responsibilities to protect people. In
doing so, they often show tremendous courage and commitment. They sometimes
give their lives to United Nations service. Ensuring that the United Nations speaks
out consistently against abuses and identifies the perpetrators is a key goal of my
Human Rights Up Front initiative. I therefore intend to ensure that all mis sions are
provided with additional guidance on the fulfilment of their reporting obligations,
particularly with regard to human rights and the protection of civilians. I also look
forward to the upcoming review of United Nations peace operations as an
opportunity to comprehensively address this issue, to which I attach the greatest
importance.

2/8

14-63587

S/2014/771

I would be grateful if you would bring the present letter and its annex, which
contains the executive summary of the report of the review team on allegations of
manipulation of reporting on Darfur, to the attention of the members of the Security
Council.
(Signed) BAN Ki-moon

14-63587

3/8

S/2014/771

Annex
Executive summary of the report of the review team on allegations
of manipulation of reporting on Darfur
Introduction
In her briefing to the Security Council on 17 June 2014, given pursuant to
paragraph 8 of Security Council resolution 1593 (2005), the Prosecutor of the
International Criminal Court expressed concern about recent allegations that
reporting from the African Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur
(UNAMID) had been subject to manipulation, with the intentional effect of covering
up crimes committed against civilians and peacekeepers, in particular those
committed by the forces of the Government of the Sudan. This concern was
prompted by a series of four articles published in Foreign Policy on the basis of an
account of a former UNAMID spokesperson, Aicha Elbasri. The Prosecutor called
on the Secretary-General to establish the facts of the allegations made by the former
spokesperson. In response, on 2 July 2014 the Secretary-General announced the
appointment of a review team to report on the veracity of the allegations. In its
resolution 2173 (2014), the Security Council welcomed the announcement.

Methodology
Ms. Elbasri agreed to cooperate fully with the review team and provided
extensive documentation to support her account. In doing so, she made reference to
additional incidents in respect of which UNAMID reporting was allegedly lacking.
The review team then examined the way in which 16 incidents were reported
officially, as well as the way in which six of them were reported to the public. All of
the incidents had occurred during Ms. Elbasri’s eight-month tenure as UNAMID
spokesperson.
With the help of Ms. Elbasri and cooperation from UNAMID and the
Department of Peacekeeping Operations, the review team followed the reporting of
each incident through the chain of command in the Mission to the Department and,
where significant, to reports of the Secretar y-General and the weekly briefing notes
on field operations to the Security Council prepared by the Departments of
Peacekeeping Operations and of Political Affairs. This involved reviewing hundreds
of documents, e-mails, reports and briefing notes. Contact was made with most
former and current senior staff in UNAMID and the Department of Peacekeeping
Operations to gather their views on the reporting of incidents by UNAMID and to
provide context where the paper and electronic records lacked clarity. A planne d
visit by the review team to UNAMID was cancelled as visas were received late and
it was judged that all relevant information could be collected by video - and
teleconference or by e-mail.

Analysis of the reporting of incidents
In its report, the review team endeavours to put its analysis in context, as the
eight-month period covered by the review cannot be seen in isolation. UNAMID is
known to be one of the most difficult peacekeeping missions. It contends with a

4/8

14-63587

S/2014/771

challenging mandate, a harsh environment, historical animosities, insufficient
human and material resources, and a host Government that has impeded the
operational capacity and mobility of the Mission’s forces. Frank reporting by
UNAMID has been discouraged by the threat of retribution by th e host Government.
Similarly, UNAMID staff have been threatened for doing their mandated work in
the field and access has been routinely denied when attempts have been made to
verify attacks on the civilian population.
The review team noticed that, in some of the incidents reviewed, the initial
reports identifying attackers as suspected government or pro -government forces
were changed at some point in the official reporting chain so that the perpetrators
became “unidentified assailants” or “armed men in military uniform” owing to the
inability of UNAMID to verify their identity with certainty. The change provided
the perpetrators with anonymity and the Government could not be held accountable
for the criminal acts of its forces and/or proxies.
Of the 16 incidents reviewed, seven relate to attacks on civilians, two to an
alleged failure to report/investigate human rights abuses, six to attacks on UNAMID
and one to attacks on both civilians and UNAMID. The review team found that in
11 of the 16 incidents, the allegations could not be sustained, including the two on
human rights reporting by UNAMID. In these 11 cases, additional documentation
was found to contradict the allegations and/or the review team did not agree with
Ms. Elbasri’s interpretation of the events. To varying degrees, the review team
found issues in the reporting of the remaining five incidents, as outlined below:
• Tawilla. UNAMID failed to share with the Department of Peacekeeping
Operations a copy of the verification report on the attacks, rapes and looting at
four villages in Tawilla by pro-government forces. As a consequence, and
while the initial incident was being brought to the attention of the Security
Council, the verified findings were neither brought to the attention of Council
members nor included in the Secretary-General’s report to the Council.
• Kushina. In reporting an aggressive overflight by two government attack
helicopters, UNAMID did not report to Headquarters the verbal threat by the
Government to bomb/attack the convoy from the air or mention that it was
carrying an arms expert who was a member of the Panel of Experts on the
Sudan. The incident was fully disclosed to the Security Council only through
an incident report of the Panel of Experts.
• Hashaba. There was reasonable evidence, including as reported internally in
UNAMID, that members of the border guards were involved in this attack and
went on to commit crimes and human rights abuses. This was not reported by
UNAMID to Headquarters, nor was a public statement ever issued
condemning the criminal action.
• Sigili. UNAMID chose not to report to Headquarters the threat made by
members of the Popular Defence Forces that they would identify and kill two
Zaghawa villagers travelling in a UNAMID convoy. The patrol returne d to
base only after the Popular Defence Forces had searched the United Nations
vehicles and started to aggressively question Sudanese national staff of
UNAMID. The Mission reported that the patrol had been aborted owing to
time lost at a checkpoint.

14-63587

5/8

S/2014/771

• Muhajeria team site. There was considerable evidence and reason to believe
that the fatal attack on the Muhajeria team site was carried out by
pro-government forces. A military investigation, the report of an integrated
mission and the report by the Panel of Experts on the Sudan all confirm this.
Although two attacks occurred that night, only the second attack, which was
fatal, was ever reported publicly. The Department of Peacekeeping Operations
described the attackers as “unidentified assailants” owing to a lack of certainty
regarding the identity and affiliation of the assailants. The Government agreed
to investigate but, more than a year later, justice has still not been done.

Release of information to the media
A review of media reporting revealed a stubborn resolve among key senior
leaders of UNAMID not to make any public announcements without verification,
even when the incidents had already been reported in the international media. Press
releases were routinely delayed by days because of a lack of verification, taking
them out of the media cycle, particularly when government and pro -government
forces were suspected of being involved.
Within the Mission, the Communications and Public Information Division was
dysfunctional and deeply divided over the issue of responsibility for the preparation
and release of Mission press statements. The then Head of the Division was never
able to deploy to Darfur because he could not obtain a visa from the Sudanese
authorities and had to perform his functions remo tely, from Addis Ababa.
Ms. Elbasri’s vision and expectations of her role as spokesperson, based on the
generic job description for a spokesperson in a peacekeeping mission and on the
United Nations media guidelines, were far from the reality of the Missi on’s terms of
reference for her position, which were much narrower and limited to conveying
messages for the Head of Mission. Exacerbated by a combination of the above
issues, a lack of trust quickly developed between her and much of the senior
Mission leadership, leading eventually to her resignation.

Conclusions and recommendations
The review team found no evidence to support the proposition that UNAMID
or the Department of Peacekeeping Operations intentionally reported in such a way
as to cover up crimes against civilians and peacekeepers.
In reaching its conclusions, the review team is mindful that UNAMID faces
unique challenges in dealing with a host Government that accepts the Mission’s
presence reluctantly — a situation seemingly tolerated by Member States.
Maintaining civil relations and cooperation with the Government of the Sudan to
make sure that the Mission can fulfil its mandate to the best of its ability has
become an end in itself. The period under review, which was of only eight months ,
could not be seen in isolation from the events of the previous four years, since the
Mission’s establishment. Those years have left an atmosphere of intimidation and
reticence by staff to report negatively on the Government for fear of reprisal, such
as travel restrictions and delays in the issuance of visas.

6/8

14-63587

S/2014/771

The review did reveal that the practice of not attributing responsibility without
verification and certainty had led to incidents being underreported when
government and pro-government forces were suspected of being involved. In some
instances, there was a distinct contrast in the reporting of incidents between “front line” reports and what eventually appeared in official reports. In part, this might be
explained by occasional poor standards of reporting within the various chains of
command. The Mission’s practice of censoring itself in its reporting to
Headquarters, however, needs to be addressed immediately.
The notable absence of code cable traffic on incidents involving suspected
government forces indicates that there is a need to increase the confidence, at
Mission level, that highly sensitive information (such as urgent but still unverified
information) transmitted to Headquarters by code cable is handled confidentially.
Almost all reporting of incidents was carried out through the daily
consolidated situation reports prepared by the Mission’s Joint Operations Centre.
Follow-up verification and military investigation reports containing more detailed
information were not always sent to Headquarters. Had they been, the Department
of Peacekeeping Operations would have been in a better position to ensure that the
Security Council was fully informed and that the sensitivities arising from
government involvement were dealt with by the Council in closed consultations.
Missions do have to make judgement calls on when it is prudent to proactively
put out media statements and when to put out statements only once facts have been
verified. It is not the role of a peacekeeping mission to publicly report clash es
between combatants, but it is the Mission’s responsibility to be in a position to
respond to media questions when fighting or criminal activity spills over into
attacks on the civilian population, especially when the protection of civilians is the
most important element of the Mission’s mandate. Had UNAMID adopted a more
proactive media approach it may have become the political advocacy tool the former
Joint Special Representative ad interim needed to respond to concerns related to the
protection of civilians and have advanced the peace process.
Mindful that the situation may have changed in the 16 months since the period
covered by the present review, the review team makes the recommendations set out
below.
Recommendations for the Department of Peacekeeping Operations
The review team recommends that the Department of Peacekeeping
Operations:
• Examine ways in which the confidentiality of sensitive information (in code
cables, verification reports, investigation reports, human rights reports etc.)
can be assured, both in peacekeeping missions and at Headquarters
• Review the procedures in place for the protection of information sent by code
cable, as the current handling of classified code cables fails to ensure
confidentiality
• Ensure that the results of verification and incident investigation reports are
included in the reports of the Secretary-General, where warranted
• Critically review the role of the spokesperson and Media Relations Unit to
ensure there is synergy and cooperation

14-63587

7/8

S/2014/771

Recommendations for the African Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation
in Darfur
The review team recommends that UNAMID:
• In reporting to Headquarters, does not censor its own information because of
its sensitivity
• Augment daily situation reports on incidents concerning the protection of
civilians, human rights violations or attacks on UNAMID by providing a short
analysis on the context in which the incident occurred, as well as special
reports sent by code cable
• Automatically transmit to Headquarters, by code cable, verification reports of
attacks on civilians and investigation reports on attacks on the Mission
• Formally follow up and report on the progress of government investigations
into incidents in which peacekeepers died or were wounded
• Review the Mission’s media strategy with a view to adopting a more
responsive, transparent and proactive relationship with international media
outlets, with the aim of keeping them informed of the good work done by the
Mission and engaged in times of crisis

8/8

14-63587
