TWENTY-THIRD

th

1
NEW

YEAR

MEETING: 26 MARCH 1968

YORK

CONTENTS
Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/ 1408) . . . . . . , . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . , , , . . .
Adoption

of the agenda

. ... .. ,... ,.,. ....,... ,.....,....,.,..

Page

1

1

Question concerning the situation in Southern Rhodesia: letters dated 2 and 30
August I963 addressed to the President of the Security Council on behalf of the
representatives of thirty-two Member States (S/5382 and S/.5409):
Letter dated 12 March I968 addressed to the President of the Security Council
by the representatives of Algeria, Botswana, Burundi, Cameroon, Central
African Republic, Chad, Congo (Brazzaville), Congo (Democratic Republic
of), Dahomey, Ethiopia, Gabon, Ghana, Guinea, Ivory Coast, Kenya, Lesotho,
Liberia, Libya, Madagascar, Mali, Mauritania, Morocco, Niger, Nigeria,
Rwanda, Senegal, Sierra Leone, Somalia, Sudan, Togo, Tunisia, Uganda,
United Arab Republic, United Republic of Tanzania, Upper Volta and Zambia

(S/8454)

. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . ..a....

A?znex: Resolution on Rhodesia adopted by the Council of Ministers of the
Organization of African Unity at its tenth ordinary session . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

1

13

.

S/PV.1408

NOTE
Sy-mbois of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined with
figures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United Nations document.

Documents of the Security Council (symbol S/. . .) are normally published in quarterly
Supplements of fie Official Records of the Security Council. The date of the document

indicates the supplement in which it appears or in which information about it is given.
The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a system
adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of Resolutions and Decisions of the
Security Council. The new system, which has been applied retroactively to resolutions
adopted before 1 January 1965, became fully operative on that date.

FOURTEEN

HUNDRED

AND EIGHTH

MEETING

Held in New York on Tuesday, 26 March 1968, at 3 p.m.
&&dent:

Mr. Ousmane So& DIOP (Senegal).

Present:
The representatives of the following States:
Algeria, Brazil, Canada, China, Denmark, Ethiopia, France,
Hungary,
India, Pakistan, Paraguay, Senegal, Union of
Soviet -Socialist Republics, U&ed Kingdom of Great
Britain and Northern Ireland and United States of America.
Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/l408)

3. Adoption

of the agenda.

2. Question concerning the situation in Southern Rhodesia: letters dated 2 and 30 August 1963 addressed to
the President of the Security Council on behalf of the
representatives of/ thirty-two Member States (S/5382
and S/5409):
Letter dated 12 March 1968 addressed to the Presi”
dent of the Security Council by the representatives of
Algeria, Botswana, Burundi, Cameroon, Central African
Republic,
Chad, Congo (Brazzaville), Congo (Democratic Republic of), Dahomey, Ethiopia, Gabon, Ghana,
Guinea, Ivory Coast, Kenya, Lesotho, Liberia, Libya,
Madagascar, Mali, Mauritania, Morocco, Niger, Nigeria,
Rwanda, Senegal, Sierra Leone, Somalia, Sudan, Togo,
Tunisia,
Uganda, United Arab Republic, United Republic of Tanzania, Upper Volta and Zambia (S/8454).
Adoption

of the agenda

The agenda was adopted.
Question
concerning the situation in Southern Rhodesia:
letters
dated 2 and 30 August 1963 addressed to the
President
of the Security Council on behalf of the
representatives
of thirty-two
Member States (S/5382 and
S/5409):
Letter dated 12 March 1968 addressed tn the President of
the Security Council by the representatives of Algeria,
Botswana,
Burundi, Cameroon, Central African Republic, Chad, Congo (Brazzaville), Congo (Democratic
Republic
of), Dahomey, Ethiopia, Gabon, Ghana,
Guinea, Ivory Coast, Kenya, Lesotho, Liberia, Libya,
Madagascar, Mali, Mauritania, Morocco, Niger, Nigeria,
Rwanda, Senegal, Sierra Leone, Somalia, Sudan, Togo,
Tunisia,
Uganda, United Arab Republic, United Republic of Tanzania, Upper Volta and Zambia (S/8454)

1, The PRESIDENT
(translated from French): In accordance with the Council’s earlier decision, if I hear no
objection
I shall invite the representative of Jamaica and
the Minister for Foreign Affairs of Zambia to take places at

the Council table in order to participate in the debate
without the right to vote.
At the invitation of the President, Mr. K. Johnson
(Jamaica) and Mr. R. C. Kammgn (Zambia) took places at
the Council table.

2. Mr. CSATORDAY (Hungary) (translated from French):
It is extremely disturbing to note that, although the
Council has only just concluded its discussion of the illegal
and tyrannical domination of the people of South West
Africa by a white racist minority, we are again called upon
to discuss essentially the same problems concerning Zimbabwe, or Southern Rhodesia. It is really astonishing to see
to what extent the racist regimes of South Africa and
Southern Rhodesia are following the same policies; but it is
far more disturbing to see the marked resemblance in the
attitude taken by some Powers to those two rCgimes, since
the sternness of the language used in both cases is
accompanied by remarkable lack of action,
3. As we all know, the racists of Salisbury, like those of
Pretoria, are constantly talking about defending the values
of Western civilization. By so doing, they are trying to
obtain the support of those in other continents who are
pursuing a policy of domination and intervention. We regret
to note that the obvious motives of the racists of Salisbury
and Pretoria are welcomed with understanding in some
Western countries.
4. In considering the latest pseudo-juridical murders committed by the illegal rCgime of Ian Smith, we must stress
that the Council cannot confine its deliberations solely to
the revolting executions of the Zimbabwe patriots. The
Smith regime makes no secret of its intention to commit
other crimes of the same kind. About 100 Zimbabwe
patriots sentenced to death some years ago are now waiting
for a clique of racist settlers to decide whether or not they
will be executed for the crime of having fought for the
genuine independence of their country.
5. Although this intolerable situation has persisted for
years, some people pour out soothing statements about the
true intentions of Ian Smith and his accomplices. But the
facts speak for themselves and belie the promises and
assurancesof those who would have us believe that patience
and understanding will eventually force the fascists of
Salisbury to give way. We do not believe that the Smith
clique will abandon its policy of deportation and execution
because the events of the past have convinced US that
appeasement and compromise with fascistslead only to the
same kind of disastrous results that we have still fresh in
our minds.

mation on the subject. We have sometimes been criticized
for failing to comprehend the sacrifices which the United
Kingdom has had to bear as a result of the imposition of
SOme sanctions. However, we have never been asked, as far
as I can recall, to evaluate the enormous profits which have
resulted from colonial cOnqUeStS.
COllSeqUently,
We are
convinced that the United Kingdom can put UP with the
trifling sacrifices which result from the inevitable process of
decolonization.

6. The following question arises: how is it possible that a
clique of racist settlers dares to defy international public
opinion? Several factors should be considered in the reply
to that question: the first-and perhaps the most imPortant-factor is the policy which the United Kingdom
pursues with regard to the usurpers in Salisbury. Despite
repeated statements about the illegality of the rkgime, the
British Government has never ceased to give it de facto
recognition. It has maintained official contacts with this
small group of rebels and the British Prime Minister has
conducted official negotiations with Ian Smith aboard a
British ship. Moreover, if we remember the harsh Sentences,
the long periods of detention and the deportations meted
out to the foremost leaders of the national independence
movements .by the British colonial authorities, and if we
remember how often Governments not to the liking of the
United Kingdom Cabinet were dissolved in dependent
territories-actions which were never brought before the
Security Council-then we are forced to conclude that the
rebels of Salisbury are given completely different treatment. It is often said that this difference of treatment may
be due to the colour of the skin of the Salisbury racists. We
should like to believe that this is not so, but, speaking
frankly, we can find no other valid explanation of the
attitude of the United Kingdom.

9. A third and equally important factor is the role played
by South Africa and Portugal in helping their allies in
Salisbury, Everyone knows what efforts these three
bastions of colonialism and racialism have made to curb
progress in Africa. It would be unnecessary to quote figures
to prove the crucial role which South Africa and Portugrtl
have played in their efforts to protect the Salisbury r&me
from the effects of the sanctions decided upon by the
Security Council, which, moreover, were hr too limited.
The nefarious alliance of these forces of darkness against
national independence movements has often been pointed
out. We find it significant that the members of this unholy
alliance continue to maintain close links with the leading
members of NATO, who never tire of explaining to us the
spiritual values which unite them.

7. The fact that the repeated resolutions of the General
Assembly have not been carried out by the British
Government and that its delegation has done everything in
its power to prevent the Security Council from adopting
truly effective sanctions against the rebels can only convince Ian Smith and his friends that the United Kingdom
and its allies will frustrate any effort that might lead to the
result desired by the overwhelming majority of our Organization. I regret to have to add that the statement made in
this debate by the United Kingdom representative has
shown us that his country continues to pursue a policy
which contains nothing constructive.

10. It is well known that a large number of the Members
of the United Nations, including the socialist countries,
have conscientiously carried out the decisions of United
Nations organs. My country, for example, informed the
Secretary-General on 6 March 1967: “The Government of
the Hungarian People’s Republic has implemented fully the
provisions of Security Council resolution 232 (1966) and
actually went beyond them long before the adoption of the
said resolution, Hungary is not among the countries having
export or import trade with Southern Rhodesia.” [See
S/7781/Add.2, annex.]

11. This is how the socialist countries intend to defend the
interests of the Zimbabwe people and to help them achieve
true independence. We are in favour of total sanctions
against the Smith regime and it is not we who have been
delaying them for years. There can be no question of the
responsibility of some Western countries for the maintcnance of the fascist rCgime of Salisbury. These countries
have protected the Ian Smith clique against the consequences of truly effective sanctions. Their moral and actual
responsibility for the murder of the Zimbabwe patriots is
also well established.

8. The second factor is that the attitude taken by the
British Government is faithfully followed by its allies in
NATO. While these countries verbally denounce the fascists
of Salisbury, they continue to help to maintain them in
existence. Allow me to refer to the statement in the British
weekly, the New Statesman, which says in its issue of
8 March of this year, quoting publications of the Organization for Economic Co-operation and Development, that
trade between the Smith regime and the Federal Republic
of Germany and other NATO countries has considerably
increased since the so called “selective” sanctions were
decided upon by the Security Council. It is significant to
note that, as the Soviet Union representative showed at the
1400th meeting when he quoted an official statement of
the Berlin Government, the German Democratic Republic
has adopted a position which is diametrically opposed to
that of West Germany. One may rightly wonder what
miracle produced the curious results of those sanctions. For
example, industrial production in Southern Rhodesia was
6.5 per Cent higher in 1967 than in 1966 and in the past
two years the establishment of 4.50 industrial enterprises
has been approved in the Territory. Those figures are taken
from the Financial Times of 2 January 1968. The Secretary-General’s
report
of 30 November
1967
[8/7781/Add.4/
gives more precise and detailed infor-

12. In view of the circumstances, expressions of despair
are often heard. We are told that nothing can be done. We
refuse to accept that. We do not deny that the policy which
the United Kingdom and its allies have pursued for years
has created a very serious situation which calls for strong
measures. The execution of the Zimbabwe patriots has
revolted world public opinion; but however barbaric those
executions were, they are only a sympton of a verY
dangerous situation. It is the existence of an illegal r&imc
which is the main problem. Consequently the Hungarian
delegation considers that: First, the universal indignation of
the members of the Council, and indeed of all mankind,
should be reflected in decisive action, namely, the application of the severest possible sanctions against the criminal
2

-

been criticized
lich the United
: imposition of
en asked, as far
Ifits which have
uently, we are
ut up with the
table process of
the role played
their allies in
ts these three
: made to curb
to quote figures
:a and Portugal
Salisbury regime
1 upon by the
Lr too limited.
larkness against
n been pointed
s of this unholy
Jith the leading
lining to US the
$ the Members
ialist countries,
sions of United
, informed the
Government of
nented fully the
232 (1906) and
adoption of the
:ountries having
tiodesia.” [See
td to defend the
11pthem achieve
total sanctions
who have been
question of the
for the mainteThese countries
linst the conscnoral and actual
abwe patriots is
sions of despair
:an be done. We
:he policy which
tlrsued for years
calls for strong
we patriots has
r barbaric those
?ton of a VerY
an illegal r&gime
I the Hungarian
al indignation Of
of all mankind,
ely, the applica.nst the criminal

I
L

?’
!

sooner rather than later, draw the Governments concerned
into a direct confrontation with the rebel regime on a
purely racial basis.

clique in control of Southern Rhodesia. Such action should
be taken by the United Kingdom, which is responsible for
the territory. Secondly, the sole purpose of this concerted
action, which should be supported by all Members of the
United Nations, must be to overthrow the illegal regime of
Ian Smith. We cannot agree that the goal of our action
should be to change the policy of an illegal rtgime, as we
heard one speaker say the other day. Thirdly, the United
Kingdom must take the necessary steps to help the
Zimbabwe people to attain national independence immediately.

19. Having said that, let me at this stage express my
thanks to you, Mr. President, and to other members of the
Council, for allowing me to address the Council both on my
Government’s behalf and on behalf of the Organization of
African Unity, of which Algeria, Senegal and Zambia are
the official co-representatives at all Security Council
meetings on the burning question of Rhodesia. The other
two members have already expressed their views on the
abhorrent rule of tyranny and murder under the cloak of
justice which characterize Southern Rhodesia’s racist
righe. I support fully the views set forth and the noble
stand taken by our colleagues of Algeria and Ethiopia at
these deliberations.

13. The Hungarian delegation would support any steps
which would make it possible to achieve those objectives,
14. The PRESIDENT (trumlnted .fionz French): I call on
the Minister for Foreign Affairs of the Republic of Zambia.

;

20.. Needless to say I am, on behalf of my Government,
equally moved by and grateful to many other members
around this table who have come out strongly against the
barbaric events of the last few weeks, and those still going
on in Rhodesia. Acknowledgement is due, too, to all those
who have recognized the special plight into which the illegal
acts of Smith and his henchmen have thrown my peaceloving and still developing young nation, The extreme
hardships into which geography and the British colonial
policies of the previous decades have thrown us were
enough to break any but the most courageous of leaders,
which, of course, my President under the fast deteriorating
situation, tries hard to continue to be. The sacrifices which
the people of Zambia are called upon to make spell for
them misery and discomfort which strain the very political
and economic fabrics through which the leadership hoped
to consolidate their people’s hard-won independence and
freedom.

1.5. Mr. KAMANGA (Zambia): Mr. President, the first task
of my delegation this afternoon is to express our sincere
congratulations on your assumption of the Presidency of
this important organ of the United Nations. We are fully
convinced that under your wise and able leadership the
proceedings of the Council on the grave situation in
Southern Rhodesia will be crowned with success.
16. My second task is to welcome Deputy Foreign
Minister and Ambassador Malik of the Soviet Union who is
here as the representative of one of the greatest Powers of
our times. It is a great pleasure for me to welcome him in
view of the close and friendly ties which exist between the
people and Government of the Soviet Union and the people
and Government of Zambia. It is in this context that my
delegation believes that the Soviet delegation, led by this
experienced diplomat, will make a substantial contribution
to the solution of the problem now before the Council.

21. The opposition in Rhodesia to a black participation in
Government has taken on such arrogance and contempt
that it now presents the most negative threat to our
deliberately balanced policy of humanism, which is without
distinction as to race or colour. What kind of threat Smith
posesfor the rest of the world, therefore, needs very careful
re”examination both in its specific relation to Zambia and
in its general relation to the rest of Africa and the world.
For Zambia, first, as I have just mentioned, the r6gim::‘s
doctrine of separatism is the very opposite of Zambia’s and,
indeed, of the United Nations Universal Declaration of
Human Rights.

17. The Security Council is holding this urgent meeting at
the request of African countries to consider the deterioration of an already serious situation in Rhodesia. The
emotions of anger and anguish which the illegal hanging of
five Africans by the racist minority regime in that country
has engendered have quite properly been felt by all civilized
mankind, which stands now shocked by a nightmare that,
with appropriate action, could earlier have been prevented.
It is, therefore, right and proper that this event should
remind the United Nations, and particularly the Council, of
the basic and abhorrent evilness of racism in the establishing of political systems, and should emphasize the need for
effective measures to be taken to eliminate discrimination
such as that based on race and oppression and exploitation
of man by man throughout the world.

22. To maintain the special privileges which the white
community enjoys in Rhodesia the rbgimc has to perpetuate a class distinction, with colour as the only
distinguishing mark. Like South Africa, it has systematically to reduce the freedom of the majority of its black
members and bring them to the state of serfs and helots in
order to maintain the special cheap labour which makes its
agricultural and mining output cheaper and competitive on
a world market. It will do this by persuasion through cheap
psychological processes playing up the fears of those
Africans who are willing to question the regime’s practices
but dare not. It will, as it has done all along, tyrannize them
using all the familiar tactics I-Iitler used in the 1939-1945
War, the Africans’ only crime being their readily acknowl-

18. My delegation has not asked to be allowed to address
this urgent meeting on the degenerating situation in
Rhodesia only on the basis of Zambia’s proximity to that
country; it has done so also, and even more, because now,
more than ever before, we are convinced, even as all our
previous predictions have since come true, that the day is
not far off-unless Britain can even at this late hour take
apprapriate action-when
the whole situation will be
completely out of hand and will engulf not only innocent
civilians on the frontiers between Rhodesia and neighbouring African independent countries, but, Wib-ndlY,
will,
3

Cd&

ilbilily

to

leadership in state and industry,
ability to rcducc
ta
a lTli%tiW
hit

usswiie

and Cherefc~re their
deserved state of

inlpotcncc

IlOt

all,

htlt

3

SigIlitkilIlt

of the white ConmuI~ity
and their sons whose only advantage over most of cvcn the
as yet uneduc:~ted Africans is n~erety h:iving D white skin.
nuntbcr

of

the

present

~nembers

23. Like South Africa, the r&ginie hns tilken every tldministrative step and cvcn conimittcd acts of violence under the
law--yes, and even illegal acts--to ensure that the African is
permnnently and effectively excluded from the basic fruits
of a civilised living. And yet lillodesiil spe:lks out in the
1lam2
of Christianity mC1 justice, as if it ml not lhose
whom Rhodesia oppressed were the enduring vie t ims of the
pernicious system it 113sCrcnted.
Rhodesia did not find its
acquired power and apparently impregnable position by
accident. Nay, ns if by special design, ISritain laid tdl the
foundntion for the present strength of the r6ginie which,
through its oscillating polioies arid irresponsible rejection ot
the use of force at ;I critical stnge in history, it has iti effect
continued to protect,

24. To a Rhodesia cast in this mould WC in Z;tIllbia
pose
cl
threat.
Just nbout my exctm
will do, and the United
Nations, and in particular Britain, which mcmtizcs and
tcmporizcs
with such duplicity, will soon find that ttic
blood-bath which they say they have been seeking tu
prevent will finally overtake us all.
Clear

2.5. Let me elaborate a little. Britilill
llns Sll filr said tIV0
things about the use OF force: it has soid it will not USC
force to bring about 8 political scttlemcnt; it h3s nlscl Silid it
will consider the us6 of force only in the cvcnt of ;1
breakdown of law and order. This particular sl:~tcmcnt
must be analysed, since unless the Council reuiizcs how
Britain has hen
1enCli11g the African ltlilsses in Rhodesia
down the path to perdition, the Council runs the risk of
believing its professed but realty hollow sincerity, md will
unwittingly bear wilnoss to a sure SCll-OUt~-~il
sell-out
moreover, which
would
hi.9 equal
to ttliit of South Africa in
1910 but which will not be countennnccct in this day and
ilge by the Africans in Rll~XlCSiil
31lCl which,
thcreforc,
1ul1st
lead d~9wrl LEN path to wilr. TIN signs of this iIre i~tre;~dy
numerous on the frontiers. More Africans Hrc dying in
skirmishes with the racist troops, and the Rhodesinns and
their South African supporters are swooping clown 011our
Zambia both by uir rind by l:md.
26. The point is this: After iI ctluntry has dcclnrcct itself
independent; nftcr it , has tyrannizecl eve everybody iind
muzzlctt the press; after it has browbeater> the courts into
giving it &* f&to recognlrion; after it he.5 gone ml from
there to effect hangings in dCfiilIlCC
uf ttlc highest
ConStitlb
tional safeguard, which, in this cuse was the Q~ICCII’S
reprieve.-in Queen, nlorcovcr, to whom
the rdginie conveniently held allegiance; after foreign troops hiIvC+!entered
a territory and the responsible metropolitan Power has
spent its last vest&c of legal ndvicc to prove its own
ilnpotcncc---after all this, if nut even before, is it not (imc
that it was rccognized that law and order have broken Down
in that CCltlIlt~“?
IS Britain waiting until
ttlc
thr(9iltS
of
Europeans
have
actually been slit, and does it intend (0
I~KW
in then only in order to help the Europeans fight
back the enraged black insurgents? Just what can ]jritain
mean’?
In our minds, the voluntary, quixotic exploits of
4

lmbined
nere is a
and a
: conse:r a new
,itain to
i’ means
;e.

t try to
ikes an
,uise of
I r&me
ltion of
even to
,e 1967
:e) Act
ing the
y death
arms of
on ofa
lstantial
equally
. This is
f which
e white
n Rhoin an
March,
h Iittlc
I death
tiaintelites in

“One of the demonstrators said: ‘This is a mourning
gesture-not on behalf of the executed men but in the
name of humanity’. But there were jeers and hostile
reactions from many white passers-by, One white motorist stopped his car and shouted: ‘Where’s your hammer
and sickle? ’ There were a few police around the square at
the time but they made no attempt to intervene.”

own business, is it not the duty of Britain to say “hands off
Rhodesia” instead of using South Africa as an excuse for
stalling?
34. The British Prime Minister seems to delight in political
riddles. Recently he said in the House of Commons,
referring to Rhodesia: “The rigime itself slammed the door
on the possibility of further contacts by proceeding with
the illegal hangings of three men and then two more.” The
Prime Minister added that the executions took place while
the British Government was considering new ideas with
regard to settlement which had been brought back from
Rhodesia by former British Prime Minister Sir Alec Douglas
Home; this in spite of Britain’s own earlier declaration that
it would not deal with a treasonable regime and of the clear
recommendations of the General Assembly to the British
Government not to enter into any negotiations with the
representatives of the rebel r&me. The United Kingdom
made repeated attempts during the past year to arrive at
some understanding with the rebels, culminating, of course,
in the ridiculous Tiger constitution’ which proved-very
conveniently, I must say-to be the paper tiger that it was.

30. This is the behaviour of people who call themselves
civilized, people who claim to be the defenders of Western
democracy and civilization. In the name bfdemocracy and
Western civilization they discriminate against black human
beings, oppress them and treat them as if they were slaves
and quite without feelings. What is there to be learned from
a Western democracy so practised? It denies even the
ordinary, basic freedoms of life: freedom of movement,
freedom of speech, freedom of action and all other kinds of
freedom which are the standard attributes of what we know
as a civiIized society.
31. As I speak now, all the black nationalist leaders and
hundreds of their brothers are under detention in concentration camps in Gonakuzingwa and Whawha. No one is
allowed to seethem, not even their wives. The moving story
reported in The Times of Zambia on 13 March will
illustrate this. It is said that Mrs. Joshua Nkomo last saw
her husband in October 1966. Since then the rebels have
constantly refused to allow her to see him, and have refused
to answer her letters on this subject, Indeed, we are not
even sure whether Nkomo and Sithole are still alive.

35. Speaking of the possible reaction of the Security
Council, Mr. Wilson is reported to have said that the
passionate feelings which the executions had aroused
internationally, and consequently at the United Nations,
had created a new situation, and he thought that “some
desperate and perhaps some unrealistic proposals” might
come out of a meeting of the Security Council to be called
soon at the demand of the African nations. He is further
reported to have said: “Perhaps a little less forceful talk and
a little more practical action might get the right answer.”
What practical action can he expect if he himself started off
by throwing away the golden opportunities which existed
just before and shortly after the unilateral declaration of
independence? For our part, we in Zambia have not merely
talked; we have acted-and to our great cost, as Britain well
knows.

32. The kind of freedom which 220,000 white racists
allow to the 4 million black people cannot endure for long.
The Africans will not take it lying down, and indeed they
have begun to rise in small but significant numbers. The rest
of Africa looks on and wonders how long it will be before it
too is dragged into the quagmire of a racial war.

ccoullt

rbarity
:ry. On
James
‘1Lhony
execu.enrt of
lacards
Quare,
lthercd
; larger
lowers
oly of
Idesian
,up of
rabbed
pile of
, in his
on the
Small
1 being

33. We in Zambia feel particularly sensitive because of our
proximity
to the boundary. That is why we have been
outspoken critics of the blundering policies of the British
Government over the last two years and four months. Nor
can Britain escape responsibility, It will be recalled that by
an Act of Parliament passed by the House of Commons in
November
1965, the British Government affirmed its
authority and responsibility concerning Southern Rhodesia.
Further, the British Government does not deny that it is its
responsibility to topple the rebel rCgime in Rhodesia; it has
promised not to grant independence to the minority rCgime
without majority rule. This policy, adopted with the accord
of the Commonwealth nations only a year ago, was stated
very clearly, although we now fear that, with typical
subtlety, it is conditioned by all kinds of ifs and buts. Yet
the British Government insists that it will not use force
against Rhodesia, nor will it impose any economic sanctions
which will bring it into direct confrontation with South
Africa. The British say now that they intend to extend and
strengthen the application of sanctions. One is left with the
unanswered question of how they intend to do so if they
deliberately refuse to run the risk which any such PoficY of
sanctions necessarily entails. Is Britain now going to turn
round and say that it cannot use force in Rhodesia because
it would not wish to be confronted by South African
troops
in that Territory? If South Africa will not mind its

36. My delegation is not surprised that the British Government has reacted in this manner to the barbarous and
cold-blooded assassination of these black nationalists.
British policy on the Rhodesian situation has been and
remains evasiveand protective of the interests of the British
settlers. The interests of the 4 million black people of
Zimbabwe are apparently negotiable, whereas those of the
white settlers are not; hence the contacts which the British
Government renewed with the treasonable Smith while it
was not prepared to consult the aggrieved people of
Zimbabwe, who are after all the innocent party in this
situation, The Tiger Constitution was, in their view, a
spectacular example of British duplicity aimed at selling out
black interests to the white settlers.
37. Let me say, even at the risk of repetition, that my
delegation is not impressed by the pious words uttered by
the British representative in this Council when he saysthat
1 For the statement and document of the meeting between Prime
Minister &rold Wilson and Mr. Ian Smith on board HMS Tiger,
setting
out proposals for an independence constitution; see:
Rhodesia-proposals for LISettlement, 1966 (London, Her MaJesty’s
Stationery Office, 1966), Cmnd. 3159.

5

request which has already been voiced by the friends of
Zambia that effective measures be provided to protect
Zambia from a sneak invasion which might come in the
form of a reprisal by trigger-happy white settlers in
Rhodesia. This matter is serious and urgent.

his Government has “maintained the principles on which
we believe a just settlement should be based” (1399th
meeting, para. .X5/. Can utterances such as Mr. Wilson’s,
which I quoted earlier, be said to reflect any desire or
determination on the part of the British Government to
settle the impasse?

43. May I now turn to the question of economic sanctions
imposed by the Council on 16 December 1966 [res&&~n
232 (1966)J at the request of the British Government. As
we all know, those sanctions have now been in effect for
nearly one and a half years. But, as we predicted, they have
failed.

38. We believe and are convinced that the British Government is perfectly capable of settling the Rhodesian situation with such help as it might request, but mainly the use
of force. We cannot address our condemnation of the acts
of murder perpetrated by the rebels in Rhodesia to the
rebel regime because, in terms of Britain’s own Act, it is
Britain which is the sovereign Power in Rhodesia. To us, the
British Government is the legal administering Power in
Rhodesia, and all acts of violence perpetrated by the rebels
are, therefore, carried out in the name of the British
Government.

44. Their effect on Rhodesia has been very little, if any,
but they have imposed a serious hardship on my country
instead. Alfred Friendly Jr., the special f%w York Times
correspondent in Rhodesia, writing on 22 March 1968,
summed up the Rhodesian situation in the following terms:
“Rhodesia is a going concern. It has won its rebellion
against Britain, and in the most vital economic sectors it
has beaten the effort to impose sanctions on its imports
and exports.
“Since 11 November 1965 when it declared its independence of Britain, Rhodesia has lost as much as two thirds
of its volume of $126 million tobacco exports, but it has
managed to evade restrictions on oil imports and is
believed to have more than a year’s supply in storage.”

39. My delegation is convinced that British policy on
Rhodesia, dubious and vacillating as it may appear, may not
be altogether free from guile, We see it rather as the work
of an intelligent actor trying to mislead the world. The
alternative is equally difficult to accept; and that is that all
the reputed intelligence of this great Power has been
outweighed by Smith. Rather than say that the lion has lost
his strength and cannot roar any more, the probable truth is
that the British Government follows a well-charted course,
makes well-planned manoeuvres and cleverly manipulates
the racial situation, favouring kith and kin. In a way, the
British Government has decided who should win this
struggle in the end. Indeed, some of its national newspapers-notably The Daily Telegraph-have openly cheered
Smith and jeered at the Africans as terrorists.

On the contrary, Zambia’s oil supplies are hand-to-mouth in
nature. Development projects are at a stand-still due to
serious shortages of oil in Zambia. Rationing, on the order
of five gallons of petrol per month, is still in operation in
Zambia.
45. Mr. Friendly goes on to say:
“So far the challenge has involved little conspicuous
sacrifice by the 250,000 Whites who live a country-club
existence
among some 4.3 million
Blacks ia
Rhodesia , . . .”

40. The Security Council should not close its eyes to the
fact that a racial war has begun in southern Africa. The
Rhodesian and South African freedom fighters who have
joined forces to fight against the racist and illegal regime in
South Africa have described it as an open war, and the
struggle is to be regarded as such. The people of Zimbabwe
are sacrificing their young men in the fight for freedom.

46. I do not wish to bore the Council with figures and
facts to show how and why the selective mandatory
sanctions which my delegation never believed would work
but which we supported as a matter of principle have failed.

41. If the reports we receive are to be relied upon, more
than 100 freedom fighters have lost their lives in the
Zambezi Valley since the war started in August. Rhodesian
and South African forces stand glowering at Zambia from
across the Zambezi and accuse us openly of aiding the
freedom fighters. After all, it was Vorster who recently
threatened that his Government would hit so hard that
Zambia would not forget it. Clearly, the Council must
address itself to this problem and examine what measures
can be taken to forestall any breach of peace and
international security in that part of the world,

47. We all know that Britain, which maintains a naval
blockade off the Mozambique port of Beira with its
pipeline to Rhodesia, explains away the flow of oil to
Rhodesia through Lourenco Marques on the grounds that it
serves the Portuguese colony as well as a few other
neighbouring States. We cannot therefore understand the
logic of further sanctions unless those sanctions are backed
by the use of force to make them work effectively on
Rhodesia before they can ruin Zambia.

42. The fact that we share a common border with
Rhodesia, South West Africa, Mozambique and Angola,
where black people are still struggling to emancipate
themselves, is a matter of geographical accident and of great
concern to us. I wish to assure the Council that my country
is not responsible for the instability and struggle which
exists between our borders. I wish to bring to the attention
of the Council the serious and grave threat the Rhodesian
situation poses to my country. I should like to confirm the

48. The past record of sanctions has shown up the
difficulty of taking only half-hearted measures. Portugal has
kept open the rail connexions and seaports, particularly
Beira, Mozambique, Rhodesia’s principal export and import
channel. One report stated that Mozambique had supplied
Rhodesia with enough oil to ensure a stockpile against two
years of sanctions. Portugal had also reportedly been
exporting Southern Rhodesia’s embargoed goods, primarily
tobacco and sugar. Furthermore, oil continues to be
6

transported across the border from South Africa, reportedly in excess of the minimum amount required. All this is
facilitated by new fast rail service connecting Rhodesia with
South Africa, not to mention proposals for additional rail
service, Zambia’s President Kaunda recently complained
that eleven Member Governments-including
those of
Britain, Japan, West Germany and many western European
countries-were breaking the oil embargo.

the friends of
:d to protect
: come in the
te settlers in
)mic sanctions
56 [resoll4tion

wernment. As
1 in effect for
ted, they have
little, if any,
n my country

1

j York Times

March 1968,
lowing terms:
n its rebellion
smic sectors it
In its imports
:d its indepenLas two thirds
)rts, but it has
lports and is
1 storage.”
d-to-mouth in
d-still due to
, on the order
i operation in

.:

,;

r

: conspicuous
country-club
z Blacks in

1

h figures and
le mandatory
1 would work
Ile have failed.

;

stains a naval
,eira with its
ow of oil to

i

lawn up the
5.Portugal has
s, particularly
)rt and import
: had supplied
ile against two
lortedly been
‘ads, primarily
.tinues to be

:

1

Salisbury, in callous disregard of the reprieve granted by the
British Crown in the exercise of its rights as the Administering Authority of Rhodesia. The Rhodesian hangings
deeply shocked the Brazilian Government and Brazilian
public opinion and so today we join our voice to those
which have strongly condemned that appalling deed. We
urge the Salisbury regime not only to refrain from any new
crimes, but also to reconsider the disastrous course upon
which it has been embarked since November 1965 and
which can only spell more untold sorrow and suffering for a
population which has been denied every basic political and
civil right.

49, My delegation condemns the activities of the Government of Portugal and the South African authorities for
sustaining the Rhodesian rebels and aiding them to beat the
sanctions. As Members of the United Nations, clearly they
should be under the obligation not to frustrate the effort
which is being made with the sanctions caIled for by that
body. Two colonial States cannot be permitted to disrupt
the collaborative efforts of the international community.
We raise our voices, furthermore, in condemnation of the
acts of the trading partners of those two States which give
them encouragement to continue with their iniquitous
policies.

53. My Government has fully supported the actions taken
by the United Nations in coping with the serious situation
in Southern Rhodesia. We have fully applied the economic
sanctions recommended by Security Council resolution
232 (1966). In February 1968, the Brazilian Government,
by executive decree, ordered all national authorities to
implement the selective embargo decided upon by the
Council. As far as the Brazilian Government is concerned,
this policy has been and will continue to be strictly
enforced. During the twenty-second session of the General
Assembly, the Brazilian delegation voted for resolution
2262 (XXII), which was approved by 92 votes,

50. Allow me, in conclusion, to sum up the position of my
Government and that of the Organization of African Unity:
first, we remain convinced that the most effective way of
bringing the rebels to their knees is the use of force, We call
upon the British Government to realize that this is the only
realistic measure. We particularly call upon it to face up to
its responsibilities. Secondly, we hold the view that the
British Government is fully responsible for the recent
assassinations of African nationalists in Southern Rhodesia.
We condemn British failure to take decisive measures to
prevent the assassinations and to topple the illegal rbgime.
Thirdly, we declare the existing selective mandatory economic sanctions to be both a farce and a fiasco and totally
incapable of ever inflicting harm on the rebel rhgime in
Salisbury, and we condemn the actions of the South
African authorities who, in support of their policy of
apartheid, have aided and abetted the rebels in their efforts
to beat the sanctions. Fourthly, my Government wishes to
state to the United Kingdom Government that the responsibility for settling the Rhodesian situation is and remains the
responsibility of the British Government, which is the
administering Power. Fifthly, we are convinced that the
situation in Rhodesia has reached a tragic state of chaos and
that law and order does not exist there, and consequently
we request the British to respect their policy as pronounced
by Mr. Wilson, when he said on 11 November 1965: “Our
troops are asked to preserve law and order and to avert a
tragic action, subversion, murder and so on.” We submit
that that stage has now been reached and that, finally,
British troops are required to proceed to the Territory to
preserve law and order,

54. No doubts seem to exist around this table as to the
substance of the problem before us. We all agree on the
need for taking positive action to stop Southern Rhodesia
from continuing along the perilous path it has chosen. The
problem, is, however, one of method, of what can best be
done to attain this purpose. My delegation feels that the
Security Council should strongly censure the de facto
regime in Southern Rhodesia for the illegal execution of the
five African nationalists and that it should also warn
Salisbury against the repetition of such crimes.
55. My delegation believes, however, that this is not
enough and that the Council should move forward, proceeding to a thorough examination of the whole situation
in Southern Rhodesia in the light of the Security Council
decision of 16 December 1966 and its aftermath. The
discussion of the real effectiveness of the selective sanctions
applied to Southern Rhodesia has produced more heat than
light. This is no time to reopen the issue, but the fact is that
no precise and irrefutable conclusion has been reached on
it. One fact stands out clearly, however: although Southern
Rhodesia’s economic life seems to have been hurt, the
Salisbury regime has somehow managed to survive and to
ignore its condemnation by the international community.
56. Thus it seems to us that the course of wisdom lies in
this Council’s tightening to the breaking point the economic pressure on Southern Rhodesia. This can be effectively done through a broadening of the trade embargo,
which should finally convince the white minority in
Rhodesia that the time has come to reassess past and
present policies, to accept the reality of change and to
withdraw its support of the Smith rigime, putting an end to
the rebellion. In applying selective sanctions to Rhodesia,
the Council has not even partially utilized the entire range
of economic measures which it can take under the Charter
of the United Nations; and, as we all know, economic
sanctions are only one of the many kinds of sanctions,

5 1d Mr. President, once again may I thank you very much
indeed for giving me this opportunity to express the views
of my country before this very important Council.
+

52. Mr. DE CARVALHO SILOS (Brazil): We meet today,
at the request of the African countries, to consider the
question of Southern Rhodesia in view of the recent events
in that country. The conscience of the whole world has
already expressed its total repudiation of the illegal
execution of five African nationalists by the Government of
7

short of the use of force, available to the Council under
Article 41 of the Charter.
57, To broaden the present embargo and to tighten the
controls on its application represent, in the view of the
Brazilian delegation, the best action for the Council to takC.
My delegation is ready to support any decision by the
Council along those lines.
58. Mr. SHAH1 (Pakistan): The Government and people of
Pakistan have expressed their horror at the action of the
usurper rdgime of Ian Smith in putting t0 dcattl five
freedom fighters of Zimbabwe, This brutal crime, perpetrated in defiance of the authority and majesty of the
Queen, has aggravated ,the threat to international peace and
security in southern Africa.
59. In the view of my delegation the primary responsibility for protecting the human rights of the people of
Zimbabwe pending the transfer of power to them must
remain that of the United Kingdom as the administering
Power. Everything that is humanly possible must be done
to ensure that no more killings of freedom fighters take
place. Operation paragraph 4 of Security Council resolution
217 (1965) of 20 November 196.5 called upon the administering Power to quell the rebellion of the racist minority
regime. Unfortunately,
the performance of the administering Power has fallen short of our expectations.
GO. The Prime Minister of the United Kingdom gave the
assurance that his Government would not rule out the use
of force in the event of a breakdown of law and order. One
is constrained to ask: is not the contemptuous defiance of
the authority and prerogative of the Crown and the
recourse to a reign of terror indicative of a collapse of law
and order? My Government does not have the slightest
doubt that the acts of murder had a purely racial
motivation and were designed to intimidate the Zimbabwe
freedom fighters. They furnish a shocking reminder to us all
of the inadequacy of the action taken so far by the
international community. Indeed this inadequacy has cmboldened the Smith rdgime to extend the inhuman system
of upurtlzeid to Southern Rhodesia; the representatives of
Algeria and Ethiopia have already drawn our attention to
this.
01. It is inevitable that this campaign of repression should
proportionately increase resistance on lhc part of patriots.
A former Premier of Southern Rhodesia, Mr:Garfield
Todd, stated recently that “events are pushing Africans to
seek opportunity through violence”‘.
62. The gravity of the situation in the southern part of
Africa cannot be met by half measures taken haltingly. If I
do not now intend to speak at length, it is because my task
has been lightened by the lucid and comprehensive analyses
of the situation made by the representatives of Algeria and
Ethiopia and other colleagues, notably by the Foreign
Minister of Zambia a few moments ago,
63. The Security Council has to address itself to one
concrete question: why has the grave situation in Southern
Rhodesia continued and worsened despite the adoption of
resolution 232 (1966) of 16 December 19&j? In other
8

bit also to their psychological impact and their political
results.We are, however, apprehensive that the effect will
be countered, the impact weakened and the results forestalled unless a determination
is shown to plug the
loop-holes that may be discovered after the application of
sanctions.Therefore, the Security Council should not only
proceedto impose comprehensive mandatory sanctions but
should also establish a procedure to close the loop-holes
and to ensure the strict implementation of the resolution
underits own continuing direction and control, in addition
to the Secretary-General’s administrative supervision.

which spelled out the steps to be taken by the British
Government and the Governments of Member States of the
United Nations with a view to bringing the Smith regime to
reason.
72. It did not take long to discover, however, that
resolution 217 (1965) was incapable of achieving the sort
of miracle expected of it. The economic collapse of
Southern Rhodesia which was said tc; be inevitable did not
come to pass. A year later, in December 1966, the British
Government again came to the Council to obtain its
backing for the next step-namely, the imposition of
selective mandatory sanctions against the Smith rCgime.
The purpose was to inflict damage on the economy of
Rhodesia to such an extent as to convince Ian Smith and
his associates that unless they came to terms with Britain
their rCgime would have no future.

68. I venture to submit with all respect that the Security
Council, after adopting resolution 232 (1966) under Chapter VII of the Charter, has so far not exercised its own
supervision over the implementation of that resolution. We
areimpelled to call for the continuing direction and control
of the Security Council over the implementation measures
becausethe application of comprehensive mandatory sanctions would be a historic step for the United Nations to
take. We must not underrate the magnitude, the difficulty
and the complexity of the task. If we are to prevent a
repetition of past failures in the history of sanctions, it is
imperative to reinforce the Secretary-General’s supervision
of implementation
of the resolution with that of the
Council itself.

73. The African delegations rightly questioned the efficacy of the selective mandatory sanctions. The situation in
Southern Rhodesia, they argued, involved more than
human rights and fundamental freedoms; it constituted a
threat to international peace and security, They therefore
pressed for the use of force. On this point I said in my
statement before the Council on 16 December 1966:
$‘I can appreciate the reluctance on the part of the
United Kingdom Government to employ military action,
but I am not sure whether it is wise or necessary that the
legitimate use of force should be ruled out of consideration entirely. The important thing is that the situation
should be liquidated as swiftly as possible. Economic
sanctions, if they are not effectively applied, will only
prolong the agony and cause increasing hardship to the
millions of indigenous inhabitants whose welfare we all
seek to protect.” (1339th meeting, para. 40.1

69. In conclusion I would emphasize, on behalf of my
Government, that the situation in Rhodesia has become
more grave since it was first brought before the Council,
What disturbs the world community and should evoke the
Security Council’s response is not only rebellion and the
collapseof the rule of law in a certain Territory, the utter
denial of human rights or e,ven the barbarities committed
there. Those are no doubt the explosive elements in the
situation. But there is also the growing menace of the
alliance of racism and colonialism in southern Africa. That
sinisteralliance has launched an offensive against the forces
working towards a just and stable order in Africa. The
Security Council cannot now retreat or parley. It has no
choice but to go forward and fight the offensive tc a
victorious end. That is the message that should go from the
Councilto Salisbury,

At that time I also pointed out, however, that the use of
force, if it were necessary, had to be left to the discretion
of the administering Power.
74. That remains the position of my delegation. Inasmuch
as the unilateral declaration of independence is an ,act of
rebellion against the constitutional authority, the British
Government has the legitimate right to suppress it with all
the means at its disposal, including military action. Indeed,
the British Government did not hesitate in’Apri1 1966 to
ask for authorization to use force to prevent the shipment
of oil to Rhodesia via Beira. My delegation well knows that
force should not be lightly used. But force, the legitimate
use of force, in the prevailing circumstances should not be
precluded as a last resort when all possibilities of a peaceful
settlement are exhausted. It is significant that this line of
reasoning has lately found expression in a responsible
section of public opinion in the United Kingdom itself.

70. Mr. LIU Chieh (China): I wish to begin by saying that
the Chinese Government and people, in common with all
mankind, have been profoundly shocked by the executions
recently carried out in Southern Rhodesia in defiance of
worldopinion.
71. It is now more than two years since the Security
Council came to the conclusion that the Smith r6gime
shouldbe brought to an end as speedily as possible, But the
measuresthat have been brought to bear on the situation
havebeen either too limited in scope or too restricted in
their application. On 12 November 1965 Mr. Michael
Stewart, then British Foreign Secretary, indicated to this
Council that the economic and financial measures put into
forceby the British Government, with the support of the
United Nations, would be sufficient to “compel those who
havecommitted this illegal act to realize that they have
therebyinflicted grave damage on the trade, economy and
currency of their country” (1257th meeting, para. 331.
The result was the adoption of resolution 217 (1965),

75. In the last analysis, of course, the main burden of any
enforcement action must necessarily fall on the United
Kingdom. That being so, my delegation believes that it is
the United Kingdom that must decide whether force can be
effectively used. The responsibility of the United Nations is
not so much to suppress a rebellion as to protect the
interests of the 4 million inhabitants of Southern Rhodesia.
76. So far as the sanctions authorized by the Security
Council in resolution 232 (1966) are concerned, my Gov9

people. They alone possess the unchallengeable right to

ernment has faithfully carried out its obligations. It must be
admitted that by and large the selective sanctions have not
been a resounding success. Rhodesia’s foreign trade has
been hurt in some areas, particularly in the export of
tobacco and sugar. But in other areas the impact has hardly
been felt. Rhodesia has experienced no difficulty, for
example, in selling almost all its asbestos and copper and
large quantities of its iron ore and chrome. The country
produces no oil, but its industry has not been paralysed for
lack of oil. Actually, its foreign trade has increased rather
than decreased, This has not been confined to what are
commonly referred to as Rhodesia’s trading partners. Many
other countries, including some that have been most
vociferous about the imposition of sanctions in order to
bring Rhodesia to its knees, have participated in this trade.

elect their own representatives, to exercise the right of
self-determination and to choose their own road to their
historic destiny.
82. The United Nations and the Security Council, which
firmly deny recognition to the minority racist regime of
Southern Rhodesia, now have a great responsibility and
duty to fulfil. In view of the legal tie between Southern
Rhodesia and its administering Power, the United Kingdom,
which confers on the latter special responsibility for the
Zimbabwe people, my delegation will strive with the other
members of the Council to secure the adoption of measures
calculated to strengthen previous collective action and as
rapidly as possible to achieve the fundamental objectives I
have just defined.

77. It is all too clear, therefore, that there can be no
effective economic sanctions without the co-operation of
all Member States of the United Nations. Unless all Member
States of the United Nations are prepared to fulfil their
obligations under the Charter, the sanctions cannot be
effective.

83. The PRESIDENT (translated from French): I trust
that Council members will now allow me, as representative
of SENEGAL, to state my delegation’s views on the matter
before us.
84, “Everything has been said and we are too late, for men
have lived and have thought for 7,000 years. We can only
imitate the Ancients or glean something from the cleverest
of the Moderns.” La Bruyere said that back in the 17th
century, and that is the thought which comes to my mind
as we embark upon the question of Southern Rhodesia.

78. It has been suggested in the course of the present
debate that sanctions authorized by the Council should be
broadened into a total trade embargo against Rhodesia. My
delegation is in favour of such comprehensive mandatory
economic sanctions. That, too, requires the full co-operation of all Member States. As far as my delegation is
concerned, we are prepared to support any appropriate
moves the Council may take to bring to an end the illegal
Smith regime.

85. In fact, since 11 November 1965, when the white
minority in Southern Rhodesia unilaterally proclaimed the
country’s independence in defiance of world opinion and of
the international sovereignty of the United Kingdom, the
Security Council has on several occasions turned its
attention to this serious problem.

79. Mr. SOLANO LOPEZ (Paraguay) (translated porn
Spa&z): Once again the Security Council is meeting to
consider serious events that have taken place in the
southern part of Africa. On this occasion we are considering
the situation in Southern Rhodesia, where an illegal,
minority and racist regime will go to any lengths in its
attempt to retain the power it exercises over a people
ruthlessly subjugated, exploited and repressed. Once again
the Council is confronted with the results of the inhuman
and universally condemned policy of apartheid.

86. Senegal, which together with Algeria and Zambia has
been given a special mandate to follow this matter in the
General Assembly as well as in the Security Council, has
from the very beginning called for drastic action to put an
end to Mr. Ian Smith’s illegal regime and thus rescue the
Zimbabwe people from being slaves in their own country.
We have said repeatedly that this illegal regime could be
eliminated only by means of total and compulsory sanetions, or even, if necessary, by the use of force. But we
believe that the great initial error committed in this affair
was the statement by Mr. Wilson, the Prime Minister of the
United Kingdom, who on 29 October 1965 told the African
leaders at Salisbury that if Mr. Ian Smith’s Government
made a unilateral declaration of independence the United
Kingdom would not intervene militarily.

80. The illegal Salisbury regime has imposed the maximum
penalty on a large number of Zimbabwe nationals for the
crime of having loved their homeland. Five of them have
already been executed, after being deprived of their most
elementary rights, The same fate hangs over many others.
81. The monstrosity of the crime committed by the racist
regime in Southern Rhodesia has shocked the conscience of
the world and caused an uproar of indignation and protest.
The Government I represent has supported and scrupulously implemented the decisions of the United Nations,
and it now adds its voice to that protest and pays a tribute
to the martyrs sacrificed at Salisbury, At this tragic time for
the tortured, heroic Zimbabwe people, it is our individual
and collective duty to condemn the inhuman acts committed by the Smith regime, to safeguard the lives and
rights of the prisoners in the condemned cell and, above all,
to do all in our power to put an end to the rebellion on
which the illegal regime is based and to restore power to
those to whom it truly belongs, namely, the Zimbabwe

87, Did this not in fact amount to giving Mr. Ian Smith’s
Government a clear field by assuring it of impunity in
advance? It was, moreover, a very surprising action, since
the United Kingdom was one of the first Powers to
decolonize and to grant freedom and national independence
to millions and millions in Africa and Asia. Yet in the
course of this emancipation, the United Kingdom seems
suddenly to hesitate, to stop and even to draw back, with
the psychological vacillations to which the heroes of
Shakespearean drama are prone.
88. We are accustomed to read on the British coat-ofarms: “Dieu et mon droit”, In this Rhodesian affair,
0

to

of
:ir

1st
VC

.er
:n
lY
:st
th
nd
ite
IJC
Of
he
its

however, the British lion, while still believing in God, no
longer seems to be sure of its right.

torch; YOU arc a burning flame and you consume all you
touch.”

89. In Lagos in January 1966, the British Prime Minister
predicted that Ian Smith’s illegal r6gime would fall in a
matter of weeks because of the application of sanctions.
Unfortunately, however, Ian Smith’s illegal rCgime is doing
very well and has surpassed its former arrogance by
disregarding the pardon granted by the Queen to condemned men whose only
crime was to defend their
country’s freedom and their own human dignity.

95, Be that as it may, the Security Council must decide to
impose total and compulsory economic sanctions against
Southern Rhodesia, this time taking the precaution of
providing for effective measures to prevent the evasion of
such sanctions by trade infiltration through South Africa
and Mozambique. To act otherwise would be to foster, in
southern Africa south of the Zambesi, the advent of an era
of hatred and racial discord leading to bloody disturbances
which, sooner or later, would greatly endanger international
peace and security.

90. We are forced to admit that selective sanctions have
failed, They have failed chiefly because of the trade which,
by-passing them, has infiltrated through South Africa and
Mozambique. This has only confirmed Senegal’s fears, for
we said from the very first that economic sanctions are
always a delusion. Contemporary history shows that States
to which they are applied always succeed in thwarting and
evading them. Witness the failure of all the sanctions ever
carried out, from Napoleon I’s continental blockade against
Great Britain to the sanctions which have been applied
against Ian Smith’s illegal Government, with special mention of the sanctions decreed by the League of Nations
against Mussolini’s Italy when he invaded Ethiopia.
91. Nevertheless, in view of the tragic worsening of the
situation in Southern Rhodesia following upon the hanging
of the freedom fighters, the United Kingdom must come to
recognize the ineffectiveness of selective sanctions and must
assume its full responsibilities by applying more vigorous
economic sanctions and if necCssary resorting to the use of
force.

WC

92, As regards the use of force, here is the opinion of the
leader of the British Liberal Party, who made the following
statement during the last weekend:
“Great Britain should have sent troops to Rhodesia
within three hours of the unilateral declaration of
independence and Great Britain should have bombed the
railway communications between Rhodesia and Mozambique when the economic sanctions on petroleum were
violated.”

air
he
:an
:nt
.ed

That is what the leader of the Liberal Party, Mr. Jeremy
Thorpe, said in Colchester last week. He added
“It is not too late to consider the use of force to put an
end to the regime of Ian Smith.”

LBS

he
tils
an
he
ry.
be
lC-

h’s
in
Ice
to
ICC

the
111s

i th
of
-ofair,

93. The white minority in Rhodesia has tried to formulate
an ideology to justify its misdeeds in southern Africa, South
of the Zambesi.
94. Mr. Ian Smith, Pretoria and Portugal are now the
champions of the values of Western civilization and Western
culture. But these three sinister crusaders have a strange
way of defending the values of Western culture, for they do
it by hanging, torturing and massacring the Africans. In this
way they are’ not merely mutilating but betraying the real
and genuine values of Western culture. It is surely to them
that one of the greatest of contemporary Indian poets,
Rabindranath Tagore, was speaking when he cried: “Civilization, civilization, pride of the Europeans, YOU are not a

96, Speaking as PRESIDENT, I now call on the representative of the United Kingdom to speak in the exercise of his
right of reply.
97. Lord CARADON (United Kingdom): I do not propose
now to comment on a series of remarkable and thoughtful
speeches which have been made this afternoon, nor, indeed,
even to comment on the moving address to which we have
just listened from our poet President. But I feel that, in
respect to the Foreign Minister of Zambia, I should say a
word in reply to him.
98. I am indeed sorry that he should speak so bitterly,
though I do not believe that he has come all the way from
Africa, all the way from Lusaka, only to make sweeping
imputations of low motive and bad faith. I fully understand
the reasons for the bitterness of his words, Some of them
were wounding and insulting. But I well know the strains
and the sacrifices which Zambia has suffered, and I may be
permitted to say perhaps that I admire the stand which his
country has made in the face of those strains and sacrifices,
and I well appreciate the depth of feeling of anger and
disgust caused,by the brutal hangings. I share those feelings,
and the last thing that I want to do is to quarrel with the
Foreign Minister of Zambia.
99. Me rightly said that there is really only one question
before us, and that is the question: What practical action
can now be taken, what practical and effective action?
100. The representative of Hungary said that British
policy had no constructive elements. That is not so and we
shall show that that is not so. One of the most unsatisfactory customs of the Council is to quote one’s own speeches,
but I ask permission to refer to what I said when I spoke a
few days ago, because the Foreign Minister of Zambia was
not then present, I said then:
“My earnest recommendation to the Council is that we
should at once undertake a full and careful review of past
action and future possibilities, and I accordingly place
myself at the disposal of the Council for urgent consultation. I sincerely trust that that offer will be accepted in
the spirit of full co-operation in which it is made.
“I do not for a moment forget or deny the practical
difficulties we must honestly face and the real limitations
on what can in fact be done. We have not failed to state
them. But I greatly hope that, however strong the feelings
of members of the Council, and before they make up
their minds, there will be a readiness to consult on the
basis of the hard facts and the practical possibilities. I

trust that we shall not run away from our responsibilities
by resort merely to sweeping declarations and demands
that cannot be met.
“I trust that WCshall not allow ourselves to be defeat&t
in the sense that we abandon further practical illld
effective action, limited and unspectacular though pcrhaps most Of it must be, in favour of mere invective illld
dispute
among
ourselves.”
(1399th
rncetirlg,
paras. 596O.J
I said that when I spoke before, and I repeat it to the
Foreign Minister.
101. 1 made the offer of consultations. It has been taken
up and we have been pursuing those consultations in a spirit
of conlplete frankness and in an endeavour to find coI11111o11
ground for our advance. 1 made the offer to members of
this Council and, as the Foreign Minister of Zambia wiil
know, I made the smile offer to him. Wllerl he cz.m~~to New
York I put myself at his disposal for a discussion with him,
which I undertake will be a full and frank discussion, so
that he can understand the practical difficulties which I
have to explain to him, and I can better understand the
course which he believes that WC should follow. I a111
convinced that nothing but good can come from sucl~
consultations. Maybe disagreements, maybe strong feehgs
will remain, but I am sure that it is necessary--and I have 110
doubt that he will agree=that WC must in the present
situation sit down together to see what can be done.
102. I cannot believe fht in so doing members of the
Council and the Minister of Zambia, so closely conccmed,
will be wasting our time. Because in a]1 the stntenlcnts I
have read and seen in recent weeks on the appallingly
difficult problem which facts
US,
I have s~erl imlongst the
African and Asian statements that-,-.whatevcr else is asked
for--there is a demand that we sh0~1d exanlinc what more
can be done to make sanctions more fully effective. WC arc
ready and anxious to carry out that survey, and to do it not
alone, but in full and, I hope, frienclly co~~sultntion,
103. I do not wish to misrcprcscnt anyone. I know that
the decision taken by the Organization of African IJnity a
month ago contained murly rcquiremcnts and included a
number of major dcmnnds. But you will permit me,
perhaps, to read the final demand that was made by the
Organization of African Unity at the mceting3 which took
place just over a month ago in Addis Ababa. The final
requirement reads as follows:
“lit@ll.~tS
the African Croup at the United Nations with
the task of working tirelessly for the cffcctive hplementation of Security Council resolution 232 ( 1966) and
to work for an extensian of the present alectivc
mandatory sanctions, so that they become comprchcnsivc
3 ‘I’cnth Ordinary
Organizalion

of African

Session

of

the

Cbuncil

of Ministers

of t[Ic

Unity, 20-24 February 19(jg.

12

If the
ration

lcil an
r this
; our
heard
ly the
with
lad to

a has
e will
1sthe
lortly
Presirence
.isters
: the
n the
: sake
nd to
ment
n the
The
1. He

ANNEX
Resolution
on Rhodesia adopted by the Council of Ministers of the
Organization
of African
Unity at its Tenth Ordinary
Session

The Council of Ministers, meeting in its Tenth Ordinary Session at
Addis Ababa, Ethiopia, from 20 to 24 February 1968,

and political responsibilities to the people of Zimbabwe and by
allowing the illegal racist minority regime of Ian Smith to
consolidate its position in defiance of African and world opinion;

Noting
with approval
the report of the Administrative SecretaryGeneral, and the report of the Committee of Five on Rhodesia as
well as the report of the Foreign Ministers of Algeria, Senegal and
Zambia,

4. Strongly condemns all those countries, and in particular Great
Britain which, in violation of Security Council resolution
232 (1966) of 16 December 1966 imposing selective mandatory
sanctions on Rhodesia, continue to maintain direct and indirect
commercial and trade links with the illegal regime;

RecaNi/tg its resolutions CM/lies.75 (VI) of 6 March 1966,
CMjRes.78 (VII) of 4 November 1966, CM/Res.96
(VIII) of
4 March 1967 and CM/Res.108 (IX) of 10 September 1967 concerning Rhodesia, and also resolution 232 (1966) of 16 December 1966
of the Security Council of the United Nations imposing selective
mandatory sanctions against Rhodesia, and General Assembly
resolution 2262 (XXII) of 8 November 1967,

5. Reiterates its conviction that the primary responsibility for
toppling the illegal racist minority regime in Salisbury rests squarely
with the United Kingdom and remains convinced more than ever
that the only way to bring down the illegal r6gime is by the use of
force;
6. Strongly
reaffirms
the right of the people of Zimbabwe to
freedom and independence;

Colluinced that the selective mandatory sanctions as approved by
the United Nations have completely failed to bring down the illegal
racist minority regime in Rhodesia,

7. Again calls upon the liberation movements of Zimbabwe to
close their ranks and form a common front in their struggle against
the common enemy for the speedy and effective liberation of their
country;

S’frongly convinced that the’situation
in Rhodesia represents a
threat to international peace and security,
1. Condemns
as a crime against humanity the atrocities perpetrated by the illegal racist minority regime in Rhodesia against the
African people fighting for their freedom;

8. Entrusts the African Group at the United Nations with the
task of working tirelessly for the effective implementation of
Security Council resolution 232 (1966) and to work for an
extension of the present selective mandatory sanctions, so that they
become comprehensive and mandatory as envisaged under
Chapter VII of the Charter of the United Nations in view of the
deterioration of the grave situation in Rhodesia;

2. Condemns the economic, financial and other interests which
impede the progress of the African people towards independence;
3. Condemns unreservedly the Government of the United
Kingdom for its continued failure in assuming effectively its moral

9. Decides to retain the question of Rhodesia on its agenda.

In of
:dom
f this

have
st of
lOUld
that,
tions
:seas
nade
; will
:here
r no

ed to
o the

13

/I _
I

,i

‘,

HOW

T O OBTAIN

UNITED

NATIONS

United
Notions
publicotions.moy
the world.
Consult
your
bookstore

PUBLICATIONS

be obtained
or write

from bookstores
to: United
Notions,

and

distributors
Sales Section,

throughout
New York

or Geneva.

COMMENT

SE PROCURER

Les publications
dkpositaires
du
Nations

Unies,

KAK

IlOnY~MTb

des
monde

LES PUBLICATIONS
Nations
entier.

Section

der

Unies
sent
Informer-vous

venter,

MSAAHMfl

New

COMO

CONSEGUIR

publicaciones

in U.N.

las Naciones

Price:

ou Genkve.

06bEAMHEHHbIX

HAuMfi

hfOiIiii0
ICYII~ITL n I~iliiiliIiLiX
MEirZli1li~X
CIIpaIIiiif
06 ii3J(tliliiliX
n ilaiIiClr
IiiiiiiiiIiOX
Opmiinoaqwr Ofi~e~iii~e~iii~i~
Ifaqrdi,
Cewi~
xhIlCB&
Ik@i
IhnOAaTC

PUBLICACIONES
de

en todor
porter
del mundo.
Consulte
Ventar,
Nuevo
York o Ginebro.

Litho

York

UNIES

en vente
dans
ler libroiries
et les ogencer
auprk
de votre libroirie
DU adrerrez-vous
6:

OPTAHM3A~MM

~h~Hlli1~
Opl%ilIi3N~nil
06’I~t’AiiilCiiiii,iX
BI’CIIT~‘TiI~X 110 DPCX ptli”iOlIaX
Jrlipa.
Ytlra3IIiiC
ii.lii
LliillIilTC
II0 Zl@CCj’:
IIpOAaiiiC
il3&aIlilfi,
~~~biO-~O~lii
ii.lil

tar

DES NATIONS

DE LAS
Unidas
q

NACIONES

estdn

en vento

su librero

o dirijare

$U.S. 0.50 (or equivalent

II

uo

UNIDAS
en libreriar

in other

y cosos

a: Nocioner

currencies)

Unidos,

distribuidoras
Secci6n

de

35418-March

1971-2,100
