S/2020/879

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
8 September 2020
Original: English and French

Letter dated 4 September from the President of the
Security Council addressed to the Secretary-General and the
Permanent Representatives of the members of the Security Council
I have the honour to enclose herewith a copy of a briefings provided by
Ms. Stephanie Williams, Acting Special Representative of the Secretary-General
and Head of the United Nations Support Mission in Libya; and Ambassador
Guenter Sautter, Deputy Permanent Representative of Germany, in his capacity as
Chair of the Security Council Committee established pursuant to resolution 1970
(2011) concerning Libya, as well as the statements delivered by the representatives
of Belgium, China, Estonia, France, Germany, Indonesia, the Niger, the Russian
Federation, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, South Africa, Tunisia, the United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, the United States of America and
Viet Nam, in connection with the video-teleconference on “The situation in Libya”
convened on Wednesday, 2 September 2020.
In accordance with the procedure set out in the letter by the President
of the Security Council addressed to Permanent Representatives of Security
Council members dated 2 April 2020 (S/2020/273), which was agreed in the light
of the extraordinary circumstances caused by the coronavirus disease pandemic,
these briefings and statements will be issued as an official document of the
Security Council.
(Signed) Abdou Abarry
President of the Security Council

20-11648 (E) 110920 021020

*2011648*

S/2020/879

Annex I
Statement by the Acting Special Representative of the
Secretary-General and Head of the United Nations Support Mission
in Libya, Stephanie Williams
Allow me to congratulate the Niger on assuming the presidency of the Security
Council during the month of September and for giving me the opportunity to brief
the Council today.
It is becoming a regrettable cliché to appear before the Council and warn that
Libya is at a critical juncture, but I am compelled to pronounce those same words
yet again today. Libya is indeed at a decisive turning point. The Council’s support,
not only in words but more importantly in action, will help determine whether the
country descends to new depths of fragmentation and chaos, or progresses towards
a more prosperous future.
On the ground, an uneasy standoff continues around Sirte, imperilling the
lives of the city’s 130,000 vulnerable inhabitants, as well as the country’s vital oil
infrastructure, which comprises its economic lifeline. While the front lines have
remained relatively quiet since June, both the Libyan Arab Armed Forces (LAAF)
and forces under the control of the Government of National Accord (GNA) continue,
regrettably, to benefit from the assistance of foreign sponsors in stockpiling advanced
weaponry and equipment.
Since the Secretary-General last briefed the Council on 8 July (see
S/2020/686), some 70 resupply flights landed in eastern airports, in support of the
LAAF, while 30 resupply flights were dispatched to airports in western Libya, in
support of the GNA. Similarly, around nine cargo vessels docked in western ports,
in support of the GNA, while a reported three cargo vessels arrived in support of
the LAAF. Foreign sponsors are fortifying their assets at key Libyan air bases in
the east and west. The activity described above constitutes an alarming breach of
Libya’s sovereignty and a blatant violation of the United Nations arms embargo, not
to mention the commitments undertaken by the Berlin Conference participants. The
Mission continues to receive reports of a large-scale presence of foreign mercenaries
and operatives, who are further complicating local dynamics and reducing the
chances of a future settlement.
While the rate of accidents from booby traps — including improvised
explosive devices, landmines and explosive remnants of war — has decreased,
explosive hazard contamination remains a significant risk to many communities,
particularly in southern Tripoli. As of 24 August, a total of 61 people had been killed
and 113 people injured, of whom 107 were civilians. The United Nations continues
to support the authorities in developing and implement strategies to ensure the safe,
dignified and voluntary returns of people to their homes.
Reports of imminent offensives and reliance on social media networks to
spread those rumours exacerbate the risk of miscalculation. As a sign of increased
volatility, localized tensions among armed groups, most recently in the cities of
Al-Asabaa, Sirte and neighbouring localities, are on the rise, with allegations of
unlawful arrests and detention, abuse of power and targeting of civilians being widely
shared with the Mission. Those developments make the requirement for a genuine
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration programme even more urgent.
On the night of 26 August, General Haftar’s forces launched Grad rockets
towards areas in which GNA forces were operating near Sirte. Last night, there were
similar reports of rockets launched by forces affiliated with General Haftar. The
rockets did not cause any damage or injuries, but they are a breach of the ceasefire
2/34

20-11648

S/2020/879

that General Haftar’s signed on to in June, according to his spokesperson. With the
stakes so high, such reckless action risks igniting large-scale confrontation, with the
devastating consequences that would entail for the country and the region at large.
It is imperative that the Council use its influence to impress on all sides that now is
the time for restraint.
The instability is further compounded by degraded socioeconomic conditions
that are fuelling popular unrest and threatening the fragile calm required to advance
our security and political discussions.
The partial lifting of the oil blockade, announced by the LAAF on 18 August,
had a minimal impact on the severe energy crisis faced by the country as it only
applied to the removal of condensates from eastern stores. While that allowed the
National Oil Corporation to continue providing natural gas for eastern power plants,
the blockade otherwise remains unreasonably in place, including a forced shutdown
of all domestic refineries. As the international price of fuel increases, so do domestic
fuel shortages, which negatively impacts multiple sectors of the economy, including
electricity. In the nation’s capital, residents too often go without electricity for up
to 20 hours a day. We must make the full lifting of the oil blockade, in place since
January, a top priority.
The immiseration of the Libyan people is further compounded by the
debilitating effect of the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic, which appears
to be spiralling out of control. The number of confirmed cases has more than doubled
in the last two weeks, with 15,156 cases and 250 recorded deaths as of 1 September.
Exponential increases are a worrying trend, with community transmission now
reported in some of Libya’s main cities, including Tripoli and Sebha. We are,
however, looking at the problem through a keyhole, as persistent shortages in testing
capabilities, adequate health-care facilities and contact tracing mean that the true
scale of the pandemic in Libya is likely to be much higher. The handling of the
pandemic is limited by the fragmentation of health-sector institutions, the extreme
shortage of medical supplies and workers, as well as a funding shortage. After more
than nine years of conflict, the health-care system is nearing full collapse and is
unable to respond to the additional burden of COVID-19 patients in addition to
maintaining normal health services, including child immunization programmes.
The United Nations and our partners are at the forefront of supporting the
national authorities through the provision of health supplies and personal protection
equipment. We are also working closely with the authorities to build the capacities
of health workers, to destigmatize the virus and to increase awareness so as to
ensure that people take the proper precautions to protect themselves. It is essential
that Libyan authorities cooperate transparently in our joint fight to control this
terrible plague.
The challenge of humanitarian access, compounded by COVID-19 restriction
measures, remains persistent across the country. These challenges notwithstanding,
humanitarian organizations have reached more than 243,000 people with assistance
since the beginning of the year, including getting support to 66,000 internally
displaced people, 119,000 vulnerable conflict-affected Libyans and recent returnees,
and 58,000 migrants and refugees. The socioeconomic impact of COVID-19, along
with the protracted crisis and deteriorating public services, continued to stretch
the coping capacities of those in the most vulnerable circumstances, particularly
the more than 1 million people estimated to be in need of humanitarian assistance
in 2020.
I remain concerned that migrants, refugees and asylum seekers continue to
attempt to cross the Mediterranean, at great risk to their lives. I am deeply saddened
20-116483/34

S/2020/879

by the recent deaths of 45 migrants and refugees attempting to cross to Europe in
a singular incident on 18 August when their boat sank off Libya’s coast. More than
7,000 migrants and refugees have attempted the crossing this year, more than 300
of whom have died. Reports of delays in rescue and disembarkation highlight the
need for a review of European countries’ approach to this situation and for a more
humane and predictable disembarkation mechanism in line with the responsibilities
placed on Member States by international human rights law and search and rescue
obligations. Libya cannot be considered a safe port for disembarkation.
Many migrants and refugees who have been intercepted at sea have been
returned to Libya and placed into detention. As of 21 August, almost 2,400 migrants
and refugees are in official detention centres in Libya, where they are routinely
subjected to grave human rights violations. Many more are in unofficial sites where
the United Nations does not have access. I continue to urge the authorities to take
greater steps against smugglers and traffickers and to find alternatives to detention
in Libya.
The United Nations Support Mission in Libya (UNSMIL) welcomes the
nomination by the High Commissioner for Human Rights of the three members of
the Independent Fact-Finding Mission on Libya. We look forward to cooperating
with them and assisting them in fulfilling their mission to document violations of
international human rights law and humanitarian law since 2016, address impunity
for such violations and act as a deterrent. Sustainable peace in Libya will be achieved
only through justice and accountability.
All the elements I mentioned are producing fertile ground for social unrest
across the country and confirm once more that the status quo is simply unsustainable.
In recent days, Libyans have come out in force throughout the country, most notably
in Tripoli, to express their anger over the lack of basic services, widespread water
and power cuts and rampant corruption. I have personally communicated to Libyan
authorities the concerns the United Nations has about reports of excessive force
used against peaceful demonstrators, and I reiterated our calls for the rights to
peaceful assembly and freedom of expression to be respected. Those who have been
arbitrarily detained by armed groups must be released. The surge in the use of hate
speech and incitement to violence — occasionally stirred up through foreign-based
media outlets and electronic armies — appears designed to further divide Libyans,
increase polarization and tear at the country’s social fabric, at the expense of a
Libyan-Libyan solution.
On 29 August, the situation morphed into an open political crisis when
the Presidency Council suspended Minister of Interior Bashagha and expedited a
governmental reshuffling, exposing underlying tensions that had resurfaced within
the western camp, as the threat posed by General Haftar’s offensive subsided. Now
is the time to join hands, as efforts are undertaken to reach a settlement that would
aim to preserve the country’s sovereignty and integrity and to address long-standing
economic shortcomings and the need to implement lasting DDR and security
sector reforms.
The disturbing trends I have just described should compel us all to press
for immediate de-escalation and a return to the political process before the fragile
window of opportunity created by the informal halt in hostilities dissipates to the
detriment of Libyans, first and foremost, but also to the detriment of international
peace and security. However, glimmers of hope have appeared from within the
country, and UNSMIL, with the support of the Berlin-established International
Follow-up Committee on Libya, is working on nurturing and using them as an anchor
for its own efforts. Rejuvenation of political activity in the west and the east has
enabled the emergence of a constituency advocating for change, for a Libyan-Libyan
4/34

20-11648

S/2020/879

solution, for the restoration of the country’s sovereignty and for efforts to disentangle
the Libyan people from broader regional and international struggles.
On 21 August, President of the Presidency Council Serraj and Speaker of
the House of Representatives Saleh issued separate yet simultaneous statements
calling for an immediate ceasefire, the lifting of the oil blockade and a return to the
political process under United Nations auspices. These statements were met with
overwhelming expressions of support from Libyans of all political affiliations and
from international partners as well. I remain optimistic that, with many points of
convergence between both declarations, we may have a chance to move forward with
intra-Libyan political and security discussions while continuing to engage with other
key political and military forces across the country.
Since my previous briefing (see S/2020/421), I have conducted a number
of missions to shore up support for the United Nations efforts in Libya, including
visits to the United Kingdom, Algeria, Morocco and Egypt. Earlier today, I met
with Tunisian President Saïed to specifically thank the Tunisian Government for its
unstinting support for the United Nations operations in Libya. From all of my regional
and international interlocutors, I secured commitments on assisting UNSMIL in its
tasks of bringing the Libyan parties together and of working to maintain calm on the
ground. Libya’s neighbours are directly threatened by the continuing instability and
influx of weapons and mercenaries.
I also met directly with Prime Minister Serraj, House of Representative Speaker
Saleh and High State Council President Al-Mishri, as well as with a number of their
representatives and other key figures. I would like to thank the Swiss Government
for its superb facilitation of our meetings with Libyans in these difficult times. At all
levels, the Mission is engaging with Libyan stakeholders to counsel calm and build
the bridges that will ease the political process.
In Ghat, on 18 August, the relatively high turnout recorded in municipal
elections despite COVID-19-related constraints demonstrated Libyans’
determination to exercise their rights to elect their representatives. It is therefore not
surprising that spoilers would seek to sabotage further such exercises, as happened
in Traghen on 25 August, when an armed group affiliated with the LAAF forced the
suspension of the vote. These green shoots of democracy must be protected. I salute
the tireless efforts of the Central Committee for Municipal Council Elections as it
continues preparations for elections in a new group of municipalities, starting with
Misrata tomorrow.
On the military front, UNSMIL continued discussions with delegations of
both sides under the auspices of the 5+5 Joint Military Commission and moved
past areas of convergence identified previously to adjust to new dynamics on the
ground. As of today, and since 8 July, we have convened three virtual rounds of
discussions with the GNA delegation and two with the LAAF delegation in an
attempt to urge for immediate de-escalation. I encouraged both sides to consider
the incremental establishment of a demilitarized area starting with Sirte, supported
by a comprehensive set of confidence-building measures. This proposal would also
comprise a small international-Libyan joint ceasefire monitoring mechanism. While
divergences of views and distrust between the two sides remain high, I call on the
Security Council to encourage the parties to refrain from insisting on unrealistic
and maximalist positions and participate in good faith for the sake of their country.
Addressing the economic drivers of the conflict is at the core of any hope for
a sustainable settlement. To create the necessary confidence required for a frank
and open discussion over the transparent allocation of resources, UNSMIL had long
pushed for an international audit of both branches of the Central Bank of Libya, as
20-116485/34

S/2020/879

requested by Prime Minister Serraj in a letter to the Secretary-General in July 2018.
I am pleased to report that, thanks to UNSMIL’s support, the international financial
review audit was launched on 1 August and is moving forward quickly. This process
will advance efforts to unify the two branches of the Central Bank of Libya, enhance
accountability and create the transparency needed to inform discussions on the
equitable management of revenue.
I remind Council members that, 16 months ago, we were on the cusp of a broadly
gauged Libyan national conference that would have established the framework to
replace the current divided political structures with one that would have more clearly
reflected the legitimate aspirations of all Libyans. That effort was upended by those
who falsely believed they could achieve their aims through the use of force. After
14 months of needless death and destruction, they did not succeed. The use of oil as
a weapon of war has only exacerbated the misery of the Libyan people and propelled
the country towards economic and social collapse. It is therefore clear that the only
path out is through dialogue and compromise leading to a comprehensive political
settlement and culminating in national elections.

6/34

20-11648

S/2020/879

Annex II
Statement by the Chair of the Security Council Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1970 (2011), concerning Libya,
Guenter Sautter
In accordance with paragraph 24 (e) of resolution 1970 (2011), of 26 February
2011, I have the honour to report to the Security Council on the work of the
Committee established by the same resolution. The report covers the period from
20 May to 2 September 2020, during which time the Committee conducted its work
using the silence procedure. The members of the Committee also met, on 28 July,
in the “informal informals” format via closed video-teleconference, with 18 invited
Member States, including Libya, and three regional organizations. The purpose of
that event, which was a follow-up to the third formal meeting of the Committee,
held on 30 August 2019, was to continue to strengthen the dialogue on the effective
implementation of the sanctions measures imposed by the Security Council in
relation to Libya, with a focus on the implementation of the arms embargo, and to
seek information regarding actions taken thereto. I will now report on the activities of
the Committee and developments as they relate to the individual sanctions measures.
With respect to the arms embargo, the Committee received two written updates
from the Panel of Experts focusing on aspects of implementation. This was followed
by information on three entities and one individual whom the Panel considered to
have met a sanctions designation criterion. The Committee received a letter from
Turkey that addressed, inter alia, the application of the authorizations contained
in resolution 2292 (2016), as most recently extended by resolution 2526 (2020), for
the implementation of the arms embargo on the high seas off the coast of Libya.
The Committee also received a letter from Tunisia concerning one of the Panel’s
updates. The Committee approved an exemption request, invoking paragraph 9 (c) of
resolution 1970 (2011), submitted by Malta and is currently considering a request for
guidance related to the applicability of the arms embargo from Tunisia.
Concerning the measures aimed at preventing illicit exports of petroleum,
including crude oil and refined petroleum products, the Committee received
notifications from its Libyan focal point pursuant to resolution 2146 (2014), as well
as from the Panel of Experts, regarding the activities of a Gabon-flagged tanker,
the M/V Jal Laxmi, which had been adrift outside Libyan territorial waters with the
alleged aim of loading heavy fuel oil and maritime gas oil outside the umbrella of the
Libyan National Oil Company. The Committee dispatched a letter to the flag State.
Ultimately, the vessel did not berth at Tobruk port and left the international waters
off the coast of Libya.
In connection with the assets freeze, the Committee received two letters
from the Libyan Investment Authority (LIA), a listed entity, pertaining to different
aspects of its functioning. It exchanged additional correspondence with the Kingdom
of Saudi Arabia on a matter related to the LIA and, in that connection, received a
letter from the Panel of Experts. No negative decision was taken by the Committee
in relation to three exemption notifications, invoking paragraph 19 (a) of resolution
1970 (2011), submitted by Bahrain, Switzerland and the United Kingdom. The
Committee also received a letter from the Panel of Experts on the subject of one of
the aforementioned paragraph 19 (a) exemption notifications.
In connection with the travel ban, the Committee received an exemption
notification, invoking paragraph 16 (c) of resolution 1970 (2011), submitted by the
Russian Federation regarding the imminent travel of Mr. Abu Zayed Umar Dorda, a
listed individual. The Committee was subsequently informed that the travel would

20-116487/34

S/2020/879

not be taking place. The Committee also approved an exemption request, invoking
paragraph 16 (a) of resolution 1970 (2011), submitted by Ms. Safia Farkash Al-Barassi.
On 15 June, the Committee dispatched a note verbale to all Member States, in
follow-up to paragraph 8 of resolution 2509 (2020), which called upon them to report
to the Committee on the steps they had taken to effectively implement the travel ban
and assets-freeze measures in relation to all individuals on the Libya sanctions list.
The Committee has received six implementation reports since that date.
During the reporting period, the Committee also received information from
the Panel of Experts on a second individual whom the Panel believes meets additional
designation criteria.
I would also like to note that the Committee received the interim report of
the Panel of Experts on Libya on 20 August. Members of the Committee intend to
discuss it in the coming days.
In conclusion, I would like to highlight the importance of the full
implementation by Member States of all sanctions measures and encourage them
to continue supporting the work of the Panel of Experts. With regard to the work of
the Panel, I would like to recall the privileges and immunities enjoyed by experts on
mission under the 1946 Convention on the Privileges and Immunities of the United
Nations. I would also like to reiterate the Committee’s commitment to contribute to
promoting peace and stability in Libya.

8/34

20-11648

S/2020/879

Annex III
Statement by the Permanent Representative of Belgium to the
United Nations, Philippe Kridelka
I would like to thank Ms. Williams for her briefing today and for her dedication
to peace in Libya. I would also like to thank Ambassador Sautter for his first briefing
as Chair of the Committee established pursuant to resolution 1970 (2011), concerning
Libya, and thank his predecessor, Ambassador Schulz, for his chairmanship.
As the recent demonstrations have shown, many Libyans aspire to peace,
security, development and an effective response to the coronavirus disease
(COVID-19) pandemic. Belgium therefore welcomes the statements made by
Mr. Serraj and Mr. Saleh regarding a ceasefire. We call on all actors, inside and
outside Libya, to follow suit and stop the war logic. All mercenaries need to leave.
No valid reason exists for not responding positively and immediately to these calls
for a ceasefire.
A dialogue remains the only sustainable solution to the crisis, and the
parameters are well known: the Libyan Political Agreement, the principles agreed
in Berlin, the three-track approach of the United Nations Support Mission in Libya
(UNSMIL) and resolution 2510 (2020). We welcome the steps taken by the Joint
Military Commission in the 5+5 format and urge additional progress in order to
sustain a reliable ceasefire. We also welcome the positive developments on the
political and economic tracks, with regard to which the start of the audit of the
Central Bank of Libya is to be highlighted. Progress on these three tracks will enable
the complaints expressed by the demonstrators in recent days to be addressed. In that
context, the appointment of a new Special Representative of the Secretary-General
to help guide the political process is indispensable.
The arms embargo continues to be flagrantly disregarded. I want to be
clear: there is no excuse for not respecting the arms embargo. Violating it means
contributing to the spiral of violence, exacerbating tensions among Libyans and
severely undermining a lasting way out of the crisis. More important, it means
contributing to the loss of life of innocent civilians, Libyans and migrants. I would
like to commend the efforts of the European Union Naval Force Mediterranean
Operation IRINI in that regard.
All parties need to protect civilians. My country considers that widespread
impunity will undermine a durable reconciliation among Libyans. National courts,
transitional justice and the International Criminal Court all have a complementary
role to play. I welcome the establishment of a fact-finding mission by the Human
Rights Council to investigate violations and abuses of international human rights
law and international humanitarian law by all parties to the conflict. I call on all
Libyans parties to cooperate with the mission so that it can start its work in earnest.
We remain concerned about the excessive use of force against demonstrators in
Tripoli and the arbitrary arrest of a number of civilians.
With regard to the UNSMIL mandate, which we will discuss in the coming
days, the mission currently has insufficient capacity to systematically monitor,
verify and attribute cases of violations against children, which we all know to be
widespread. We believe that it needs to be strengthened in order to better ensure
systematic monitoring and reporting of violence against children, including through
language in the future mandate.
We are deeply concerned by the continued blockade of oil production, which
has disastrous consequences for the economy of the country and the population as
a whole. We call for a full resumption, at full capacity, of oil production throughout
20-116489/34

S/2020/879

the country in the interest of the Libyan people, along with the implementation of
economic reforms, with a view to agreeing on a fair and transparent distribution
mechanism for oil revenues and to enhancing the governance of Libyan economic
and financial institutions. Libya’s natural resources belong to all Libyans, and their
exploitation is vital to maintain the country’s economy, particularly given the need to
address the COVID-19 pandemic. I urge that the civilian nature of oil infrastructure
be respected and encourage further dialogue on how to better share the revenue
it generates. In that regard, I welcome the recent announcements and encourage
further progress in order to lift the blockade and scale up production.
In conclusion, allow me to once again commend the courage and determination
of the entire staff of UNSMIL and the whole country team.

10/34

20-11648

S/2020/879

Annex IV
Statement by the Deputy Permanent Representative of China to the
United Nations, Dai Bing
I congratulate the Niger on its assumption of the presidency of the Security
Council for the month of September. China will fully support your work this month,
Sir. I also wish to commend Indonesia for its tireless efforts and professional guidance
during its presidency in August.
I would like to thank the Acting Special Representative, Ms. Williams,
and Ambassador Sautter for their briefings. I welcome Ambassador Elsonni to
this meeting.
The Secretary-General’s report (S/2020/832) and Ms. Williams have made
clear, and China agrees, that the current situation in Libya is complex and fragile.
We note the worrisome tensions in Sirte and Jufra, the serious problem of refugees
and migrants and the dire humanitarian situation. Moreover, the Libyan people
are suffering the impact of the coronavirus disease (COVID-19). The international
community should strengthen coordination to support all parties in Libya in
achieving lasting peace and sustainable development. Let me elaborate on the
following five points.
First, China welcomes the 21 August statements calling for a ceasefire by
the Government of National Accord and the House of Representatives, respectively.
There is no way out through the military option, and there must be a ceasefire
as the first step towards peace. We now have a rare window of opportunity. All
parties to the Libyan conflict should effectively implement a ceasefire, immediately
halt hostilities, resume dialogue within the framework of the 5+5 Joint Military
Commission and reach a permanent ceasefire agreement. China welcomes all efforts
towards a lasting ceasefire in Libya and the positive response to the SecretaryGeneral’s appeal for a global ceasefire.
Secondly, the international community should respect the sovereignty,
independence and territorial integrity of Libya, stay committed to the Libyanled and Libyan-owned political process under the United Nations framework,
effectively implement the outcomes of the Berlin summit and the relevant Security
Council resolutions, and promote the implementation of the three-track approach by
the United Nations Support Mission in Libya (UNSMIL). We appreciate the recent
discussions on Libya by the African Union and the League of Arab States and their
unique role in mediating disputes among the parties. Relevant countries should
use their own influence and play a constructive role in encouraging the parties to
increase mutual trust and adhere to a political settlement.
Thirdly, China supports the work of UNSMIL, and we, in principle, support
extending its mandate for 12 months, as recommended by the Secretary-General.
Under the current circumstances, UNSMIL should focus on promoting a ceasefire
among the parties to the conflict, mobilize the international community to help the
Libyan people cope with the pandemic and step up its efforts to assist Libya in
making practical and feasible plans for national reconstruction and economic reform,
so as to lay the foundation for sustainable socioeconomic development. The position
of Special Representative of the Secretary-General has been vacant for six months.
China calls for the appointment of a new Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral as soon as possible.
Fourthly, it is China’s consistent position that sanctions are a means, not an
end. Sanctions regimes should always serve a political settlement. We call on all
Member States to earnestly implement Security Council resolutions, avoid military
20-1164811/34

S/2020/879

involvement in the Libyan conflict and interference in Libya’s internal affairs and
strictly abide by the arms embargo. Meanwhile, attention should be paid to the
negative impact of sanctions on Libyan civilians and third States. Sanctions should
not harm the normal life and humanitarian needs of the Libyan people, especially
during the COVID-19 pandemic. The Committee established pursuant to resolution
1970 (2011), concerning Libya, and its Panel of Experts should act objectively
and impartially, in strict accordance with the mandate, and play a positive role in
advancing the Libyan political process.
Fifthly, terrorism in and around Libya continues to threaten regional security
and stability and causes serious spillovers in the Sahel and the Lake Chad basin.
The international community must stay highly vigilant with regard to that trend and
combat terrorism in all its forms across Libya, in particular to guard against the
cross-border movement of foreign terrorist fighters. Libya must not be allowed to be
the hotbed of regional terrorism.
China is ready to work with the international community to actively promote
the political process in Libya and support its early realization of peace, stability
and development.

12/34

20-11648

S/2020/879

Annex V
Statement by the Permanent Representative of Estonia to the
United Nations, Sven Jürgenson
I thank Acting Special Representative Stephanie Williams for her briefing,
as well as the Secretary-General for his written report on the latest developments in
Libya (S/2020/832).
The coordinated calls for ceasefire by the Government of National Accord
and the eastern-based House of Representatives on 21 August were a welcome step
in bringing Libya closer to peace, but now both parties need to follow that up with
concrete action. It is extremely important that the talks in the framework of the
5+5 Joint Military Commission continue at a good pace and result in an effective
ceasefire agreement.
Furthermore, we fully support the calls from the Libyan parties to cease all
foreign intervention in Libya, including the departure of all foreign fighters and
mercenaries who are present in Libya. Lasting peace in Libya can come about only
through a Libyan-led and Libyan-owned political process, and we need to create
space for it. The only acceptable international framework to support that is the
Berlin process conducted under the auspices of the United Nations.
All international efforts to stop the blatant violations of the Libyan sanctions
regime must continue. The European Union Naval Force Mediterranean Operation
IRINI will continue to make an important contribution to those efforts.
The already dire humanitarian situation in Libya took a turn for the worse
over the past months. We are extremely concerned about the growing suffering of
civilians amid the frequent and significant power and water cuts, and call on all
parties to stop the attacks on civilians and civilian infrastructure.
I would like to express Estonia’s concern about the increasing number of
reports of human rights violations in Libya. All people must be able to exercise their
fundamental rights to peaceful assembly, protest and freedom of expression without
having to fear excessive use of force by the authorities in retaliation. All incidents of
international humanitarian law and human rights law violations must be thoroughly
investigated and those responsible must be held accountable.
I would also like to reiterate Estonia’s full support to the work of the United
Nations Support Mission in Libya (UNSMIL) and the United Nations-facilitated
political process in Libya. We support the further extension of the UNSMIL mandate
for another 12 months.

20-1164813/34

S/2020/879

Annex VI
Statement by the Permanent Representative of France to the
United Nations, Nicolas de Rivière
[Original: English and French]
First of all, I would like to thank and congratulate Indonesia for its presidency
of the Security Council in August, to wish the Niger good luck for the month of
September and to assure the President of the Council of my full support.
I thank Stephanie Williams and the Deputy Permanent Representative of
Germany, Chair of the Security Council Committee established pursuant to resolution
1970 (2011) concerning Libya, for their work, of course, and also for their briefings.
We continue to reiterate that there is no military solution in Libya. Once
again, France calls for a ceasefire and the resumption of the political process, under
the auspices of the United Nations and on the basis of the parameters agreed upon
by the Libyans. That must pave the way for elections, the reunification of Libyan
institutions and economic and security reforms, which are absolutely essential.
In this spirit, the statements of 21 August by the President of the Presidential
Council, Faiez Serraj, and the Speaker of the House of Representatives, Aguila
Saleh, represent a positive step. Those statements must now be followed by action on
the ground and lead to an immediate and lasting ceasefire, the cessation of military
operations in Libya, the dismantling of militias and the resumption of oil production.
This momentum, which must be based on reciprocal, credible and verifiable gestures,
will lead to the resumption of the political process.
We call on Libyan and international actors to make every effort to that end
by ceasing hostilities and committing themselves in good faith to supporting these
developments. Foreign forces must withdraw from Libya. Such interference is
not acceptable. In that regard, we condemn the interference and violations of the
arms embargo, the number of which has unfortunately increased since the Berlin
Conference of 19 January.
France also calls on the parties to continue their efforts to enable the
resumption of oil production as soon as possible and the transparent allocation of the
resulting revenues.
In this perspective, the Council must fully play its role and, in particular,
strengthen the mediation of the United Nations and the United Nations Support
Mission in Libya (UNSMIL).
The Council must be united on the appointment of a new mediator by the
Secretary-General without further delay. Almost six months have passed since the
resignation of Ghassan Salamé. The vacancy in the United Nations mediation must
be filled.
To enable the United Nations to fully play its role in Libya, we support the
United Kingdom as it negotiates an ambitious renewal of UNSMIL’s mandate for
one year. In particular, we are open close discussion with all our partners within
the Council on ways to enhance the effectiveness of the Mission. We propose
strengthening UNSMIL’s role in supporting a possible ceasefire in Libya and in
enforcing the arms embargo.
France will remain fully committed to a political solution in Libya in order to
put an end to this conflict, which has gone on for too long. To that end, France will
continue to support the efforts of the United Nations and their strengthening.
14/34

20-11648

S/2020/879

Annex VII
Statement by the Deputy Permanent Representative of Germany to
the United Nations, Guenter Sautter
Let me start with the glimmers of hope. We welcome the declarations in favour
of a ceasefire by Prime Minister Serraj and Speaker of the House of Representatives
Saleh. This is a real window of opportunity. This gesture of compromise must now
also feed into the 5+5 Joint Military Commission for the resumption of talks. It must
be translated into a lasting ceasefire agreement.
This is an opportunity we must not miss. The coming days and weeks will be
a test of national responsibility, including for Mr. Haftar and the Libyan National
Army (LNA). Let me make this clear: protracted rejection of talks is unacceptable.
The 5+5 talks must continue constructively. We take note of the optimism expressed
by the United Nations Support Mission in Libya (UNSMIL) in the recent report of
the Secretary-General (S/2020/832). We must all support this approach.
The country’s wealth is the property of the Libyan people. Therefore, we call
for an immediate lifting of the oil blockade by the LNA.
We wholeheartedly support Acting Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral Stephanie Williams in her unwavering dedication. At the same time, we
want to strongly underline the need to agree on a successor of Ghassan Salamé
swiftly in the Council, with a view to the upcoming mandate renewal. UNSMIL
must be enabled to quickly react to provide the necessary support for monitoring a
possible ceasefire and for a demilitarized zone.
Let me now turn to the gloomy elements. I want to enumerate three. With
regard to the first one, Special Representative Williams already referred to the
tensions within the Government of National Accord. We have noted with serious
concern recent internal tensions in Tripoli. And we call on all Government actors to
respect the rule of law and to act responsibly for the common good.
The second gloomy aspect I wish to stress is the arms embargo and the
violations of this embargo. It is foreign interference by a number of countries that
keeps reappearing in the reports of the Panel of Experts of the Security Council
Committee established pursuant to resolution 1970 (2011) concerning Libya that is
fanning the flames of this conflict. The delivery of guns and bombs, of unmanned
aerial vehicles, of missiles and launch systems, of armoured vehicles, of ground and
air defence systems, this entire build-up of arms and military material, is obvious,
as is the harmful presence of foreign fighters and mercenaries.
These blatant violations of the arms embargo must end in the Council. We
frequently have exchanges about double standards and hypocrisy. We believe that
this is a very good example of this, and we are extremely concerned by the fact
that members of the Security Council and participants of the Berlin Conference are
involved in this.
We must therefore continue to increase pressure through targeted sanctions
with operations. With the European Union Naval Force Mediterranean Operation
IRINI, the European Union has so far been the only actor implementing the mandate.
We need more credible international engagement to fight against arms embargo
violations and violators.
The third gloomy aspect I wish to touch upon is attacks against civilians
and violations of international humanitarian law and human rights. The continued
suffering of the civilian population remains alarming. We see a rising death toll
of the civilian population due to mines, unexploded ordinance and victim-operated
20-1164815/34

S/2020/879

explosive devices left behind in southern Tripoli by General Haftar’s forces. We are
horrified by the discovery of multiple mass graves in Tarhouna. The perpetrators
must be found and brought to justice. We therefore commend you for providing
the technical support to the Libyan Government to conduct its investigation as the
United Nations registered an increase in reports of human rights violations. We need
to also support the Mission and the Libyan people amid the demonstrations. Libya
has witnessed during the past days a call for the full preservation of the civil and
political rights of all Libyans.

16/34

20-11648

S/2020/879

Annex VIII
Statement by the Deputy Permanent Representative of Indonesia to
the United Nations, Muhsin Syihab
At the outset, allow me to congratulate you, Sir, on assuming the presidency
of the Security Council for the month of September. You can rest assured of the
support of the Indonesian delegation for your presidency. I would also like to take
this opportunity to thank all delegations for their full support and cooperation during
our presidency last month. I thank Acting Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral and Ambassador Sautter for their presentations.
We affirm our continuing support to the United Nations Support Mission in
Libya (UNSMIL) and the Acting Special Representative of the Secretary-General.
We welcome her engagement with leaders in Libya, as well as international partners.
We also take this opportunity to welcome the new Chair of the Security Council
Committee established pursuant to resolution 1970 (2011) concerning Libya and
reiterate our commitment to work together with the Committee and its Panel
of Experts.
We welcome the Committee’s informal meeting in July 2020 together with
Libya and the wider membership of the United Nations. Such interaction is indeed
crucial to encourage dialogue and transparent working methods and to prevent what
the Secretary-General calls “political hypocrisy in international relations”.
Allow me to focus on the following points.
First, we support all efforts for peace in Libya. I join the Secretary-General
in welcoming the recent Libyan calls for a ceasefire and hope these calls will be
respected by all armed forces. We expect international efforts, such as the Berlin
process, will also play their role to support these calls. And we expect both parties
to resume dialogue immediately through the UNSMIL-facilitated intra-Libyan 5+5
Joint Military Commission talks. We also welcome the resumption of the political
dialogue in Geneva last month.
We must ensure the preparedness of Libya in carrying out the result of the
dialogue, including the planned general election next year. UNSMIL — as the
embodiment of the United Nations on the ground — needs to have sufficient resources
to guard that process, including its mandate, funding and political presence. This is
why we reiterate our call for all members of the Security Council to proceed with
the nomination of a new Special Representative of the Secretary-General by the
Secretary-General as soon as possible.
We also reiterate our strong support to the Secretary-General’s call for a
global ceasefire, especially during the crisis of the coronavirus disease (COVID-19).
Secondly, we need to focus our efforts on saving Libyan lives. This includes
those who are particularly vulnerable — women, youth, children and migrants.
Right now, deaths in Libya come not only from bullets and bombs, but also from
the COVID-19 pandemic. The Libyans deserve to have access to adequate health
facilities, and there should be ample space for humanitarian assistance. All parties
need to fully respect international humanitarian law, take measures to protect all
civilians and heed the call for a global ceasefire.
Thirdly, with regard to the importance of regional actors for peace in Libya,
efforts made by neighbouring countries, as well as regional organizations — such
as the African Union and the League of Arab States — remain relevant and should
be further encouraged. We realize that as neighbours, countries in the region have

20-1164817/34

S/2020/879

felt the direct impact of the conflict. They should never be left out, as they provide a
unique perspective for peace.
Our term as an elected member of the Council is short, and what we do right
now will be recorded in history. The people of Libya have grown tired of empty
narratives that have zero impact on the ground. They want us, the international
community, not to meddle but to find a political solution for lasting peace. At the
end of the day, the ultimate question will be: Have we been successful in saving lives
in Libya?

18/34

20-11648

S/2020/879

Annex IX
Statement by the Permanent Representative of the Niger to the
United Nations, Abdou Abarry
[Original : English and French]
I would like to express our appreciation to Ms. Stephanie Williams, Acting
Special Representative of the Secretary-General in Libya, and Mr. Guenter Sautter,
Deputy Permanent Representative of Germany and Chair of the Security Council
Committee established pursuant to resolution 1970 (2011) concerning Libya, for the
quality of their presentations and for the perspective they have just given us on the
current situation in Libya.
As a neighbour of Libya, the Niger is sensitive to all, good and bad, that
affects this country, and it is in that regard that we welcomed the announcement
made by the Presidents of the Presidential Council, Mr. Faiez Serraj, and of the
House of Representatives, Mr. Aguila Saleh, in favour of an immediate ceasefire.
Very little good news has reached us from Libya lately. That is why the
announcement of the ceasefire should lead us to say that, despite the current chaos,
there are signs of hope. Indeed, when Libyans are able to talk to each other, they can
create a space for peace and reconciliation in their country.
In the same vein, the prospect of organizing elections by March 2021 should
be welcomed and encouraged. It is obvious that true legitimacy is obtained through
the ballot box and not through arms transferred in large quantities to Libya at the
whim of interests contrary to the aspirations for peace of a population that has been
exposed to acts of hatred and violence for too long.
The suffering of the Libyan people is unfortunately exacerbated by the
context of the coronavirus disease pandemic, the number of cases of which has
recently soared.
For almost a decade, the situation in Libya has continued to deteriorate. After
more than a decade of war, Libyans have not experienced the democracy they were
promised and to which they legitimately aspire. Worse still, they have lost peace and
security and are now threatened with losing the unity of their country.
Our repeated appeals and good intentions are, unfortunately, being thwarted
by the refusal of several actors to respect the arms embargo, to which they freely
subscribed in Berlin. Libya and its people have paid a heavy price, its women and
children are being killed by the thousands, its resources are being plundered and its
infrastructure destroyed, including its schools and hospitals, despite the coronavirus
disease pandemic.
Despite his efforts, the Secretary-General has been unable to appoint a Special
Representative, which is necessary to relaunch the only valid way out of the crisis,
that of political dialogue and reconciliation. It is urgent that a Special Representative
of the Secretary-General be appointed, so that he can strengthen the momentum of
the quest for a political solution to the Libyan crisis.
Here my delegation would reiterate the importance of the role that the Security
Council, the African Union, the League of Arab States, the European Union and all
the other actors concerned must continue to play in order to reverse the current trend
and help Libya become once again a country of peace, stability and prosperity.
In that regard, the Niger welcomes the efforts made by the Ad Hoc High-level
Committee on Libya and by the Contact Group on Libya of the African Union.
20-1164819/34

S/2020/879

We also welcome the positive role played by the United Nations Support
Mission in Libya, which, despite the difficult context, through its good offices and its
multifaceted support, is working to bring the parties to the conflict closer together,
in accordance with its mandate. To that effect, we would therefore be in favour of
extending the mandate of the Mission for a further period of 12 months.
The Niger also commends the role played by the European Union Naval Force
Mediterranean Operation IRINI, in monitoring the arms embargo, in accordance
with resolutions 2473 (2019) and 2292 (2016), while considering that special attention
should be paid to the situation of African migrants in detention camps, who often
are killed during bombings or otherwise used as combatants or human shields by the
various armed groups in the country.
In addition, the Niger agrees with the Secretary-General on the need to
review the policy of returning migrants and refugees intercepted at sea to Libya. The
volatility of the security situation and the situation of vulnerability in which they
find themselves once they are disembarked back in Libya should be of concern to us.
At the economic level, the serious consequences of the conflict have led to
a deterioration in the living conditions of the Libyan population and reduced the
capacity of the authorities to meet the basic social needs of their fellow citizens. That
is why we encourage the lifting of the oil blockade throughout the country, because
the resumption of production will generate the resources that Libya needs to meet
the needs I mentioned earlier.
To conclude, today more than ever Libya needs reconciliation; it needs the input
of all its children, without exception, to build once again the strong and dignified
nation it has always been. While we are committed to the triumph of justice, we
are even more eager to see peace return to Libya, because without such peace there
will be no justice. Indeed, to the crimes committed yesterday will be added those
of today, which are even more serious and unacceptable. Libya needs our solidarity
now more than ever, and it is time to act.

20/34

20-11648

S/2020/879

Annex X
Statement by the Permanent Representative of the Russian
Federation to the United Nations, Vassily Nebenzia
We welcome the delegation of the Niger as President of the Security Council
for the month of September and wish you, Ambassador Abarry, every success. We
also thank the Indonesian delegation and Permanent Representative Djani for the
efforts and leadership of the Council during the challenging month of August.
We thank Acting Special Representative of the Secretary-General Williams
for her report on the situation in Libya. We also thank Guenter Sautter, Chairman of
the Security Council Committee established pursuant to resolution 1970 (2011), for
his report on the work of that body.
Russia remains convinced that the Libyan crisis can be resolved only by
political and diplomatic means. There is no alternative to a peaceful solution. We
have consistently advocated the establishment of a sustainable cessation of hostilities
in Libya and an end to the bloodshed that has been tearing the country apart since
NATO’s intervention in 2011. In that regard, the recent statements by the Head
of the Government of National Accord, Mr. F. Serraj, and the head of the Libyan
Parliament, Mr. A. Saleh, give cause for cautious optimism.
We call on the parties to launch the Libyan national dialogue as soon as possible
within the mechanisms created by the Berlin Conference and approved by resolution
2510 (2020). We confirmed this position during the most recent teleconference of
the Berlin Conference follow-up committee, as well as in contacts with interested
parties. At the same time, we proceed from the principle that we have repeatedly
voiced that any decisions and recommendations must be coordinated and approved
by the Libyans themselves. Without this, no success can be achieved.
Although the military situation has stabilized, we cannot exclude a fresh
escalation at any moment. The ongoing armed conflict has a negative impact on the
socioeconomic and humanitarian situation of the population. Mass protests were
held in Tripoli demanding urgent measures to remedy the situation. We are also very
concerned at the rapid increase in cases of the coronavirus disease. We call on the
Libyan authorities to respond promptly to these challenges and on the international
community to continue humanitarian assistance.
We are worried about reports of ongoing violations of the arms embargo in
Libya. We are convinced that the supply of weapons and foreign terrorist fighters to
this country must be stopped. “Pumping” Libya with weapons, which started back in
2011, as well as the presence of Western military specialists with unknown missions,
further fuels the crisis and, accordingly, increases radical sentiments and the spread
of the terrorist threat throughout the African continent.
We reiterate our approach to peaceful settlement in Libya. This process should
be Libyan-owned and Libyan-led. All issues, including those related to the situation
around Sirte and Al-Jufra, should be discussed within established mechanisms.
Progress on military and economic tracks could become a door opener for inclusive
dialogue on the political modalities of the comprehensive settlement. We believe that
in the current critical situation all States that have leverage over the warring Libyan
parties must do their best to help launch the negotiation process.
In addition to statements on the ceasefire, a number of peace initiatives have
recently been voiced, including by the head of the Libyan Parliament. Mr. Aguila
Saleh, and the President of Egypt, Mr. Abdel Fattah Al Sisi, supported by many
influential States. We believe that the aforementioned ideas could form the basis
for political discussions within the framework of the process of a comprehensive
20-1164821/34

S/2020/879

Libyan settlement. On our part, we will continue contacts with countries interested
in stabilizing Libya, including Turkey, on the basis of the statement adopted by
our two countries on 22 July. The most recent round of such contacts was held
on 31 August.
At the same time, we stress that the central and leading role in the Libyan
settlement belongs to the United Nations. We believe that a new Special Representative
can help move forward the political process and coordinate all existing initiatives
and ideas. We call on the Secretary-General to appoint a Special Representative as
soon as possible and on Security Council members to contribute to this process,
which has dragged on unjustifiably and is clearly impeding international efforts.
We have already heard accusations of Russian interference in Libya. I am sure
that there will be a follow-up to the ones that we originally heard. In this regard, I
would like to reiterate what I said in our previous statements. We have repeatedly
reiterated that not a single Russian serviceman is currently in the combat zone in
Libya. There are no reports of them participating in armed clashes or dying there.
Behind all this there is a clear desire to divert attention from the destructive
role played in Libya by those who are the loudest today in paying lip service to
the fate of ordinary Libyans. Such behaviour will not mislead the Libyans or their
neighbours, who are well aware of who has in fact pushed the region into chaos.
We are very surprised that those who spread accusations about so-called Russian
involvement in Libya are turning a blind eye to their own military presence, in both
the capacity of national armed forces and through private military companies, in
both the west and east of Libya. They send weapons and ammunition to different
armed groups, train them and recruit mercenaries. We call on those delegations to
stop these hypocritical accusations.

22/34

20-11648

S/2020/879

Annex XI
Statement by the Deputy Permanent Representative of Saint Vincent
and the Grenadines, Halimah DeShong
Saint Vincent and the Grenadines joins Council members in congratulating
the Niger, our partner in the group of three African countries that are members of
the Security Council, on what we anticipate will be a purposeful and successful
presidency. We also express our appreciation to Indonesia for its excellent work as
President in the month of August.
This morning we extend very special thanks to Acting Special Representative
of the Secretary-General Williams and Ambassador Sautter for their presentations.
Libya is at a very critical juncture. The increasingly volatile situation, as
well as ongoing regional tensions, amid the coronavirus disease (COVID-19)
pandemic, are extremely worrying. My delegation continues to monitor very closely
the unsatisfactory, highly polarized and polarizing circumstances unfolding in and
around Libya. We deplore the incessant violence, in particular the indiscriminate
attacks against civilians and civilian infrastructures. We also reaffirm our position
that resolving the conflict in Libya is equally crucial for neighbouring countries, the
wider African continent and Europe.
We welcome the recent call for a ceasefire by Libyans but remain mindful that
previous calls have not been respected. The only path to peace in Libya is for the
warring parties to immediately cease all hostilities, agree to the United Nations draft
ceasefire agreement within the framework of the intra-Libyan 5+5 Joint Military
Commission and engage in an inclusive dialogue for a Libyan-led and Libyan-owned
political solution.
It is our firm conviction that there can be no military solution to the conflict
and that a permanent ceasefire is key to the restoration of peace and stability in
Libya. We reiterate our support for the efforts of the United Nations, led by the
United Nations Support Mission in Libya, the African Union, the League of Arab
States, the European Union and all other constructive initiatives toward finding a
peaceful solution. Further, it has been more than six months since the resignation of
Ghassan Salamé, and the complexities surrounding the situation in Libya demand
the immediate appointment of a new Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral to advance the Libyan process within the framework of the United Nations
three-point plan.
Peace in Libya requires that the purposes and principles of the Charter of
the United Nations be strictly upheld. The proliferation of weapons and terrorist
activities in and around Libya, with scant regard for United Nations sanctions,
remain extremely troubling. My delegation calls on all external actors to immediately
desist from providing military support to the warring parties. Resolution 1970 (2011)
and all other relevant resolutions on Libya must also be strictly implemented. It is
unconscionable that Libya has been transformed into a conflict of proxy dimensions
where some seek to advance narrow political agendas instead of assisting in
alleviating the suffering of the Libyan people. Libya’s territorial integrity and
sovereignty should be completely respected.
We acknowledge the sharp increase in the number of people requiring
humanitarian assistance following the review of Libya’s humanitarian response plan
2020 and encourage the international community to continue providing support.
We stress that atrocities meted out against civilians, especially against groups
made most vulnerable, should not go unpunished. To that end, we call for thorough
investigations into violations and abuses and for perpetrators to be held accountable.
20-1164823/34

S/2020/879

Similarly, all parties must respect the principles of international humanitarian and
human rights law.
Simultaneously addressing the multiple challenges in Libya, including by
ending the almost 10-year crisis, combating the ever-present threat of the COVID-19
pandemic, addressing the dire humanitarian crisis, tackling the economic
impediments and creating the ideal space for reconciliation, are indeed taxing, if
not overwhelming, objectives. However, Libya’s ultimate goal of bringing sustained
peace, security and development to its people and the international community’s
support to keep the process on track must never be derailed.
My delegation remains in solidarity with Libya. We renew our commitment to
assisting the international community in finding a peaceful solution to the conflict.

24/34

20-11648

S/2020/879

Annex XII
Statement by the Permanent Representative of South Africa to the
United Nations, Jerry Matthews Matjila
I thank the Acting Special Representative of the Secretary-General,
Ms. Stephanie Williams, for her statement, as well as the Chair of the Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1970 (2011), Ambassador Guenter Sautter, for
his briefing.
Allow me to begin by expressing South Africa’s deep concern at the prevailing
security situation in Libya. The continued military confrontations and escalations,
particularly in and around Sirte in recent weeks, is of grave concern to us.
We call on the parties to cease all hostilities with immediate effect and heed
the calls for a permanent and lasting ceasefire, as called for by the parties. South
Africa firmly believes that this will create an environment for inclusive dialogue to
pave the way towards a Libyan-led, Libyan-owned political process.
In this regard, we welcome both the ceasefire announced on Friday, 21 August
by the Government of National Accord that indicated that all combat operations in
all Libyan territories had been halted, as well as the announcement of the holding
of elections as early as March 2021. South Africa continues to support the peace
process as supported by the African Union (AU) through its Peace and Security
Council and the High-level Committee on Libya and its Contact Group, as well as the
work of the AU Special Envoy for Libya, as they continue to engage with the main
stakeholders in Libya.
The continued insecurity in Libya has further exacerbated the humanitarian
and economic conditions on the ground, which have been compounded by the
coronavirus disease pandemic.
The reports of alleged abuses and violations of international humanitarian law
and human rights are worrisome. In this regard, we welcome the appointment of the
members of the international fact-finding mission to Libya, which will be crucial in
ensuring that the perpetrators are held accountable.
Moreover, Libya’s ailing economy, exacerbated by the continued blockage of
oil exports, is a worrying trend that does not serve the interests of all Libyans. We
welcome calls for the resumption of oil production and for exports to resume fully,
which will bring in much-needed revenue and improve the economic and financial
situation for the benefit of all Libyans. We encourage continued talks to find a
sustainable solution to the economic challenges.
In seeking a peaceful solution to the conflict, we wish to reiterate the support
of South Africa and the African Union for the conclusions of the Berlin Conference,
as endorsed by resolution 2510 (2020). These processes are vital for the achievement
of peace in Libya. In that regard, South Africa encourages the continued support
of the Security Council and its commitment to strengthen cooperation between the
African Union and the United Nations. This is of paramount importance for ensuring
common purpose to put an end to the conflict in Libya.
Despite repeated calls for strict adherence to the arms embargo, violations
persist by both parties and by external players, with an influx of weapons and foreign
fighters into Libya. In that regard, we welcome the calls for the implementation of
sanctions against those who violate the arms embargo.
We appeal to all countries concerned and those responsible for recruiting
foreign fighters to immediately withdraw them from Libya and cease these activities.
We recommend the demobilization and demilitarization of those involved in the
20-1164825/34

S/2020/879

confrontations, as well as the integration of Libyan citizens into local societies and
the repatriation of foreign fighters to their countries of origin.
Furthermore, the continued involvement of external actors remains a threat
to the territorial integrity and sovereignty of Libya. We therefore reiterate our call
for an end to foreign interference in order to enable efforts to unify State authority.
In conclusion, we underscore the importance of appointing a new Special
Representative of the Secretary-General who will oversee and support the political
process in Libya. We extend our full support to the United Nations Support Mission
in Libya and the important work it continues to carry out through its mandate. In that
context, we support the renewal of its mandate for another 12 months.

26/34

20-11648

S/2020/879

Annex XIII
Statement by the
United Nations

Permanent

Mission

of

Tunisia

to

the

Let me first congratulate you, Sir, on assuming the presidency of the Council
for the month of September and wish you and your outstanding team every success
in this responsibility. I would like also to express our appreciation and deep
consideration to Indonesia for its successful presidency during the past month.
We reiterate Tunisia’s support for the United Nations Support Mission in
Libya (UNSMIL), headed by Ms. Stephanie Williams, and we reaffirm Tunisia’s
commitment to facilitating the conduct of UNSMIL operations. We also thank
Germany for its engagement at the head of the Committee established pursuant to
resolution 1970 (2011) concerning Libya.
As the President of the Republic of Tunisia, Mr. Kaïs Saïed, reiterated today
when he received Ms. Stephanie Williams, there is no military solution to the crisis
in Libya, and the only sustainable solution would be through an inclusive, Libyanled and -owned political settlement that puts an end to violence and escalation,
addresses the root causes of the conflict and alleviates the suffering of the Libyan
people. The current situation, which continues to deteriorate and threaten peace and
security, is unacceptable and unsustainable.
We call upon all Libyan parties to maintain unity and resolve their differences
through constructive dialogue that leads to national reconciliation and to create
conditions conducive to the resumption and success of the political process, in
accordance with the political agreement, the Berlin Conference conclusions and the
relevant Security Council resolutions.
In that regard, de-escalation remains the top priority. Accordingly, we appeal
to all parties in Libya to commit immediately to a permanent ceasefire and to fully
engage in the 5+5 Joint Military Commission talks in order to reach consensus on
the ceasefire agreement and its implementation, in accordance with resolutions 2510
(2020) and 2532 (2020).
Despite the current deadlock in the Libyan political process, we firmly believe
in the ability of the Libyan parties to overcome their differences and promote the
supreme national interests so as to bring an end to the crisis and ensure the fulfilment
of the legitimate aspirations of the brotherly Libyan people for security, democracy,
development and reform.
In that connection, Tunisia welcomes the recent announcements aimed at
ending hostilities, breaking the political stalemate and restoring peace, security and
stability. We consider the conduct of municipal elections in Ghat to be yet another
promising signal.
In the same vein, we believe that agreeing on the top representation of the
United Nations in Libya would significantly bolster international and regional efforts
to advance the solution and help the Libyan parties re-engage in the political process.
Tunisia renews its call on all parties to fully commit to implementing the arms
embargo imposed on Libya. We also stress the necessity of putting an end to all
forms of external interference in Libya’s internal affairs and preventing the country
from becoming an arena for settling regional and international scores.
We also express our deep concern about the continued influx of foreign
fighters into Libya, as specified in the recent updates of the Panel of Experts of the
Committee established pursuant to resolution 1970 (2011) concerning Libya, and we
strongly call for an end to those trends and violations, which can only exacerbate the
20-1164827/34

S/2020/879

conflict and expose the region to a serious terrorist threat. We note the responsibility
of the Security Council in that regard.
Since the situation remains tense in Libya, we remind all parties of the necessity
of respecting international humanitarian and human rights law, particularly with
regard to ensuring the safety of civilians and the protection of groups in vulnerable
situations, such as migrants and refugees.
We highly value the efforts of the humanitarian country team in Libya,
especially those in support of the Libyan national and local health authorities’
response to the coronavirus disease pandemic. We stress, however, that the full
implementation of the 2020 Libya humanitarian response plan will require enhanced
support from the international community.
It is also high time to resume oil production and exportation so as to alleviate
the dire socioeconomic situation in Libya for the benefit of all Libyans.
In closing, Tunisia reaffirms its strong commitment to the sovereignty,
independence, territorial integrity and national unity of Libya. We express once
more our determination to support all international efforts aimed at resolving the
Libyan crisis and recall the important role of neighbouring countries in efforts to
restore security, stability and peace to Libya.

28/34

20-11648

S/2020/879

Annex XIV
Statement by the Chargé d’affaires of the United Kingdom of Great
Britain and Northern Ireland to the United Nations, Jonathan Allen
I would like to congratulate you, Sir, on your presidency for the month
of September.
I also thank Ms. Stephanie Williams, Acting Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, for her briefing and for all the work that the United Nations
Support Mission in Libya (UNSMIL) does. She has just delivered a powerful and
compelling statement about the situation in Libya. She set out, I am afraid, a bleak
picture, with few glimmers of light. But I want to thank her for her honesty and for
her service to the people of Libya and to the United Nations.
The situation in Libya is one of the biggest challenges that the Council faces.
We, the international community, are collectively failing. We are failing to meet
the obligations and commitments that we have freely entered into. We are failing to
enforce the obligations and commitments laid out by the Council.
The humanitarian backdrop is particularly concerning, as is the rise in
coronavirus disease (COVID-19) cases. The people of Libya have had enough, as
they demonstrated once again in recent days. But let us try to pick up on one of the
glimmers of light in her statement.
The United Kingdom welcomes the 21 August statement from the President of
the Presidency Council, Faiez Serraj, and the President of the House of Representatives,
Aguila Saleh, calling for a ceasefire. The Libyan people have been clear about their
desire for peace. And as the events since April 2019 have demonstrated, there is no
military solution. These announcements mark a significant step on the road towards
sustained peace, security and stability. We commend both sides for their commitment
to the political process and thank UNSMIL for its leadership in engaging with and
facilitating dialogue between the Libyan parties.
These statements alone are not enough. This opportunity must be seized by
all involved in the conflict and the Libyan people if we are to make progress in
achieving sustainable peace. Now is the time for restraint from those on all sides of
the conflict and for all Libyan parties to take their cue from these statements and
engage constructively to implement them.
We also need a reinvigorated UNSMIL that can take advantage of this and any
other opportunities.
We are concerned about the rapidly shrinking space for Libyan women to
voice their opinions and participate in political life and post-conflict reconstruction,
with some women subjected to physical threats and attacks seemingly linked to
their public roles. In the twentieth anniversary year of resolution 1325 (2000), we
welcome the Acting Special Representative’s commitment to the full and effective
participation of women in political and public life, including all political processes
and peacebuilding initiatives. Remember, colleagues, this is about not only what is
right, but also what is effective.
I said that the international community, including members of the Council,
were not honouring commitments freely entered into or honouring the obligations
laid down by the Council. International backers must commit to the departure from
Libya of all foreign forces and mercenaries, and must provide Libyan parties with
the space and support needed to achieve a ceasefire, engage meaningfully in the
United Nations-led political process and secure an inclusive political agreement that
places the people of Libya at its centre.
20-1164829/34

S/2020/879

We welcome the continued engagement of the parties in the United
Nations-led 5+5 dialogue, which the United Kingdom supports as co-chair of the
Security Working Group, and we urge the parties to have the courage to make the
necessary compromises.
We fully support UNSMIL’s efforts to de-escalate the situation around Sirte.
A demilitarized solution in Sirte could serve as a foundation for a broader ceasefire,
but we remain highly concerned about the ongoing conflict, which is fuelled by
reckless international intervention and violations of the arms embargo through
the provision of arms and supplies to the parties, as well as the activities of the
Wagner Group and other foreign mercenaries. We fully support the work of the
Panel of Experts of the Committee established pursuant to resolution 1970 (2011)
concerning Libya and call for the external backers of the parties to comply with the
embargo and the commitments they made at the Berlin Conference. That applies to
all external backers.
We are troubled by the ongoing humanitarian impact of the conflict and its
effect on human rights, compounded by the worsening COVID-19 situation, as
set out by Ms. Williams. The increase in civilian casualties from April to June,
documented by UNSMIL, is unacceptable, as are the continued attacks on medical
facilities, ambulances, medical personnel and schools.
We reiterate our concern about casualties resulting from mines, booby traps
and improvised explosive devices left by withdrawing forces aligned with the Libyan
National Army. We continue to call for the mass grave sites at Tarhouna to be secured
until a proper investigation can be conducted. We reiterate our condemnation of all
human rights violations and abuses, as well as violations of international humanitarian
law, including indiscriminate attacks; unlawful killings; sexual and gender-based
violence, the silencing of journalists, activists and human rights defenders; and the
mistreatment of vulnerable people, particularly migrants. We are concerned about
reports that civilians were fired upon and abducted during recent protests. It is vital
that the right to peaceful assembly, protest and freedom of expression are upheld. In
that regard, we welcome the appointment of the members of the Independent Fact
Finding Mission on Libya to investigate human rights violations and abuses, and we
reiterate our call for all parties to allow the Mission access to the whole country.
We support the calls to resume oil production in the recent statements from
the Government of National Accord and the House of Representatives. We welcome
the independent audit of the two Central Bank branches as a vital step towards
improved transparency and reunification. The oil blockade only serves to harm the
Libyan people. We must move forward with resuming production for the benefit of
all Libyans and the Libyan economy.
I want to echo the concluding remarks of Acting Special Representative
Williams. There is no military solution in Libya. Those who deliberately undermined
the peace process in April 2019 thought that a military campaign could work. Fifteen
months later, it has been proved time and again that it cannot. All that has been
achieved in the meantime is death and misery amid a huge increase in weaponry into
Libya. So let me once again urge the Libyan parties and their international backers
to listen to the cries of the Libyan people for peace and to put the interests of the
Libyan people above their own narrow, selfish interests. Let all commit to a lasting
ceasefire and let us empower a strong UNSMIL to take forward negotiations on
peace and lasting security.

30/34

20-11648

S/2020/879

Annex XV
Statement from the Permanent Representative of the United States
of America to the United Nations, Kelly Craft
I congratulate you, Sir, on your presidency this month. I thank in particular
Acting Special Representative of the Secretary-General Stephanie Williams for her
commitment to the United Nations Support Mission in Libya (UNSMIL) and the
people of Libya.
Libya is at a critical juncture. With UNSMIL and international partners, we
welcome the 21 August declaration by Libya’s Prime Minister and Speaker of the
House of Representatives calling for a ceasefire, demilitarization, the resumption of
oil sector operations and a return to United Nations-facilitated political talks.
These Libyan statements represent the hope of the Libyan people that their
leaders will turn away from the violence and forge a peaceful political solution
that rejects continued foreign interference and preserves Libyan sovereignty. This
initiative by Libya’s leaders is a positive, courageous step forward that we all should
collectively support.
Respect for Libya’s sovereignty and territorial integrity should remain the
international community’s guideposts. We oppose any scheme purporting to divide
Libya, occupy it or foist an external political settlement on Libyans. Libyan parties
must drive the solution, which will best be reached through inclusive, United Nationsled political negotiations aimed at national elections. But a political solution will
remain elusive as long as foreign backers on both sides continue to fuel the conflict.
To be clear, the United States opposes all foreign military interference in
Libya, supports United Nations-led negotiations toward a sustainable ceasefire and
backs an immediate return to a United Nations-facilitated political process. We have
said it before and we say it again — There is no military solution to the conflict
in Libya.
All actors involved in the conflict should abide by the commitments they made
in Berlin and immediately suspend military operations, halt the ongoing transfer
of foreign military equipment and fighters to Libya and allow local authorities to
respond to the coronavirus disease pandemic. We urge Member States to continue to
share information with the Panel of Experts on Libya with regard to potential arms
embargo violations.
We must make progress towards a lasting ceasefire. We believe finding a
demilitarized solution beginning with Sirte offers a practical way forward to build
confidence on the ground. There is no place for foreign mercenaries or proxy forces
in Libya, including the Wagner Group, a Russian Ministry of Defence proxy, which
is fighting alongside, and in support of, Libyan National Army forces.
The United States remains appalled by reports of mass graves in Tarhouna.
We welcome the appointments of three members of the Independent Fact-Finding
Mission on Libya. The Fact-Finding Mission will assist in holding accountable those
who have committed human rights violations and abuses and deter further violations
and abuses. Accountability for human rights violations and abuses committed by all
actors is key to strengthening the durability of a political solution, so that Libyans see
a genuine path to reconciliation and justice. The Security Council should consider
ways to hold those who commit violations to account, including possible sanctions.
We reiterate our strong support for Acting Special Representative Stephanie
Williams and commend her and UNSMIL’s leadership in facilitating a comprehensive
political process and confidence-building measures. As we begin discussions on
20-1164831/34

S/2020/879

UNSMIL’s mandate renewal, we must not waste this opportunity to ensure that
UNSMIL is fit for purpose going forward. We must capitalize on these recent positive
developments and ensure that UNSMIL is as effective and efficient as it can be and
that its leadership structure reflects this goal. Reforming UNSMIL now gives us the
best chance to capitalize on battlefield changes to bring about a permanent political
settlement and reinforce the Berlin process.
The United States believes the peace process will succeed in the country,
but only when the outside parties to the conflict stop fuelling the conflict and
support the United Nations-led peace process, so the opposing leaders reconcile and
come up with a peaceful power-sharing agreement that represents the wishes of the
Libyan people.

32/34

20-11648

S/2020/879

Annex XVI
Statement by the Permanent Representative of Viet Nam to the
United Nations, Dang Dinh Quy
At the outset, I would like to congratulate the Niger on assuming the presidency
of the Security Council for the month of September. I would also like to commend
Indonesia, our fellow member of the Association of Southeast Asian Nations, for its
successful presidency in August.
I thank Ms. Stephanie Williams, Acting Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for Libya, and Ambassador Guenter Sautter, Chair of the Security
Council Committee established pursuant to resolution 1970 (2011), concerning
Libya, for their insightful briefings. I would also like to welcome Ambassador Taher
M. T. Elsonni, Permanent Representative of Libya, to this meeting.
Viet Nam continues to closely follow the developments in Libya. We remain
concerned about the ongoing conflict, which has resulted in over 300 civilian
casualties in the second quarter of 2020. This worrisome figure represents a 173 per
cent increase as compared to the first quarter, according to the United Nations
Support Mission in Libya (UNSMIL). The presence of terrorist groups and the
continued spread of the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic have further
exacerbated the situation in the country and in neighbouring countries. We are also
concerned about the worsening economic conditions in Libya owing to the ongoing
conflict and the current pandemic.
On the political front, we take positive note of the recent statements by relevant
Libyan parties calling for a ceasefire and paving the way for elections in the coming
months. However, it is greatly regrettable that direct talks between the parties have
not been resumed. In that context, Viet Nam wishes to highlight the following points.
First, the momentum for a ceasefire gained recently on the political front must
be maintained in order to put an end to the hostilities and return to peace talks on
the three tracks, in line with resolution 2510 (2020) and the Berlin Conference on
Libya. We urge the parties to soon finalize the draft ceasefire agreement proposed
by UNSMIL and proceed with its implementation. We also note the parties’ call for
the establishment of a demilitarized zone in Sirte. In this regard, the collaboration
among UNSMIL, regional organizations, neighbouring countries and other relevant
Member States will continue to play a key role. We would like to welcome the
continued efforts of the members of the International Follow-up Committee on
Libya in support of the resumption of the peace talks. We also welcome the African
Union’s intention to hold the intra-Libyan reconciliation conference later this year.
It is necessary to underline that all efforts should aim at supporting an inclusive
Libyan-led and Libyan-owned peace process as the only viable solution to the current
conflict in Libya.
Secondly, Viet Nam once again urges all relevant parties in Libya to fully
respect international humanitarian law and refrain from targeting civilians and
civilian objects. The parties must ensure the safety of health-care workers and allow
unhindered humanitarian access to effectively fight the COVID-19 pandemic. Further
attention and measures must be taken to protect vulnerable groups, particularly
women, children, migrants and refugees, from the negative impact of both the
conflict and the COVID-19 pandemic. We also welcome the efforts of UNSMIL
and the United Nations Mine Action Service in helping to address humanitarian
challenges in Libya.
Thirdly, we reiterate the importance of upholding relevant Security Council
resolutions on Libya, particularly those related to the arms embargo. We share the
20-1164833/34

S/2020/879

concerns of the Secretary-General about the reported flow of arms into Libya in
recent months. We urge all parties, inside and outside of Libya, to strengthen their
commitment and actions in adhering to the embargo and towards putting an end to
foreign interference in the country.
Fourthly, we would like to commend the continued efforts of Ms. Williams
and reaffirm our full support for the work of UNSMIL. In this regard, we support
the 12-month extension of UNSMIL’s mandate. Viet Nam will work closely with
other Council members to that end. We would also like to reiterate the importance
of the long-overdue appointment of the new Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral for Libya.
In conclusion, Viet Nam would like to reaffirm its strong support for the
pursuit of peace, stability and development of Libya.

34/34

20-11648
