S/PV.8997

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-seventh year

8997th meeting

Thursday, 17 March 2022, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mrs. Alhefeiti . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(United Arab Emirates)

Members:

Albania . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Brazil. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Gabon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ghana . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
India . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ireland. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kenya. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Mexico. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Norway . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Ms. Dautllari
Mr. De Almeida Filho
Mr. Zhang Jun
Mrs. Broadhurst Estival
Ms. Bongo
Mr. Agyeman
Mr. Ravindran
Mr. Flynn
Mrs. Toroitich
Mr. De la Fuente Ramírez
Ms. Juul
Mr. Nebenzia
Dame Barbara Woodward
Mr. DeLaurentis

Agenda
The situation in Afghanistan
Report of the Secretary-General on the situation in Afghanistan and its
implications for international peace and security (S/2022/64)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

22-29108 (E)
*2229108*

S/PV.8997

The situation in Afghanistan

The meeting was called to order at 10.05 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in Afghanistan
Report of the Secretary-General on the
situation in Afghanistan and its implications
for international peace and security (S/2022/64)
The President (spoke in Arabic): The Security
Council will now begin its consideration of the item on
its agenda.
Members of the Council have before them document
S/2022/237, which contains the text of a draft resolution
submitted by Norway.
I wish to draw the attention of Council members to
document S/2022/64, which contains the report of the
Secretary-General on the situation in Afghanistan and
its implications for international peace and security.
The Council is ready to proceed to the vote on the
draft resolution before it. I shall put the draft resolution
to the vote now.
A vote was taken by show of hands.
In favour:
Albania, Brazil, China, France, Gabon, Ghana,
India, Ireland, Kenya, Mexico, Norway, United
Arab Emirates, United Kingdom of Great Britain
and Northern Ireland, United States of America
Against:
None
Abstaining:
Russian Federation
The President (spoke in Arabic): The draft
resolution received 14 in favour, no votes against and
1 abstention. The draft resolution has been adopted as
resolution 2626 (2022).
I shall now give the floor to those members of the
Council who wish to make statements after the voting.
Ms. Juul (Norway): As penholder on Afghanistan
and the mandate renewal of the United Nations
Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA), allow
me to thank all Council members for constructively
engaging in the process leading to today’s adoption of
resolution 2626 (2022), renewing the mandate of the
2/7

17/03/2022

United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan for
one year.
The resolution sends a clear message that the
Council stands firmly behind the continued support
of the United Nations for the Afghan people as they
face unprecedented challenges and uncertainty. The
resolution ensures that UNAMA has a strong and robust
mandate to promote inclusive political dialogue, monitor
and report on human rights and continue to facilitate
humanitarian and basic human needs assistance, as well
as to engage with all Afghan actors — that includes the
Taliban — on all those issues.
The resolution expresses particular concern about
the situation for Afghan women and girls. It provides
UNAMA with a strengthened mandate to monitor and
report on violations, abuses and reprisals committed
against women. As well as a strengthened mandate to
support Afghan women’s participation in dialogue and
decision-making about their future and that of their
country, the resolution also recognizes that children
are disproportionately affected by the complex crisis in
Afghanistan. It therefore tasks UNAMA to continue its
crucial work to monitor and report on the protection
of children.
Moreover, Afghanistan has experienced its worst
drought in 27 years. While we are glad to have included
an important reference to drought in the text, we are
disappointed that we could not agree on the need
for climate-related security risks to be included in
UNAMA’s analysis and reporting.
All the components in this renewed mandate for
UNAMA will be crucial not only to responding to the
immediate humanitarian and economic crisis, but also
to supporting the Security Council’s overarching goal
of peace and stability in Afghanistan. We once again
thank Council members for their valuable efforts to
renew that mandate and extend our sincere thanks to
the entire UNAMA team for their tireless work every
day for the people of Afghanistan.
Dame Barbara Woodward (United Kingdom):
Let me start by thanking Norway for its hard work as
penholder on resolution 2626 (2022).
Today the Council spoke with one voice in support
of a robust United Nations Assistance Mission in
Afghanistan (UNAMA) — to lead and coordinate
urgent humanitarian efforts; to support the rights
of all Afghans, including women and girls; and to
22-29108

17/03/2022

The situation in Afghanistan

S/PV. 8997

hold the Taliban to account on its commitments. It is
disappointing that one Council member decided to
abstain, just when UNAMA’s work is more important
than ever.

of them. This mandate empowers UNAMA to execute
a variety of critical functions and serves as an advocate
for Afghans throughout the country as they face a
variety of urgent and mutually reinforcing challenges.

More than 20 million Afghan people need urgent
assistance. For our part, the United Kingdom has
doubled aid for Afghanistan this financial year to
$370 million. And on 31 March, the United Kingdom,
Qatar, Germany and the Office for the Coordination
of Humanitarian Affairs will co-host a pledging
conference to raise funds for the United Nations
humanitarian response plan. We encourage Member
States to respond generously. Today’s adoption ensures
that UNAMA will continue to play a key role in
coordinating the United Nations response as it scales
up across the board.

Through the adoption of resolution 2626 (2022),
the Security Council has tasked UNAMA with
facilitating dialogue among Afghan and international
stakeholders that focuses on the promotion of inclusive,
representative, participatory and responsive governance
that serves the needs of all Afghans — regardless of
their gender, ethnicity or identity.

Beyond the humanitarian crisis, we are particularly
concerned about reports of reprisals against former
Government officials and attacks and intimidation
against minority groups and civil society. We are
also concerned about detentions and enforced
disappearances, in breach of international norms. And
although there has been a reduction in civilian casualties,
the Taliban needs to demonstrate that extremist groups
are no longer able to flourish in the country.
Let me be clear — the Taliban has a choice. The
international community has made its expectations
clear. We will base our approach on the actions the
Taliban now takes.
UNAMA will play a key role in supporting the rights
of all Afghans, promoting an inclusive society in which
women and girls participate fully. We are watching
closely to see if the Taliban meets its commitments that
girls return to secondary school at the end of March.
In conclusion, I would like to pay tribute to Special
Representative Lyons and her team and reaffirm the
United Kingdom’s solidarity with the Afghan people.
Mr. DeLaurentis (United States of America): At
the outset, the United States would like to commend
Norway for the cooperative and constructive spirit
with which it led the Security Council’s negotiations
on this text.
The Council’s adoption of a new and robust
mandate for the United Nations Assistance Mission in
Afghanistan (UNAMA) demonstrates the international
community’s enduring commitment to the people of
Afghanistan and to the Organization’s work in support

UNAMA continues to have a robust humanrights mandate to monitor and report on the situation
of women, members of ethnic and religious minority
groups, persons with disabilities and other vulnerable
or marginalized populations, as well as to advocate
for those suffering from violence. We are also pleased
the United Nations can continue its important child
protection work, which aligns with the Council’s efforts
on children and armed conflict.
Critically, this mandate ensures that UNAMA
can continue its vital work in support of women’s and
girls’ empowerment, their ability to fully enjoy human
rights and fundamental freedoms and their full, equal
and meaningful participation at all levels and stages
of decision-making. In doing so, the Security Council
has instructed UNAMA not just to advocate for
Afghanistan’s women, but to engage with them as vital
partners in its work.
As the Security Council notes through the
resolution we adopted today, enhancing respect for the
rights of all Afghans is not only of critical importance
in itself, but also contributes to the conditions essential
to Afghanistan’s development. Afghanistan cannot
prosper if half the population is denied access to
education or is not permitted to work. The United
States is closely watching the Taliban’s actions in order
to ensure it meets its commitments to respecting the
rights of women throughout the country.
This mandate also ensures that UNAMA will
continue to contribute to efforts to address the
widespread humanitarian emergency and ongoing
economic crisis in Afghanistan. As the single-largest
donor of humanitarian assistance to Afghanistan, the
United States remains firmly committed to UNAMA’s
work to facilitate the efforts of partners on the ground
that are providing vital humanitarian aid to Afghans.

22-291083/7

S/PV.8997

The situation in Afghanistan

In addition to our humanitarian contributions,
we continue to support measures to help address the
enormous challenges facing Afghanistan’s economy, as
shown by the steps we have taken recently to protect
certain property of the Central Bank of Afghanistan,
held in the United States for the benefit of the Afghan
people. We welcome the opportunity to continue to
engage closely with the United Nations to advocate for
an Afghan Central Bank that is free from interference
and meets global technical standards.
The Security Council took an important step today
to underscore the importance of the Organization’s
continued work in Afghanistan as the country navigates
a pivotal moment in its history.
Mr. Flynn (Ireland): Ireland welcomes the adoption
this morning of resolution 2626 (2022), renewing the
mandate of the United Nations Assistance Mission
in Afghanistan (UNAMA). I would like to express
our sincere appreciation to Norway as penholder for
its untiring efforts to secure an agreement on a new
mandate for UNAMA. Today’s vote demonstrates the
resounding support of the Security Council for the vital
work of UNAMA at this extremely difficult time for
the people of Afghanistan.
Following the takeover in August by the Taliban,
the Afghan people have seen their rights systematically
eroded and their need for urgent humanitarian
assistance increase exponentially. Ireland welcomes
the clear mandate given to UNAMA to work in support
of the Afghan people in order to help address these
vital issues.
This resolution provides a clear and unambiguous
foundation upon which UNAMA can engage with all
relevant Afghan stakeholders in support of a better
future for Afghanistan and its people — to coordinate
urgent humanitarian aid and a response to basic human
needs; to facilitate dialogue across Afghan society,
with a focus on promoting inclusive, representative and
participatory governance; to engage on the protection
and promotion of human rights for all Afghans; to support
and promote gender equality, women’s empowerment
and their full, equal, meaningful and safe participation
in all dialogue and political processes; to support girls’
empowerment and their right to education; to monitor
and report on violations and abuses against children;
and to promote stability and peace in Afghanistan for
all its citizens.
4/7

17/03/2022

At the same time, we regret that the Council could
not agree to include a reference to climate insecurity
at a time when, in Afghanistan, the link is becoming
clearer.
The voices of Afghan women have been heard clearly
in the Chamber over the past seven months — voices
that carried the messages of millions of women and
girls whose lives were upended by the Taliban takeover.
I want to acknowledge the courageous activism of
Afghan women in the face of intimidation, reprisals,
disappearances and killings. They have strongly
advocated for themselves and for their fellow citizens.
Their efforts and their sacrifices have had an impact.
The members of the Security Council have now
given UNAMA a mandate informed by those brave
testimonies — one that will uphold their rights and the
rights of all Afghan people. Now the hard work in this
changed reality truly begins for UNAMA, but with
the welcome surety of the support of the international
community and the full support of the Council.
Ms. Dautllari (Albania): Albania, too, welcomes
the adoption of resolution 2626 (2022), commends the
efforts of Norway as a penholder for having prepared a
strong and balanced text and congratulates the members
of the Council on that achievement.
We welcome the renewal of the mandate of the
United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan
(UNAMA), which we believe will bring sizable
and tangible results to the people of Afghanistan.
As previously expressed, Albania supports a robust
mandate for UNAMA, which is playing a crucial role as
a concrete bridge between the international community
and all relevant stakeholders in Afghanistan. That
clear and strong Mission with extended duties will
focus on human rights, the rights of women and youth,
assistance in the area of humanitarian aid delivery and
other tasks. That gives us hope in terms of making the
lives of all Afghans, especially women and girls, better
and brighter.
Albania is of the opinion that this adopted text
constitutes a positive initial step towards assisting
Afghan society in returning to normality. Albania
looks forward to the implementation of the resolution
and strongly supports the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General.
Mr. De Almeida Filho (Brazil): I thank Norway
for having facilitated the negotiation of the text that
22-29108

17/03/2022

The situation in Afghanistan

we have just adopted — resolution 2626 (2022). Brazil
understands that the resolution reflects the concerns of
most Council members and gives the United Nations
Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA) a robust
mandate that matches the responsibilities of the United
Nations towards Afghanistan. I also thank the other
Council members for their willingness to compromise
in the name of a greater purpose.
The resolution sends a clear message to the Afghan
people and the de facto authorities conveying the
expectations of the international community for the
future of their country. That includes respect for human
rights, the protection of children and the dignified
treatment of women and minorities.
By strengthening the Mission’s political component,
the new mandate consolidates UNAMA’s role as a
mediator. It also confirms the Mission’s role as an agent
for capacity-building and institution-strengthening in
this transitional period.
We believe that cooperation with UNAMA offers
an opportunity for Afghan stakeholders to better
understand the concerns of the United Nations and its
Member States. It is up to the relevant authorities to
indicate which path they want to follow. We can only
hope that their choice is for a stable, prosperous and
dignified Afghanistan for all its citizens.
Mr. Nebenzia (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): The Russian Federation was compelled
to abstain in the voting on resolution 2626 (2022),
extending the mandate of the United Nations Assistance
Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA). We did so for the
following reasons.
From the beginning of the discussions on the draft,
we tried to convey to colleagues on the Council the
importance of achieving the agreement of the host
country on the presence of the United Nations. That
imperative was consistently taken into account in
each extension of the mandate of the special political
mission for many years. However, this time the
reference to it met with opposition from those who for
years have continued with their irresponsible politics in
Afghanistan, not helping to resolve pressing issues and
ultimately leaving the population to the whims of fate.
To our great regret, we continue to see stubborn
ignorance of the new realities in the country and the
promotion of irrelevant approaches. Ultimately, the
entire responsibility for resolving the situation, as well

S/PV. 8997

as the possible risks connected with it, falls wholly on
UNAMA. Like in any other United Nations mission,
there is a need to have a realistic objective. We wish the
Mission every success, but we do not want to bear any
responsibility if in the end it is not able to fulfil all the
tasks that it faces. We would not want UNAMA to turn
into a United Nations “mission impossible”.
Support from the de facto authorities would allow
the Mission to effectively fulfil its mandate and to
achieve its objectives. Furthermore, those conditions
would be a guarantee of the security of United Nations
personnel, giving them the possibility of access to
those regions that have been literally closed to them for
seven months.
Finally, it is important to ensure more substantive
cooperation between the special political mission and
the Taliban authorities, which we regularly hear about
during discussions of the situation in the Council. The
fact that this is not mentioned in the resolution may
jeopardize the effectiveness of the Mission in achieving
its mandate and, on the whole, could undermine
international efforts to stabilize the situation.
It is indeed UNAMA — as has repeatedly
been mentioned by its Head, Deborah Lyons, in her
statements — that can play a role in securing the
potential of the new authorities to effectively resolve
political and human rights issues, considering regional
and cultural specifics and with an emphasis on best
practice borrowed from regional neighbours, including
the Organization of Islamic Cooperation. The steps that
have been taken towards cooperation with the Taliban
leadership in that direction would enable us to lay the
foundation for national reconciliation.
In our work on the text, we were guided first and
foremost by the interests of the Afghan people. We
thought that the primary objectives were to provide
humanitarian assistance and prevent economic collapse.
Where there is full paralysis of the banking system, a
crisis in liquidity and restrictions, a quick resolution of
those issues without any preconditions or provisos is
extremely important.
We see UNAMA’s objectives as effective
cooperation in resolving that problem, facilitating the
unfreezing of assets and working towards a sustainable
post-conflict recovery in the country. We hope that the
contacts between the Mission and donors will help to
ensure significant progress on the issues of the future

22-291085/7

S/PV.8997

The situation in Afghanistan

self-reliance and independence of the Afghan economy
from international financing.
On the whole, the key is maintaining stability,
which would benefit everyone: Afghanistan itself, the
region and the rest of the world. At the same time,
we are grateful to the Norwegian penholders for their
efforts to harmonize the position of Security Council
members and for their rational approach to considering
all the pressing issues I mentioned earlier. We also take
note of the reflection in the resolution of the terrorist
and drug threats.
Mr. Zhang Jun (China) (spoke in Chinese):
Since the withdrawal of foreign troops last August,
Afghanistan has ushered in a critical phase of peaceful
reconstruction. China supports the important role of
the United Nations on the Afghan issue and welcomes
the mandate renewal of the United Nations Assistance
Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA) to enable it to
continue to provide assistance in achieving peace,
stability and development in Afghanistan.
Helping Afghanistan emerge from its humanitarian
and economic crisis is the most urgent task at present and
should also be the most important work of UNAMA in
the coming period. UNAMA should actively implement
the mandate contained in resolution 2626 (2022), urge
major donor countries to increase aid without political
strings attached and help Afghanistan improve people’s
livelihoods. We expect UNAMA to assist Afghanistan
in cooperating with international financial institutions
to gradually activate Afghanistan’s commercial
and financial activities and promote economic and
social development.
Resolution 2626 (2022) specifies that Afghan assets
belong to the Afghan people, which reflects the common
view of the international community. In line with the
clear mandate from the Security Council, UNAMA
should further play a coordinating role in promoting
the unfreezing of assets in the country concerned.
We call on the country concerned to expedite efforts
to unconditionally return those assets to the Afghan
people. We look forward to substantive progress in that
regard before the next UNAMA briefing to the Council.
We have seen that the interim Afghan
Government is actively engaging in foreign exchange
and taking measures to respond to the expectations
of the international community. The general direction
is correct. The international community should
adhere to the “Afghan-led and Afghan-owned”
6/7

17/03/2022

principle, strengthen contacts with the interim Afghan
Government and all other parties, actively guide and
promote the establishment of an open and inclusive
political structure and gradually restore order, the rule
of law and economic development.
We should support Afghanistan in increasing
investment in education and health, protecting the basic
rights of all people, including women and children,
combating terrorism in all its forms and developing
friendly cooperation with other countries. This time,
the Security Council reprioritized UNAMA’s mandate
in the light of the changing situation on the ground.
As the situation is unfolding too fast and is filled with
many uncertainties, it is not an easy task to ensure that
the new mandate fits the latest developments, meets the
real needs of the Afghan people and is practical and
feasible to implement.
As penholder, Norway engaged in in-depth
communication with Council members and made
unremitting efforts towards building consensus. I
would like to take this opportunity to express my
special thanks to the delegation of Norway. At the same
time, we must admit that we still have many doubts
about whether the priorities set out in resolution 2626
(2022) are appropriate, whether the mandated tasks
are generally balanced and whether they can play the
expected role.
In a prudent manner, we should take stock of
UNAMA’s future work in a timely fashion and be ready
to make new adjustments at any time. We hope that
UNAMA will make full use of its existing resources,
implement its mandate in an orderly and balanced
manner and divide the work and coordinate with other
United Nations agencies to improve its performance.
While always respecting the sovereignty and leadership
of Afghanistan, it is important to pay attention to the
legitimate concerns of the interim Afghan Government
and carry out the various tasks on the basis of mutual
understanding and active communication.
At present, terrorists remain active in Afghanistan.
UNAMA should therefore maintain communication
with the interim Afghan Government and take the
measures needed to ensure the safety of United
Nations personnel.
For a long time, the neighbours of Afghanistan
and countries of the region have actively supported
Afghanistan in its peace, reconciliation and
reconstruction process and made great efforts to
22-29108

17/03/2022

The situation in Afghanistan

promote its peaceful development. China is making
preparations for the third meeting of Foreign Ministers
of the Neighbouring Countries of Afghanistan and is
ready to promote efforts by countries of the region aimed
at strengthening communication and coordination
so as to create a favourable environment for stability
and reconstruction in Afghanistan. We call upon the
international community to keep its attention focused
on, and maintain its input into, Afghanistan and let the
Afghan people know that they have not been forgotten.
The President (spoke in Arabic): I shall now make
a statement in my capacity as the representative of the
United Arab Emirates.
At the outset, I thank Norway for leading the
consultations. I also thank all the members of the
Security Council for their positive contributions in the
course of the consultations.
The adoption of a new resolution renewing the
mandate of the United Nations Assistance Mission
in Afghanistan (UNAMA) is an important step that
falls within the efforts of the Council to deal with
the situation in Afghanistan. The tasks adopted for
UNAMA reflect the commitment of the international
community to responding to the needs of the Afghan
people, especially women and girls.
We express our deep concern about the continued
escalation of the humanitarian situation in Afghanistan,
as Afghans lack the financial liquidity to provide
the necessary services. We are also concerned about
significantly limiting the freedoms and rights of women
and girls as well as the escalation of the terrorist threat.
In the light of those realities, we understand the
importance of the adopted mandate, which allows the
Mission to pursue its vital role in Afghanistan and
to face several urgent challenges that fall within its
mandate. Resolution 2626 (2022) will allow the Mission
to support the efforts needed to achieve stability in
Afghanistan and to put the country on the right track to
realize a more sustainable future.

S/PV. 8997

We welcome maintaining the role of the Mission in
protecting the rights of women and girls as an essential
pillar of its tasks, especially because discrimination
against them continues. In that regard, we stress that it
is important for the international community to pursue
its efforts to improve the situation of women and girls in
Afghanistan through effective, regular and sustainable
coordination with all stakeholders.
Turning to the humanitarian situation, despite
the tireless efforts of the United Nations in previous
months, the current humanitarian needs are increasing
significantly. We are nevertheless confident that the
renewed mandate will allow the Mission to continue
its role in coordinating the humanitarian response in
collaboration with the relevant stakeholders present
in Afghanistan.
We also emphasize the importance of political
access in UNAMA’s mandate. Such access will allow
the Mission to enter into dialogue with the Taliban
and convey the international community’s messages
on the importance of comprehensive governance. We
also reiterate the importance of the role played by
the Organization of Islamic Cooperation, which is
an important partner for Afghanistan and UNAMA
alike, including in the cultural, religious and
humanitarian fields.
In conclusion, the renewed mandate is part of
our commitment to responding to the challenges in
Afghanistan. The international community, especially
the Security Council, should continue to focus on
addressing Afghanistan’s situation. The United Arab
Emirates looks forward to continuing its support aimed
at improving the security situation and achieving
stability and prosperity in Afghanistan and the region.
I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.
There are no more names inscribed on the list
of speakers.
The meeting rose at 10.35 a.m.

22-291087/7
