S/2003/85

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
24 January 2003
English
Original: French

Letter dated 22 January 2003 from the Secretary-General
addressed to the President of the Security Council
I have the honour to transmit to you herewith a communication dated
6 December 2002 addressed to me by the Secretary General of the North Atlantic
Treaty Organization (see annex).
I should be grateful if you would arrange to have this letter and its annex
brought to the attention of the members of the Security Council.
(Signed) Kofi A. Annan

03-22390 (E)

270103

*0322390*

280103

S/2003/85

Annex
Letter dated 6 December 2002 from the Secretary General of the
North Atlantic Treaty Organization addressed to the SecretaryGeneral of the United Nations
[Original: English]
In the light of the great importance the Alliance attaches to close cooperation
with the United Nations in the struggle against terrorism, and following my letter of
25 June 2002 to Sir Jeremy Greenstock, Chairman of the United Nations Security
Council Counter-Terrorism Committee, I would like to inform you on the significant
decisions taken at the Prague Summit of Heads of State and Government relevant to
the fight against terrorism.
As you are aware, while the Prague Summit was marked by the Alliance’s
historic decision to invite Bulgaria, Estonia, Latvia, Lithuania, Romania, Slovakia
and Slovenia to begin accession talks to join the North Atlantic Treaty Organization
(NATO), our Heads of State and Government also adopted a series of measures to
strengthen our ability to counter the new threats of the twenty-first century. In so
doing, they reiterated their steadfast commitment to the transatlantic link; to
NATO’s fundamental security tasks, including collective defence; to our shared
democratic values; and to the Charter of the United Nations.
The Summit meeting was also an occasion for our Heads of State and
Government to once again categorically reject and condemn terrorism in all its
forms and manifestations and to underline their determination to combat this
scourge for as long as necessary. Recalling the tragic events of 11 September 2001,
and NATO’s subsequent invocation of article 5 of the Washington Treaty, they
approved a comprehensive package of measures, based on NATO’s Strategic
Concept, to strengthen our ability to meet the challenges to the security of our
forces, populations and territory, from wherever they may come. These measures
will ensure that NATO can better carry out the full range of its missions and respond
collectively to those challenges, including the threat posed by terrorism and by the
proliferation of weapons of mass destruction and their means of delivery.
In particular, the Alliance Heads of State and Government decided to:
• Create a NATO Response Force, which will have its initial operational
capability as soon as possible, and at the latest by October 2004; and its full
operational capability not later than October 2006;
• Streamline NATO’s military command arrangements, making them leaner,
more efficient, effective and deployable, with a view to meeting the
operational requirements for the full range of Alliance missions;
• Approve the Prague Capabilities Commitment as part of the continuing
Alliance effort to improve and develop new military capabilities for modern
warfare in a high threat environment. Capabilities required for the full range of
NATO’s missions, including defence against terrorism, will be enhanced
through this new commitment;
• Endorse a military concept for defence against terrorism. This concept sets out
NATO’s potential military role in leading or supporting operations or

2

S/2003/85

conducting other activities in defence against terrorism. It is a part of a
package of measures that also includes improved intelligence sharing and
crisis response arrangements;
• Reiterate NATO’s commitment, in cooperation with its partners, to fully
implement the Civil Emergency Planning Action Plan for the improvement of
civil preparedness against possible attacks against the civilian population with
chemical, biological or radiological agents;
• Endorse the implementation of five nuclear, biological and chemical weapons
defence initiatives, which will enhance the Alliance’s defence capabilities
against weapons of mass destruction;
• Strengthen our capabilities to defend against cyber attacks;
• Examine options for addressing the increasing missile threat to Alliance
territory, forces and population centres.
With respect to the Euro-Atlantic Partnership Council’s contribution to the
global fight against terrorism, I fully shared Sir Jeremy Greenstock’s assessment,
when he met with the North Atlantic Council on 5 June, that the Euro-Atlantic
Partnership Council could make a substantial contribution to the activities of the
United Nations in the struggle against terrorism. It is therefore with great pleasure
that I bring to your attention the Partnership Action Plan against Terrorism, a copy
of which is enclosed herewith, as an initial contribution of the Partnership to the
implementation of the United Nations Security Council resolution 1373 (2001). The
Action Plan, elaborated by Allies and Partners, was welcomed by the Heads of State
and Government of the Euro-Atlantic Partnership Council at Prague. In the days
ahead, the Council will work on the implementation of the Partnership Action Plan
against Terrorism, and I will keep you updated on our activities in this regard.
At Prague, our Heads of State and Government also welcomed the significant
achievements of the NATO-Russia Council, in which NATO member States and
Russia are working together as equal partners, making progress on a range of issues,
including the struggle against terrorism.
NATO Heads of State and Government further decided to upgrade substantially
the political and practical dimensions of our Mediterranean Dialogue and
encouraged intensified practical cooperation and effective interaction on security
matters of common concern, including terrorism-related issues.
They have also reiterated the Alliance’s commitment to enhancing NATOEuropean Union cooperation, including in the light of events since 11 September
2001.
Let me take this opportunity to point out two other areas relevant to the United
Nations that were addressed at Prague. As you know, NATO member States have
already responded to the call of the United Nations Security Council to assist the
Afghan Government in restoring security in Kabul and its surroundings. In a further
sign of our commitment, NATO has agreed to provide support in selected areas for
Germany and the Netherlands, which will jointly assume the leadership of the
International Security Assistance Force following the United Kingdom of Great
Britain and Northern Ireland and Turkey.

3

S/2003/85

Concerning Iraq, NATO Heads of State and Government stated that the Allies
stand united in their commitment to take effective action to assist and support the
efforts of the United Nations to ensure full and immediate compliance by Iraq,
without conditions or restrictions, with United Nations Security Council resolution
1441 (2002). They recalled that the Security Council, in that resolution, warned Iraq
that it will face serious consequences as a result of its continued violation of its
obligations.
Let me conclude by reiterating my appreciation of the cooperation between the
United Nations and NATO in responding to the threat of terrorism and express my
strong commitment to bring it closer.
I would appreciate if you could bring the present letter, as well as the
Partnership Action Plan on Terrorism (see enclosure) to the attention of the
members of the Security Council.
(Signed) George Robertson

4
