S/PV.8516

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-fourth year

8516th meeting

Thursday, 25 April 2019, 3 p.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Heusgen . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Germany)

Members:

Belgium. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Côte d’Ivoire . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Dominican Republic. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Equatorial Guinea. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Indonesia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kuwait. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Peru. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Poland . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
South Africa . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mrs. Van Vlierberge
Mr. Wu Haitao
Mr. Ipo
Mr. Trullols Yabra
Mr. Ndong Mba
Mr. Delattre
Mr. Syihab
Mr. Albanai
Mr. Ugarelli
Mr. Lewicki
Mr. Nebenzia
Mrs. Tshabalala
Mr. Allen
Mr. Cohen

Agenda
Letter dated 28 February 2014 from the Permanent Representative of Ukraine to
the United Nations addressed to the President of the Security Council (S/2014/136)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

19-12028 (E)
*1912028*

Ukraine

S/PV.8516

The meeting was called to order at 3.05 p.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Letter dated 28 February 2014 from the Permanent
Representative of Ukraine to the United Nations
addressed to the President of the Security Council
(S/2014/136)
The President: In accordance with rule 37 of the
Council’s provisional rules of procedure, I invite the
representative of Ukraine to participate in this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite the following
briefers to participate in this meeting: Ms. Rosemary
DiCarlo, Under-Secretary-General for Political
and Peacebuilding Affairs; Ms. Ursula Mueller,
Assistant Secretary-General for Humanitarian Affairs
and Deputy Emergency Relief Coordinator; His
Excellency Mr. Ertuğrul Apakan, Chief Monitor of the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe
Special Monitoring Mission to Ukraine; and His
Excellency Mr. Martin Sajdik, Special Representative
of the Organization for Security and Cooperation in
Europe Chairperson-in-Office in Ukraine and in the
Trilateral Contact Group.
Mr. Apakan and Mr. Sajdik are joining the meeting
via video-teleconference from Kyiv.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I give the floor to Ms. DiCarlo.
Ms. DiCarlo: On 21 April, millions of Ukrainians
exercised their democratic right to choose their next
President. We commend the Ukrainian people on the
peaceful conduct of the election and take note of the
assessment of the electoral process by the international
and domestic observer groups, including the Office
for Democratic Institutions and Human Rights of the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe
(OSCE). The United Nations, including through its
presence in Ukraine, is committed to continuing to work
with the Ukrainian authorities and the people of Ukraine,
in particular to support the provision of humanitarian
assistance, the promotion and safeguarding of human
rights and the country’s critical reform process.
2/22

25/04/2019

The recent election took place in the shadow of the
ongoing conflict in eastern Ukraine, many of whose
residents were unable to exercise their democratic
rights and continue to face the daily challenges
associated with an active conflict. A lasting and durable
ceasefire remains an urgent priority. In that regard, we
regret the inconclusive discussions on a new ceasefire
recommitment on the occasion of Orthodox Easter
during yesterday’s meeting of the Trilateral Contact
Group in Minsk. We commend the efforts of the OSCE
representatives and join their calls for agreement
without delay on this important issue. We also want to
point out that the implementation of a lasting ceasefire
should be accompanied by the withdrawal of heavy
weapons from populated areas, the disengagement
of forces and the protection of civilians and critical
civilian infrastructure.
Assistant Secretary-General Mueller will brief the
Council in detail on the current humanitarian needs
and the ongoing United Nations efforts on the ground.
As a matter of principle, I want to reiterate that it is
essential that the United Nations humanitarian work not
be politicized or instrumentalized by any party.
Today’s Council meeting is also taking place in the
context of a Russian presidential decree of 24 April that
reportedly makes it possible for the residents of certain
regions of eastern Ukraine to obtain Russian citizenship
under a simplified procedure. According to the decree,
the decision has been made
“with a view to protecting human and citizens’
rights and freedoms, and guided by the
universally recognized principles and norms of
international law”.
It was welcomed by the entities in control in certain
areas of the Donetsk and Luhansk regions of Ukraine.
Reacting to this latest development, the Ukrainian
authorities strongly protested the decree as an
unprecedented interference by the Russian Federation
in the country’s internal affairs and a violation of the
sovereignty, territorial integrity and independence of
Ukraine contrary to the Minsk agreements.
In its resolution 2202 (2015), unanimously adopted
on 17 February 2015, the Security Council endorsed
the package of measures for the implementation of
the Minsk agreements, calling on all parties to fully
implement the measures. In its presidential statement
of 6 June 2018 (S/PRST/2018/12), the Council again
unanimously reaffirmed the centrality of the Minsk
19-12028

25/04/2019

Ukraine

agreements. The United Nations expects that the
spirit and the letter of the Minsk agreements will be
respected by all concerned. To that end, we urge all the
parties to avoid any unilateral steps that may potentially
undermine the implementation of the agreements and to
address concerns through constructive dialogue in the
existing negotiation formats.
Most recently, on 12 February, the Council had
a special meeting focusing on the implementation
of the Minsk agreements and on the ongoing conflict
(see S/PV.8461). As was noted during that meeting,
the United Nations continues to fully support the lead
efforts of the Normandy Four, the Trilateral Contact
Group and the OSCE to reach a peaceful solution to
this five-year conflict.
Since their signing, the Normandy Four and
participants in the Trilateral Contact Group, as well
as the Council, have devoted considerable attention
to promoting the need for full implementation of the
Minsk agreements. Regrettably, progress has stalled.
Following the recent election in Ukraine, those efforts
need to continue with greater resolve and urgency.
We expect all concerned to act in accordance with the
Minsk agreements and once again reiterate the need to
revitalize diplomatic efforts. It remains incumbent on
all parties to demonstrate the necessary political will
and to undertake steps that would decrease the current
tensions and allow the resumption of constructive
dialogue using existing mechanisms and at all levels.
The United Nations underlines its commitment to
the sovereignty, independence and territorial integrity
of Ukraine, within its internationally recognized
borders, in accordance with relevant General Assembly
and Security Council resolutions. Against the
prevailing dangerous trajectory over the past five years,
it is our sincere hope that, at long last, a new positive
dynamic can emerge to enable an end to the conflict and
prevent it from becoming protracted. That is essential
for fostering national cohesion and lasting stability in
Ukraine, and critical to the maintenance of peace and
security in Europe.
The President: I thank Ms. DiCarlo for her briefing.
I now give the floor to Ms. Mueller.
Ms. Mueller: I thank you, Mr. President, for
the opportunity to brief the Security Council on the
humanitarian situation in eastern Ukraine.

S/PV. 8516

Since I briefed the Council two months ago (see
S/PV.8461), the conflict in Ukraine has remained an
active one. The daily impact on civilians on both sides
of the contact line is increasing as coping mechanisms
are being stretched to their limits. After five years of
conflict, which have seen more than 3,300 civilians
killed and up to 9,000 injured, 3.5 million people still
need humanitarian assistance and protection. Half a
million people, many of whom are elderly, women and
children, live within only five kilometres of the contact
line, where shelling, gunfire, landmines and unexploded
ordnance put them in danger. Many of these people live
in settlements that have been isolated by the conflict,
making it difficult to access markets, livelihoods, health
care and schools.
Shelling damages and disrupts critical civilian
infrastructure, even though it serves both sides of the
contact line. Since the beginning of 2019, 24 incidents
have affected water and sanitation facilities and 12
incidents have affected schools. For instance, the first
lift pumping station of the South Donbas waterway,
which supplies water to more than 1.1 million people
on both sides of the contact line, has already been
affected by 16 separate incidents, including shelling,
this year. It must be underscored that attacks against
civilian infrastructure increase the risks communities
face when their access to water, energy and education
services is interrupted.
Since I last briefed the Council, civilian workers
came under small-arms fire while conducting emergency
repairs of impacted power lines in Marinka and water
pipelines damaged in the area between Berehove and
Olenivka. While no casualties were reported as a result
of those incidents, the repair works were suspended
and further delayed as the workers were forced to
evacuate to safe areas. Parties to the conflict must take
all precautions to avoid, and in any event minimize,
civilian harm. International humanitarian law must
be upheld by all parties to protect civilians and their
access to critical services at all times.
In addition, I have previously commended
the Government of Ukraine in the Council on
the adoption of its national strategy on internally
displaced persons (IDPs) — as 1.5 million people are
registered as IDPs — and continue to encourage the
Government to make sufficient funding available for
the implementation of the strategy. The United Nations
will continue to support those important efforts for the
internally displaced.

19-120283/22

Ukraine

S/PV.8516

I have three
consideration today.

messages

for

the

Council’s

The first is that the freedom of movement of people
affected by the crisis must improve. Since April 2014,
over 1,000 civilians have been killed or injured by
mines and explosive remnants of war. Mine-related
incidents were the leading cause of casualties among
children last year. That is unacceptable. I implore all
parties to immediately cease using landmines and to
work with mine-action partners to provide awareness
to civilians and plan for demining.
While overall the crossing conditions have improved
since last year, essential services at checkpoints need
to be further enhanced on both sides of the contact
line and delays in crossing must be reduced. Since my
most recent briefing to the Council on this subject,
12 civilian deaths were reported at the checkpoints
in eastern Ukraine, mainly owing to health issues
complicated by delays, bringing the total number to 22
civilian deaths since the beginning of 2019. I must again
inform the Council, as I did in February, that there has
been no progress on repairing the pedestrian bridge of
Stanytsia Luhanska, which civilians — many disabled
or elderly with limited mobility — must cross to reach
essential services, including health care or access to
their pensions, which for many is their only means of
support. I regret that I have to encourage again the
immediate rebuilding of the bridge and simultaneous
improvement of the conditions at the bridge. Speedy
passage, in particular for those who are suffering from
health issues, must be ensured.
The second message concerns support for
humanitarian access in eastern Ukraine, which
remains unpredictable, particularly in areas beyond
Government control. Humanitarian assistance should
not be politicized. The United Nations and its partners
provide assistance in accordance with the universally
recognized principles of humanity, impartiality,
neutrality and independence. As they seek to reach the
most vulnerable civilians, humanitarian organizations
require unimpeded and sustained access.
The third message is that every effort must be made
to increase humanitarian funding. More resources are
urgently required to meet people’s needs. Through the
2019 humanitarian response plan, which aims to provide
2.3 million people with protection and assistance to
restore their access to livelihoods, essential services
and critical infrastructure, the United Nations and
4/22

25/04/2019

its partners require $162 million. Humanitarian
organizations remain committed to providing relief to
the people of Ukraine, but unfortunately, as of today,
only 9 per cent of the funding they require has been
received. Donors have been generous over the years and
the recently established Ukraine Humanitarian Pooled
Fund is receiving support from donors, but more is
needed. I encourage increased engagement and support
for humanitarian action in Ukraine.
The people of Ukraine continue to suffer the effects
of this conflict. We must redouble our efforts to provide
them with all necessary assistance and protection. I
also call on the parties to find solutions to this crisis in
order to avoid further suffering. The people of Ukraine
deserve nothing less.
The President: I thank Ms. Mueller for her briefing.
I now give the floor to Mr. Apakan.
Mr. Apakan: I thank you, Mr. President, for
this opportunity to brief the Security Council on the
security situation in eastern Ukraine. I will provide
members with an update on the observations of the
Organization for Security and Co-operation in Europe
(OSCE) Special Monitoring Mission to Ukraine
(SMM), in particular with regard to the implementation
of the Minsk agreements and the outcome of the recent
discussions in Minsk.
On 24 April, the sides did not reach any agreement
in Minsk on a recommitment to the ceasefire on the
occasion of the Easter holiday period. Ukraine had
announced a unilateral decision to implement a ceasefire
as of 18 April. I still believe that a mutual agreement
can be reached for that important holiday.
Achieving a sustainable ceasefire is a critical first
step to addressing the broader security situation on the
ground. Since the last recommitment to the ceasefire
on International Women’s Day, which was one of the
shortest to date, the Mission has recorded more than
50,000 ceasefire violations, including about 15,000
explosions. Ceasefire violations were concentrated
in four areas, namely, areas east and north-east of
Mariupol, the Popasna-Pervomaisk-Zolote area, the
Avdiivka-Yasynuvata-Donetsk airport area and the areas
south and south-east of Svitlodarsk. Since 8 March, the
SMM has recorded 238 instances of the use of weapons
that should have been withdrawn in accordance with
the Minsk agreements.
19-12028

25/04/2019

Ukraine

The discussion on the security provisions of the
Minsk agreements did not yield substantial progress.
Although some recommitments to the ceasefire were
mutually agreed, they were short-lived, as I mentioned.
Additional measures to strengthen the ceasefire are
needed. Some concrete steps on humanitarian mine
action, in particular around schools and kindergartens,
have been taken in recent months. While such steps
are encouraging, progress in other areas has remained
limited since I last briefed the Council in February (see
S/PV. 8461).
No remedial action has been taken to address the
worsening security situation in the disengagement
areas. Particularly in the disengagement area of Zolote,
civilians living in nearby villages have continued to be
affected by the gradual re-engagement of forces and
hardware. We have reported on casualties and damage
to civilian infrastructure there, and I have called on the
participants in the Working Group on Security Issues
to enable the SMM to have full access to the area.
They are encouraging the sides to implement a phased
withdrawal of heavy weapons from the populated areas.
On Monday, I returned from a visit to Luhansk,
where I joined a commemorative event marking the
anniversary of the tragic incident in which our colleague
Joseph Stone lost his life. On 23 April 2017, an SMM
patrol hit what appeared to be an anti-tank mine on an
unpaved road.
Mine-related incidents have continued to claim
the lives of civilians. This year alone, the Mission has
recorded 15 civilian casualties due to mines, unexploded
ordinance and improvised explosive devices, four of
whom were killed and 11 injured. As I travelled in the
Luhansk region, I saw people preparing for the Easter
celebrations and visiting cemeteries. Those sites,
located close to the contact line, need to be safe. We
are calling on the sides to ensure that, as a matter of
urgency, the sites are demined in the coming days.
The SMM remains a comprehensive security
instrument. Its presence in the field is reassuring for
those caught in the conflict. Through its monitoring,
verification and reporting, the Mission contributes
to the stabilization of the situation and facilitates the
implementation of the Minsk agreements. The protection
of civilians continues to be an issue. Much needs to be
urgently done to improve the conditions of those living
close to the conflict-affected areas. That is especially
important with regard to vital civilian infrastructure.

S/PV. 8516

Incidents close to civilian infrastructure sites,
including the Donetsk filtration station and the pumping
station in Vasylivka, occur with increasing frequency.
For six days, beginning on 12 April, tens of thousands
of civilians on both sides of the line of contact in the
Donetsk region were left with limited access to water due
to the damage to the pumping station’s water pipelines.
As I have mentioned in the past, sustainable solutions
to ensure the protection of civilian infrastructure
include the full withdrawal of heavy weapons from
those areas as well as from populated areas. The SMMfacilitated local ceasefires used for the repair of civilian
infrastructure must also be respected.
In the past, I described the hardship faced by
civilians. Their situation has unfortunately not
improved. The existing entry-exit checkpoints are
insufficient to support the large volume of people
moving across the contact line on a daily basis.
I have described the struggle of men, women,
children and in particular the elderly, having to move
across precarious wooden ramps connecting the
broken bridge at Stanytsia Luhanska. That remains
the only entry-exit checkpoint in the entire Luhansk
region. As members may recall, in February, the OSCE
Chairman-in-Office, Slovak Foreign Minister Lajčák,
visited the bridge and the area and highlighted the urgent
priority of repairing it. A solution to that pressing issue
needs to be found.
The Mission continues to face a challenging
security environment. Targeting of SMM unmanned
aerial vehicles and signal interference take place with
worrying frequency. The situation regarding access and
freedom of movement for the SMM has not improved.
On the contrary, impediments remain, in particular
in areas outside Government control in the southern
Donetsk region and in areas close to the border. All those
impediments are steadily eroding the Mission’s ability
to fulfil its mandated tasks. It is the responsibility of the
sides to ensure effective monitoring and verification by
the OSCE.
I wish to thank the Security Council once again
for the opportunity to share the observations of the
OSCE SMM. I also wish to express my gratitude for the
close cooperation with the United Nations agencies in
Ukraine, both in Kyiv and in the field. I am also grateful
to Ambassador Sajdik for his support to the SMM. I
would like to acknowledge the work of my colleagues,

19-120285/22

S/PV.8516

Ukraine

SMM members and the dedicated men and women with
whom I have the honour to work.
Before closing, I would like to underline that
civilians deserve the chance to celebrate the current
Easter period in peace. Weapons can be silenced if
there is the will.
The President: I thank Mr. Apakan for his briefing.
As Mr. Apakan will soon complete his term, on
behalf of the Security Council, I would like to thank
him for all the work he has accomplished. I should
also like to ask him to convey to everyone from the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe
Special Monitoring Mission to Ukraine the Council’s
appreciation for their work.
I now give the floor to Mr. Sajdik.
Mr. Sajdik: I am truly honoured to brief the Security
Council today once again following my intervention
on 12 February (S/PV.8461), in which I spoke about
the functions of the Trilateral Contact Group and its
working groups, the role of the Normandy Four and
its oversight mechanism, enshrined in resolution 2202
(2015) of 17 February 2015.
At the previous meeting on this subject, I spoke one
day before our regular negotiating rounds in Minsk.
Today, it is one day afterwards. Yesterday in Minsk,
I had the opportunity to stress that, according to the
international election observation mission led by the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe
(OSCE), the presidential election in Ukraine had been
conducted in a way that allowed competition and
respected fundamental freedoms. Perhaps, this fact is
a bigger victory for the people of Ukraine than for the
winner of the electoral race, President-elect Volodymyr
Zelensky. In that process, however, the voters, inter alia,
clearly signalled their expectation of a lasting peace in
the eastern part of the country.
The past years have seen a growing and deepening
divide between certain areas of the Donetsk and Luhansk
regions — that is to say, the territories that are not
under the control of the Ukrainian Government — and
the rest of Ukraine. It is a divide that has also been
fuelled by rhetoric from certain areas in the past
months, advocating their further integration with
Russia — rhetoric that has been void of any initiative as
to how to reintegrate with the Government-controlled
part of Ukraine. It is a divide that is symbolized by
the use of a different currency in certain areas and
6/22

25/04/2019

by the fact that there are only five entry and exit
points through which a constantly growing number of
people — currently some 37,000 — cross the contact
line daily, taking often six hours or more to finally get
to the other side. This is a real humanitarian issue.
In my 12 February briefing, I urged that the
conditions of the existing crossings and opening new
entry-exit checkpoints be improved, but nothing has
happened so far. As Assistant Secretary-General Ursula
Mueller just outlined, the conditions at the crossing
point of Stanytsia Luhanska, the only exit point in the
Luhansk region, which is a pedestrian bridge, are as
bad as ever. The sides have been unable to agree on
the technical aspects for erecting an auxiliary bridge
to substantially improve the conditions of getting
across. The main point of contention is the width of
the auxiliary bridge. In their demands, the sides are
literally 80 centimetres apart, but neither is willing to
make concessions. As a result, elderly people aged 80
years or older who have to travel to the Governmentcontrolled part of the region to collect their small
pensions still have to venture down slippery wooden
ramps, with injuries being a common feature.
With the sides drifting further and further apart,
the efforts of the coordinators of the security, economic
and humanitarian working groups — with Ambassador
Apakan coordinating the security working group with
extraordinary ability and patience — have mostly
focused on mitigating the effects of the deepening
divide on the populations on both sides of the contact
line. By concentrating on the protection of civilians, the
number of civilian victims decreased last year by more
than half in comparison to 2017, and that is fortunately
a continuing trend. The number of casualties from
gunfire or shelling has dropped significantly, but mines
and unexploded ordnance are ubiquitous dangers near
the contact line. More and more mines, particularly
anti-tank mines, continue to be laid. The region is now
one of the most landmine-contaminated areas in the
world. Therefore, demining and an end to remining are
essential for the population.
I wish to welcome the decision of the Ukrainian
Parliament this morning to amend the financing
provisions of the law on demining, which paves the
way for active donor engagement in that literally vital
activity. Together with Ambassador Apakan, I have
many times called on the sides to urgently carry out
humanitarian demining around such areas as schools,
hospitals and crossing points. Ceasefires brokered
19-12028

25/04/2019

Ukraine

by Ambassador Apakan have tremendously helped
to reduce shelling and civilian as well as military
casualties. I therefore regret to state that we have not
been able to broker a special ceasefire on the occasion
of the Easter festivities this year. The sides wanted it
but could not agree on a text. It is therefore our hope
that the upcoming Orthodox Easter weekend, followed
by the May holidays, will still be peaceful.
In the economic sphere, we have managed, for
example, to more or less ensure regular water deliveries
to the population, especially in certain areas of the
Luhansk region, and improved mobile telephone
communications across the contact line. But it is not
enough to mitigate the effects of the divide; we have to
undertake every effort to narrow and even eradicate it.
Statements by the future leadership of Ukraine make
me optimistic that there is resolve to actively work
against that divide.
Yesterday’s ukase will most likely not be helpful in
that regard. What is really urgently needed is to stop the
growing economic disconnectivity across the contact
line and reverse the disruptive measures that triggered
the brutal interruption of economic links in March 2017.
I am referring to the blockade and economic ban on
the one side and the so-called external administration,
which is nothing other than the expropriation of
companies under Ukrainian jurisdiction on the side of
certain areas. That should also include the resumption
of railway transportation services for passengers. Ways
can be found to finally pay the pensions of all those
eligible in non-Government controlled areas, starting,
for instance, with true hardship cases. Scenarios based
on pragmatic solutions also exist thanks to the creative
proposals of the International Committee of the Red
Cross. Narrowing the divide is also necessary in the
political area, especially with regard to the special
status of certain areas.
The ultimate goal of our efforts has to be the full
implementation of the Minsk agreements, to which, as I
stated in my 12 February briefing, there is no alternative.
It is in that vein that I welcome the recent remarks of the
Secretary General of the OSCE, Ambassador Thomas
Greminger, on the idea of a joint United Nations-OSCE
mission in eastern Ukraine. I firmly believe that close
international cooperation of that kind would be key to
the resolution of the conflict in eastern Ukraine.
The President: I thank Mr. Sajdik for his briefing. I
think that for him the same holds true as for Mr. Apakan.

S/PV. 8516

This might be one his last briefings, if not the his last
one, to the Security Council. I also thank him for the
work that he has done. I do not know which has been
more difficult — heading a committee at the United
Nations, as he had previously done, or his present job.
I now give the floor to those Council members who
wish to make statements.
Mr. Delattre (France) (spoke in French): I warmly
thank Ms. DiCarlo, Ms. Mueller, Mr. Apakan and
Mr. Sajdik for their informative briefings on the tragic
situation facing Ukraine. Allow me to express our
heartfelt gratitude to Mr. Apakan and Mr. Sajdik for
their excellent work.
France condemns in the strongest terms Russia’s
decision to facilitate the granting of Russian nationality
to Ukrainian citizens residing in certain areas of the
Ukrainian oblasts of Donetsk and Luhansk. In so doing,
Russia is deliberately undermining the spirit of the
Minsk agreements.
That provocative decision comes on the heels of the
election of a new President in Ukraine, who made the
policy of reaching out to the people of eastern Ukraine
one of the central aspects of his election campaign.
Five years after the beginning of the destabilization of
Donbas, Russia, on the other hand, is showing its lack
of political will to contribute to the implementation of
the Minsk agreements, as well as its disregard for the
commitments to which it has subscribed. The decision
to facilitate the granting of Russian passports to
Ukrainian citizens is a flagrant violation of Ukraine’s
sovereignty, as was the holding of pseudo-elections in
territories under separatist control last 11 November. In
that regard, I would like to emphasize three points.
First, the alleged humanitarian grounds presented
by the Russian side are baseless. While several million
people in Ukraine today are in need of humanitarian
assistance, the de facto separatist authorities continue
to obstruct humanitarian access to the territories under
their control, thereby further aggravating the situation
of the most vulnerable people. Concrete actions must
now contribute to improving the humanitarian situation.
I refer in particular to the renovation of the Stanytsia
Luhansk bridge and the opening of new crossing points
on both sides of the line of contact to facilitate the
movement of hundreds of thousands of people. A new
prisoner exchange must also be prioritized, with the last
conflict-related prisoner exchange dating back to 2017.

19-120287/22

S/PV.8516

Ukraine

25/04/2019

Secondly, it is also urgent to sustainably improve the
security situation. The ceasefire is still not being upheld
by the parties, nor is the withdrawal of heavy weapons.
Mines continue to claim casualties indiscriminately on
both sides of the line of contact. Russia has an undeniable
responsibility, given its considerable influence over the
separatists, which it continues to support financially
and militarily.

commitments to which it has subscribed, with a view
to adopting a positive outlook on settling the conflict.

The Minsk agreements provide for the monitoring of
the situation and the implementation of the agreements
by the Organization for Security and Cooperation in
Europe, whose Special Monitoring Mission must enjoy
free and unhindered access to the entire conflict zone,
as provided for by its mandate. We strongly condemn
the impediments to its movement and the attacks on
the security of its personnel and equipment that are
observed on a daily basis on the ground, particularly in
the separatist zone.

Donbas is in Ukraine and the people there are
Ukrainian, regardless of the language they prefer to
speak. Conferring citizenship en masse to the citizens
of another State undermines and violates the principle
of sovereignty. Russia’s actions subvert the principles
on which the Minsk agreements are based — that
Donbas is an integral part of Ukraine and the Ukrainian
Government must re-establish its control over
that territory.

Lastly, the solution to the crisis is not to give
Russian passports to Ukrainian citizens; it is to respect
the commitments undertaken in the Minsk agreements
to end the conflict. The latest alarming developments
are giving rise to uncertainty, even as the new Ukrainian
President-elect Volodymyr Zelensky has shown his
determination to relaunch the implementation of the
Minsk agreements and engage in closer relations with
the populations residing in areas currently outside the
control of the Ukrainian Government.
In addition to the Donbas issue, we have not
forgotten the Autonomous Republic of Crimea and the
city of Sevastopol. Five years after the illegal annexation
of that Ukrainian peninsula, we are witnessing a steady
deterioration in the human rights situation, particularly
with regard to the Crimean Tatar community. We are
also facing a deteriorated security situation in the Sea
of Azov and the Black Sea, following the serious naval
incident of November 2018. The 24 Ukrainian sailors
detained since 25 November have still not been released,
despite our repeated calls for their unconditional
release, which I reiterate today.
In conclusion, I reaffirm France’s commitment to
the territorial integrity, independence and sovereignty
of Ukraine, as well as our readiness to pursue our
efforts, together with Germany, to resolve the conflict
in the context of negotiations in the Normandy format.
While the coming months offer us an unprecedented
opportunity to relaunch the negotiation process, Russia
must now make a gesture of goodwill to honour the
8/22

Mr. Cohen (United States of America): The
United States, too, condemns Russia’s decision to grant
expedited Russian citizenship to Ukrainians living
in Russia-controlled Donbas. Through that highly
provocative action, Russia is clearly intensifying its
assault on Ukraine’s sovereignty and territorial integrity.

Russia signed the Minsk agreements in 2014 and
2015, and President Poroshenko and President-elect
Zelensky have reaffirmed that those agreements are the
best vehicle for ending the conflict in eastern Ukraine.
It is unacceptable that Russia would take steps to
stymie the peace process just four days after Ukraine’s
presidential elections. We welcome President-elect
Zelensky’s expressed commitment to implementing the
Minsk agreements and redoubling efforts to support
Ukrainian citizens living in territories controlled
by Russia.
If Russia were truly interested in the well-being of
the Russian-speaking citizens of Ukraine, it would seize
this moment to chart a new course in Russian-Ukrainian
relations and seek to work with President Poroshenko and
his successor to promote peace. Instead, Russia further
fuels a conflict that has already claimed over 13,000
lives. Despite that deeply disturbing development, we
stand ready to support the efforts of Ukraine to restore
Ukrainian Government control over all territory
within its internationally recognized borders. United
States Special Representative Kurt Volker is prepared
to engage intensively with Ukraine, Russia and our
partners here at the United Nations to de-escalate the
conflict and advance the implementation of the Minsk
agreements, including through an international security
force that would facilitate their implementation.
Once again, we affirm that our Donbas-related
sanctions will remain in place until Russia withdraws
its forces from eastern Ukraine and implements the
Minsk agreements. Our Crimea-related sanctions will
19-12028

25/04/2019

Ukraine

remain in place until Russia returns control of the
peninsula to Ukraine.
Mr. Trullols Yabra (Dominican Republic) (spoke in
Spanish): At the outset, let me thank you, Mr. President,
for having convened this meeting, and we take this
opportunity to express our gratitude to all the briefers
for the important remarks that they delivered.
The Dominican Republic will always echo the
concerns of States when international peace and
security are jeopardized. In that regard, we understand
that the concerns expressed and the potential impact of
the latest developments on the peace process contravene
the commitments undertaken by the parties in the
Minsk agreements. The Security Council has assumed
that the Minsk agreements are the genuine expression
of the will of all those involved, including the Council,
which endorsed them in resolution 2202 (2015)
and strengthened them with presidential statement
S/PRST/2018/12, of 6 June 2018.
The parties must reaffirm their commitment to
multilateralism and the peaceful settlement of disputes.
In that regard, we call on the parties to refrain from any
unilateral action that could hinder the process and the
efforts being made to achieve peacebuilding in eastern
Ukraine. Only in that way will it be possible to restore
the conditions that will lay the foundation for ensuring
the country’s stability and sustainable development.
Just a few days ago, Ukraine concluded its elections,
in which the popular vote chose a single winner. In that
context, we strongly welcome the timely statements
made by the President-elect that he will revive the
Minsk agreements and work towards the achievement
of the long-awaited peace. In that light, we reiterate
our rejection of any hostile act that might undermine
the aspirations of the parties to end the conflict. Those
are the very wishes of the Ukrainian people and the
international community, which vehemently desire a
return to normalcy in eastern Ukraine and the region.
The Dominican Republic takes this opportunity
to commend the solidarity of and efforts that the
United Nations continues to make, together with the
international community, to mitigate the difficulties
that the civilian population has endured since this
situation began. Furthermore, we highlight the high
level of commitment of the international community
to building a sustainable peace in Ukraine. We call for
continued support for all actions that would facilitate
a return of peace and restore hope to a nation that,

S/PV. 8516

through free elections, has placed its trust in youth,
unity and a more promising future and, as a result, will
bring an end to the confrontations that have caused so
much harm to the country and its people.
In conclusion, our delegation asks that the dialogue
between the parties in the current Normandy format
and the Trilateral Contact Group be maintained. At
the same time, we express our firm commitment to the
defence of the independence, territorial integrity and
sovereignty of Ukraine, in absolute adherence to the
spirit of the Charter of the United Nations.
Mrs. Tshabalala (South Africa): We note that
today’s discussion is taking place as requested by
Ukraine in its letter dated 24 April 2019.
At the outset we wish to thank the briefers for their
briefings on the current situation in eastern Ukraine.
It is clear from the briefings and recent
developments that there remains an urgent need for the
immediate cessation of hostilities in eastern Ukraine.
The ongoing tensions and conflict will continue to
exacerbate the humanitarian conditions on the ground.
In that regard, it is important that the parties ensure
that there is an urgent de-escalation of tensions to allow
for a situation that is conducive to the alleviation of the
humanitarian crisis.
In order to make meaningful progress, it remains
necessary that all the parties fully implement all
of their respective commitments under the Minsk
agreements. At this point, the Minsk agreements,
including the package of measures agreed under the
Minsk II agreements, provide the most promising road
map for the peaceful settlement of the hostilities in
eastern Ukraine.
South Africa notes the recent tensions between
the parties. It is of critical importance that the parties
refrain from actions that could escalate tensions
and further destabilize the situation on the ground.
Furthermore, the Organization for Security and
Cooperation in Europe’s Special Monitoring Mission
to Ukraine has played a critical role in the region. It
therefore remains important that the Mission continue
its work with unhindered access to monitor and verify
compliance with the Minsk agreements in line with
its mandate. South Africa encourages all the parties
to strengthen all diplomatic efforts to produce an
inclusive, sustainable and peaceful solution based on
cooperation and dialogue.

19-120289/22

S/PV.8516

Ukraine

Mrs. Van Vlierberge (Belgium) (spoke in French):
First of all, allow me to warmly thank the speakers
for their informative briefings and to warmly thank
Mr. Apakan and Mr. Sajdik for their work of recent years.
On 24 April, the Russian President signed a decree
to facilitate the granting of Russian citizenship to
residents of certain areas of the Ukrainian oblasts of
Luhansk and Donetsk. We condemn that unilateral
measure, which not only is contrary to the spirit of the
Minsk agreements but may also exacerbate tensions
between the parties. We recall Belgium’s view that
the Minsk agreements remain the only way to reach
a lasting political solution to this conflict. Therefore,
we expect all parties to refrain from unilateral action,
implement the agreements swiftly and fully, and honour
their commitments.
Belgium supports the efforts of the Trilateral
Contact Group, the Organization for Security and
Cooperation in Europe and the Normandy format. We
call for the ceasefire to be respected and on Russia to
immediately stop fuelling the conflict by providing
financial and military support to armed groups and
to instead use its influence to encourage these groups
to fully comply with their commitments under the
Minsk agreements. We strongly encourage the parties
to the conflict to respect the mandate of the Special
Monitoring Mission to Ukraine and to allow it safe and
unhindered access to all Ukrainian territory, including
along the Ukrainian-Russian border and in Crimea.
I reaffirm our unwavering commitment to the
sovereignty and territorial integrity of Ukraine within its
internationally recognized borders. We do not recognize
the illegal annexation of Crimea by Russia, which we
consider to be contrary to international law. We call on
the parties to overcome the differences between them
and to fully engage in the resumption of the dialogue
necessary to achieve a just and lasting peace.
We continue to face many humanitarian challenges.
The civilian population on both sides of the line of
contact suffers from the presence of heavy weapons and
mines, which are contrary to the Minsk agreements. We
call for a complete withdrawal of those weapons and
the disengagement of troops from designated areas.
We urge all parties to allow full access, in accordance
with humanitarian principles. We are deeply concerned
about the targeting of crucial civilian infrastructure,
which is contrary to international humanitarian law.
Three and a half million people — as Ms. Mueller
10/22

25/04/2019

further confirmed — need help and protection due to the
widespread presence of mines, increasing psychological
trauma and lack of access to basic services.
The human rights situation in eastern Ukraine
also continues to attract our attention. In that regard,
we support the work of the Human Rights Monitoring
Mission of the Office of the High Commissioner for
Human Rights and call on the parties to allow safe
and unhindered access for international observers, in
particular the Commissioner for Human Rights of the
Council of Europe.
I should like to conclude by referring to the recent
presidential elections held in Ukraine. The elections
were a successful test of Ukrainian democracy, five
years after the Maidan revolution. The elections, which
were well organized and effective, went smoothly and
transparently. Fundamental freedoms were widely
respected. We congratulate the Ukrainian people
on their demonstration of democratic maturity and
encourage them to continue the process of reform
and the implementation of the European Union
Association Agreement.
Mr. Ndong Mba (Equatorial Guinea) (spoke in
Spanish): First, I want to thank all of today’s briefers for
elucidating the current situation in Ukraine, especially
eastern Ukraine.
The situation in eastern Ukraine remains of great
concern to the international community in general and
to the Republic of Equatorial Guinea in particular. The
parties involved in the conflict have various means at
their disposal that could help to facilitate the path towards
a peaceful solution to the crisis. Mechanisms such as
the Normandy format, the Trilateral Contact Group and
the package of measures for the implementation of the
Minsk agreements, signed four years ago and endorsed
in resolution 2202 (2015), demonstrate the efforts
and commitment of the international community to
supporting the parties in their search for a sustainable
solution to the crisis in eastern Ukraine.
We regretfully note that the process of mediating
the crisis in Ukraine is currently stalled. We are
therefore of the view that the complete readiness of
the parties and their determined political will are the
missing components that are key to ending this conflict.
We congratulate Ukraine on the outcome of its
recent elections and hope they will help to galvanize
the negotiations in a transformational and positive way.
19-12028

25/04/2019

Ukraine

In that regard, we appeal to the parties to show greater
political will and to do everything necessary to reduce
tensions and achieve a comprehensive and peaceful
solution to the crisis.
We continue to witness with deep concern the
negative impact that the violence and instability of this
protracted conflict continues to have on the population,
as well as its detrimental effect on the lives of some
5.2 million people, 3.5 million of whom require urgent
humanitarian assistance and protection. Humanitarian
conditions on the ground continue to worsen. In 2018,
landmines and explosives accounted for more than 40
percent of civilian casualties. In that regard, access for
humanitarian personnel to the affected areas is crucial
to alleviating people’s suffering and improving their
living conditions. It is in that context of humanitarian
assistance that we should commend the Office for
the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs for the aid
it is providing and the humanitarian actors on the
ground for their commitment. We urge the parties to
ensure the protection and safeguard the security of
all those affected by the crisis, with special attention
to the most vulnerable, including women, children,
the elderly and people with disabilities, and to ensure
the protection of infrastructure for the delivery of
humanitarian assistance.
We would like to take this opportunity to thank
the delegation of the Organization for Security and
Cooperation in Europe for its work on the ground and
its efforts to facilitate dialogue and maintain stability
in the region. We hope that their efforts, together with
the political will of the parties, can help to put an end
to this crisis.
In conclusion, we reiterate that the only possible
solution to the crisis in the region is a peaceful
one achieved through direct, frank and inclusive
negotiations, which should focus on reaching a final
and just solution that will help strengthen harmonious
relations and foster stability in Ukraine and the region.
Mr. Albanai (Kuwait) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, I would like to thank Ms. Rosemary DiCarlo,
Ms. Ursula Mueller and Ambassadors Apakan and
Sajdik for their valuable briefings on the situation in
eastern Ukraine.
We have been following the continued instability
in eastern Ukraine, now in its fifth year, with concern.
The situation there has had significant humanitarian
and economic consequences that affect residents’

S/PV. 8516

daily lives and have damaged its infrastructure. As
Ms. Mueller said, more than 3.5 million of 5.2 million
people are in need of urgent humanitarian assistance,
along with more than 1.5 million who are internally
displaced. We therefore urge both parties to refrain
from any provocative action that could exacerbate the
ongoing conflict or prevent progress being made in
implementing the Minsk agreements, which represent
the only agreed framework for a regional settlement
of the conflict. Demonstrating the necessary political
will to recommit fully to the Minsk agreements is still
the only way that regional security and stability can
be maintained.
We renew our commitment to Ukraine’s
unity, sovereignty and territorial integrity within
its internationally recognized borders, and to
non-interference in its internal affairs. We hope that
all the relevant parties will fully implement resolution
2202 (2015), the Minsk agreements and presidential
statement S/PRST/2018/12, of 6 June 2018. We also
hope that they will seek a comprehensive and balanced
solution to the issue through dialogue, in line with
article 33 of the Charter of the United Nations and in
accordance with the Normandy format and the Trilateral
Contact Group, with a view to making immediate
progress in every area. In that regard, we commend
the Special Monitoring Mission of the Organization for
Security and Cooperation in Europe and its efforts on
the ground, especially in facilitating dialogue among
all the parties to the conflict.
Mr. Lewicki (Poland): At the outset, I would like
to thank all the briefers for their valuable contributions
to today’s discussion. It is very much appreciated,
especially given the very short notice for the meeting.
Poland strongly condemns Russia’s decision to
provide expedited Russian citizenship to the Ukrainian
citizens living in Russian-controlled areas of the Donetsk
and Luhansk regions of Ukraine. We should underline
that with this step Russia is trying to escalate tensions
in Ukraine only days after the presidential elections. In
that regard, we welcome the consolidated response from
Ukraine’s political forces. This is a highly provocative
element of the Russian Federation’s ongoing aggressive
campaign to undermine Ukraine’s sovereignty and
territorial integrity. Russia is continuing its policy
of flagrant disregard for fundamental principles of
international law with respect to Ukraine, including
by violating the prohibition on interfering in matters
within the domestic jurisdiction of another State.

19-1202811/22

S/PV.8516

Ukraine

It should also be emphasized that international law
does not permit the widespread naturalization by a State
of nationals of another State residing in the latter State’s
territory. This is a clearly illegal act of coercion against
Ukraine and should be viewed as yet another measure
designed to escalate the Ukrainian-Russian conflict.
Furthermore, as several previous speakers mentioned,
it undermines the peace process and in particular the
Minsk agreements of 2014 and 2015, which define the
modalities for a permanent ceasefire and provide for
the reintegration of the temporarily occupied territories
back into Ukraine. It follows other hostile steps by
Russia towards Ukraine, including illegal elections in
non-Government-controlled areas of Ukraine in 2018,
an issue that the Security Council met to discuss last
year (see S/PV.8386); an attack on Ukrainian ships in
the Kerch Strait, as other delegations also mentioned;
the introduction of a rouble zone; and the official
recognition of documents issued by illegal military
bodies in certain parts of Donbas.
We would like to emphasize that it is not the
first time Russia has applied such illegal practices to
countries in the region. So-called passportization
is a well-known component of Russia’s strategy of
creeping annexation of Georgia’s breakaway regions
of Abkhazia and South Ossetia. Russia’s continued
fuelling of tensions in Donbas continues to be a
direct challenge to international security, with grave
implications for the international legal order that
protects the territorial integrity and sovereignty of all
States, two of the principles enshrined in the Charter of
the United Nations.
In conclusion, the international community should
therefore not accept or recognize such a flood of
disregard for the fundamental principles of international
law and should respond to Russia’s unacceptable and
illegal behaviour accordingly.
Mr. Ipo (Côte d’Ivoire) (spoke in French): My
delegation commends Ms. DiCarlo, Under-SecretaryGeneral for Political and Peacebuilding Affairs, for her
informative briefing on the current situation in eastern
Ukraine. We also thank Assistant Secretary-General
Mueller and Ambassadors Apakan and Sajdik for their
enlightening briefings.
My delegation notes with regret that differences
in interpretation are jeopardizing the implementation
of the Minsk agreements, in the Normandy format,
signed on 12 February 2015. The situation on the
12/22

25/04/2019

ground remains marked by ongoing violations of
the ceasefire and restrictions on the movement of the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe
(OSCE) Special Monitoring Mission to Ukraine. In
addition, the continuing climate of mistrust between
the Ukrainian parties is clearly a major obstacle that
could undermine the international community’s
efforts to restore peace to the Donbas region.
Côte d’Ivoire calls on all parties to exercise restraint
and urges them to fully implement the Minsk
agreements in order to save many human lives and
prevent the destruction of civilian infrastructure
essential to the provision of basic social services to
those in need. In that regard, my country reiterates
its support for the efforts of the OSCE Special
Monitoring Mission and calls on it to fully participate
in efforts to restore peace and stability in the region.
Côte d’Ivoire reaffirms its support for all actions and
efforts to find a negotiated political solution to the crisis
in Ukraine. To that end, it urges all stakeholders to
strictly respect their commitments in order to maintain
the current ceasefire, in accordance with resolution
2202 (2015).
Finally, my delegation welcomes the successful
election of His Excellency Mr. Volodymyr Zelensky
as President of Ukraine and hopes that it helps to
give new momentum to the peace process and to
regional cooperation.
Mr. Ugarelli (Peru) (spoke in Spanish): We
welcome the convening of this meeting at the request
of the delegation of Ukraine and are grateful for the
informative briefings, which provide the Council
with a complete picture of the current situation in the
Ukrainian regions of Donetsk and Luhansk. We also
welcome the presence of the Permanent Representative
of Ukraine and, through him, congratulate President
Volodymyr Zelensky on his recent election.
We express our concern about the recent Russian
decree allowing for the expeditious granting of Russian
nationality to residents of certain areas of the Donetsk
and Luhansk regions, bearing in mind that they are
occupied by separatist groups.
Furthermore, we note the recent adoption by the
Ukrainian Parliament of a law to strengthen the use of
the Ukrainian language, which could affect the rights
of linguistic minorities in the country, such as the ones
in those regions.
19-12028

25/04/2019

Ukraine

For Peru, the Minsk agreements continue to be the
legal basis for reaching a political solution to end the
conflict in eastern Ukraine. In that respect, we reiterate
our support for the package of measures for their full
implementation, which the Council endorsed more than
four years ago.
In that regard, we call on all the parties and
stakeholders concerned to fully implement the
commitments of the agreements, while refraining from
measures that impede their implementation, exacerbate
tensions and prevent resumption of the necessary
dialogue. In that connection, we welcome the continued
efforts being made under the Normandy format and the
Trilateral Contact Group to facilitate dialogue between
the parties in line with the principle of the peaceful
settlement of disputes.
Similarly, we acknowledge the role of the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe
Special Monitoring Mission, which between January
and March alone reported more than 83,000 ceasefire
violations. We reiterate the need for the parties to honour
their commitments and comply with that provision, as
well as the removal of heavy artillery and mines, which
are often in populated areas.
The civilian population, particularly women,
children, the elderly and those living on either side of
the line of contact, continue to be the main victims of
the conflict. In only five years, the conflict has claimed
the lives of more than 3,300 civilians and injured
more than 9,000 people and has destroyed critical
civilian infrastructure.
As noted by the Office for the Coordination of
Humanitarian Affairs, more than 5.2 million people
are affected by the conflict and more than 3.5 million
require humanitarian assistance, in addition to more
than 1.6 million internally displaced persons.
I conclude by reiterating our commitment to the
independence, territorial integrity and sovereignty
of Ukraine, including its Government’s control of the
conflict area, in line with the Charter of the United
Nations and the Minsk agreements.
Mr. Wu Haitao (China) (spoke in Chinese): China
thanks Under-Secretary-General DiCarlo, Assistant
Secretary-General Mueller, the Chief Monitor of the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe
(OSCE) Special Monitoring Mission to Ukraine,
Ambassador Apakan, and the Special Representative

S/PV. 8516

of the OSCE Chairperson-in-Office in Ukraine and in
the Trilateral Contact Group, Ambassador Sajdik, for
their briefings.
China always adopts an objective and impartial
position on the issue of Ukraine. We respect the
sovereignty and territorial integrity of all countries,
including Ukraine, and oppose interference in that
country’s internal affairs by any foreign forces. China
is of the view that the signing of the new Minsk
agreements and its endorsement by the Security
Council in February 2015 have played a crucial role
in the political mediation of the Ukrainian crisis.
Over the past four years, all parties have held the
agreement in high regard. However, regrettably, many
provisions of the agreement are yet to be fully and
effectively implemented.
The political mediation process of the Ukrainian
crisis has stalled. There are still difficulties in effectively
ensuring the safety of people’s lives and property in
the conflict area. We call on the relevant parties to
effectively implement the new Minsk agreements,
remain committed to a political settlement, overcome
the current problems through dialogue and consultation
and seek a comprehensive solution to the crisis with
a view to achieving peace, stability and development
in Ukraine, harmony among its ethnic groups and
peaceful coexistence between Ukraine and countries in
the region.
Mr. Syihab (Indonesia): I wish to thank all of our
briefers and welcome my colleague the Permanent
Representative of Ukraine. On this occasion, I would
like to congratulate the Government and the people
of Ukraine on the successful holding of a peaceful
and competitive presidential election, which reflects
Ukraine’s vibrant democracy.
Turning to the topic at hand, Indonesia is worried
about the developments in eastern Ukraine. It is very
clear from the briefing we have just heard that there is
not yet a positive development in eastern Ukraine.
On many occasions Indonesia has stated its
principled position on respecting the sovereignty and
territorial integrity of Ukraine. On this occasion I will
withhold from repeating it. I would like to highlight
three pertinent points.
First, based on the briefings, there remains an urgent
need for all parties to refrain from actions that could
be perceived as provocative. In the current situation, it

19-1202813/22

S/PV.8516

Ukraine

is essential that all the parties concerned exercise the
greatest possible restraint in order to prevent it from
escalating. We are also against any action that might
exacerbate hostilities and cause an already fragile
situation on the ground to deteriorate further. For those
reasons, Indonesia calls on all the parties to exercise
the utmost restraint, manage the crisis responsibly,
promote a peaceful settlement and consistently uphold
and respect international law.
Secondly, Indonesia has consistently maintained
that all the parties concerned must fully implement
resolution 2202 (2015). They must cease all hostilities,
fully implement the Minsk agreements and stay
committed to seeking a comprehensive, lasting solution
to the Ukraine issue. We share the view that UnderSecretary-General DiCarlo expressed in her briefing,
emphasizing that the Minsk agreements constitute the
legal basis for achieving a political solution to end the
conflict in the eastern Ukraine pursuant to the relevant
Security Council resolutions, as well as presidential
statement S/PRST/2018/12. It is always important to
reflect and to ask what we can do in order to better
implement the agreement in good faith rather than wait
for other parties to act.
Thirdly, as we have said many times, any settlement
of the crisis in Ukraine must be a political one and should
be reached through inclusive and direct dialogue. We
also stress the importance of dialogue and diplomacy
between the parties concerned so that they can make
progress in achieving peace, stability and development
in Ukraine. Indonesia believes in the value of dialogue
and the importance of settling disputes amicably.
The situation in Ukraine has been on the Council’s
agenda since February 2014, and progress in the region
has unfortunately been limited. While I realize that
a bumpy road lies before us, I am still hopeful that
the Council will take on its full responsibility for
ensuring the maintenance of international peace and
security and promoting a dialogue aimed at achieving a
universally acceptable solution. Only through genuine
dialogue and diplomatic talks among the parties, with
the support of the United Nations and the international
community, will they be able to reach a sustainable
solution to the crisis. For its part, Indonesia will fully
support all constructive efforts aimed at resolving the
conflict in Ukraine peacefully, in accordance with
international law and the principles of the Charter of
the United Nations.
14/22

25/04/2019

Mr. Allen (United Kingdom): It is important that
Ukraine is regularly discussed here in the Council.
Ms. Mueller told us that the leading cause of death of
children in Ukraine is landmines, and that is a grim
reminder of the real impact of this ongoing conflict,
as also set out by our briefers from the Organization
for Security and Cooperation in Europe. Thirteen
thousand people have died, 30,000 have been injured
and 3.5 million are in need of humanitarian aid in this
modern conflict in Europe.
Why are we here? We are here because Russia
sent troops to Crimea and later grabbed it after an
illegitimate pretence of a referendum, held at the barrel
of a Russian gun. Russia’s actions were clearly illegal.
One hundred Member States voted in favour of General
Assembly resolution 68/262 in March 2014, and not one
country around this table voted with Russia. Russia sent
troops and supported separatists in eastern Ukraine and
continues to destabilize those regions, with devastating
humanitarian consequences. Last year Russia attacked
Ukrainian ships in the Sea of Azov, and it continues to
impose daily restrictions on vessels in a blatant attempt
to destabilize Ukraine’s economy. All those who care
about the territorial integrity of Member States and
the principle of non-interference should ask Moscow
to stop interfering with its neighbour and get off its
territory. We therefore condemn President Putin’s
recent decision on passports, which is further evidence
of Russia’s aggressive actions aimed at destabilizing
Ukraine and undermining its security, sovereignty and
territorial integrity.
Rather than creating further obstacles to the
reintegration of those communities into Ukraine, Russia
should focus on implementing the Minsk agreements
endorsed by the Council, ending its support for armed
separatist formations and ensuring the safe delivery and
distribution of humanitarian assistance by international
agencies. That is the only way to end the fear and
suffering of ordinary people in eastern Ukraine.
Last month was the fifth anniversary of Russia’s
illegal annexation of Crimea. Apart from their
illegal seizure of Ukrainian land, infrastructure and
economic assets, the Russian authorities have held
illegitimate elections and imposed Russian citizenship,
law and military conscription on the population in
that part of Ukraine. We have seen an increase in the
persecution of ethnic and religious groups such as the
Crimean Tatars, including the unlawful detention of
23 Crimeans following recent raids on their homes.
19-12028

25/04/2019

Ukraine

There are continuing reports of arbitrary detentions and
arrests, forced disappearances and torture of political
opponents and minorities. Seventy-three political
prisoners are currently being held in Crimea and Russia.
It is unacceptable that the Russian Federation has not
cooperated with the General Assembly’s calls to allow
access for the United Nations High Commissioner for
Human Rights.
I would like to extend my congratulations to
Mr. Volodymyr Zelensky on his success in the
presidential election. That peaceful election process is
a testament to the development of Ukraine’s democracy
and an example to some of Ukraine’s neighbours. As my
Prime Minister has said, we look forward to working
with Mr. Zelensky. The Russian Federation had an
opportunity to show willingness to work with the new
President, reduce tensions, bring calm and work for
peace. Sadly, Russia has continued down its aggressive
path instead.
Mr. Nebenzia (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): I see that you are turning over your wonderful
hourglass once again, Mr. President. I have to tell you
that it will not help you turn back time or change the
past. Incidentally, I did not see the hourglass at the open
debate on sexual violence in conflict (see S/PV.8514).
Or is sexual violence in conflict the only subject that
can be discussed interminably and with no regard for
the clock?
Needless to say, I thank the briefers for their
briefings today. Frankly, however, I fail to understand
what they have to do with the issue that brings us to the
Chamber today at Ukraine’s request or what that issue
has to do with the Minsk agreements, although in the
opinions expressed by Ms. Mueller and Mr. Sajdik, they
are apparently related to its discussion because of the
dire situation of many Ukrainians and residents of the
various areas in the Donetsk and Luhansk regions that
Kyiv does not control.
I will not hide the fact that we were surprised by
our Ukrainian colleagues’ initiative in convening
today’s meeting, which was immediately supported
by the German presidency. After all, it obliges us to
talk about some things that are extremely unflattering
for Ukraine — actions that have essentially outlawed
4 million of the country’s citizens, whose existence has
been obstinately ignored by the Western parts of the
international community. Of course it would be better
for Ukraine to stay modestly quiet about this kind of

S/PV. 8516

thing rather than flaunting it before the whole world,
but since it insists, let us talk about it, despite the fact
that the issue poses no threat whatever to international
peace and security.
To listen to our Western colleagues, one might get
the false impression that Russia is forcing the people
of Ukraine to change their citizenship, while, of
course, and how else could it be, “violating” the Minsk
agreements. Let me ask once again: What aspect of the
Minsk agreements have we violated? Has anyone here
read the Minsk agreements? How many utterly absurd
accusations have we not heard today? Let us describe
the real version rather than the false, ideologized one
that has been put forward. The President of Russia
signed a decree under which residents of the selfproclaimed Donetsk and Luhansk People’s Republics
have the opportunity to obtain Russian citizenship
in a simplified procedure. To do that, they are not
required — please listen carefully — they are not
required to renounce their Ukrainian citizenship. Given
that the process of drafting and passing the decree was
carried out transparently and began some time ago,
there is no reason to claim that the President’s decree
was timed to coincide with any event or meant to send
a message to anyone.
According to data from Russia’s Ministry of Internal
Affairs, in the period from 1 April 2014 to 2 April 2019,
925,548 citizens from the south-eastern regions of
Ukraine entered Russian territory and remained there.
Overall, there are 2.3 million Ukrainians in Russia.
During the same period, more than 334,000 Ukrainian
citizens applied for Russian citizenship, numbers that
demonstrate that there is a high demand for Russian
citizenship among people from south-eastern Ukraine
whose living conditions Kyiv has made intolerable. In
other words, Russia’s legislative initiative is a response
to the aspirations of many thousands of people. It is not
we who are forcing them to become Russian citizens
but rather they themselves who desire it. We are simply
providing them with an opportunity and significantly
simplifying the process.
Why was it done? The conflict in Donbas has been
going on for five years. For five years, the inhabitants
of Donbas have been deprived of the ability to exercise
their human rights and freedoms in Ukraine. They
were denied the right to vote in the recent presidential
elections. Since 2017 the socioeconomic blockade of
Donbas, which has de facto existed since 2015, has
been toughened and legitimized. For five years, Kyiv’s

19-1202815/22

S/PV.8516

Ukraine

officialdom has been sabotaging the implementation
of the Minsk agreements, subverting, changing and
distorting their content. For five years, the Ukrainian
authorities have been calling the inhabitants of Donetsk
and Luhansk terrorists and separatists. Today’s speakers
have all referred to the Minsk agreements, which most
of them have not read. I will read out two paragraphs
from them.
Paragraph seven states that Ukraine must
“[e]nsure safe access, delivery, storage, and
distribution of humanitarian assistance to those in
need, on the basis of an international mechanism.”
Paragraph eight requires the
“[d]efinition of modalities of full resumption of
socioeconomic ties, including social transfers such
as pension payments and other payments (incomes
and revenues, timely payment of all utility bills,
reinstating taxation within the legal framework
of Ukraine).

25/04/2019

care and social protection once again. Like all of us
in this Chamber, they hope to see the realization of
their legitimate right and those of their children to
education, social services, health care and other rights
enshrined in the 1966 International Covenant on
Economic, Social and Cultural Rights. They are getting
none of that from the Ukrainian Government, and we
therefore felt compelled to offer them assistance. And
no one is taking anything away from anyone. On the
contrary, we are consciously taking on a significant
socioeconomic burden. And perhaps now the elderly
people whom Mr. Sajdik mentioned will not have to
cross the line of contact and risk their lives to collect
their miserable pensions on territory controlled by the
official authorities. And yet instead of commending us
all we have heard from our Western colleagues today
are hypocritical, clichéd accusations of Russia’s acts of
aggression and insidious plans against Ukraine.

It is obvious to us that most people here have
no interest in the people who live in Donbas. It suits
them much better to obscure their daily suffering
and deprivation behind mythical stories of Russia’s
imaginary aggression and blame anything and
everything on it. They cannot see that the residents of
Donetsk and Luhansk have survived all these years in
spite of what they have done. They have been deprived
of income sources, pensions and benefits that other
Ukrainian citizens are entitled to. They would not have
survived without Russia, which despite all the West’s
threats and sanctions refused to abandon a people whom
we feel very close to. Yet all this time they kept hoping
that the Kyiv authorities would nevertheless fulfil the
Minsk agreements and that a long-awaited peace would
return to their land.

The decree under discussion today was signed on
the basis of article 14 of Russia’s federal citizenship law,
which provides for the possibility of granting Russian
citizenship through a simplified process. It in no way
contradicts Russian legislation. According to part one of
article 29 of the federal law, for humanitarian purposes
the President of the Russian Federation may determine
categories of foreign citizens and stateless persons
having the right to apply for Russian citizenship through
a simplified process. Besides, our actions are part of
a more general trend aimed at simplifying migration
procedures and the rules granting residency and
citizenship. In 2018, for example, according to Eurostat,
States in the European Union provided protection to
more than 300,000 people requesting asylum. I would
like to point out that granting citizenship is a sovereign
right of every State. In accordance with the European
Convention on Nationality of 1997, each State has
the right to determine in its own legislation who its
nationals are. The preamble to that international treaty
establishes that in matters concerning nationality,
account should be taken of the legitimate interests of
both States and individuals. Article 15 of the Universal
Declaration of Human Rights declares that no one can
be arbitrarily deprived of his nationality or the right to
change his nationality.

But in five years nothing has changed, and we
can no longer pretend that it has. Five years is quite
long enough to define one’s view of such a sensitive
and important humanitarian issue. The people of
Donetsk and Luhansk deserve to have reliable State

We know what Mr. Yelchenko will say in his
statement. He will say that this is interference in
Ukraine’s internal affairs, a flagrant violation of
international law and the Russian Constitution, the
creeping annexation of the territory of Donbas and the

To this end, Ukraine shall reinstate control of
the segment of its banking system in the conflictaffected areas and possibly an international
mechanism to facilitate such transfers shall
be established.”
None of that has happened.

16/22

19-12028

25/04/2019

Ukraine

creation of an opportunity to challenge its affiliation. I
want to answer him now. None of that has anything to
do with reality. We are not interfering in the internal
affairs of Ukraine or engaged in a creeping annexation.
We are simply giving people the opportunity to finally
solve issues of vital importance to them, because
the Kyiv authorities have refused to, in violation of
the Minsk agreements. The people will decide for
themselves whether to exercise that right or not. In
the final analysis, even before the decree was issued
hundreds of thousands of Ukrainians had applied for
Russian citizenship. We have never refused them and
now we have just simplified the process for the most
vulnerable of them. Of course, for Kyiv, the number
of applications for Russian citizenship will become a
litmus test and a referendum on the attitude to it of the
residents of Donbas, and apparently that is precisely
what the current Kyiv Government fears. I want to
underscore once again that Russia is not imposing
citizenship on the inhabitants of Donbas but rather
giving them an opportunity to apply for it voluntarily
and independently under the established procedure to
the competent Russian authorities while preserving
their Ukrainian citizenship.
We seriously and sincerely hope that the new
Ukrainian authorities will not only change the previous
Government’s rhetoric regarding Donbas and its
inhabitants, a good illustration of which is the hackneyed
clichés of today’s statement by the Ukrainian Foreign
Ministry, but will also take real steps to implement the
Minsk agreements and take into account the interests
of its citizens in south-eastern Ukraine. If that happens,
we will be only too glad.
The President: I shall now make a statement in my
capacity as the representative of Germany.
I would first like to align myself with the statement
made by my French colleague in the Normandy format.
We have worked very closely together and I subscribe
to everything he said.
I just listened to Mr. Nebenzia’s statement and
I must admit that I have always been fascinated by
Russian diplomacy. I believe the Russian State Institute
of International Relations has textbooks that prescribe
the patterns of behaviour to be followed in Russian
foreign policy. Mr. Lewicki, the representative of
Poland, mentioned earlier that there are other examples
of the passport policy that are applied on a regular basis.

S/PV. 8516

The German Foreign Service teaches us how to deal
with a country with which we have strained relations or
a President with whom we may not be on the best of
terms. If there is a new, inexperienced President, we
would perhaps send that President rhetorical flowers
and write a congratulatory letter before inviting him or
her to visit us.
In Russia, one could do the same thing. There is
a new President. Perhaps it was not possible to work
with the old one, but now a new one has been elected.
Rhetorical flowers could be sent — paragraph 1 of
the Minsk agreements and a full ceasefire could be
implemented, or Russia could liberate the 24 marines
that are in prison or, with respect to the bridge of
Stanytsia Luhanska, the Ukrainians could be granted the
80 centimetres and finally people can cross the bridge.
However, that is not in the textbooks of the Russian
State Institute of International Relations. Rather, its
textbooks teach that if there is a new, inexperienced
leader, efforts should be made to intimidate him on the
first day following his election in order to provoke him
and try to catch him off guard. That is what Russia has
been doing. That is textbook diplomacy and those of us
old enough to remember will recall how when John F.
Kennedy became President, Khrushchev provoked him.
Another lesson in Russian textbooks is that
one should not miss an opportunity for cynicism.
Accordingly, President Putin signed the decree on
passports yesterday, on 24 April, the International
Day of Multilateralism and Diplomacy for Peace, the
day on which at the General Assembly we all spoke
about multilateralism and the need to adhere to an
international rules-based order. By its actions, Russia
demonstrated its disdain for the international rulesbased order.
I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.
I give the floor to the representative of Ukraine.
Mr. Yelchenko (Ukraine): Mr. President, we
appreciate your swift reaction and that of your team and
the convening of this briefing at such short notice, at the
request of our delegation.
I thank the members of the Security Council who
condemned the illegitimate decree of the Russian
President. I could wish the briefers had focused more
on that specific issue, which is the main purpose of
today’s meeting, but I will try to fill that gap. I ask the

19-1202817/22

S/PV.8516

Ukraine

25/04/2019

indulgence of the Council because I will probably take a
little more time than the sand in the hourglass permits.

and cynical passport gambit could be made to look like
a humanitarian act.

The Council has already heard the Russian
attempt to sell the decree to the wider United Nations
membership. As you have already mentioned,
Mr. President, it is the usual Russian-style subversive
diplomacy that the Council is accustomed to by
now — cynical misinterpretation, manipulation, lies
and disinformation. I am once again fascinated by
the talented foresight of Mr. Nebenzia, who knows
in advance what I am going to say. Just consider this.
Only yesterday, when Putin was signing the decree, his
Minister for Foreign Affairs was delivering a statement
at — just imagine — the Moscow Conference on
International Security. That is such a nice title. He said:

Yesterday’s decree is yet another appalling episode
in a chain of events designed to grab the Russianoccupied territories from Ukraine. The fake elections
in 2014 and 2018, organized by the Kremlin in breach
of its obligations under the Minsk agreements, the
introduction of the ruble zone, the expropriation of
Ukrainian enterprises, the official recognition of
documents issued by illegal bodies, the incidents of
piracy, the capture of Ukrainian sailors in Ukrainian
territorial waters and now the decree are all different
pieces of one puzzle — Russia’s creeping occupation
of Ukraine.

“We hope the new Ukrainian leadership will
realize its responsibility and will contribute to the
settlement of the crisis by fully implementing the
Minsk package of measures within the Trilateral
Contact Group and the Normandy format, in full
accordance with Security Council resolution 2202
(2015). Germany and France will have to play an
important role not to allow any attempts to review
the Minsk agreements.”
Shall we take it that the left hand does not know what
the right hand is doing? I doubt it. That is the usual
behaviour of Russia — double-speak and putting the
blame on others.
On 26 November 2018, when speaking before
the Council (see S/PV.8410), I compared the Russian
aggression in Ukraine to the Soviet dirty war against
its neighbour in 1939. Unfortunately, history seems to
be repeating itself. The Russian Federation is steadily
embarking on the same road that led to the expulsion
of the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics from the
League of Nations. Like the Russian representative
today, the Soviet diplomats at the time would stop at
nothing to offer excuses for Moscow’s flagrant violation
of international law. For example, when Soviet planes
were bombing a neighbouring country, then Minister for
Foreign Affairs Molotov insisted that the bombers were
not dropping bombs but rather food for the starving.
It looks like our Russian colleagues are making
their arguments with exactly the same logic. In the
distorted reality of hybrid war, the Kremlin seems to
be bringing to life George Orwell’s satire, in which war
is peace, freedom is slavery and ignorance is strength.
It is impossible to explain otherwise how a transparent
18/22

As stressed by the President of Ukraine, the signing
of the decree is yet another example of interference
by the Russian Federation in the internal affairs of
an independent State. It is a brutal violation of the
sovereignty, territorial integrity and unity of Ukraine. It
is also a wholesale dismissal by Russia of its obligations
in the framework of the Minsk agreements. The
agreements clearly state Russia’s commitments — stop
the shelling, withdraw Russian troops and armaments,
free Ukrainian hostages and return the control of
the State border to Ukraine. In that regard, Russia’s
categorical refusal to support the initiative of Ukraine
and the Organization for Security and Cooperation
in Europe to launch an Easter armistice starting on
26 April is not accidental.
In addition, the Kremlin has deliberately and
cynically violated international humanitarian law,
which prohibits the occupation’s authorities from
changing the citizenship of the inhabitants of the
occupied territories. Why? Because the Russian
Federation cannot hide any more the presence of its
regular military and mercenaries in Donbas or conceal
its lead role in the armed conflict there. That is why it
decided to switch from the five-year-old mantra “they
are not there” to the revanchist slogan “our citizens are
there”. We heard that before the Second World War,
we heard that in Georgia and we all know where that
slogan leads.
The provocative and destabilizing nature of the
decision of the Russian side becomes obvious after
even a cursory glance at the Russian-Georgian conflict
in South Ossetia. Here are some facts. In 2006, more
than 90 per cent of the residents of the Georgian region
of South Ossetia held Russian citizenship. On 8 August
19-12028

25/04/2019

S/PV. 8516

Ukraine

2008, with the beginning of hostilities in South Ossetia,
the Russian President made the following statement at
the meeting of the country’s Security Council. It is
worth recalling:
“Now in South Ossetia, peaceful people — women,
children, elderly — are dying. Most of them are
citizens of the Russian Federation. In accordance
with the Constitution and federal laws [of Russia],
as the President of the Russian Federation, I have to
defend the lives and dignity of Russian citizens, no
matter where they are. The logic of our actions now
is defined by these circumstances. We will not allow
the death of our compatriots to go unpunished.
Those responsible will be brought to account.”
Council members know the rest. More than 10 years
after the conflict, Georgia’s territorial integrity has yet
to be restored and the Geneva International Discussions,
launched in 2008 with participation of the United
Nations, the OSCE and the European Union, have yet
to bear fruit.
Now let us return to the situation in the Ukrainian
Donbas. Distributing Russian passports en masse
in that region can easily be used by the Kremlin to
legitimize its military presence in Ukrainian territory
in the name of protecting would-be Russian citizens.
The Kremlin’s decision is clear proof that Moscow is
choosing that scenario.
It is nothing but a thinly veiled attempt to justify
the ongoing occupation of those territories, to wrest
them from Ukraine and dismember my country. It is
nothing but an artificial pretext to continue sending
Russian troops to Ukraine and sustain the undisguised
military aggression against my country. It is nothing
but a premeditated and concerted effort to undercut
prospects for a peace settlement on the basis of the full
and proper implementation of the Minsk agreements.
Indeed, the illegitimate decree of the Russian President
completely undermines the logic of the Minsk
agreements and, in fact, makes their implementation
practically impossible.
Council members must judge for themselves. The
purpose of the Minsk agreements is the reintegration
of the temporarily occupied areas of the Donetsk and
Luhansk regions into the legal, political and economic
space of Ukraine. In contrast, the logic of the Russian
President’s decree is disintegration and consolidation of
total Russian control over the occupied territories. Are
those not clear signs of a creeping annexation?

Importantly, distributing Russian passports
in the occupied territories will make it practically
impossible to conduct legitimate local elections there
in accordance with the Ukrainian legislation and
relevant OSCE standards under the OSCE Office for
Democratic Institutions and Human Rights monitoring,
as envisaged by the Minsk agreements.
I
also
have
a
Ambassador Nebenzia.

specific

question

for

(spoke in Russian)
Would he also find nothing unusual about a
situation in which the citizens of border areas in Russia
were systematically given passports en masse by
other States?
This is, instead, a story about how difficult life has
become for people in Donbas.
(spoke in English)
Does the Russian leadership not realize that its
actions totally disrupt the Minsk agreements? Does
Russia not realize what kind of ticking time bomb it is
planting? Does Russia not realize that it is responsible
for undermining the peaceful settlement process in the
eastern part of Ukrainian Donbas?
I think the Kremlin realizes all of that very well
but is doing it on purpose. Implementation of the Minsk
agreements was never the intention of the Russian side.
Destabilization and fragmentation of Ukraine has been
the crystal-clear intent behind its every move during
the last five years. But Russia will bear responsibility
for its actions. That is why reinforcing international
pressure on the Kremlin, including new targeted
sanctions against the aggressor State, should be our
shared endeavour. That is the way to bring Russia back
onto the path of implementation of its obligations under
the Minsk agreements. That is the way to peaceful
settlement in eastern Donbas.
Council members will recall the meeting less than
three months ago, on 12 February (see S/PV.8461),
when the Russian representative was going out of his
way to convince everybody that the Ukrainian side
was sabotaging the implementation of the agreements.
We were accused of — and I quote the Russian
representative — “venturing new provocations that
threaten only to worsen the situation and ruin the peace
process” (ibid., p. 10).

19-1202819/22

S/PV.8516

Ukraine

It is indeed true that actions speak louder than
words. Are there any doubts in anyone’s mind as to
who is responsible for stalling the implementation of
the Minsk agreements? The answer should be obvious.
Russia’s purpose is clear — to destabilize Ukraine,
even more so in this post-electoral period, and ruin the
Minsk agreements, all of which is in direct defiance
of the consistent calls by the international community
demanding that the parties refrain from taking any
unilateral steps that might undermine the Minsk process.
The illegal issuance of passports to Ukrainian
citizens also means that the Kremlin recognizes its
occupation of Ukrainian territories in the Donetsk and
Luhansk regions and is in fact making another step
towards the annexation of that occupied territory. By
its decision, Russia once again debunks the narrative
of its own propaganda that this is a so-called internal
conflict in Ukraine.
Russia’s neighbours know all too well how skilfully
the country is using a humanitarian pretext to interfere
in internal affairs and to invade. We learned this not
from the Finns, the Poles or the Georgians but from
our own experience. While we were under Soviet
domination, Moscow applied forced Russification and
moved Russian settlers to non-Russian areas. Now,
under the pretext of protecting ethnic Russians and
all Russian-speakers, Moscow is trying to restore its
domination by meddling in the internal affairs of other
countries and annexing territories.
We know all too well in Donbas and in South Ossetia
and Abkhazia that Russian tanks and rocket launchers
are Moscow’s favourite tools for protecting Russianspeakers. We also know that the purely humanitarian
action of passport distribution is usually a prelude to
further aggression and annexation, as was stressed in
the appeal to the United Nations and other international
organizations adopted yesterday by the Parliament of
my country.
Ukraine will do everything possible to protect,
provide adequate assistance to, and ensure respect for,
the rights of its citizens residing in the temporarily
occupied territories, including those who may be forced
by the Russian occupation authorities into acquiring
Russian citizenship. Yesterday’s decree by the Russian
President is simply illegal. It is a blatant breach of
Russia’s obligations and commitments under bilateral
and multilateral agreements and documents.
20/22

25/04/2019

Ukraine does not recognize any consequences
of that act. The Security Council should consider it
null and void. Ukraine urges Russia to immediately
cancel that presidential decree as well as decree No.
74, of 18 February 2017, relating to the recognition of
documents and license plates issued in the occupied
part of the Donetsk and Luhansk regions.
I call on the Security Council to prevent the worstcase scenario and resolutely condemn the destructive
and illegal actions of the Russian authorities and to
restore respect for the Charter of the United Nations.
The members of the Security Council sitting around
this table have a single choice to make — to wrap up
this meeting without taking a decision or turn once
again to expressing serious concerns and calling on
both sides to respect the Minsk agreements. But let
us be honest — unless the majority of this Council is
ready to come up with real action, even if it is to be
challenged by Russia, the aggressive behaviour of our
neighbour will never be stopped. History knows that
appeasement of aggressors never stops them.
Finally, since we have representatives of the OSCE
and the Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian
Affairs here with us, I would like to ask them some
questions. I would like to ask Ambassadors Apakan
and Sajdik whether, in their assessment, the Russian
decision on citizenship contributes to implementation
of the Minsk agreements or complicates it.
I would like to ask Assistant Secretary-General
Mueller, from whom we heard about the difficult
humanitarian situation in the occupied territories of
the Donbas — and her report is accurate — whether,
in her assessment, the Russian President’s decree is
a warranted and justified response to the difficult
humanitarian situation, and in what ways the Russian
side can truly contribute to alleviating the humanitarian
crisis that it itself has created.
The President: The representative of the Russian
Federation has asked to make a further statement.
Mr. Nebenzia (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): I would first like to ask you how you managed
to get hold of our secret diplomatic textbook. You could
almost have been reading it aloud. I recognized it from
my time at the Moscow State Institute of International
Relations. That was exactly what it was like. Some other
time I will tell you about what else you can find there.
19-12028

25/04/2019

Ukraine

I would like to share the feelings I was left with
after the statements by our Western colleagues and
Mr. Yelchenko, particularly since he asked me a direct
question that I want to answer. In general, we heard
nothing new today, just the same tired, unfounded
accusations and even openly distorted facts. I was
especially amused to hear that Russia apparently
blocked the Easter truce in Donbas. Mr. Sajdik, who
participated in the meeting of the Trilateral Contract
Group, knows more about that. I will not ask him today
how many Russian troops he has seen in Donbas since
the last time we met with him. That question I will not
ask. But what I would like to ask him is why the Easter
truce between the parties did not happen.
Based on today’s discussion, any observer could
be left with the impression that nothing has changed.
However, I would like to point out that in the past
month a great deal has changed. The Ukrainian people
categorically and resoundingly rejected everything that
President Poroshenko has done in the past five years,
both in Ukraine and in relation to Russia. And no
attempts to use Poroshenko’s usual lying anti-Russian
rhetoric can change that situation, which testifies to the
fact that the Ukrainian people have spoken very clearly.
They want real change, normal relations with Russia, a
dignified life and a peaceful future for their children.
They are tired of the attempts to blame Russia for all
Ukraine’s troubles, which is frankly what President
Poroshenko has done during all his years in power. The
people of Ukraine need real action and steps towards
peace, which means having a real dialogue with the
people of Donetsk and Luhansk. That is the basis for
settling any conflict — a direct dialogue between
the conflicting parties, which the Ukrainian side has
consistently refused to do this entire time. The keys to
resolving the Ukrainian issue are in Kyiv, not Moscow,
and in the Western capitals that have enabled Kyiv to
sabotage the Minsk agreements.
As regards the rhetorical flowers that you suggested
sending to President-elect Zelensky, Mr. President, it is
still too early for flowers. So far he has been sending
mixed signals. We are genuinely interested in seeing
him take real steps to deal with the situation, but we will
learn his intentions from his actions, and not before. We
will therefore wait to see how he realizes his declared
intention of changing the situation in Donbas. We will
see if he complies with the Minsk agreements or comes
up with new formats for how to do it. Time will tell.

S/PV. 8516

As for Mr. Yelchenko’s question, he undoubtedly
knows that hundreds of thousands of people in Russia
have dual citizenship. And incidentally, he knows
very well that some of Ukraine’s neighbours issue
their countries’ passports to Ukrainian citizens of
non-Ukrainian extraction, and there are hundreds of
thousands of them. And there are hundreds of thousands,
if not millions, of citizens in Russia who have dual
citizenship. That is well known both in our country
and in the rest of the world, and we are not going to
deprive them of their right to accept if someone offers
them citizenship of another country, whether it borders
us or not. I want to emphasize once again that unlike
what Mr. Yelchenko said, no one is going to make these
people take a Russian passport. It is their choice of
their own free will. No one is going to drag them into a
Russian internal affairs office and force them to accept
a passport.
I will say it again. They have the right to keep their
Ukrainian citizenship. This is a humanitarian measure.
Please try to understand that. Russia truly wants peace,
and seeing our brother country of Ukraine stable and
flourishing is in our interests. That is essentially the
purpose of the President’s decree, which is aimed at
ensuring that citizens who have ended up in terrible,
wretched living conditions have an opportunity for
social protection and development, and for an education
for themselves and their children in Russian schools
alongside Russian citizens. It has nothing to do with
the Minsk agreements and is no way prevents Ukraine,
Donetsk and Luhansk from implementing them. That
can be done if the political will for it is there.
The President: In addition to the questions asked
of the briefers, in my national capacity I would like to
add one further question for Mr. Apakan with regard to
his work and that of the monitors of the Organization for
Security and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE). Can he tell
from the statistics where access for the OSCE Special
Monitoring Mission to Ukraine is most impeded? Is it
more in the Ukrainian Government-controlled area or
in the area that is not controlled by the Government?
I now give the floor to Assistant Secretary-General
Mueller to respond to comments and questions raised.
Ms. Mueller: I would like to respond to the question
posed by the Ambassador of Ukraine, which was
about how all the parties can contribute to alleviating
human suffering. I first want to implore all the parties
to immediately cease using landmines and work with

19-1202821/22

S/PV.8516

Ukraine

Mine Action Service partners to provide awareness to
civilians and plans for demining.
Secondly, I would like to call on the parties to the
conflict to take every possible precaution to prevent or
at least minimize civilian harm. International law must
be upheld by all the parties so as to protect civilians
and their access to critical services at all times. Very
concretely, I urge that the pedestrian bridge at Stanytsia
Luhanska be rebuilt and also that the conditions at the
bridge be improved to enable speedy passage across
it, in particular for the elderly, who desperately need
access to their pensions and to health services.
Finally, humanitarian assistance should not be
politicized. Humanitarian assistance is provided based
on the universally recognized principles of humanity,
impartiality, neutrality and independence.
The President: I thank Ms. Mueller for the
clarifications she has provided.
I now give the floor to Mr. Sajdik to respond to the
comments and questions raised.
Mr. Sajdik: In the past nearly four years
Ambassador Apakan and I have been able to divide our
work quite well. I will therefore refer to the statement by
the chairmanship of the Organization for Security and
Co-operation in Europe (OSCE) that was issued today.
I do not think that I need to quote it word by word
but I will say that the Slovak chairmanship believes that
Russia’s unilateral measure
“could undermine the efforts for a peaceful
resolution of the crisis in and around Ukraine,
and calls for adherence to the OSCE principles
and commitments by all its participating States.
The chairmanship invites all sides to refrain from
unilateral steps and to jointly continue searching
for ways to fully implement the Minsk agreements.”
That is just one part of today’s statement.
I should like to add the answer I provided to a
journalist, who I believe was from TASS, at my press
briefing in Minsk concerning my assessment. I said the
following to him in Russian:
(spoke in Russian)
“As you know, I have always been committed to
following the letter and the spirit of the Minsk
agreements, based on the principles of the
sovereignty and territorial integrity of Ukraine”.
22/22

25/04/2019

(spoke in English)
With regard to the question asked by the
representative of Russia as to why no agreement was
reached yesterday on the Easter truce, I believe that I
addressed that in my briefing. I can only repeat what
I said, which is that, unfortunately, the sides could not
agree on the text of the statement. We proposed two
texts, both of which had previously been adopted on
the occasion of earlier ceasefires. In this specific case,
sadly, neither text was found acceptable. One text was
unacceptable for the Ukrainian side, while the other
was unacceptable for the Russian representatives and
the representatives of certain areas of the Donetsk and
Luhansk regions. Despite all the efforts of Ambassador
Apakan, we were unable to reach an agreed text.
The President: I now give the floor to Mr. Apakan.
Mr. Apakan: Actually, I have nothing to add to
Ambassador Sajdik’s explanations. In Minsk, our
expectation yesterday was to reach a recommitment
to the Easter ceasefire. To that end, there was an
agreement on the date and timing of such a ceasefire. I
am referring to the discussions of the working group on
security. However, each side took a different approach
to the text of the statement. I believe that they missed an
opportunity yesterday.
In response to the question by the Permanent
Representative of Germany, I have to say that, with
regard to access to southern areas of Donetsk, the
non-Government side is a real issue for us. Our access
and observation capacity is limited. I must add that there
is also some limited access to southern border regions.
We have been going to border regions through Izvaryne
more frequently than in past years. However, there are
still some issues, which limits our ability to observe
all of Donbas, particularly the non-Government side.
I do not want to go through specific location names
and details, but that is what we have experienced.
In my briefing today, as well as in Minsk and at the
Permanent Council of the Organization for Security
and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE), I emphasized
those points.
Lastly, Ambassador Sajdik referred to the OSCE
Chairperson-in-Office
statement
on
unilateral
measures. I must say that I share Mr. Sajdik’s views and
the Chairperson-in-Office on that point.
The meeting rose at 5.15 p.m.
19-12028
