RESOLUTIONS ADOPTED WITHOUT REFERENCE TO A COMMITIEE
Question considered by the Security Council at its 7 49th and 750th meetings,
held on 30 October 1956

Hequests, as a matter of priority, the SecretaryGeneral to submit to it within forty-eight hours a plan
for the setting up, with the consent of the nations concerned, of an emergency international United Nations
Force tu secure and supervise the cessation of hostilities
in accordance \Yith all the terms of the aforementioned
re~olutiun.
563rd plenary meeting,
4 November 1956.

Resolution 997 (ES-I)
The General .·1ssem/lly,
Noting the disregard on many (Kcasions by parties to
the Israel-Arab armistice agreements of 1949 of the
terms of such agreements, and that the armed forces
of Israel have penetrated deeply into Egyptian terri-tory in violation of the General Armistice Agreement
between Egypt and Israel uf 24 February 1949, 4
Noting that armed forces of Fr:mce and the United
Kingdom of Great Britain anrl Northern Ireland are
conducting military operation~ against Egyptia11 territory,
Noting that traffic through the Suez Canal is now
interrupted to the serious prejudice of many nations,
Expressing its gra,_.e conrern over these developments,
1. Urges as a matter of priority that all parties now
involved in hostilities in the area agree to an immediate
cease-Ere and, as part thereof, halt the movement of
military forces and arms into the area;
2. Urges the parties to the armistice agreements
promptly to withdraw all forces behind the armistice
lines, to desist from raids across the armistice lines into
neighbouring territory, and to observe scrupulously
the provisions of the armistice agreements;
3. Reco1nmends that all Member States refrain
from introducing military goods in the area of hostilities and in general refrain from any acts which would
delay or prevent the implementation of the present
resolution;
4. Urges that, upon the cease-fire being effective,
steps be taken to reopen the Suez Canal and restore
secure freedom of navigation;
5. Requests the Secretary-General to observe and
report promptly on the compliance with the present
resolution to the Security Council and to the General
Assembly, for such further action as they may deem
appropriate in accordance with the Charter;
6. Decides to remain in emergency session pending
compliance with the present resolution.
562nd plenary meeting,
2 November 1956.

Resolution 999 (ES-I)
/'fie General .·lsscmb/_\',
.V oti11g with rcyret that not all the parties concerned
have yet agreed to comply with the provisions of its
resol11tio11 <J97 ( l•:S- I) of 2 November 195(,,

Xotiny the spe,ial priority given in that resolution
tu an immediate cease-fire and, as part thereof, to the
halting of the movement of military forces and arms

in t II the area,
Yoiiny furlht'r that the resolution urged the parties
tu the armistice agreements promptly to withdraw all
forces behind the armistice lines, to desist from raids
a,ross tl1e armistice lines into neighbouring territory,
all(l to obsen-e scrupulously the provisions of the
ar111istice agreemc11ts,
I_ Reaffirms its resolution 997 (ES-I), and once
again ca11s upon the parties immediately to comply
with the provisions of the said resolution;
l. ,-luthori:::es the Secretarv-General immediately to
arrange with the parties con:erned for the i111ple111entation of the cease-fire and the halting of the movement
of military forces and arms into the area, and requests
him to report compliance forthwith and. in any case,
11ut later than twelve hours from the time of adoption
of the present resolution;
3. Requests the Secretary-General, with the as;,istance of the Chief of Staff and the members of the
United Nations Truce Supervision Organization, to
obtain compliance of the withdrawal of all forces behind
the armistice lines;
4. Decides to meet again immediately on receipt of
the Secretary-General's report referred to in paragraph
:? of the present resolution_
563rd plenary meeting,
4 November 1956.

Resolution 998 (ES-I)
The General Assembly,
Bearing in mind the urgent necessity of facilitating
compliance with its resolution 997 (ES-I) of 2 November 1956,

Resolution 1000 (ES-I)
The General Asse111bly,
Having requested the Secretary-General, m its resolution 998 (ES-I) of 4 November 1956, to submit to it
a plan for an emergency international United Nations
Force, for the purposes stated,

4 Official Records of the Security Council, Fourth Year,
Special Supplement No. 3.

2

General As~emhly-First Emergency Special Session

Noting 'lvith satisfaction the first report of the Secretary-General on the plan, 5 and having in mind particularly paragraph 4 of that report,
1. Establishes a United Nations Command for an
emergency international Force to secme and supervise
the cessation of hostilities in accordance with all the
terms of General Assembly resolution 9()7 (ES-I) of
2 November 1956;
2. Appoints, on an emergency basis, the Chief of
Staff of the United Nations Truce Supervision Organization, Major-General E. L. M. Burn~. as Chid of the
Command;
3. Authorizes the Chief of the Command immediately to recruit, from the observer corps of the United
Nations Truce Supervision Organization, a limited
number of officers who shall be nationals of countries
other than those having permanent membership in the
Security Council, and further authorizes him, in consultation with the Secretary-General, to undertake the
recruitment directly, from various Member States other
than the pennanent members of the Security Council,
of the additional number of offlcers needed;"
4. Invites the Secretary-General to take such administrative measures as may he neces:-;ary for the prompt
execution of the actions envi.,aged in the present resolution.
565th plenary meeting,
5 November 1956.

Resolution 1001 (ES-I)
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution ~)7 ( ES-l J o( 2 November
1956 concerning the cease-tire, 11 ithdrawal of troops
and ot_her ma~ters related to the military operations in
Egyptian terntory, as well as its resolution 998 (ES-I)
of 4 November 1956 concerning the reque:,;t to the
?ecreta~y-Gener~l to su~mit a plan for an emergency
mternat1onal Umted Nations Force,
~ Having establislied by its resolution 1000 ( ES-1) of
J November 1956 a United Nations Command for an
emergency international Force, having appointed the
Chief C?f S_taff of th~ United Nations Truce Supervision
Orga111zat10n as Chief of the Command with authorization to him to begin the recruitment of officers for the
Command, and having invited the Secretary-General
to take the administrative measures necessarv for the
prompt execution of that resolution.
·
Noting with appreciation the second and final report
?f the S_ecretar};'-<:;eneral 6 ~m the plan for an emergency
111ternat10nal Umted Nations Force as requested in
General Assembly resolution 99R (ES-Tl. and having
examined that plan,
1. E.xpres~es jts approval of the guiding principles
~or the ?rgamzat~on an;f ~unctioning of the emergency
mternat10nal Umte<l Nations Force as expounded in
paragraphs 6 to 9 of the Secretary-General's report;
2. Concurs in the definition of the functions of the
Force as stated i11 paragraph l.:? of the SecretaryGeneral's report;
3.. Invit~s the Secretary-General to continue discuss10ns with Governments of ~ ember States concerning offers of participation in the Force, toward the
objective of its halanced composition ;
5
Q_fficial R_ecrwds of the General Assembly, First Emerq,mrv
Specwl Session, Anne.res, agenda item 5, document .\/J289. ·
6 Ibid., document A/3302.

3

4. Requests the Chief of the Command, in consultation with the Secretary-General as regards size and
rnmposition, to proceed forthwith with the ful] organization of the Force;
5. Appro,_1es provisiona1lv the basic rule concerning
the financing of the Force °bid down in paragraph 15
(li the Secretary-General's report;
CJ. Establishes an Advisory Committee composed of
one representative from each of the following countries: Brazil, Canada, Ceylon, C"olomhia, Tndia, Norway
and Pakistan, and requests this Committee, whose
( :hairman shall be the Secretary-General, to undertake
the development of those aspects of the planning for
the Force and its operation not already dealt with by
the (_;eneral Assembly and 11 hich do nc,t iall within the
area of the direct responsibility of the C:hid of the
c:ommancl:
7. Authori:::es the Secretarv-General to issue all
regulations and instructions \\'hich may he essential to
the effective functioning of the Force. iollowing consultation with the Committee aforementioned, and to
take all other necessary administrative ancl t>:::ecutive
action;
~- nctermines that, following the fulfilment of the
1111mcdiate responsibilities defined for it in operative
paragraphs <> arnl 7 above, the Advisory Committee
,hall continue to assist the Secretarv-Ceneral in the
responsil1ilities falling to him under" the present and
othn relevant resolutions:
() lhcides that the Advisory Committee, in the perfonnance of its duties, shall he empm1 ered to request.
t hrongh the usual procedures, the cun vcning of the
l ;eneral .\ssembl_v and to report to the :\sscmhly when('1·cr 111atters arise which. in its opinion, are of such
11rgencv and importance as to reqnire consideration Ii:,·
the ( ;eneral Assembly itself;
10. Requt'sls all :i\Iemhcr States to aff(lrd :1~~i~t:1,1Cl'
as necessary to the United Nations Command in the
performance of its function.s, inclucli11g arra11:,;c111ents
for pas:-age to and from the area in\·oh·ecl.
567th plenary meeting,
7 November 1956.

Resolution 1002 (ES-I)
'/'he General • lssn11bly.

N.ecalfing its resolutions CJ~7 (ES-I) oi 2 l\overnber
1956, 998 (ES-I 'i and <J<J<J ( I•:S-1) of 4 .:\"ovemlll'r 19.Sr,
and 1000 (ES-I'! of 5 '\fovernlwr 1956. adopted ln
overwhelming majorities,
Noting in partiwlar that the General ,\ss<'(11hlv. liv
its resolution 1000 (ES-I), established a Unitel Nations Command for an emergency international Force
to secure and supl'rvise the cessation (lf hostilities in
accordance with a 11 the terms of its resolution 997
(ES-I),
1. Reaffirms the above-mentioned resol11tions;
2. Calls once again upon I ~rael immediately to 1,·ithdraw all its forces behind the armistice lines established
hy the General Armistice .-\greement between Egypt
and Israel of 24 February 1949 ;7
J. Calls onCI' agai11 upon the United Kin°c] 1111 and
France immediately to 1,ithdr:rn· all their fo~ccs fro111
Egyptian territory, consistentlv with the ahovementioned resolutions :
·
7 Official RNnrd., nf 1/,r Suuritv Co,mril. Fnu,·th i·,.l'r, S{'rrial Supplemmt .V n. 3.
·
