S/PV.7117

United Nations

asdf

Security Council

Provisional

Sixty-ninth year

7117th meeting

Monday, 24 February 2014, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Ms. Murmokaitė . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

(Lithuania)

Members:

Argentina . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Australia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Chad . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Chile . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Jordan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Luxembourg . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Nigeria . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Republic of Korea . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Rwanda . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . . 
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mrs. Perceval
Ms. King
Mr. Cherif
Mr. Errázuriz
Mr. Shen Bo
Mr. Araud
Mr. Hmoud
Ms. Lucas
Mr. Sarki
Mr. Oh Joon
Mr. Churkin
Mr. Nduhungirehe
Mr. Tatham
Mrs. DiCarlo

Agenda
Briefing by the Chairperson-in-Office of the Organization for Security and
Cooperation in Europe

14-24288 (E)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the
delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-506.

*1424288*

S/PV.7117

Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe

The meeting was called to order at 10.05 a.m.

This is also the first time in the history of the
OSCE that two countries holding the chairmanship for
a second time cooperate so closely — Switzerland this
year and Serbia in 2015. We have together developed
a joint work plan and we hope that this consecutive
chairmanship will guarantee more continuity in the
work of the OSCE. Moreover, we think that this
continuity model should be instructive for the future.

Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Briefing by the Chairperson-in-Office of the
Organization for Security and Cooperation
in Europe
The President: Under rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite His Excellency
Mr. Didier Burkhalter, Chairperson-in-Office of the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe
and President of the Swiss Confederation, to participate
in this meeting.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I give the floor to Mr. Burkhalter.
Mr. Burkhalter (spoke in French): It is a great
honour for me and for my country, Switzerland, to
address the Council today as Chairperson-in-Office
of the Organization for Security and Cooperation in
Europe (OSCE). I thank the Council for its invitation.
Switzerland has embraced its chairmanship of the
OSCE with great determination and modesty, realizing
full well that security is an art, and a difficult and
fragile one, as the events in Ukraine are demonstrating
once again — indeed, I shall dwell on that topic for
longer that I had intended, as things there have now
moved into a new phase.
Switzerland decided to assume the chairmanship of
the OSCE for strategic reasons. We view the promotion
of stability in Europe and its neighbouring regions, as
well as in the fragile regions of the world, as a major
axis of our new foreign affairs policy. We also believe
that our tradition of mediation and good offices can add
an enriching contribution to the OSCE.
We wish to contribute on the international
front in order to demonstrate our responsibility and
solidarity, which are two of the underlying principles
of Switzerland’s policy of peace and security.
With regard to the United Nations, our policy is
also reflected in our decision to seek membership
in the Security Council for the period 2023-2024,
as well as in our OSCE chairmanship for a second
time — Switzerland being the first country to do so.

2/24

24/02/2014

It is therefore with particular pleasure that I
address the Council under Lithuanian chairmanship,
given that it was your Government, Madam President,
that facilitated that innovative type of presidency at the
Vilnius Ministerial Conference in 2011. Today, I will
outline the priorities of our presidency by setting them
off against the backdrop of the cooperation between the
OSCE and the United Nations. As chairperson-in-office,
I want to strengthen that cooperation. I will also talk
about the role the OSCE plays in international efforts
to manage the crisis in Ukraine. That topic has strongly
marked the initial phase of the Swiss chairmanship of
the OSCE.
As the Council is aware, the OSCE is the largest
regional security organization. It covers both the
Euro-Atlantic and Eurasian regions. It brings together
57 countries, from Vancouver to Vladivostok, as well as
11 partners, all the way to Australia. It takes its decisions
by consensus. That is both a strength and, at times, a
weakness, as we must constantly reach compromise in
order to act. That is the spirit of cooperation that is at
the heart of all the activities of the OSCE.
That spirit of cooperation is also reflected in
relations with the outside. The work of the OSCE, as a
regional organization under Chapter VIII of the Charter
of the United Nations, contributes to the efforts of the
United Nations to maintain and re-establish peace,
security and international stability.
Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon recently relaunched
the debate on the revitalization of the role of regional
organizations under Chapter VIII. We will organize a
conference on that very subject in Vienna on 27 and
28 May, at which representatives from the United
Nations and several regional organizations will
participate.
The concept of multidimensional security that the
OSCE has developed could inspire other regional actors.
The Helsinki Final Act of 1975 recognized for the first
time that threats to stability and security not only came
from troops and weapons but also — without reference

14-24288

24/02/2014

Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe

to any hiearchy — from economic crises, environmental
degradation and human rights violations. Today, that
comprehensive security model is more relevant than
ever because it provides effective responses to current
challenges and the security needs of the individual. We
therefore hope to strengthen cooperation between the
OSCE and other regional security organizations and the
United Nations, always in line with the provisions of
Chapter VIII of the Charter.
The cooperation between the OSCE and the
Council of Europe is an example at the regional level.
One week ago, the Austrian presidency of the Council
of Europe and the Swiss chairmanship of the OSCE
jointly organized a conference aimed at strengthening
institutional cooperation between the two organizations
in the fight against trafficking in human beings. The
conference was a success. A framework identifying
concrete measures was developed that, among other
things, provides for developing joint training to improve
criminal prosecution.
With regard to relations between the OSCE and
the United Nations, further cooperation should be
envisaged on the ground. A successful example is
undoubtedly the work carried out in Kosovo by the
United Nations Interim Administration Mission in
Kosovo and the OSCE Mission.
Within the OSCE, we have launched a process
of reflection with regard to further improving the
efficiency of our field missions. The OSCE and its four
specialized agencies carry out 16 missions — from
Bosnia and Herzegovina to Kyrgyzstan — with a
relatively modest annual budget of €145 million. To
give an example, that is 15 times smaller than the
amount that Switzerland devotes to internaitonal
cooperation. We would like to introduce a new mission
model that better corresponds to the specific needs of
each host country. At the same time, we should ensure
that we preserve the crucial preventive role played
by our missions and that we safeguard the identity of
the OSCE as a field organization that supports host
countries in the implementation of the commitments
made at the organization.
We could also consider other joint actions under
Chapter VIII of the Charter — for example, in the
area of training. Two years ago, we organized a course
on conflict prevention for employees of the United
Nations, the European Union (EU) and the OSCE. That
format should be reactivated and serve as a model. We
are prepared to devote ourselves to that task.

S/PV.7117

On elections, there is close cooperation between
the United Nation and regional organizations and,
as in the case of Georgia and Afghanistan, efforts
are complementary. The OSCE will support the
presidential elections to be held in Afghanistan in April
2014. Afghanistan is one of the OSCE’s six partner
cooperating countries in the Asian region. That will be
the fifth time that the Office for Democratic Institutions
and Human Rights (ODIHR) of the OSCE will monitor
elections in Afghanistan.
I should briefly like to expand upon an idea
concerning the Asia-Pacific region. Next year,
Switzerland will assume the chairmaship of the Partners
for Cooperation in Asia forum, where we hope to discuss
how to implement elements of an OSCE integrated and
cooperative security model in East Asia. In the context
of ongoing territorial disputes, rapidly increasing
defence budgets and the increased risk of tensions
and political polarization, East Asia could benefit
from the experience of the OSCE on the establishment
confidence-building measures and common standards
through dialogue and transparency. The Asia-Pacific
region is an engine for economic integration, and that
may serve as a model when it comes to integration on
the security front.
(spoke in English)
Since assuming the chairmanship of the OSCE at
the beginning of 2014, my agenda has been dominated
by the political crisis and recent escalation of violence
in Ukraine. The outbreaks of violence in the context
of the struggle about the future course of Ukraine and
the high degree of instability the country has recently
faced are a sobering reminder that security in Europe
cannot be taken for granted. Those developments have
revealed the need to foster dialogue, re-establish trust
and rebuild bridges, both within Ukraine and across
the Euro-Atlantic and Eurasian regions. It is my firm
conviction that the OSCE has a major role to play on
both counts.
During recent weeks, I have repeatedly called
upon all sides to refrain from violence, resolve the
crisis through dialogue and political means and respect
human rights. In a series of meetings, I have discussed
options for OSCE assistance with the then-Ukrainian
Government as well as with members of the opposition.
The agreement reached on 21 February marked
an important step towards ending the violence and
paved the way for a political solution to the crisis.

14-242883/24

S/PV.7117

Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe

I congratulate everyone involved who made that
breakthrough possible, including the Polish, German
and French Foreign Ministers and the Special Envoy of
the Russian Federation.
With the appointment of an interim President by
the Parliament, Ukraine has now entered a new phase of
transition. Formidable challenges lie ahead. We should
unite in our efforts to support Ukraine in these difficult
times. A stable, democratic and united Ukraine is in
the interest of us all. I therefore propose establishing
an international contact group on Ukraine. Ukraine
should of course play a prominent role in the group,
and the key international actors should be included.
We are currently consulting on that idea with all actors
involved. The main task of the proposed group would be
to support Ukraine in this transition period. The contact
group would serve as a platform for coordination and the
sharing of information on international assistance and
project activities in Ukraine. Through its impartiality
and inclusivity, the OSCE has the necessary attributes
to host and moderate the group. Ukraine and all
international actors involved in the crisis are in fact
participating States of the OSCE.
I have decided today to appoint Ambassador Tim
Guldimann as my personal envoy on Ukraine. He will
coordinate all ongoing and planned OSCE activities in
Ukraine on behalf of the chairmanship. He will quickly
start consultations with all sides and will cooperate
closely with international partners.
A small OSCE core team has been sent to Ukraine
to conduct a needs-assessment mission in the next few
days. There is an urgent need to rebuild trust among
all the parties involved. I encourage the new leaders of
Ukraine to invite the ODIHR to send a human rights
assessment mission to the country to establish the facts
and circumstances of the incidents that took place in
Ukraine. A human rights assessment mission would
recommend measures to deal with serious violations of
human rights allegedly committed during the crisis. Its
findings would be presented in a report and would help
advance national reconciliation in Ukraine.
Presidential elections will be a crucial moment in
the current transition period. We expect the Ukrainian
authorities to issue an early invitation for an ODIHR
election observation mission. In view of the rapidly
changing developments, we are also ready to review
and further specify the activities of the OSCE project
coordinator’s office in Kiev.

4/24

24/02/2014

We are currently witnessing a phase of de-escalation
in Ukraine. It is essential to support a fair and inclusive
process of transition that does not marginalize any part
of Ukraine or any community. Ukraine deserves full
international attention and support. I am convinced that
the OSCE has the necessary tools to assist Ukraine in
this difficult phase.
I will now turn to the priorities of the Swiss OSCE
chairmanship. As the Council can see on the outline
distributed this morning, we would like to contribute
three main objectives, that is, fostering security and
stability, improving people’s lives and strengthening the
OSCE capacity to act. Those three objectives embody
three values — security, freedom and responsibility. For
each of those main objectives, we have defined three to
four priority areas. The Council will find information
on the priority areas in the fact sheets provided. I am
going to focus on some of them in this discussion with
my following comments.
With regard to our first objective of fostering
security and stability, I will limit myself to our
geographical priorities, namely, the Western Balkans
and the Southern Caucasus. I will also briefly mention
the situation in Transdniestria.
In the Western Balkans, we want to make progress
on regional cooperation and assist people to overcome
the difficulties of the past — the reconciliation. A
specific field of cooperation we wish to support
concerns the issue of missing persons. We also intend
to launch a process on migratory challenges, which
should lead to the development of a regional strategy
with the Regional Cooperation Council and in close
consultation with the European Union.
The violent recent protests in Bosnia and
Herzegovina and the resignation of several political
leaders there have reminded us of the difficult political,
economic and social context in that country and the
prevailing risk of instability. Our mission on the ground
is working closely with the European Union Force and
the EU delegation to help improve the situation. The
OSCE field presence is ready to offer its good offices
and to facilitate dialogue in Bosnia and Herzegovina. It
is well positioned to do so, as it has managed to build
up trust over the years both with cantonal and federal
authorities and with representatives of civil society. My
Special Representative has called on the authorities to
engage in immediate dialogue with the citizens.

14-24288

24/02/2014

Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe

We will also contribute to normalizing the
situation in northern Kosovo. The OSCE is not only
organizing elections there, but it also aims to help
create a democratic environment, restore confidence
and encourage the political participation of minorities,
again in close cooperation with the European Union.
As for our second geographical priority, Switzerland
is looking for ways to build on its long-term involvement
in the Southern Caucasus to help resolve the protracted
conflicts in that region.
In Georgia, the OSCE is working closely with the
United Nations and the EU in the context of the Geneva
international discussions. The Swiss chairmanship
will support that format as much as possible. We stand
ready to revive discussions on an international presence
in Georgia if that is in line with what Georgia wants
and if all the parties involved demonstrate a degree
of openness and flexibility on the issue. The Geneva
discussions should move towards a real format for a
settlement of the crisis.
Concerning the conflict in Nagorno Karabakh,
the Swiss chairmanship will maintain and support the
established formats for conflict settlement, primarily
the Minsk Group, co-chaired by the United States,
Russia and France. The conflict deserves particular
attention at this stage, as tensions have been rising
lately with several violent incidents.
I also consider it important to draw the Council’s
attention to the difficult situation in Transdniestria and
throughout Moldova. Alongside Russia and Ukraine,
the OSCE has been mandated to act as a joint mediator
in the Transdniestrian settlement process since 1993.
There are indications that we may be entering a period
of growing tensions in the conflict. I ask all the parties
involved to act with caution and to refrain from making
unilateral moves. More than ever, it is essential that the
international community act in a coordinated manner.
Our second objective aims at improving people’s
lives. It is important for the OSCE to act not only in
the interest of States but also of their citizens. All good
politics is in the service of the people, by the people
and for the people. That notion also lies behind our
leitmotiv for our chairmanship in 2014, which is to
create a security community for the benefit of everyone.
The Swiss chairmanship is convinced that
reinforcing cooperation between regional and global
organizations in promoting and protecting human rights,

S/PV.7117

democracy and the rule of law would significantly
increase the impact of our work. Regional organizations
need to play a leading role in implementing on the
ground the commitments undertaken in the context of
the United Nations.
That is precisely why we have decided to focus
our efforts on better implementation. International
instruments for human rights, democracy and the
rule of law, as well as conventions and political
commitments, can help improve people’s lives only
if their implementation is accepted and promoted by
States at the national level. Organizations like the
United Nations and the OSCE should do everything
possible to support States in those efforts. Our focus
is therefore on implementing the current commitments
and not on developing new ones.
One particular aspect worth mentioning in that
regard is our focus on the prevention of torture. A
chairmanship event on the issue will bring together the
United Nations Special Rapporteur on torture and other
cruel, inhuman or degradeing treatment or punishment,
Mr. Juan E. Méndez, and experts from civil society
and other multilateral and national agencies involved
in torture prevention. There will also be a sequence
of regional workshops with a view to increasing the
involvement of civil society across the OSCE.
The Swiss chairmanship undertakes such initiatives
with a view to encouraging the implementation of
international commitments throughout the OSCE,
beginning with those contained in the basic documents,
namely, the Convention against Torture and Other
Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment
and its Optional Protocol. The Optional Protocol, which
has not yet been ratified by all participating States, is
a fundamental instrument in combating torture in all
its forms.
Next is the topic of climate change and security. As
a consequence of climate change, the number of natural
disasters is increasing. Those disasters put the lives of
many individuals at risk. That is why we have decided
to make better prevention, mitigation and management
of natural disasters a priority of our chairmanship.
Promoting know-how and fostering cooperation on
such issues will help to improve the safety conditions
for people who live in the OSCE area and beyond.
We are working on that in close cooperation with
specialized United Nations agencies, such as the United
Nations Office for Disaster Risk Reduction. By doing

14-242885/24

S/PV.7117

Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe

so, we also seek to contribute to the World Conference
on Disaster Risk Reduction of March 2015, held in
Sendai, Japan. Moreover, we are committed to firmly
embedding the topic in the United Nations sustainable
development goals, also for 2015.
Within the field of combating transnational threats,
the fight against terrorism is a key concern. Kidnapping
for ransom is a major source of funding for terrorist
groups and organizations. They use those funds to
increase their operational capacity and to carry out
terrorist attacks. While they release upon payment,
they are in fact setting up new victims.
We should all find a common response to such
a challenge. That is why the Swiss chairmanship
welcomes resolution 2133 (2014), of 27 January. The
resolution invites Member States to continue holding
expert discussions within the United Nations and other
competent international or regional organizations.
Switzerland supports that line very clearly and the
OSCE will contribute to such discussions. Kidnapping
for ransom will be the subject of several OSCE debates,
notably within the Security Committee and at a
conference on counter-terrorism in Switzerland at the
end of April.
At that conference, we will also address the issue of
foreign fighters. Over the past few years, an increasing
number of citizens from OSCE participating States
have joined armed groups outside the OSCE area and
have participated in violent conflicts. Syria is just one
particularly prominent example with many such foreign
fighters. There are also other examples, such as the
Horn of Africa.
Once those people return, they often stay in
touch with extremists and terrorists, which means
a heightened risk of terrorist attacks for their home
countries. We therefore need to discuss how we can
prevent such people from being recruited and departing
to those conflict areas. But we also need to reflect on
how to reintegrate returnees from such conflicts into
our societies.
Concerning our third and last main objective of
strengthening the OSCE’s capacity to act, I wish to draw
the Council’s attention to the OSCE’s current reform
process, called “Helsinki+40”. The idea behind the
process is to adapt the OSCE to the changing security
needs, to address governance issues and to redefine
the organization’s approaches. The United Nations
underwent a similar process in 2005, which resulted in

6/24

24/02/2014

the adoption of the World Summit Outcome document.
As for the Helsinki+40 process, we are attempting to
get a clear idea of where the OSCE is heading by 2015,
40 years after the signing of the Helsinki Final Act.
Within the framework of that reform process, we
seek to strengthen the OSCE’s mediation capacities.
During our Swiss chairmanship, we would like to
put Switzerland’s particular expertise in the field
of mediation to the benefit of the organization. Our
goal is to create a unit within the OSCE that is highly
specialized in mediation and dialogue facilitation. It
is absolutely essential for an organization that must
be able to build bridges in all situations, particularly
between the East and the West.
The initial results are encouraging. We would like
to thank the United Nations, more specifically the
Mediation Support Unit, for sharing its knowledge,
for participating in an expert exchange and for
co-organizing a training session.
In that context, I welcome the recent establishment
of a United Nations-OSCE mediation partnership
framework between our Conflict Prevention Centre
and the United Nations Policy and Mediation Division.
I hope that the joint framework will lead to numerous
concrete activities in the field of mediation.
Lastly, we would also like to enhance exchanges
with representatives of civil society during our
chairmanship. In particular, we would like to give
young people a voice. We are organizing a model
OSCE, where youth ambassadors from all participating
States will jointly develop a youth action plan similar
to the Global Model United Nations and the United
Nations System-wide Action Plan on Youth. They
have already started their work, in mid-January in
Vienna. We strongly hope that their plan will inspire
the OSCE Ministerial Council to adopt a youth action
plan of its own and to provide young people with an
institutionalized role within the OSCE.
I have highlighted numerous opportunities for
closer cooperation between the United Nations and the
OSCE. We are eager to intensify the dialogue between
our organizations. My hope is that we will succeed
in translating many ideas for further cooperation into
successful projects.
The President: I thank Mr. Burkhalter for his
briefing.

14-24288

24/02/2014

Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe

S/PV.7117

I shall now give the floor to the members of the
Security Council.

to that issue that best serves the interests of global
security.

Mr. Errázuriz (Chile) (spoke in Spanish): I thank
the Chairperson-in-office of the Organization for
Security and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE) for his
briefing, in which he not only reviewed the activities
of the organization that he is chairing but also notes
the priorities of his country’s chairmanship. We also
thank the Lithuanian presidency, which again brings
us together to discuss the ever-important topic of
cooperation between the United Nations and regional
and subregional organizations.

The OSCE has played an important role in bringing
people together through dialogue, even in the difficult
times during the Cold War. The expansion in the
number of its States members and its partners in the
Mediterranean and Asia shows the importance of the
bridges of understanding that it has built and of its
holistic view of security. That view includes not only the
issue of defence, but also, and primarily, development,
the environment and human welfare. The inclusiveness
and diversity of its 57 States members is a reflection
of that.

As we pointed out in the Council, for Chile collective
action is essential in order to deal with long-standing and
emerging threats. Such action is strengthened through
the involvement of regional and subregional bodies.
That is the sense in which my country understands
Chapter VIII of the Charter of the United Nations,
which leads us to promote active multilateralism with
an effective capacity to incorporate the contribution of
regional and subregional organizations, always subject
to coordination by the United Nations.
Chile wishes to commend the substantial
contribution that the OSCE has made to maintaining
international peace and security, putting into practice in
Europe and beyond the provisions of Chapter VIII of the
Charter with regard to cooperation between the United
Nations and regional and subregional organizations.
In that context, we welcome the announcement of
the Chairperson-in-office with regard to the holding
of a conference in May to review the role of regional
organizations in accordance with Chapter VIII, in line
with the repositioning of the issue made by SecretaryGeneral Ban Ki-moon.
The OSCE originated from the Conference on
Security and Cooperation in Europe, first held in
Helsinki in 1975, when the possibility of a nuclear
holocaust was not a theoretical exercise, as the preamble
to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear
Weapons warns. The organiziation made it possible to
strengthen trust, an essential prerequisite in order to
prevent conflict and address the security dilemma.
One of the lessons of the long crisis that led to the
First World War, of which we will commemorate the
one-hundredth anniversary this year, is the pernicious
effect of arms races. In fact, one of the most emblematic
results of the OSCE is the Treaty on Conventional
Armed Forces in Europe, which is the kind of approach

The three pillars of the United Nations — peace
and security, human rights and development — are
indivisible and mutually reinforcing. Fragility in one
of them inevitably affects the other two. That holistic
view should guide us in this universal Organization and
in regional and subregional organizations.
One point I wish to emphasize is the importance
of conflict prevention and early-warning systems. That
is a central issue, and one that complements the OSCE
principles in the context of a comprehensive approach
to security that goes beyond military and national
perspectives to a multidimensional approach capable
of meeting the current challenges of the international
system.
I would also emphasize the importance of
establishing cooperative ties in the field of prevention,
mainly through education and the establishment or
strengthening of networks.
The OSCE has effectively addressed a varied
agenda that is, by and large, in line with the three
pillars of the United Nations. In this second decade of
the twenty-first century, it would be risky to restrict
the security agenda to the military dimension of
global politics. Security is achieved by addressing
issues of development, the environment, an expanding
and strengtheing democracy, the rule of law, human
rights, including minority rights, the dialogue between
civilizations and the fight against terrorism. The OSCE
is making an important contribution in that regard,
one that has made the human security paradigm an
operational concept.
Once again, we reiterate to the Council the
relevance, through the use of complementarity and of
comparative advantages, of regional and subregional

14-242887/24

S/PV.7117

Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe

organizations in the work of the United Nations on
international peace and security.
Mr. Oh Joon (Republic of Korea): I would like to
extend my warmest congratulations to His Excellency
Mr. Didier Burkhalter, President of the Swiss
Confederation, on the assumption of the position of
Chairperson-in-Office of the Organization for Security
and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE) for 2014. We are
very grateful for his personal briefing today on the
priorities of the OSCE under his chairmanship.
The OSCE’s approach to security is exemplary
among the efforts to address today’s growing security
challenges, which are becoming more complex and
multifaceted. The Republic of Korea appreciates and
supports the OSCE’s unique role in that regard. In
particular, we take note of the fact that the OSCE is
taking meaningful steps to deal with transnational and
emerging threats, such as terrorism, drug trafficking
and challenges to cybersecurity.
Having hosted the Seoul Conference on Cyberspace
in October 2013, the Republic of Korea pays special
attention to the OSCE’s adoption of the initial set of
confidence-building measures to reduce the risks of
conflict stemming from the use of information and
communication technology. We believe that kind of
initiative will provide timely momentum to regional
cooperation to counter new forms of threats.
The Republic of Korea also welcomes the
“Helsinki+40” process, which aims at rebuilding
confidence measures in terms of responding to
regional challenges, which is very much in line with
the work of the Council. In that vein, we support the
OSCE’s commitment to advancing reconciliation in the
Western Balkans, resolving the protracted conflict in
the Southern Caucasus and Transnistria, and dealing
with the emerging crisis in Ukraine, as explained by
the Chairperson-in-Office.
Another area we would like to mention is the OSCE’s
continued effort to promote the implementation of
resolution 1540 (2004), regarding the non-proliferation
of weapons of mass destruction. The Republic of Korea,
as the current Chair of the Security Council Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1540 (2004), highly
values the OSCE’s efforts to enhance cooperation with
the Security Council in that area.
Central Asia and Afghanistan are another region
of shared concern between the United Nations and the

8/24

24/02/2014

OSCE. It is commendable that the OSCE has contributed
to the promotion of security in that region, as shown
by the decision to send an elections support team to
Afghanistan for the presidential and provincial council
elections coming up in April. We expect the OSCE
to continue to support Afghanistan and Central Asia
with its vast experience in confidence-building, the
prevention of conflict and rehabilitation after conflict.
Overall, we would like to reaffirm our support for
the enhanced role of the OSCE as a regional arrangement
under Chapter VIII of the Charter of the United Nations.
As a strong partner of the United Nations in promoting
international peace and security, we look forward to
closer cooperation between the OSCE and the Council.
Ms. Lucas (Luxembourg) (spoke in French): I, too,
would like to wish a warm welcome to the Security
Council to His Excellency Mr. Didier Burkhalter,
President of the Swiss Confederation and Head of
the Federal Department of Foreign Affairs. I thank
him for his very clear briefing on his priorities as
Chairperson-in-Office of the Organization for Security
and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE) for 2014.
I will begin my remarks with a subject that the
Chairperson-in-Office mentioned and that concerns us
all, namely, Ukraine. We were shocked last week by the
escalation of violence in several Ukrainian cities, which
caused dozens of deaths and numerous injuries. In
Ukraine, as in other participating States, it is essential
that the commitments under the OSCE framework be
fully respected and implemented. Those responsible for
violence must be held accountable for their actions.
We welcome the efforts made ​​by the international
community to stop the violence and find a peaceful
and negotiated end to the crisis. We call on all political
forces to show restraint and pursue dialogue. The unity,
sovereignty, independence and territorial integrity of
Ukraine must be preserved. A lasting political solution
to the crisis requires the formation of a new inclusive
Government, constitutional reform and the holding of
democratic, free and impartial elections.
The OSCE’s contribution will be important in
supporting that political solution. The Chairperson-inOffice has given us a glimpse of the shape that that
contribution could take, in close cooperation with the
European Union, the Council of Europe and other
partners. We believe that in Ukraine, the OSCE will
once again be able to play its role as a bridge between

14-24288

24/02/2014

Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe

S/PV.7117

the East and the West in order to promote peace,
democracy and stability.

Their independence and impartiality are at the heart of
the organization.

As a member of the OSCE, Luxembourg fully
supports the priorities of the Swiss chairmanship.
We appreciate the close coordination of its priorities
with those of Serbia, which will assume the OSCE
chairmanship in 2015, and its strengthening of the
continuity of its activities, and thereby the effectiveness
of the organization.

During our chairmanship of the Forum for
Security Cooperation in the past four months of 2013,
Luxembourg worked to help the OSCE better respond
to the challenges posed by small arms and weapons,
and stocks of ammunition. We also encouraged
cooperation between the OSCE and the United Nations
in Afghanistan, in the light of the major challenges that
country must face in 2014.

We also welcome the close cooperation that has
been consolidated between successive chairmanships
since the Dublin Ministerial Council of 2012 with a
view to deepening the approach taken to envisioning
a Euro-Atlantic-Eurasian security community that
is free, democratic, united and indivisible. The
recent appointment of eight coordinators to conduct
discussions is a further step towards advancing the
“Helsinki+40” process.
We welcome the intention of the Swiss
chairmanship to enhance cooperation between the
OSCE and its partners on the ground. The OSCE plays
an essential role in mediation and in dealing with
and resolving conflicts, working in harmony with the
United Nations and other regional organizations. That
is the case in Central Asia and the Southern Caucasus,
through the Minsk Group and the process of Geneva
talks. That is also the case in Moldova with regard to
the Transnistrian conflict. In Kosovo, the OSCE has
provided indispensable support in facilitating elections
in the four northern municipalities, pursuant to the First
Agreement on Principles Governing Normalization
of Relations between Belgrade and Pristina. In that
regard, we welcome the successful holding yesterday of
the initial elections towards the selection of the mayor
of Mitrovica-North.
The Swiss chairmanship has rightly focused its
chairmanship under the leitmotif of creating a security
community for the benefit of everyone. Luxembourg
shares the importance that gives to the human
dimension of security. The OSCE was founded on the
idea that lasting security is possible only if human
rights and fundamental freedoms are respected. In
that context, I would like to highlight the continuous
support my country provides to the activities of the
Office for Democratic Institutions and Human Rights,
the OSCE Representative on Freedom of the Media and
the OSCE High Commissioner on National Minorities.

I wish to assure the Chairperson-in-Office of the
OSCE and his team that Luxembourg will spare no
effort to support their efforts. In order to adhere to
the goal of making this briefing more interactive, I
will conclude my remarks by asking a question to the
Chairperson-in-Office. He referred to the phenomenon
of foreign fighters, which is of particular concern in
Syria at present. In resolution 2139 (2014), which was
just adopted the day before yesterday, the Security
Council demanded that all foreign fighters immediately
withdraw from Syria. In his veiw, what contribution can
the OSCE make to fighting against the phenomenon of
foreign fighters in general?
Mr. Hmoud (Jordan) (spoke in Arabic): I thank
you, Madam President, for convening this meeting.
It is my pleasure to warmly welcome the President
of Switzerland, Mr. Didier Burkhalter. Allow me to
congratulate him on assuming the chairmanship of
the Organization for Security and Cooperation in
Europe (OSCE) in 2014. We have full confidence in his
abilities to strengthen the capacities of the organization
in addressing security issues in a global framework of
cooperation.
The OSCE, like its predecessor the Conference
for Security and Cooperation in Europe, has played an
important and effective role in tackling the issues that
represent a threat to regional stability in Europe. That
helps strengthen security and stability throughout the
world. There is no doubt that, without its contribution,
Europe and the world would be less stable and less
safe than they are today. Jordan therefore greatly
appreciates the OSCE’s efforts and its cooperation
with the United Nations with a view to upholding
the purposes and principles of the United Nations as
well as the provisions of Chapter VIII of the Charter
of the United Nations. That will inevitably help boost
collective security, in particular in the spheres of
preventive diplomacy, confidence-building measures,

14-242889/24

S/PV.7117

Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe

curbing the arms race, tackling transnational threats
and in mediation, reconciliation and negotiation.
In that regard, the OSCE, as part of its three
dimensions in the field of security, has optimal tools
for responding to international challenges and building
stability and peace. Security and peace cannot be
achieved by tackling international challenges via
military means alone; rather, a comprehensive approach
is required, incorporating economic, social and human
elements. That is at the heart of the Helsinki process and
of United Nations efforts to resolve various conflicts.
Jordan, which has been a Mediterranean partner
of the OSCE since 1998, attaches great importance
to the role of the partnership between the OSCE and
a number of Mediterranean countries with a view
to strengthening the security regime in the EuroMediterranean region. It positively supports the pursuit
of partnership in various spheres through this forum
for dialogue and exchanging ideas and knowledge on
regional security. Recent events in the Mediterranean
region have highlighted the need to bolster and advance
that cooperation in a tangible way, based on the concept
of the complementarity of security in the Mediterranean
and Europe.
With regard to the ongoing cooperation between
the OSCE and the Afghan Government in tackling the
challenges to peace and security there, we welcome
the efforts deployed to complement those of the
international community to strengthen democracy and
stability, including through technical assistance in the
organization of the upcoming local and presidential
elections.
We attach particular importance to the various
OSCE initiatives seeking a peaceful resolution to the
crisis in Ukraine and to its efforts towards settling the
crises in the Western Balkans and the South Caucasus
as well as discussions on international cooperation.
The OSCE has proved its ability to play a leading role
in coordination with the United Nations and regional
organizations, including the European Union, in
resolving conflicts and in strengthening peace in the
Balkans. In that respect, we welcome the efforts the
OSCE has made in Kosovo in strengthening democratic
institutions and in enhancing human rights and the rule
of law. We commend OSCE efforts in supporting local
elections in northern Kosovo. The organization’s work
in Kosovo, alongside to the United Nations Interim
Administration Mission in Kosovo, as well as its role as

10/24

24/02/2014

coordinator with United Nations agencies and regional
offices contributes greatly to developing cooperation
with the United Nations on the ground.
There is no doubt that addressing international
threats and challenges is part and parcel of the OSCE’s
main task, which is why it is necessary to cooperate
in finding solutions with the organization to address
repercussions from the dangers of climate change and
natural disasters, which, along with cybercrime and the
threat of weapons of mass destruction, constitute new
security threats. Along with international terrorism,
which remains a genuine threat in all countries of the
world, those challenges require the convergence of
the international community’s efforts to confront the
threats at different levels, including the establishment
of cooperation between the United Nations and regional
organizations such as the OSCE. We commend the
Council’s unanimous adoption of resolution 2133
(2014), which calls for outlawing the paying of ransom
or political concessions for the release of hostages. We
call upon all States to implement the resolution and to
boost cooperation to put an end to that phenomenon.
In his briefing, the Chairperson-in-Office
highlighted the key elements of the Swiss chairmanship
of the OSCE, including respect for human rights in
combating torture, which is a crime in contravention
of the principles of international law. It is necessary for
the international community to work to combat such
actions, because human life and human dignity are at
the foundation of human rights.
In conclusion, we express our support for the pursuit
and intensification of cooperation between the United
Nations and the OSCE by coordinating international
efforts and in drawing up a common strategic vision to
confront common security challenges at all levels.
Mr. Cherif (Chad) (spoke in French): At the outset,
allow me to very warmly welcome His Excellency
Mr. Didier Burkhalter, Chairperson-in-Office of the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe
(OSCE) and to thank him for his briefing on the
priorities of his chairmanship and, above all, for the
strong commitment that he has expressed to meet the
challenges facing his organization.
As Mr. Burkhalter has pointed out, the OSCE is the
largest regional security organization in the world, with
57 States members in Europe, North America and Asia.
The OSCE has been recognized since 1992 as a regional
organization under Chapter VIII of the Charter of the

14-24288

24/02/2014

Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe

United Nations. Beyond the regions it covers, the OSCE
can play an important role in the settlement of conflicts
that the international community faces. The priorities
of the Swiss chairmanship for 2014 in the three areas
covered by the organization — politico-military,
economic-environmental and human — will
undoubtedly contribute to improving the situation in
member States confronting the challenges of insecurity
and violations of human rights, whether linked to the
environment or to transnational crime. The approach
chosen by Chairperson-in-Office Burkhalter is
intended to strengthen initiatives aimed at dialogue,
transparency and prevention, whether in the area of
conflict or in the environmental sphere. He would also
like to make the most of mediation and solidarity, which
are appropriate tools to strengthen the organization’s
efforts. Strengthening institutions by reforming the
OSCE is also among his priorities, because he must
provide the organization with an effective means to
face the challenges of the day.
Opening up the OSCE to new members and civil
society should contribute to bringing them together
and providing a fresh impetus to the organization.
Unfortunately, the OSCE will face no shortage of
difficult challenges when it comes to peace, given
the conflicts that have taken place recently in certain
countries and regions, which is the case in Georgia,
Bosnia and Herzegovina, the Western Balkans, Kosovo,
Nagorno Karabakh and the Southern Caucuses. The
recent events that we have seen in Ukraine in recent
days will be a fresh challenge to overcome.
Issues related to respect for human rights are also
part of the many problems to be addressed, as is the
fight against the growth of transnational crime. In
that context, strengthening collaboration between the
United Nations and the OSCE is of major importance.
The OSCE deserves special attention from the Security
Council, commensurate with the scale of the difficulties
it faces. That is why we support the comments made
by the Chairperson-in-Office, and we call upon the
Security Council to unreservedly strengthen its
cooperation with the OSCE and, in particular, with
its Chairperson-in-Office in order to successfully
accomplish the priorities set for the chairmanship in
2014.
Mrs. Perceval (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish):
Thank you, Madam President, for arranging for this
opportunity to have an exchange. I would like to welcome
His Excellency Mr. Didier Burkhalter, President of the

S/PV.7117

Swiss Confederation and Head of the Swiss Federal
Department for Foreign Affairs. I commend him on
his assumption of the chairmanship-in-offfice of the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe
(OSCE). I also thank him for his briefing on the
Swiss priorities during his chairmanship and on the
possibilities for cooperation between the OSCE and the
United Nations.
Argentina appreciates the cooperation that regional
and subregional organizations make to the maintenance
of international peace and security. Debates such as
the one we are having today enable us to reflect on the
various dimensions of the links between regional and
subregional organizations and the United Nations in
the maintenance of international peace and security.
That is a subject to which my country attaches great
importance, and we welcome the trend that we have seen
in the Council to maintain dialogues of this kind. We
hope this will be built upon further as a good practice
and will be extended to other regional and subregional
organizations on the same footing with equal treatment.
Regional and subregional organizations are key to
strengthening the multilateral system. They give greater
legitimacy to, and render more effective the actions of,
the international community in addressing challenges
to peace and in promoting dialogue and cooperation.
Their contribution complements the work of the
United Nations and builds on their knowledge of their
own regions, as well with regard to the causes of the
conflicts. Such irreplaceable comparative advantages
are of great value to efforts for conflict prevention and
resolution, peacekeeping and peacebuilding. In that
context, I reiterate my country’s appreciation for the
important work carried out by the OSCE in the areas of
early warning, conflict prevention, crisis management
and post-conflict situations.
The cooperation between the United Nations
and the OSCE, characterized by its scope both in
geographical terms and in content, has made it possible
to achieve a more coordinated approach among various
international actors. It is fitting to underscore, among
other examples, OSCE cooperation with the United
Nations Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo,
which has contributed to the work undertaken towards
normalizing relations and advancing stability in the
region.
We also believe it to be important to again
underscore the close cooperation between the OSCE

14-2428811/24

S/PV.7117

Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe

and the United Nations Regional Centre for Preventive
Diplomacy in Central Asia. Such cooperation certainly
indicates the important contribution of the Regional
Centre in dealing with both national issues that
affect regional stability and the cross-border impact
of the threat of terrorism, organized crime and drug
trafficking, as well as environmental degradation and
water-resource management.
With regard to Switzerland’s priorities during its
chairmanship, we welcome its close alignment with
Serbia, which will succeed it in the OSCE chairmanship
in 2015, in the context of a two-year work plan in order
to ensure the continuity of activities and to increase the
organization’s effectiveness.
We welcome the emphasis on regional cooperation
in the Western Balkans, the promotion of dialogue
among the Kosovo communities and support for
OSCE activities and institutions on the ground. We
also welcome the dialogue and rapprochement in
the Southern Caucasus through participation in the
Geneva talks on regional stability with a view to
promoting security and stability. We are also pleased by
Switzerland’s readiness to support the role of the OSCE
as a platform for the exchange of ideas and conventional
arms control talks in Europe.
For Argentina, based on our institutional definition
of human rights as a State policy and our social culture
founded on the principles, norms and practices of
equality, non-discrimination, individual freedom and
social justice, it is particularly appreciated that the
implementation of obligations of a human dimension
focused in areas such as the fight against torture, respect
for human rights and the rule of law in combating
terrorism, the protection of human rights defenders,
the promotion of democratic elections and respect for
the rights of those belonging to the various different
minorities are at the heart of the Swiss chairmanship. For
its part, bearing in mind the importance of cooperation
in the fight against transnational threats, such as
terrorism, we welcome the holding of a conference to
address the response to such threats, while at the same
time ensuring respect for human rights.
With regard to a topic on the Security Council
agenda, as is the case with Afghanistan, we welcome
the OSCE decision to send, at the request of the
Government of Afghanistan, a support team for the
presidential and provincial council elections that will
take place in April. That decision is an important

12/24

24/02/2014

contribution to the international community’s efforts to
promote democracy and greater stability in the country
in the context of its transition and the withdrawal of the
international security forces during this year. It is proof
of the positive synergies that are possible between the
United Nations and the OSCE.
Finally, we appreciate the high-level dialogue
proposed by Switzerland in order to advance the reform
process of the OSCE in line with the mandate entrusted
by the OSCE Ministerial Council to the chairmanship
at the end of 2012 with a view to improving the
organization’s ability to act. We agree with and support
the vision and the priorities set by Switzerland for the
work of the OSCE this year. We highlight the emphasis
on the participation of young people. We share and
appreciate Switzerland’s commitment towards gender
equality in all decision-making processes related to
inclusive and fair democracies.
We therefore trust that the Security Council and
the entire United Nations system will strengthen
cooperation efforts with the OSCE during the current
chairmanship and with other regional and subregional
organizations so as to find together the best answers
to the challenges facing us in order to ensure human
rights, democracy, peace and security.
I could not conclude without expressing Argentina’s
conviction and support because we believe that, in
the situation facing Ukraine today, only dialogue, not
violence, between the people and the various political
and social movements in Ukraine will lead to a peaceful
and democratic settlement of their differences.
Mr. Nduhungirehe (Rwanda): At the outset, I
would like to welcome His Excellency Mr. Didier
Burkhalter, President of the Swiss Confederation and
Chairperson-in-Office of the Organization for Security
and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE), and thank him
for his comprehensive briefing. I also congratulate his
country on its assumption of the chairmanship of the
OSCE for 2014.
Almost 40 years since its establishment, the role
of the OSCE, through its early-warning, conflict
prevention, crisis management and post-conflict
rehabilitation systems, has proved that the organization
is one of the important partners of the United Nations
in the maintenance of international peace and security.
We also believe that such kinds of interactions with
regional and subregional organizations are a good

14-24288

24/02/2014

Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe

opportunity to strengthen the implementation of the
mandates of those organizations.
We note the official launch of the “Helsinki+40”
project by the OSCE Parliamentary Assembly in
January. We look forward to the completion of the
OSCE strategic document in 2015, and we hope that the
conclusion of that exercise will help the organization
to contribute to the maintenance of international peace
and security in a more efficient manner.
In the meantime, I would also like to encourage
the OSCE to extend its cooperation to other regional
organizations, mainly in the area of experience-sharing,
most especially with the African Union, an organization
that is evolving into a viable and irreplaceable partner
for the maintenance of peace and security on the
African continent.
Allow me also to express our appreciation for
the important role that the OSCE is currently playing
in facilitating various processes aimed at settling
the crises and conflicts in its region, especially the
continued efforts of the co-Chairs of the OSCE
Minsk Group to mediate on the Nagorno Karabakh
conflict between Armenia and Azerbaijan. Rwanda
supports the position contained in the joint statement
of the Presidents of the OSCE Minsk Group co-Chair
countries, issued on 18 June 2013, which reiterates that
only a negotiated settlement can lead to peace, stability
and reconciliation, opening opportunities for regional
development and cooperation.
Another important contribution of the OSCE that
we value is its assistance in the destruction of surplus
weapons left by the Cold War, especially in Ukraine
and Georgia, as well as its support for arms control
through its Forum for Security Cooperation. It is also
very encouraging that the modernization of the Vienna
Document and exchange of ideas on conventional
arms control are among the priorities of the Swiss
chairmanship.
In the Balkans, we commend the active contribution
of the OSCE in the recent municipal elections in Kosovo,
its contribution to promoting the rule of law and its
continued support of the Roma and Sinti minorities.
With respect to the OSCE’s efforts in combating
transnational threats, I welcome the OSCE’s intention
to organize a conference in April on foreign fighters in
other countries. I look forward to the positive outcome
of the conference.

S/PV.7117

On Ukraine, we are very alarmed by the ongoing
situation in that OSCE member State. The situation
has proved that it has the potential to take a dangerous
twist, unfortunately leading to dozens of deaths and
injuries and the destruction of property. We welcome
the efforts of the OSCE Chairperson-in-Office to find
a peaceful solution to the crisis, including by proposing
the establishment of an international contact group on
Ukraine and the appointment of a special envoy to that
country.
We also commend Poland, Germany and France
for brokering, on 21 February, the agreement on
the settlement of the crisis in Ukraine between the
Government and the opposition. We took note of the
turn of events that followed the signing of that deal,
namely, the moves by the Supreme Rada to release
former Prime Minister Yulia Tymoshenko from a prison
hospital and to divest President Viktor Yanukovych.
Nonetheless, we hope that all parties will implement
the agreement in good faith, particularly by refraining
from all kinds of violence and by putting in place a
Government of national unity that will carry out the
necessary constitutional and legal reforms, leading to
presidential elections scheduled before the end of this
year. We call on all international actors to respect the
sovereignty of Ukraine and ensure that the process is
Ukrainian-led and Ukrainian-owned.
Finally, I would like to express my country’s
support for the vision and priorities of the Swiss
Chairperson of the OSCE’s work this year. We look
forward to continued good cooperation between the
OSCE and the United Nations in maintaining peace and
security in accordance with Chapter VIII of the Charter
of the United Nations.
Mr. Sarki (Nigeria): We are pleased to welcome
Mr. Didier Burkhalter to the Council and to congratulate
him on assuming the chairmanship of the Organization
for Security and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE). We
thank him in particular for his very informative briefing
on the OSCE’s plans and priorities for 2014 and would
like to wish him a very successful tenure.
The OSCE remains a key component of European
security. Its importance for building strong and
genuinely cooperative relationships among its 50-some
States members was quite evident from the briefing we
just heard. We are pleased that the OSCE is not only
making noteworthy progress as a regional organization,
but also enhancing cooperation with the United

14-2428813/24

S/PV.7117

Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe

Nations in the prevention, management and resolution
of conflicts in accordance with Chapter VIII of the
Charter of the United Nations.
In that regard, we commend the close cooperation
between the OSCE and the United Nations Interim
Administration Mission in Kosovo. We appreciate
the important role the OSCE is currently playing in
facilitating various processes aimed at settling crises
and conflicts in its region. We also welcome the high
priority that the Chairperson-in-Office has placed on
the agreement reached between the parties towards
the settlement of the crisis in Ukraine. We believe that
the implementation process will be strengthened by
the support and expertise of the OSCE, and we urge
that mediation, dialogue and cooperation be accorded
priority in the search for an enduring solution.
We also welcome the OSCE’s efforts in assisting
Azerbaijan and Armenia in finding a peaceful solution
to the Nagorno-Karabakh conflict, and we welcome the
European Union-led dialogue between Belgrade and
Pristina. The OSCE’s role in support of the dialogue is
very important.
The emphasis placed on human rights, women’s
and civil society issues, freedom of the press and the
promotion of democracy on the agenda of the OSCE
deserves our encouragement and, indeed, our broad
support. Challenges encountered on those cross-cutting
issues underscore the need for a further increase in
international corporation in order to jointly address
their root causes.
Going forward, pressing challenges such as the
ongoing tensions in South Ossetia, the pursuit of
freedom of the press, the safety of journalists and
the settlement of territorial disputes in the Southern
Caucasus region present a unique opportunity to
promote change in the region. We share Mr. Burkhalter’s
commitment to effectively cope with transnational
threats to international peace and security such as
human trafficking, drug trafficking and terrorism.
Since transnational crimes are not limited by territorial
boundaries, combating them requires complete
cooperation. For that reason, we urge the OSCE to
continue to create opportunities for corporation and
information exchanges with regional security agencies,
including the Committee of Intelligence and Security
Services of Africa.
Finally, we believe that the vision that the
Chairperson-in-Office has outlined ensures a very

14/24

24/02/2014

promising future for the OSCE. It is a vision that will
promote regional stability and international peace and
security. Such an agenda advances the work of the
Security Council, and is thus deserving of our support
and endorsement. But the OSCE must maintain its role
in the region. It must retain its fundamental character
as the most inclusive Atlantic forum for consultation
and joint action.
Ms. King (Australia): I would also like to thank His
Excellency President Didier Burkhalter and welcome
him to the Council as Chairperson-in-Office of the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe
(OSCE).
Cooperation with regional and subregional
organizations clearly strengthens the United Nations
efforts to maintain international peace and security,
prevent conflict and restore stability in post-conflict
situations. The OSCE provides welcome expertise in
those areas, and close cooperation with it will assist the
Council as it endeavours to fulfil its mandate.
As an Asian Partner for Cooperation with the
OSCE since 2009, Australia strongly supports the
OSCE’s work. We welcome the 2014 OSCE priorities
for fostering security and stability, improving people’s
lives and enhancing its own capacity to act.
With regard to territorial disputes, we welcome the
OSCE’s efforts to reduce tensions and engage parties
in dialogue. Those efforts are crucial in helping to
resolve territorial disputes such as those concerning
Nagorno-Karabakh, Transnistria, Abkhazia and South
Ossetia.
We welcome recent developments in Ukraine,
which has seen moves towards peaceful dialogue —
developments that were backed by calls from the OSCE
for restraint from violence, resolution through dialogue
and political means and respect for international
humanitarian norms. Australia of course shares those
views. It will be important in coming months for the
OSCE to assist in ensuring that Ukraine remains able to
transition to a new Government and a new Constitution
and to fulfil the aspirations of the Ukrainian people. In
that regard, Australia welcomes the OSCE’s willingness
to remain engaged and President Burkhalter’s offer that
the OSCE support Ukraine as an impartial witness to
the implementation of agreed steps.
We commend the OSCE’s recent appointment of a
special representative for the Western Balkans, a region

14-24288

24/02/2014

Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe

where the OSCE has worked constructively to facilitate
the recent peaceful and fair conduct of the mayoral and
municipal elections in northern Kosovo, which was a
key milestone in ensuring full implementation of the
19 AprilAagreement. In Bosnia and Herzegovina, the
special representative’s efforts will be particularly
important in improving the security environment in the
country.
We also welcome the OSCE’s continued constructive
contribution to supporting Afghanistan’s security and
stability with an OSCE election and support team to
assist with the presidential and provincial elections in
April.
We are pleased the OSCE is placing priority on
addressing transnational threats. We strongly support
the OSCE’s ongoing efforts to counter terrorism by
tackling a number of emerging aspects of the terrorism
threat. First, we welcome President Burkhalter’s focus
on kidnapping for ransom. In adopting resolution 2133
(2014) a few weeks ago, the Council sent a united
message about the increase in terror- financing through
kidnapping for ransom and about the role that regional
organizations must play in addressing that threat. We
agree with President Burkhalter that we should find a
common response to that challenge, and we encourage
the OSCE to use the strong framework provided
by resolution 2133 (2014) to continue to strengthen
awareness, capacity and cooperation among members
so as to prevent the payment of ransoms to terrorists
and draw on the support of the Security Council
counter-terrorism entities and their expert bodies, as
well as of the Global Counterterrorism Forum and its
Algiers Memorandum on Good Practices.
Secondly, we support the OSCE’s work on
countering violent extremism and radicalization.
The changing nature of the terrorism threat and the
fact that it is more diffuse, with groups intent on
taking advantage of social, economic and governance
vulnerabilities, have driven the Security Council,
and United Nations States Members more broadly, to
recognize that countering violent extremist strategies
is essential for preventing the spread of terrorism. The
OSCE is clearly doing valuable work on that issue, in
particular with its forthcoming resource on community
policing. The Security Council’s Counter-Terrorism
Committee would benefit from the OSCE’s sharing its
work and experience in that area to reinforce the way
in which the Council engages with the United Nations
membership on its counter-terrorism obligations.

S/PV.7117

Thirdly, we note the OSCE’s intention to address
the issue of the growing trend of citizens travelling
offshore to engage in or support terrorist activities
or conflict. Like other members of the international
community, Australia is very concerned about that,
and it is important for the international community to
work together in order to address the issue, including
by enforcing Security Council travel bans and through
effective measures to counter violent extremism.
Australia also values the important work being done
by the OSCE in countering trafficking in persons, and
we are pleased to have supported an OSCE programme
promoting human rights protection for trafficked
persons and vulnerable groups in Central Asia.
We also welcome the OSCE’s intention to refocus
its agenda to address the use of torture. Australia
deplores the use of torture by any country and in any
circumstances. We agree with President Burkhalter
that regional organizations need to work to implement
on-the-ground commitments undertaken in the
context of the United Nations, specifically in this
case by ratifying the Convention against Torture and
Other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or
Punishment. The international community needs to
work collaboratively to eliminate the use of torture.
Australia looks forward to working with the OSCE to
achieve that.
President Burkhalter has given the Council a clear
sense of where the OSCE and the United Nations may
serve to strengthen each other’s efforts. The Council
should continue to work closely with the OSCE. We
wish President Burkhalter every success in leading the
OSCE in its important work this year.
Mr. Araud (France) (spoke in French): I welcome
the presence of Mr. Didier Burkhalter, President of the
Swiss Confederation, and I congratulate his country on
its accession to the chairmanship of the Organization
for Security and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE) in
2014. The United Nations and the OSCE share common
objectives, one at the global level and the other at the
regional level, namely, to strengthen the links and
dialogue among States to better ensure their security.
In that regard, I welcome the proposed mediation
in Ukraine put forward by the Swiss Chairperson-inOffice of the OSCE. All efforts must be made to end
the crisis peacefully while respecting the wishes of
the Ukrainian people and the legitimate interests
of all stakeholders. Following the violence that has

14-2428815/24

S/PV.7117

Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe

caused such grief in Ukraine in recent days, we must
support the transformations under way in that country.
Institutions are being established. A new Government
will soon have to organize elections as soon as possible.
France and the European Union will continue their
efforts to favour democratic reform and modernization
in Ukraine, with full respect for its unity, integrity and
independence.
The OSCE will have a major role to play. As it
unites all of the States concerned by the crisis, it finds
itself in a unique position to overcome the geopolitical
concerns of the various parties. An artificial fault line
must not again be created in Europe, as Ukraine would
suffer from that by losing its role as a bridge at the heart
of our continent.
I will dwell on three points regarding cooperation
between the United Nations and the OSCE. From
Central Asia and Georgia to Kosovo and Bosnia and
Herzegovina, the OSCE and the United Nations have
shown their capacity to work hand-in-hand. That
complementarity draws on the commitment of the
OSCE on the ground. Through its missions, the OSCE is
present in the Caucasus, Central Asia and the Balkans,
often side-by-side with the United Nations. In the
Caucasus, the OSCE is working to promote dialogue
and rebuild trust — indeed, the Swiss chairmanship has
made that one of its priorities.
As co-chair of the Minsk Group with the United
States and the Russian Federation, France has worked
to help Armenia and Azerbaijan find a peaceful solution
to the conflict in Nagorno Karabakh. The resumption
of high-level talks between the two Presidents gives us
hope for progress in the peace process.
On Georgia, France supports the Geneva talks
and the role played by the OSCE together with the
European Union and the United Nations, and reaffirms
its support for the territorial integrity of the country.
We welcome the readiness of the Swiss chairmanship
of the OSCE to reopen discussions on the presence of
the OSCE in Georgia on the condition that the parties
show flexibility and creativity.
In Central Asia, the OSCE contributes to regional
stability. Its cooperation with the United Nations
Office on Drugs and Crime in combatting crosscutting
threats is an example of successful cooperation with the
United Nations. The OSCE will also have a role to play
in observing the presidential elections in Afghanistan
scheduled for the spring.

16/24

24/02/2014

In the Balkans, the OSCE’s collaboration with the
United Nations Interim Administration Mission in
Kosovo allowed the Kosovo electorate to participate
in peaceful municipal elections in November 2013.
The OSCE carried out that task with professionalism,
thanks again to its substantial presence on the ground.
It will once again be called upon in 2014 to facilitate the
holding of a number of elections to be held in Kosovo,
Serbia and Bosnia and Herzegovina.
Secondly, the in-depth analysis undertaken within
the OSCE contributes to broader progress on security.
We welcome the willingness of the Swiss chairmanship
to update the 2011 Vienna Document on Confidenceand Security-Building Measures. Likewise, we support
the intention to encourage the implementation of the
Code of Conduct on Politico-Military Aspects of
Security, which is important for ensuring democratic
oversight of security and the armed forces. Moreover,
we welcome the Swiss intention to organize a number
of workshops focused on transnational threats and
aimed at promoting cooperation between police forces.
Finally, we endorse the priority given to promoting
the upholding of commitments undertaken by
participating States on human rights over the past
40 years. In that regard, we attach particular importance
to the freedom of expression and media freedom.
It is a fact that the OSCE covers a vast area,
stretching from Vancouver to Vladivostok, that shares
common values — an expanse marked by the belief that
the security of the Euro-Atlantic and Eurasian regions
goes hand-in-hand with the promotion of human rights,
democracy and the rule of law. Those values are also
at the heart of the work of the United Nations. France
therefore supports the dialogue launched at the Dublin
Ministerial Council on the political future of the OSCE
in the context of the “Helsinki+40” process. Those
reforms will allow the OSCE to continue to be a modern
and effective partner for the United Nations.
France endorses the desire of the Chairperson-inOffice to strengthen the mediation capacities of the
OSCE, which is a measure of its continuing commitment
to work with the United Nations in seeking lasting
solutions to conflicts.
I conclude by once again wishing Switzerland — and
its successor, Serbia, with whom it has defined the
OSCE’s priorities — the greatest of success during its
term in office and by assuring it of France’s support.

14-24288

24/02/2014

Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe

Mr. Tatham (United Kingdom): I would like to join
my colleagues in welcoming the President of the Swiss
Confederation, His Excellency Mr. Didier Burkhalter,
to the Council today, and to thank him for setting out his
priorities as Chairperson-in-Office of the Organization
for Security and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE).
The United Kingdom strongly supports the OSCE.
As a major regional security organization in the
European space, it is well-placed to complement many
areas of the work of the United Nations. The strength
of the OSCE’s institutions means that, when the will
of all its participating States is present, the OSCE can
significantly contribute to the promotion of security,
stability, democracy and the rule of law across its
region.
I would like to express the United Kingdom’s strong
support for Swiss priorities in the OSCE. As Chair of the
Security Committee, the United Kingdom is working
closely with the OSCE chairmanship to develop many
of those priorities. We welcome the focus on counterterrorism, notably on disrupting terrorist financing,
by working in support of resolution 2133 (2014) to end
revenue streams obtained by kidnap for ransom. We
also welcome the OSCE’s continuing work in a number
of other areas, not least those related to resolution 1540
(2004), on the non-proliferation of weapons of mass
destruction, and subsequent resolutions to encourage
regional bodies to assist in implementation; resolution
2117 (2013), on small arms and light weapons, including
in relation to the Arms Trade Treaty; and resolution
1325 (2000), on women and peace and security. With
regard to the latter, I would like to stress the inclusion
of preventing sexual violence in conflict.
We also welcome the Swiss focus this year on
the Western Balkans, where the OSCE has a longstanding presence. It can add value there to the
actions of the European Union and other international
organizationsm — for example, through election
facilitation, through intercommunity relations, on
media freedom and on the rule of law. In Bosnia and
Herzegovina, we have been deeply concerned by the
violence that has accompanied recent protests. Those
protests must be a wake-up call for all of us. There needs
to be a major international effort to help strengthen
Bosnia and Herzegovina’s institutions and its territorial
integrity. The OSCE will undoubtedly have a role in
that effort.
An important focus for the international community,
including the OSCE, is the current situation in

S/PV.7117

Ukraine, which has seen serious violence and dramatic
developments in recent days. That violence has led to
the deaths of more than 80 people and left more than
600 injured. Such horrific scenes have no place in
twenty-first century Europe. Our condolences go out
to the families of all those who lost their lives, and our
sympathies to go those injured.
Events have been moving swiftly in Ukraine,
as Yanukovych has left Kiev. In his absence, the
Ukrainian Parliament has voted in a series of decrees
by large majorities, the details of which were circulated
to Council members this morning in a letter from the
Permanent Mission of Ukraine to the United Nations.
They include the formation of a unity Government.
That Government must now move rapidly to build a
stable, inclusive and fair political system and work to
fulfil the aspirations of the people of Ukraine. They
must create the conditions that will allow for free and
fair elections in May and ensure accountability for the
serious human rights violations and acts of violence
that we have witnessed during the past three months.
We hope the Government will call on the undoubted
expertise of the OSCE. Free and fair elections are
crucial for rebuilding the confidence of Ukrainians and
avoiding future tension.
We would like to pay tribute to the work of the OSCE
in Ukraine. Last December’s OSCE Ministerial Council
took place in Kiev against a backdrop of large-scale
public protests. Since then, the OSCE has played a
positive role in efforts to support a peaceful solution
through the good offices of the OSCE for mediation.
We welcome the announcement that Mr. Burkhalter has
appointed the respected Swiss diplomat Tim Guldimann
as his personal envoy to Ukraine.
The United Kingdom is committed to supporting
a stable, united and economically prosperous Ukraine.
The role of the international community must be to
allow ordinary Ukrainians to decide their future.
That is not a zero-sum game. All in the international
community want a stable and prosperous Ukraine. We
all now need to work together help restore stability and
protect Ukraine’s economy.
I again thank Mr. Burkhalter for his presentation
today. The United Kingdom will continue working
closely with him and his team in Vienna to ensure that
our shared vision for the OSCE as a forum for dialogue
and cooperation across an often divided region can be
advanced during 2014.

14-2428817/24

S/PV.7117

Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe

Mrs. DiCarlo (United States of America): I, too,
would like to welcome the Organization for Security
and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE) Chairperson-inOffice, President Didier Burkhalter, to the Security
Council and to thank him for today’s briefing on OSCE
activities under Swiss leadership.
We commend the Chairperson-in-Office for his
efforts to promote security and stability, strengthen the
OSCE’s capacity to combat transnational threats, address
protracted conflicts, ensure security after natural
disasters and advance human rights and fundamental
freedoms. We also commend Chairperson-in-Office
Burkhalter’s continued engagement on Ukraine and
note that he has repeatedly confirmed the OSCE’s
readiness to assist Ukraine in securing a peaceful way
forward.
The United States is closely monitoring
developments in Ukraine. We have consistently
advocated a de-escalation of violence, constitutional
change, a coalition Government and early elections.
The unshakable principle guiding events must be that
the people of Ukraine determine their own future.
We welcome constructive work in the Supreme
Rada and continue to urge the prompt formation of
a broad, technocratic Government of national unity.
Going forward, we will work with other States in
appropriate European and international organizations
to support a strong, prosperous, united and democratic
Ukraine. We urge Ukrainian authorities to seize
the opportunities for OSCE assistance, including
offers from the Chairperson-in-Office, the Office for
Democratic Institutions and Human Rights and the
OSCE Representative on the Freedom of the Media for
mediation, fact-finding missions, election monitoring,
legislative review or other assistance. Welcoming those
measures without delay would provide transparency to
citizens in desperate need of answers and accountability.
The United Nations-OSCE agenda is ambitious and
robust, with the two organizations working together
on a wide range of issues, from counter-terrorism
and counter-trafficking to early warning and conflict
settlement to democratization and good governance.
The memorandum of understanding between the OSCE
and the United Nations on joint projects to prevent the
proliferation of weapons of mass destruction and the
United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime-OSCE joint
action plan to address transnational threats represent
two concrete examples of the organizations’ work
together to tackle key issues of global importance.

18/24

24/02/2014

We look forward to the full implementation of those
agreements.
The United States views the OSCE as a strong
partner in international counter-terrorism efforts.
The organization has strengthened counter-terrorism
capacities by conducting training programmes that
promote norms and standards of responsible State
behaviour, by sharing and helping to implement best
practices and by providing assistance to participating
States as they develop human-rights-compliant counterterrorism policies. The OSCE has led efforts to examine
the role of women’s empowerment in countering violent
extremism through a series of expert round tables, most
recently at the International Symposium on Terrorism
and Transnational Crime held in Turkey in December.
We welcome the OSCE’s deepened collaboration with
the Global Counterterrorism Forum, established by the
United States and other concerned Governments, with
a core mission to promote the implementation of the
United Nations Global Counter-terrorism Strategy.
Good relations between neighbours is a vital
indication that our shared objective of cooperative,
indivisible security is being realized. We therefore
encourage
the
Chairperson-in-Office’s
Special
Representative for the Western Balkans, Ambassador
Stoudmann, to be ambitious in his efforts to promote
reconciliation and cooperation in the region. We have
already seen encouraging progress in Kosovo, where the
OSCE has been instrumental in helping to implement
the historic 19 April Agreement between Belgrade and
Pristina, in particular through the facilitation of local
elections in northern Kosovo.
We welcome the OSCE’s long-standing commitment
and leadership in trying to find solutions to Europe’s
protracted conflicts. The international community
should not allow the status quo in Georgia or in the
Nagorno Karabakh conflict or in the Transdniestrian
conflict to persist. The two special representatives
for the Southern Caucuses and Moldova, respectively,
whom the Chairperson-in-Office jointly appointed with
Serbia, should assist the parties in those conflicts to
identify and implement steps that will promote peaceful
settlements.
Outside its region, the OSCE provides expertise that
benefits Asian and Mediterranean partner countries.
The OSCE Border Management Staff College in
Dushanbe, for example, provides specialized training
for border security agencies from across Central Asia,
the wider OSCE region and Afghanistan.
14-24288

24/02/2014

Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe

The United States strongly supports the OSCE’s
special relationship with Afghanistan, an OSCE
Partner for Cooperation, and values the OSCE’s
continued active engagement during this crucial year
of transition. The organization’s work in Afghanistan
complements the United Nations own efforts, including
its support for the country’s upcoming elections.
Credible, transparent and inclusive elections are critical
to Afghanistan’s stability and democratic development.
For that reason, the United States has contributed
approximately $2 million to the OSCE Office for
Democratic Institutions and Human Rights for the
deployment of an election support team in Afghanistan.
We would welcome additional contributions to the team
from OSCE participating and partner States.
In the area of human rights, we share the
Chairperson-in-Office’s focus on implementing
the OSCE’s existing commitments in the human
dimension. The OSCE is a premier organization in the
protection of human rights, the promotion of tolerance
and non-discrimination, the advancement of gender
equality and support for citizens’ rights to exercise
their fundamental freedoms of assembly, association,
expression and belief. We welcome the Chairperson-inOffice’s goals to work closely with civil society
counterparts and to strengthen OSCE efforts to ensure
that participating States uphold their human dimension
commitments.
The United States is an active member of the OSCE,
and we remain fully committed to its important work.
The continued and renewed dialogue and collective
efforts of the OSCE and its participating States remain
as important as ever, and we welcome such goals and
actions in coordination with the United Nations.
Mr. Shen Bo (China) (spoke in Chinese): China
appreciates Lithuania’s initiative in organizing
this briefing on the Organization for Security and
Cooperation in Europe (OSCE) and would like to thank
Mr. Burkhalter, President of the Swiss Confederation
and Chairperson-in-Office of the Organization for
Security and Cooperation in Europe, for attending
today’s meeting. We have listened very carefully to his
briefing.
As an important regional organization, the OSCE
has over the years made a positive contribution to
efforts to conduct preventive diplomacy, enhance
security and mutual trust, mediate regional disputes
and combat terrorism and crime. China appreciates
those efforts, and we listened carefully to the three

S/PV.7117

priorities presented by Mr. Burkhalter for the Swiss
chairmanship. We encourage the OSCE to continue to
fully exploit its advantages, to settle disputes through
peaceful means, such as mediation and good offices, and
to play a positive and constructive role in maintaining
regional peace, security and stability.
Under the Charter of the United Nations, the
Security Council bears the primary responsibility for the
maintenance of international peace and security. China
supports the efforts of the United Nations, including
the Security Council, in line with Chapter VIII of the
Charter, to enhance its cooperation with regional and
subregional organizations. Such cooperation should
strive to maintain strict compliance with the purposes
and principles of the Charter of the United Nations and
the basic norms of international relations, in particular
the principles of respect for sovereignty, territorial
integrity and non-interference in internal affairs.
The United Nations and regional and subregional
organizations should capitalize on their respective
advantages and enhance their complementarity and
coordination.
China supports cooperation between the United
Nations, the Security Council and the OSCE in
maintaining regional peace and stability. We hope
that the channels of cooperation will be expanded and
approaches diversified, so as to achieve pragmatic
and effective cooperation, thereby jointly contributing
to international and regional peace, stability and
development.
China has followed the political situation in
Ukraine very closely. We hope that all parties will
continue to settle their disputes and differences
peacefully and lawfully through political consultation
and that political stability is achieved and order restored
as soon as possible. China hopes that the international
community will continue to make positive efforts and
play a constructive role in achieving stability in the
situation in Ukraine. We respect the choice made by the
Ukrainian people on the basis of national conditions. We
are ready to continue to develop a strategic partnership
with Ukraine on the basis of peace and mutual benefit.
Mr. Churkin (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We are pleased to welcome the President of
Switzerland to the Security Council in his capacity as
Chairperson-in-Office of the Organization for Security
and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE). We thank him for
his comprehensive briefing.

14-2428819/24

S/PV.7117

Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe

The Russian Federation has consistently supported
developing and improving cooperation between
the United Nations and regional and subregional
mechanisms on the basis of the Charter of the United
Nations, in particular Chapter VIII. Cooperation
between the United Nations and the OSCE should be
rest on that same foundation.
Cooperation between the two organizations is
regular and multilateral in nature. It covers all aspects
of security, as well as cross-dimensional issues. The
OSCE complements the work of the United Nations and
facilitates the implementation of mechanisms agreed at
the global level in its area of regional responsibility and
as part of its mandate.
Russia intends to cooperate constructively with
the Swiss Chairperson-in-Office, who, we trust,
will implement a balanced course in the interests
of all Member States. In general, we support the
Chairperson-in-Office’s three priorities for 2014,
namely, strengthening security and stability, improving
people’s lives and reinforcing the capacities of the
OSCE. The programme of work in those three OSCE
dimensions appears to be balanced, covering the
military, political, economic, environmental and
humanitarian spheres.
We note the willingness of the Chairperson-inOffice to take into account Russian priorities and
approaches, including combating transnational threats
such as terrorism and drug trafficking, protecting the
rights of national minorities, supporting traditional
values and combating neo-Nazism and extremism,
as well as OSCE reform, including rationalizing the
election monitoring work carried out by the Office for
Democratic Institutions and Human Rights.
In the context of providing regional stability and
removing existing dividing lines, we think that the
OSCE could be called upon to harmonize integration
processes in Western and Eastern Europe and to ensure
freedom of movement, including the streamlining of
visa regimes, particularly as the OSCE was originally
established to remove such dividing lines.
As part of the “Helsinki+40” process, in particular
with a view to ensuring the development of European
cooperation and security principles and to adapting the
OSCE to the challenges of the twenty-first century,
we reaffirm our readiness to consider the possibility
of organizing an OSCE summit in 2015, if substantial
results in those areas are achieved.

20/24

24/02/2014

We support developing the interaction between
the United Nations and the OSCE on the basis of the
2006 declaration on cooperation. We believe that the
OSCE, bearing in mind the coordinating role of the
United Nations, can make a significant contribution
to international efforts to ensure peace and security
in its area of responsibility. In our view, the greatest
potential is for cooperation on combating transnational
threats, international terrorism, organized crime and
illegal drug trafficking. We note the high level of
practical interaction between the OSCE secretariat’s
transnational threats department and the United Nations
Office on Drugs and Crime. Their joint initiatives are
yielding concrete results.
In our view, at the heart of the cooperation in that
area should be efforts to combine the comparative
advantages of each organization, namely, the regional
format of the OSCE and the global capacities of the
United Nations, thereby avoiding duplication and
wasting resources, in particular in regions where
both organizations are very active. That is the case,
for example, in Central Asia. The priority areas
for cooperation are well known: combating drug
trafficking and the illegal trade in small arms and
light weapons, cooperation on implementing resolution
1540 (2004) and fighting terrorism, organized crime,
corruption, money laundering, human trafficking and
illegal migration.
It is clear that the added value of the OSCE lies also
in its ability to tackle humanitarian issues, including
combating human trafficking and illegal migration
and encouraging tolerance and inter-civilizational
dialogue. It can also help to combat xenophobia and
discrimination, in particular in terms of ensuring the
rights of national, religious and language minorities,
which, as we know, is a particularly serious problem in
a number of European countries.
We note the prospects for cooperation on a
relatively new track for the OSCE, namely, developing
confidence-building measures and using information
and communications technologies, where the Viennabased organization complements global United Nations
efforts in the area of international information security.
At the same time, we are alarmed by attempts to
introduce into OSCE practice monitoring mechanisms
similar to those set up at the United Nations and
to implement, through the OSCE, non-consensual
documents of the General Assembly and the Human

14-24288

24/02/2014

Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe

Rights Council. We are concerned about the intention
of some countries to incorporate concepts derived from
resolution 1325 (2000) into the work of the OSCE,
despite the absence of armed conflict in its territory.
Moreover, United Nations-OSCE cooperation does
not cover a large number of important problems where
there is significant room for increased cooperation,
including ensuring the rights of children, which is
an area in which the United Nations has extensive
experience. Another such area is protecting traditional
values, which is a subject under consideration by the
Human Rights Council.
The situation in Ukraine was mentioned in the
briefing by the Chairperson-in-Office and in a number
of other statements we heard today, but it is still not
clear how violent, non-constitutional regime change
in that country is consistent with OSCE principles,
or indeed the rule of law, which is such a fashionable
subject to speak about in the Council.
The
OSCE
Chairperson-in-Office
spoke
approvingly of the 21 February agreement, which
was signed by a number of representatives, such as
the Ministers for Foreign Affairs of Germany, Poland
and France, and allegedly by the representative of
the Russian Federation. I would like to make it clear
that the Russian representative to the talks on that
agreement did not sign it. There were misgivings
that the 21 February agreement would serve only as a
smokescreen for subsequent unconstitutional action,
and that is indeed what transpired.
I would now like to share with the participants in
today’s Security Council meeting a bit of the text of the
statement released by the Ministry of Foreign Affairs
of the Russian Federation with regard to the situation in
Ukraine. The Russian Federation is seriously concerned
by developments in Ukraine. The 21 February agreement
is not being implemented, despite the fact that its signing
was witnessed by the Ministers for Foreign Affairs of
Germany, Poland and France. The United States, the
European Union and other international organizations
welcomed that document. The rioting militants have
not been disarmed. They refuse to leave the streets of
the city, which they are effectively in control of, or to
leave administrative buildings. Their acts of violence
continue.
We are surprised that a number of European
politicians have already been quick to state that
presidential elections will be held in Ukraine in May,

S/PV.7117

although the 21 February agreement provides that
elections should take place only after the conclusion of
constitutional reform. It is clear that, for the success
of that reform, all political forces in Ukraine from all
regions of the country must take part, and its results
should be put to a referendum. We believe in the need to
fully reflect the concerns of deputies from the eastern
and southern parts of Ukraine, Crimea and Sevastopol,
which were presented at the meeting in Krakow, Poland,
on 22 February.
We are particularly concerned about the legitimacy of
the actions being taken by the Ukrainian Supreme Rada.
Basing their actions merely on simple revolutionary
expediency, they are issuing so-called decisions and
laws there, including some geared towards infringing
on the humanitarian rights of Russian and other national
minorities living in Ukraine. There have been calls for
a virtual ban on the Russian language, the impeachment
of leaders, the dissolution of parties and organizations,
the closing of certain unwelcome media stations and
the lifting of restrictions on neo-Nazi propaganda.
There is a policy of muzzling dissidents in various
regions of Ukraine through dictatorial and sometimes
terrorist methods. There are now threats being made
against Orthodox shrines. National radicals continue to
vandalize memorials in various cities in Ukraine and,
in some European capitals, their supporters have been
vandalizing memorials to Soviet troops. Such events
are undermining the 21 February agreement. They
discredit its initiators and guarantors and pose a threat
to civil peace, the stability of society and civil security.
We must note that we see no concern, in the
position of several of our Western partners, for the fate
of Ukraine, but rather a unilateral geopolitical agenda.
We hear no principled condemnation of the acts of
extremists, including of neo-Nazi and anti-Semitic
manifestations. Furthermore, whether deliberately or
not, such actions are being further encouraged.
We get the lasting impression that the 21 February
agreement, with the tacit consent of its foreign
sponsors, is being used as a smokescreen for promoting
forced regime change in Ukraine by creating facts on
the ground, without any kind of wish to seek out a
common Ukrainian consensus that is in the interest of
national reconciliation. We are particularly concerned
by attempts to get international structures, including
the United Nations Secretariat, to support that line of
reasoning.

14-2428821/24

S/PV.7117

Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe

We call on all parties in the crisis in Ukraine to
show maximum responsibility, not allow any further
deterioration in the situation, return the situation to
the legal track and crack down on the activities of all
extremists.
The President: I shall now make a statement in my
capacity as the representative of Lithuania.
I warmly welcome the President of the Swiss
Confederation in his capacity as Chairperson-in-Office
of the Organization for Security and Cooperation in
Europe (OSCE) and thank him for his extensive briefing
earlier today.
The body that he is chairing is the largest
regional security organization partnering with the
United Nations. It is unique in its comprehensive
approach to security and has respect for human
rights and fundamental freedoms at its core, in which
participating States engage in open debate on pressing
security challenges and constantly review the state of
implementation of their commitments.
Let me express Lithuania’s appreciation for the
Swiss priorities of the OSCE chairmanship, which
focus on fostering security and stability, implementing
OSCE commitments and strengthening the OSCE’s
capacity to act. The OSCE remains a strong United
Nations partner under Chapter VIII of the Charter.
We look forward to the Swiss OSCE chairmanship’s
initiative to organize a conference devoted to
strengthening cooperation between the OSCE, the
United Nations and other international organizations,
with a particular focus on the human dimension.
Important cases of cooperation between the United
Nations, the OSCE, and the European Union include
their coordinated response and actions during the crisis
in Kyrgyzstan in 2010 and a contribution to security
and stability in Kosovo.
The international discussions in Geneva to address
the consequences of the 2008 war in Georgia offer a
good example of OSCE-United Nations cooperation
in the field of mediation. Those efforts could be
strengthened by the OSCE and the United Nations
presence on the ground throughout Georgia.
Dramatic events are evolving before our eyes in
Ukraine, and the most recent breathtaking democratic
changes are an impressive reminder that it is not
possible to ignore people’s striving for freedom,
democracy, human dignity and justice. Political power
22/24

24/02/2014

that disregards the will and expectations of the vast
majority of its citizens and is concerned only with its
own egoistic interests loses democratic legitimacy and
the trust of its people and is not sustainable.
Lithuania welcomes the ongoing democratic
change in Ukraine and the determined leadership of the
Supreme Rada in that historic process. We hope that it
will open the door to a quick and peaceful resolution
of the political crisis, which was created by the former
Government and President Yanukovych. We welcome
the adoption of new decrees and other decisions in Kyiv
in the past few days, which seek to introduce a new
constitutional framework, consolidate the foundations
for a comprehensive legal reform and resolve the
remaining issues of selective justice.
Lithuania remains firmly committed to supporting
Ukraine’s sovereignty, independence and territorial
integrity, as well as Ukraine’s European integration.
We believe that the OSCE, and in particular the Office
for Democratic Institutions and Human Rights, have an
important role to play in the process of preparing for
new elections in Ukraine.
The Vilnius OSCE Ministerial Council of 2011
took a decision on the conflict cycle, equipping the
OSCE with the necessary tools for the prevention of,
and response to, conflicts. That asset should not be
wasted. The political will to use those tools remains
essential.
We welcome the OSCE’s focus on addressing
transnational threats. Cybersecurity threats have been
on the rise, and we welcome the pioneering work by the
OSCE on cybersecurity confidence-building measures
at the regional level and would support a discussion on
the possibility of applying that approach beyond the
OSCE.
The OSCE is also at the forefront of implementing the
Programme of Action to Prevent, Combat and Eradicate
the Illicit Trade in Small Arms and Light Weapons in
All Its Aspects, especially in assisting participating
States in the development of relevant legislation. The
OSCE should further facilitate cooperation between
Central Asian States and Afghanistan, especially in
the area of border management, including through the
OSCE Border Management Staff College in Dushanbe.
Energy security has direct linkages to the
independence of economic and political action in
international affairs and has a direct effect on national
security, development and prosperity. We note the
14-24288

24/02/2014

Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe

complementary role of the OSCE in promoting energy
security dialogue in line with closer cooperation with
the United Nations.
Emerging regional challenges related to the use
of natural resources, including water, also merit the
OSCE’s attention. We would appreciate the views of
the Chairperson-in-Office on how the OSCE and the
United Nations could best address issues related to
inland water resources in Central Asia.
There cannot be lasting security and stability
without respect for human rights and fundamental
freedoms. Lithuania consistently supports the work
of the independent OSCE institutions relating to the
implementation of OSCE human rights commitments.
One particular area where the OSCE needs to maintain
continuous engagement is freedom of expression and
media freedom. Also, the implementation of resolution
1738 (2006), on the protection of journalists, remains
essential.
Women’s full and equal exercise of their human
rights is essential to achieving a more peaceful, secure
and democratic OSCE zone. The appointment of gender
focal points in field operations and departments of the
OSCE and the implementation of the OSCE Action Plan
for the Promotion of Gender Equality are essential. The
work of OSCE field presences in Central Asia across all
three dimensions deserves special attention, especially
in the area of democratic reforms and human rights.
Those activities are relevant and should be continued.
To conclude, let me assure the Swiss Chairperson-inOffice of Lithuania’s continued support for his work and
the priorities of his chairmanship. Lithuania will also
continue supporting the OSCE role in the realization
of a free, democratic, common and indivisible security
community, in line with the principles and commitments
enshrined in the Helsinki Final Act.
I now resume my functions as President of the
Council.
I give the floor to Mr. Burkhalter to respond to the
comments and questions raised.
Mr. Burkhalter: First of all, I would like to thank
all of those who have tried to pronounce my name as
well as possible. They did pronounce my first name
perfectly, and that is fair enough.
More seriously, I would to thank all speakers
for their thoughtful interventions and, above all, for
having clearly supported the priorities of the Swiss

S/PV.7117

chairmanship of the Organization for Security and
Cooperation in Europe (OSCE). I see once again how
very useful it is to have a one-page summary table of
our priorities. For me, it was a clear image of support
of my priorities as Chairperson-in-Office, which is
very important to me. The support of the Council is
of the utmost importance because we want to hold
consultations throughout the year with all of our
partners and all members of the Council.
I will not respond now to all the statements, but
I would like to say that Council members should rest
assured that we will integrate their points of view into
our work as its progresses throughout our term in office.
I want to focus briefly on some of the questions and
make some remarks on some issues and priorities I did
not touch upon during my statement earlier. I will then
conclude with a political message I would like to send
at the end of the meeting.
There was in fact only one formal question, unless
I am mistaken.
(spoke in French)
That question was from Luxembourg. I thank the
representative of Luxembourg for her question. What
contribution can the OSCE make in the fight against
foreign fighters? I think that, in general, it must be
said that what we need to do is to reduce as much
as possible the causes of extremism in countries of
origin. Primarily, we must act to reduce as much as
possible the fertile ground in which extremism can
grow. In addition, we must also step up reintegration
activities for such individuals. Specifically for the
OSCE, that means doing every possible to promote
cooperation among security services, the exchange of
good practices, research and the fight against terrorism
financing.
(spoke in English)
I would also like to respond positively to the Nigerian
suggestion on the same issue of enhancing cooperation
and coordination among regional organizations — such
as between the OSCE and the African Union.
With regard to the issues I did not mention earlier
that members brought up, I wish to say to Jordan, first
of all, that we are fully aware of the Mediterranean
partnership of the OSCE; indeed, we would like to make
links between our priorities and that partnership. A
concrete example is the issue of kidnapping for ransom:

14-2428823/24

S/PV.7117

Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe

we will try, with the Mediterranean partnership, to
make progress on that issue.
To France, Chile and others, I would like to say that,
although I did not mention the issues of conventional
arms control and the modernization of the Vienna
Document, they are very important to us. We must be
realistic. We know that we will not be able to move
forward very rapidly on such issues, but we do want to
engage in dialogue on conventional arms control and
want to modernize the Vienna Document.
As for the final political messages I would like to
send during today’s meeting, there are four. First, I
would like to say that, in our globalized world, there
is greater need for regional organization for security.
The conception of the OSCE is useful for the twentyfirst century. What we need is the capacity to enhance
confidence and to act. The OSCE has the capacity to
enhance confidence because it is a platform for dialogue
and acts as a common roof for the 57 participating
States, meaning we can try to reduce lines of division
in this area. In terms of our capacity for action, the
OSCE brings a comprehensive security conception — a
multidimensional approach that is so important today.
It is a major asset that should even be exported to other
regions. Furthermore, with regard to the capacity to act,
I would like to recall our action on the ground — the
fact that the OSCE is a field-based organization, and
that is very important.
The second message is the fact that the Swiss
chairmanship is fully committed to strengthening the
cooperation between the United Nations and the OSCE,
as well as with other regional organizations. There is
great potential in particular in the field of mediation
support and training.

24/02/2014

The third message is that our chairmanship wants
most seriously to build bridges between East and West.
I would like to thank all of the members of the Council
for their constructive reactions to what I said about
Ukraine, our proposal to establish an international
contact grou, and our decisions to send a special envoy
and core group for a needs assessment mission, and to
prepare potential human rights and election observation
missions, in case the Ukrainian authorities make such a
request, as we hope they will.
In addition to the measures on Ukraine I mentioned
in my statement and have just recalled, based on the
statements made today, I think that the involvement
of another important OSCE institution — the High
Commissioner on National Minorities — should be
involved. The High Commission works with a conflictprevention mandate and could help defuse tension in
the eastern part of the country and in Crimea.
The last message I would like to send today is the
fact that the chairmanship wants to work for and with
the people, and above all for and with young people.
We regard it as a key task of politics to provide good
prospects for the generations to come, and we have high
expectations of the 57 youth ambassadors of the model
OSCE in negotiation of a youth action plan.
Let me conclude by stating that Switzerland highly
values the United Nations, we remain fully committed
to the objectives of the United Nations and we are
determined to support its efforts to advance peace
and security, which are also the basis of the Swiss
Constitution.
The President: I thank Mr. Burkhalter for the
additional comments he has just made.
The Security Council has thus concluded the present
stage of its consideration of the item on its agenda.
The meeting rose at 12.15 p.m.

24/24

14-24288
