92

General Auembl:,-Twenty-fifth Seuion

that a United Nations fund be established to provide
assistance to Namibians who have suffered from persecution and to finance a comprehensive educational and
training programme for Namibians, with particular
regard to their future administrative responsibilities in
the Territory,
Taking into account the assistance provided to
Namibians at present from United Nations agencies and
funds, notably the United Nations High Commissioner
for Refugees, the United Nations Educational and
Training Programme for Southern Africa and the
United Nations Trust Fund for South Africa,
1. Decides that a comprehensive United Nations
Fund for Namibia shall be established;
2. Requests the Secretary-General to make a detailed study and report to the General Assembly at its
twenty-sixth session on the development, planning,
execution and administration of a comprehensive programm.e of assistance to Namibians in various fields;
3. Further requests the Secretary-General to take
into account the observations made during the present
session of the General Assembly in regard to the
establishment of such a programme;
4. Invites the specialized agencies, the Advisory
Committee on the United Nations Educational and
Training Programme for South.em Africa, the Committee of Trustees of the United Nations Trust Fund
for South Africa, the Ad Hoe Sub-Committee established in pursuance of Security Council resolution 276
(1970) of 30 January 1970, the United Nations
Council for Namibia, the United Nations Hi~ Commissioner for Refugees and the Organization° African
Unity to provide advice and assistance, as may be required by the Secretary-General, in the preparation
of the study and the report referred to in paragraph 2
above;

5. Decides that, in anticipation of the report of the
Secretary-General on the matter, a decision on the extent of the financial implications of the programme
should be deferred to the twenty-sixth session of the
General Assembly;
6. Authorizes the Secretary-General, in the meantime, in consultation with the Chairman of the Advisory Committee on the United Nations Educational
and Training Programme for Southern Africa, the
Chairman of the Committee of Trustees of the United
Nations Trust Fund for South Africa and the United
Nations High Commissioner for Refugees, to make
interim grants from the regular budget of the United
Nations for 1971, not exceeding a total amount of
$50,000 over and above the assistance provided at
present, in order to enable the existing Umted Nations
programmes to provide greater assistance, as necessary,
to Nanuoians.
1923rd plenary meeting,
9 December 1970.

2680 (XXV). Petition& concerning Namibia
The General Assembly,
Bearing in mind the special responsibilities of the
United Nations with regard to Namibia, including in
particular those set out in General Assembly resolutions 2145 (XXI) of 27 October 1966, 2248 (S-V)
of 19 May 1967, 2325 (XXII) of 16 December 1967,
2403 (XXIII) of 16 December 1968 and 2517
(XXIV) of 1 December 1969,

Noting that the Special Committee on the Situation
with regard to the Implementation of the Declaration
on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoeles has received and examined during
1970 three petitions concerning Namibia, in accordance
with paragraph 3 of General Assembly resolution 1805
(XVII) of 14 December 1962 and within the context of the implementation of the Declaration,
Noting further that these petitions relate, inter alia,
to the general situation and recent developments concerning Namibia, to the refusal by South Africa to implement General Assembly resolutions 2145 (XXI)
and 2248 (S-V) and, in particular, to the continued
implementation by South Africa of the recommendations of the Odendaal Commission, 8 including the removal of Africans from their ancestral lands,
1. Notes that the Special Committee on the Situation with regard to the Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial
Countries and Peoples has taken these petitions into
account in its consideration of the situation in Namibia
within the context of the implementation of the Declaration;
2. Notes further that those petitions which raised
matters of concern to the United Nations Council for
Namibia have been brought to the latter's attention by
the Secretariat and have been taken into consideration
by the Council in the performance of the functions
assigned to it by the General Assembly in resolutions
2248 (S-V), 2325 (XXII), 2403 (XXIII) and 2517
(XXIV);
3. Draws the attention of the petitioners concerned
to the report on the Territory submitted by the Special
8
Committee, to the resolutions on the question of
Namibia adopted by the General Assembly at its
twenty-fifth session and to the report of the United
Nations Council for Namibia.to
1923rd plenary meeting,
9 December 1970.

2700 (XXV). Question of Papua and the Tru•t
Territory of New Guinea
The General Assembly,
Recalling the provisions of the Charter of the United
Nations and General Assembly resolution 1514 (XV)
of 14 December 1960 containing the Declaration on
the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries
and Peoples,
Recalling its previous resolutions concerning Papua
and the Trust Territory of New Guinea, in particular
resolution 2590 (XXIV) of 16 December 1969,
Having considered the report of the Trusteeship
Council covering the period from 20 June 1969 to
19 June 197011 and the relevant chapter of the report
of the Special Committee on the Situation with regard to
the Implementation of the Declaration on the Grantinf
()f Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples, 1
s Commission of Enquiry into South West Africa Affain,
established in 1962 by the Government of South Africa under
the chairmanship of Mr. F. H. Odenda.al.
8 Official Records of the General Assembly, Twenty-fifth
Session, Supplement No. 23 (A/8023/Rev.1), chapter V.
10 Ibid., Supplement No. 24 {A/8024).
11 Ibid., Supplement No. 4 (A/8004).
12 Ibid., Supplement No. 23 (A/8023/Rev.1), chapter XIV.

Resolutions adopted on the reporta of the Fourth Committee

Having heard the statement of the representative of

the administering Power, 13
Having heard the statements of the petitioners, 13
Taking into account the observations of the Special
Committee and the Trusteeship Council regarding developments in Papua and the Trust Territory of New
Guinea,

Mindful of the responsibility of the United Nations
to render all help to the people of Papua and the Trust
Territory of New Guinea in their efforts freely to decide
their own future,
1. Reaffirms the inalienable right of the people of
Papua and the Trust Territory of New Guinea to selfdetermination and independence in accordance with
General Assembly resolution 1514 (XV) and the
Trusteeship Agreement of 13 December 1946;
2. Reaffirms further its previous resolutions regarding Papua and the Trust Territory of New Guinea;
3. Takes note of the arrangements made by the
Trusteeship Council, in accordance with paragraph 5
of resolution 2590 (XXIV) and in consultation with
the Special Committee on the Situation with regard
to the Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Pec>J>les,
concerning the composition of its forthcoming pencxlic
visiting mission to the Trust Territory of New Guinea
in 1971;
4. Invites the administering Power to co-operate
fully with the visiting mission and to provide it with
all the necessary facilities and assistance in the performance of its tasks;
5. Calls upon the administering Power to prescribe,
in consultation with the freely elected representatives
of the people, a specific time-table for the free exercise
by the people of Papua and the Trust Territory of New
Guinea of their right to self-determination and independence, and to report to the Trusteeship Council
and to the Special Committee on the action taken in
that regard;
6. Requests the administering Power to intensify
and accelerate the education and technical and administrative training of the indigenous peoples of the
Territories and the localization of the public service;
1. Requests the Trusteeship Council and the Special
Committee to continue to examine this question and
to report thereon to the General Assembly at its
twenty-sixth session.
1928th plenary meeting,
14 December 1970.

2701 (XXV). Information from Non-Sell-Govern•
ing Territories transmitted under Article 73 e
of the Charter of the United Nations

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 1970 (XVIII) of 16 December 1963, in which it requested the Special Committee on the Situation with regard to the Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of
Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples to
study the information transmitted to the Secretary13 Ibid.,

meeting.

Twenty-fifth Session, Fourth Committee, 1905th

9S

General in accordance with Article 73 e of the Charter
of the United Nations and to take such information
fully into account in examining the situation with regard to the implementation of the Declaration,
Rec.-..lling also its resolution 2422 (XXIII) of
18 December 1968 by which the General Assembly,
inter alia, requested the Special Committee to continue
to discharge the functions entrusted to it under resolution 1970 (XVIII), in accordance with the procedures
approved by the Assembly in its resolution 2109 (XX)
of 21 December 1965,
Recalling further the provisions of paragraph 6 of
its resolution 2558 (XXIV) of_ 12 December 1969,
in which it once again urged the administerini Powers
concerned to transmit, or continue to transmit, to the
Secretary-General the information prescribed in Article
73 e of the Charter, as well as the fullest possible information on political and constitutional developments
in the Territories concerned,
Having examined the chapter of the report of the
Special Committee dealing with the transmittal of information under Article 73 e of the Charter and the
action taken by it in respect of that information, 14
Having also examined the report of the SecretaryGeneral on this item, 1G
1. Approves the chapter of the report of the Special
Committee on the Situation with regard to the Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of
Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples relating to the information from Non-Self-Governing Territories transmitted under Article 73 e of the Charter
of the United Nations;
2. Deeply deplores that, despite the repeated recommendations of the General Assembly and the Special
Committee, some Member States having responsibilities
for the administration of Non-Self-Governing Territories still have not seen fit to transmit information
under Article 73 e of the Charter, have transmitted
insufficient information or have transmitted information too late;
3. Condemns the Government of Portugal for its
continued refusal to transmit information under Article
73 e of the Charter with regard to ,the colonial Territories under its domination, despite repeated requests
by the General Assembly;
4. Considers that, in the absence of a decision by
the General Assembly itself that the Territories of Antigua, Dominica, Grenada, St. Kitts-Nevis-Anguilla, St.
Lucia and St. Vincent have attained a full measure of
self-government in terms of Chapter XI of the Charter,
the Government of the United Kingdom of Great
Britain and Northern Ireland should continue to transmit information under Article 73 e of the Charter with
respect to those Territories;
5. Once again urges the administering Powers concerned to transmit, or continue to transmit, to the
Secretary-General the information prescribed in Article
73 e of the Charter, as well as the fullest possible information on political and constitutional developments
in the Territories concerned;
6. Reiterates its request that the administering
Powers concerned transmit such information as early
14 Ibid., Twenty-fifth Session, Supplement No. 23 (A/8023/
Rev.1), chapter XXI.
u Ibid., Twenty-fifth Session, Annexes, agenda item 61,
documents A/8134 and Add.I.
