United Nations

S/PV.6299

Security Council

Provisional

Sixty-fifth year

6299th meeting
Friday, 16 April 2010, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Okada . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Japan)

Members:

Austria . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Bosnia and Herzegovina . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Brazil . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Gabon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Lebanon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Mexico . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Nigeria . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Turkey . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Uganda . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . .
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Mr. Mayr-Harting
Mr. Alkalaj
Mrs. Viotti
Mr. Li Baodong
Mr. Araud
Mr. Issoze-Ngondet
Mr. Salam
Mr. Puente
Mrs. Ogwu
Mr. Churkin
Mr. Apakan
Mr. Rugunda
Sir Mark Lyall Grant
Ms. Rice

Agenda
Post-conflict peacebuilding
Letter dated 1 April 2010 from the Permanent Representative of Japan to the
United Nations addressed to the Secretary-General (S/2010/167)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the
delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-506.

10-31721 (E)

*1031721*

S/PV.6299

The meeting was called to order at 10.05 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Post-conflict peacebuilding
Letter dated 1 April 2010 from the Permanent
Representative of Japan to the United Nations
addressed to the Secretary-General (S/2010/167)
The President: I wish to welcome the presence at
this meeting of the Secretary-General, His Excellency
Mr. Ban Ki-moon, and the Minister for Foreign Affairs
of Bosnia and Herzegovina, His Excellency Mr. Sven
Alkalaj.
I should like to inform the Council that I have
received letters from the representatives of
Afghanistan, Australia, Botswana, Canada, Costa Rica,
Croatia, Egypt, El Salvador, Finland, Ghana,
Guatemala, India, Kenya, New Zealand, Pakistan,
Papua New Guinea, Peru, the Republic of Korea,
Rwanda, Sierra Leone, the Solomon Islands, South
Africa, Sri Lanka, Thailand, Timor-Leste and Uruguay,
in which they request that their delegations be invited
to participate in the consideration of the item on the
Council’s agenda. In conformity with the usual
practice, I propose, with the consent of the Council, to
invite the representatives of those countries to
participate in the consideration of the item, without the
right to vote, in accordance with the relevant
provisions of the Charter and rule 37 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure.
There being no objection, it is so decided.
At the invitation of the President, the
representatives of the aforementioned countries
took the seats reserved for them at the side of the
Council Chamber.
The President: On behalf of the Council, I extend
a warm welcome to His Excellency Mr. Zalmai
Rassoul, Minister for Foreign Affairs of Afghanistan;
His Excellency Mr. Alfred Palo Conteh, Minister of
Defence of Sierra Leone; and Her Excellency Ms. Lucia
Lobato, Minister of Justice of Timor-Leste.
In accordance with the understanding reached in
the Council’s prior consultations, I shall take it that the
Security Council agrees to extend an invitation under
rule 39 of its provisional rules of procedure to His

2

Excellency Mr. Peter Wittig, Chairperson of the
Peacebuilding
Commission
and
Permanent
Representative of Germany.
It is so decided.
I invite Mr. Wittig to take the seat reserved for
him at the side of the Council Chamber.
In accordance with the understanding reached in
the Council’s prior consultations, I shall take it that the
Security Council agrees to extend an invitation under
rule 39 of its provisional rules of procedure to
Mrs. Ngozi Okonjo-Iweala, Managing Director of the
World Bank.
It is so decided.
I should like to inform the Council that I have
received a letter from His Excellency Mr. Pedro
Serrano, in which he requests to be invited, in his
capacity as acting head of the delegation of the
European Union to the United Nations, to participate in
the consideration of the item on the Council’s agenda.
If I hear no objection, I shall take it that the Security
Council agrees to extend an invitation under rule 39 of
its provisional rules of procedure to His Excellency
Mr. Pedro Serrano.
There being no objection, it is so decided.
I invite Mr. Serrano to take the seat reserved for
him at the side of the Council Chamber.
I should like to inform the Council that I have
received a letter dated 14 April 2010 from the
Permanent Representative of Uganda to the United
Nations, in which he requests that the Permanent
Observer of the African Union to the United Nations,
His Excellency Mr. Téte António, be invited to
participate in the consideration of the item in
accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s provisional
rules of procedure. If I hear no objection, I shall take it
that the Security Council agrees to extend an invitation
under rule 39 of its provisional rules of procedure to
His Excellency Mr. Téte António.
It is so decided.
I invite Mr. António to take the seat reserved for
him at the side of the Council Chamber.
The Security Council will now begin its
consideration of the item on its agenda. The Security
Council is meeting in accordance with the
understanding reached in its prior consultations.

10-31721

S/PV.6299

I wish to draw the attention of the members of the
Council to document S/2010/167, which contains a
letter dated 1 April 2010 from the Permanent
Representative of Japan to the Secretary-General,
transmitting a concept paper for this debate.
I should now like to make an opening statement
in my national capacity.
It is a great honour for me to convene an open
debate of the Security Council on a very important
topic — post-conflict peacebuilding. At the outset, I
would like to express my sincere appreciation to the
Secretary-General, His Excellency Mr. Ban Ki-moon,
and to the ministers and special guests who have
travelled a great distance to share their experience and
insights at this meeting.
How do conflicts recur even after a ceasefire is
successfully concluded? Why does peace not take root
in post-conflict countries? These are critical issues to
which the international community has yet to find a
definitive answer. I believe that the key to solving them
is for people in a post-conflict situation to have hope
for the future. To this end, how can political stability
and security be achieved in parallel with social
stability? How can a comprehensive peacebuilding
strategy be created, with the assistance of the
international community? I look forward to a lively
discussion on these points.
When we think about peacebuilding, we should
first of all emphasize the importance of political
leaders implementing a peace agreement with steadfast
determination. It is also important that the fruits of
democratic elections, which include political stability,
be shared among all the people, including those who
did not prevail, and not simply be reserved for the
winners. This requires as its foundation the
achievement of peaceful coexistence and reconciliation
among parties to the conflict. In the States that
comprised the former Yugoslavia, especially Bosnia
and Herzegovina, which was most heavily affected by
the conflict, continuous efforts have been made to that
end. Afghanistan, where self-reliant efforts are being
made for reconciliation and reintegration, also requires
the support and cooperation of the international
community.
With regard to security, peacekeeping operations
have a significant role to play and lay the groundwork
for promoting security sector reform. The building of

10-31721

national police force capacity is an especially urgent
task, for instance, in Haiti and Timor-Leste.
We recently lost many of our dear colleagues in
the earthquake in Haiti, including Mr. Hedi Annabi,
Special Representative of the Secretary-General, and
another friend, Mr. Takahisa Kawakami, in Dili last
month, who, as the Deputy Special Representative of
the Secretary-General at the United Nations Integrated
Mission in Timor-Leste (UNMIT), had not yet fulfilled
his aspiration to build the national police of that young
nation. I call upon the international community to
continue the efforts of these dedicated United Nations
staff members by striving harder to enhance national
police capacity in many post-conflict countries.
In order to break the vicious circle of social
instability and prevent the recurrence of conflicts, it is
important that conflict-affected people be provided
with basic services and thereby enjoy a peace dividend.
It is essential, from the viewpoint of human security, to
protect and empower individuals, including women and
the vulnerable. Refugees, internally displaced persons
and ex-combatants must be reintegrated into society.
We need to generate conditions that are conducive to
making peace irreversible through promoting
coexistence and reconciliation.
Youth unemployment is a common issue of
serious concern in many countries in the post-conflict
stage. I therefore propose that, when assistance is
extended to such countries, high priority be attached to
the creation of youth employment. Young people
represent the future of a country. They should not take
up weapons but rather engage in productive work,
which will enable them to participate in the
reconstruction of their nation and its communities.
Thus, they can provide a foundation for socioeconomic development, which will lead to the true
consolidation of peace.
Creating a long-lasting peace requires sustained
cooperation between a post-conflict country and the
international community. In this connection, I would
like to highlight three points.
First, we should think about how efforts for
peacebuilding can be carried out in an integrated
manner. In Sierra Leone, the Peacebuilding
Commission and the Government of Sierra Leone made
concerted efforts to formulate a Peacebuilding
Cooperation Framework, which included such socioeconomic development measures as energy assistance,

3

S/PV.6299

together with measures to create political stability and
security. The international community is currently
assisting the country under this framework. A
framework of this kind should serve as a model for
other peacebuilding strategies.
Secondly, the assistance and involvement of the
international community may have conflicting impacts
on the ownership efforts of a post-conflict country. For
instance, will provision of food assistance be consistent
with efforts to promote domestic agricultural
production? Will the pursuit of justice by the
international community advance the effort for national
reconciliation? Does the hiring of local experts by
international
programmes
affect
the
national
Government’s efforts at capacity-building? If we
overlook these issues, the fundamental goal of building
the country’s self-reliance will not be achieved. The
international community must respect the ownership
and capacity-building efforts of the post-conflict
country.
Thirdly, peacebuilding
requires
long-term
engagement and sustainable resources. We first need to
make the best possible use of funds available for the
immediate aftermath of a conflict — for example, the
Peacebuilding Fund. But such funds must be followed
by medium- and long-term resources from bilateral and
multilateral programmes. It is also essential to secure
and strengthen necessary expertise to serve the diverse
requirements of peacebuilding activities, including in
the areas of governance and the rule of law. In this
regard, we look forward to the work of the Senior
Advisory Group for the Review of International
Civilian Capacities, launched by the Secretary-General
last month.
The Security Council must continue its strong
engagement in favour of peacebuilding, and we hope to
see the Peacebuilding Commission obtain enhanced
results through the ongoing review process. Building
on today’s debate, Japan will continue to participate
actively in the efforts towards achieving sustainable
peace in post-conflict countries.
I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council. I now invite His Excellency Mr. Ban
Ki-moon, Secretary-General of the United Nations, to
take the floor.
The Secretary-General: Thank you, Minister
Okada, for taking part in person in this very important
Security Council debate and for focusing the attention

4

of the Council on this important subject. I congratulate
the delegation of Japan for its success in presiding over
the work of the Security Council this month.
In our previous debates, a consensus has emerged
on some of the factors leading to success in postconflict peacebuilding. The report on peacebuilding in
the immediate aftermath of conflict that I presented to
this Council last July laid them out in some detail
(S/2009/304). We must seize the crucial opportunity
that is presented at the end of a major conflict. We
must respond early and robustly. And we must then
stay engaged over the long term. We have also agreed
that our collective efforts must be tailored to the needs
of each country.
Today I would like to emphasize three points in
order to situate our discussion in a larger context.
First, we build peace in the minds and hearts of
people. This means delivering concrete peace
dividends. Peace will not last unless people see real
benefits in their daily lives: safety, justice, jobs and
prospects for a better future. In this regard, our work
must always be guided by the principle of national
ownership.
Secondly, peace will not endure unless
Governments in post-conflict countries are able to
perform the basic functions of the State and to ensure
sustainable security. These functions include policing
the streets, upholding the rule of law, establishing a
functioning justice and corrections system and
delivering basic services. Governments should also be
capable
of
demobilizing
and
reintegrating
ex-combatants, developing a professional security
sector and protecting civilians from death and injuries
caused by landmines.
Thirdly, we must take a comprehensive approach.
That means addressing the security, political, economic
and social dimensions. It means engaging national,
bilateral, regional and international actors, and it
means coherence, coordination and common vision.
The United Nation continues to sharpen its work.
We are building partnerships and synergies across the
United Nations system and with regional and
international actors, with an emphasis on early
engagement. This includes a stronger partnership with
the World Bank and other international financial
institutions.

10-31721

S/PV.6299

We are bolstering our capacity to support viable
peace processes that produce durable agreements. We
are improving our tools for deploying and supporting
peacekeeping operations, integrated peacebuilding
offices and other field operations that take on
peacebuilding tasks.

countries on the Commission’s agenda. I am pleased to
announce that this month the Fund will reach $200
million in allocations. With 48 donors and nearly $350
million in deposits and pledges, the Fund continues to
make progress, including through the guidance
provided by its Advisory Group.

We are paying more attention to the nexus
between
peacekeeping
and
peacebuilding.
Peacekeepers themselves are, in an important sense,
early peacebuilders. They seize the window of
opportunity in the immediate aftermath of conflict.
They are the first to set priorities. We must take
advantage of their unique yet temporary presence while
remaining aware that peacekeepers do not have the
resources for long-term development.

However, the Peacebuilding Fund’s value is in
identifying priority areas and helping to channel
resources to them. By itself, it can not meet the
financial needs of countries emerging from conflict.

The Secretariat is working on a strategy to ensure
that critical early peacebuilding tasks, carried out by
peacekeepers and others, contribute to longer-term
peacebuilding and development. In doing this, we want
to draw on the assets of all partners, in particular those
from the South.
To this end and following through on one of the
recommendations contained in last year’s report
(S/2009/304), I have asked the Peacebuilding Support
Office to conduct a review of civilian capacities for
peacebuilding. I have also appointed a Senior Advisory
Group, chaired by the former Under-Secretary-General
for Peacekeeping Affairs, Mr. Guéhenno. I understand
that the Peacebuilding Commission will also provide
input to this review, thus ensuring that we capture the
views of a broad and unique segment of the
membership.
Timely funding is essential. It is vital to have
adequate and timely resources for early peacebuilding
tasks, including, if necessary, the rapid deployment of
standing police and other civilian capacities.
Last year, the Peacebuilding Fund revised its
terms of reference so that it would be better positioned
to provide the kind of flexible, rapid and predictable
resources envisaged in my 2009 report. Since its
inception in late 2006, the Fund has provided resources
to 16 countries. Eighty-eight per cent of this funding
has gone to countries with either peacekeeping
missions or political and peacebuilding missions.
The Peacebuilding Fund also serves as a pillar of
support for the Peacebuilding Commission, with
approximately $106 million allocated to the four

10-31721

I therefore urge donor countries to increase their
support as bilateral donors, through direct
contributions to countries emerging from conflict and
as multilateral donors, through the international
financial institutions or United Nations agencies on the
ground.
The ongoing review of the peacebuilding
arrangements agreed to in 2005 is an opportunity to
strengthen our work in important ways. Peacebuilding
is a complex and multifaceted undertaking. It requires
significant amounts of human, financial and
institutional resources. But the most important tool we
can deploy is the political commitment of national and
international actors.
The Security Council has a central role to play.
As peacekeeping mandates increasingly include
peacebuilding responsibilities, I urge Council members
to ensure that the resources provided are commensurate
with the tasks assigned, and I urge them to use their
great influence and experience to help peacebuilding
achieve its potential.
The President: I thank the Secretary-General for
his statement. I now give the floor to Mr. Zalmai
Rassoul, Minister for Foreign Affairs of Afghanistan.
Mr. Rassoul (Afghanistan): First of all, let me
extend my congratulations to you, Minister Okada, and
your country for assuming the presidency of the
Council for this month, and thank you for convening
this meeting and inviting me to participate. I would
also like to thank His Excellency the Secretary-General
for his presence here today.
The rebuilding of societies emerging from
conflict is one of the biggest challenges to the
maintenance of international peace and security and
thus among the most important functions of this
Council and this Organization. It is also of central

5

S/PV.6299

importance to Afghanistan, which struggles on a daily
basis to establish peace and security.
In Afghanistan, reconstruction and stabilization
efforts began immediately after the fall of the Taliban
at the end of 2001. When we first gathered in
December 2001 in Bonn, Germany, we began a process
that, in five years, would put Afghanistan back on the
path towards an enduring stability. Though we were
astonishingly successful in achieving the benchmarks
set by the Bonn process, we soon acknowledged that
further efforts would be necessary to address the
magnitude of the challenges we faced. In Tokyo in
2002, London in 2006 and Paris in 2008, we adapted
our plans to emerging realities and extended our efforts
towards establishing a secure, stable and prosperous
Afghanistan.
After three decades of war, Afghanistan’s
economy was decimated, the State had disintegrated,
and the society was bereft of infrastructure or even the
most basic necessities of life. Millions had died.
Millions more were forced to flee from their country —
among them, a large number of technocrats and
educated Afghans.
Continuous conflict during this period crippled
the social fabric of the country. Further, the ongoing
political and social instability bred networks of
terrorists, extremists, criminals, drug dealers and
opportunistic regional elements that depend on
insecurity in Afghanistan and the region. A nexus of
drugs, extremism and crime fed on the chaos and
anarchy that now seriously threatens our efforts to
build peace.
Despite the challenges, we have achieved
remarkable success in nine years, establishing a
convincing basis for optimism for the future of the
country. Afghans have forcefully renounced the
totalitarian rule of the Taliban and established a
Government through three successful elections,
including the most recent presidential election, run
entirely by Afghans. The Afghan Government is
becoming more efficient and effective every day, and is
increasing its capacity to provide governance and
services to the people. More than three quarters of
Afghans now have access to basic health care. Millions
of children now have the opportunity to attend school,
many for the first time.
a

6

We have addressed the legacy of violence through
comprehensive disarmament and reintegration

programme that has successfully reintegrated
thousands of former fighters into society. In particular,
I would like to recognize and offer thanks for the
efforts of Japan in that area, including through the
financing
of
programmes
for
disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration and the disbandment
of illegal and armed groups, as well as for hosting a
comprehensive conference on peace and reconciliation
in Tokyo last November. In addition, we have built and
continue to improve the Afghan National Army and
Police through recruiting, training and equipping. They
are beginning to take primary responsibility for
providing security for the people and the country.
In
rebuilding
Afghanistan’s
shattered
infrastructure, we have built thousands of miles of
roads with the help of the Council, as well as hundreds
of schools and clinics, local wells, and improved
irrigation systems. We have seen immense economic
growth. This year, for the first time, the Afghan
Government has taken in more than $1 billion in
revenues. The average Afghan income has jumped sixfold in the past four years.
Change has also come in ways that are not
visible. The Afghan people are more vocal, more
engaged and more involved in the future of their
country than ever before. We have a vibrant media, an
active civil society and well-informed citizens. Social
structures are beginning to re-knit and a feeling of
national unity is emerging.
We are proud of our accomplishments to date, but
we still face daunting challenges. Security remains
Afghanistan’s number one challenge. Terrorists are still
intent on jeopardizing our progress and are trying to
take Afghanistan back to the days of tyranny and
oppression. In stabilizing Afghanistan, we know that
military means are essential. Nonetheless, they are not
the only answer. That is why we have embarked upon a
comprehensive strategy that includes military, political
and economic efforts.
As an important element of our security strategy,
the role of international forces and the manner in which
they operate are crucial. More needs to be done to
ensure the protection of civilian populations. We
emphasize the need for the utmost care and precision
during combat operations to avoid civilian casualties. It
is also essential that international forces conduct their
duties with strict adherence to cultural sensitivities and
in close coordination with Afghan security forces. By

10-31721

S/PV.6299

the same token, we appreciate the new approach of
NATO Commander General Stanley McChrystal, which
places added emphasis on the protection of the civilian
population.
To achieve success in defeating terrorism and
improving security, more focus is required to address
the main sources of insecurity. The problem of
insecurity will not be solved so long as terrorist
sanctuaries and safe havens in the region continue to
provide terrorists with ideological, financial and
logistical support.
Regional cooperation is another essential element
in achieving stability in Afghanistan. We continue our
collaboration with regional countries — bilaterally,
trilaterally and through other forums — to overcome
the challenges in Afghanistan and in the region.
Going forward, we must work to ensure the
sustainability of our progress economically, politically
and socially. Much remains to be done. We must build
the capacity of the Afghan Government and the
strength of its institutions so that it can stand on its
own feet. We still must focus more on improving good
governance and fighting corruption. We must guarantee
the long-term security of the Afghan people and more
fully win their confidence. And we must foster the
social well-being that is necessary for stability and
peace.
A few months ago, at the beginning of his new
term, President Karzai proposed a strategy that was
subsequently endorsed by the international community
in London at the end of January. That strategy is
focused on building lasting, sustainable peace and
stability in the coming three to five years through the
Afghanization of national ownership and leadership, by
empowering and engaging Afghans themselves, by
promoting long-term socio-economic development, and
by undertaking new regional cooperation.
First, if peace is to be sustainable, Afghans
should be involved in their own security. The Afghan
national security forces will play a central role. In the
coming three to five years, intensified training and
recruitment will enable those forces to begin to take
the primary responsibility for the security and defence
of the country and its citizens, thereby allowing the
international community’s role to evolve from a
primary to a supporting one.

10-31721

Secondly, the Government of Afghanistan will
engage more fully with all Afghan people and address
their concerns in order to strengthen national unity and
social stability. Improved capacity will allow the
Government of Afghanistan to address corruption,
strengthen good governance, end the culture of
impunity and better serve the Afghan people.
Thirdly, we will offer former combatants and
those willing to join the peace process a chance for a
peaceful life and a decent future through a
reconciliation and reintegration process. That is a good
alternative for ending the continuing insecurity in parts
of the conflict and an important way of isolating
extremists and terrorists and ensuring that Afghans will
continue to choose peace over violence.
Fourthly, although those elements will promote
peace and stabilization, the only way to guarantee the
sustainability of progress is to anchor society on a
foundation of long-term socio-economic development.
The Government of Afghanistan must be able to fund
its programmes, support its people and decrease its
dependence on international aid. Job creation and
agricultural development in particular are central
elements that will cement short-term gains, improve
social
cohesiveness
and
promote
political
normalization. In addition, there must be a focus on
education to help build capacity, promote social
stability and confront extremism.
A crucial piece of the London strategy is the
central role of the Government of Afghanistan in
coordinating and leading those efforts as Afghans take
greater responsibility for their country. With regard to
development assistance, a much better job is required
to improve its efficiency. To date, only 20 per cent of
such aid has gone through Afghanistan’s national
budget; 80 per cent of assistance has been channelled
on a bilateral basis. In short, we must Afghanize
development priorities.
Through improved coordination, we should work
to address parallel or competing governance structures,
which do more harm than good.
President Karzai’s new Afghanization strategy is
built upon a workable and reliable partnership between
the Government of Afghanistan and the international
community. My Government and the Afghan people
are very grateful for the continuing commitment and
generosity of our international partners and friends. We

7

S/PV.6299

recognize that a partnership based on respect and
realism is vital to our success.
Understandably, we have different expectations,
different timelines and different priorities. We can
avoid fragmentation and confusion only through
mutual understanding, open communication and an
awareness of our shared goals. Our efforts will take
time to bear fruit. This process cannot be hurried. In
addition
to
short-term
measures,
long-term
development supported by a committed partnership
with the international community is the key to a
healthy and sustainable Afghan society that is safe
from the risk of recurring conflict.
The President: I now give the floor to His
Excellency Mr. Alfred Palo Conteh, Minister of
Defence of Sierra Leone.
Mr. Conteh (Sierra Leone): At the outset, my
delegation wishes to congratulate you most warmly,
Mr. President, on your assumption of the presidency of
the Security Council for the month of April. We assure
you of our full support and cooperation during your
tenure. I would also like to extend our appreciation to
your predecessor for his able leadership in directing the
work of the Council during the past month. I would
also like to thank the Secretary-General for his
presence at this debate.
My delegation also wishes to express its sincere
appreciation to the Permanent Mission of Japan for
organizing this open debate of the Security Council on
the topic of post-conflict peacebuilding and developing
a comprehensive peacebuilding strategy to prevent the
recurrence of conflict. The Government of Sierra
Leone appreciates this opportunity to participate in
deliberations focused on shaping a comprehensive
global strategy on this important issue.
Before I proceed, allow me to convey the
profound regrets of my colleague, Foreign Minister
Zainab Hawa Bangura, who is unavoidably unable to
participate in today’s session as originally planned,
owing to compelling countervailing events of a serious
nature.
As a country that has been fully engaged in the
process of post-conflict reconstruction over the past
few years, Sierra Leone has gained keen insights into
the
challenges
involved
in
formulating
a
comprehensive and sustainable peacebuilding strategy.
We recognize, in particular, the urgent need for the

8

international community to assess how best the current
architecture, including the Peacebuilding Commission
(PBC), can be strengthened to ensure a successful
transition from peacebuilding to sustainable security
and development in countries emerging from conflict.
My delegation shares the ideas in many of the
perceptive reflections outlined in the concept note
prepared by Japan. Accordingly, I will endeavour to
focus my intervention on the key questions highlighted
therein and share with you my delegation’s views
concerning the lessons to be learned from Sierra
Leone’s own modest experience with post-conflict
peacebuilding.
Over the past decade, Sierra Leone has served as
a veritable field laboratory for the design and
implementation of long-term peacebuilding strategies,
as considerable international efforts have been
expanded on addressing a vast array of challenges,
initiatives and policy options during the country’s
transition from peacekeeping to peacebuilding.
Today, Sierra Leone is on the threshold of the
fifth anniversary of the Peacebuilding Commission’s
engagement in the country, having received catalytic
funding through the Peacebuilding Fund to undertake
critical peacebuilding efforts over this period.
Key among the challenges the United Nations and
the international community have confronted during
their engagement in Sierra Leone is the question of
how best to devise comprehensive strategies and
mechanisms to mobilize adequate support and
resources designed to minimize the likelihood of a
relapse.
Given the fragility of countries emerging from
conflict, the challenges of building lasting peace can
only be met with a comprehensive and integrated
approach that goes beyond merely establishing
political stability and security. In order for durable
peace to be achieved, there must be a seamless linkage
between those core goals and measures intended to lay
a foundation for long-term development and
democracy, particularly with respect to governance
issues, social stability, human rights and the rule of
law.
Unlike current peace operations, earlier efforts in
conflict resolution were narrowly focused on crisis
management, which allowed for gaps to emerge
between the political and security spheres, on the one

10-31721

S/PV.6299

hand, and reconstruction and development, on the
other. That approach increased the likelihood that
conflict countries would degenerate into renewed
violence, in that it failed to adequately address the root
causes of violent conflict, particularly the interplay
between both underdevelopment and weak governance,
on the one hand, and intra-state warfare, on the other.
In this regard, contemporary peace operations
must focus on tackling the complexities of conflict
situations by identifying and supporting structures that
consolidate peace, not only during the peacebuilding
phase, but also during the traditional peacekeeping
period.
Following the Revolutionary United Front rebel
barricade of some United Nations troops in the eastern
part of Sierra Leone during the early stages of
development, the role of the United Nations Mission in
Sierra Leone was broadened to include emergency
relief, disarmament and demobilization, the training of
the military and police forces, human rights training,
the repatriation of internally displaced persons and
refugees, and the monitoring of elections. Building
lasting peace also requires addressing the root causes
of violent conflicts by strengthening Government
institutions and enhancing political participation.
On the specific question of what measures can be
implemented to achieve political stability, security and
social stability in the framework of a comprehensive
and integrated approach, I will endeavour to speak
about some of the initiatives undertaken in the Sierra
Leone and their impact on the overall peacebuilding
process to date.
In the aftermath of the cessation of hostilities and
the signing of the Lomé Peace Agreement, which
paved the way for the successful conclusion of the
disarmament,
demobilization
and
reintegration
programme, the Government, in collaboration with the
United Nations and other bilateral and multilateral
partners, embarked upon a comprehensive sector
reform process involving the security and justice
sectors.
The Republic of Sierra Leone Armed Forces, for
example, were increased from 1,700 to 8,500, and
underwent critical training and logistical support led by
the International Military Advisory Team (IMAT),
which was led by the United Kingdom. Sierra Leone
has achieved a significant milestone — the deployment

10-31721

of military and civilian police peacekeepers in ongoing
United Nations peace operations.
Similar interventions were undertaken with
respect to the national police force, including critical
training and logistical support and the rehabilitation
and construction of police facilities throughout the
country. In addition, the numerical strength of the force
was increased from 5,000 to 9,000, with the aim of
broadening and intensifying the Government’s reach
across the entire country for the maintenance of law
and order and the enhancement of the respect for the
rule of law.
Critical reforms were introduced through the
Justice Sector Development Programme, resulting in
the enhancement and development of the capacity of
the judiciary to dispose of the existing backlog of
cases.
All of the foregoing initiatives culminated in a
comprehensive
institutional
reform
process
encompassing defence, police, intelligence, the
judiciary and prisons, aimed at strengthening civilian
oversight and democratic accountability of the security
apparatus.
Undeniably, the security sector has come a long
way in its development and Sierra Leone continues to
progressively move towards the establishment of a
coordinated security and intelligence architecture
designed to allow a participatory approach to assume
full ownership and responsibility for the security
sector. The underlying principle has been: without
security there can be no sustainable development.
The relational dimension of peacebuilding is
critical to the attainment of lasting peace and social
cohesion. The Truth and Reconciliation Commission
and the Special Court for Sierra Leone were
established as instruments to achieve the twin goals of
promoting reconciliation and forgiveness and
combating impunity.
Adopting a strategy that includes comprehensive
measures to protect and promote human rights,
strengthen governance and rebuild democratic
institutions will inevitably address many of the root
causes of conflict. Accordingly, since the formal
declaration of the end of the war in Sierra Leone in
2002, a broad array of initiatives within the securitypolitical-humanitarian-development framework have
been undertaken to enhance democracy and rebuild

9

S/PV.6299

weak or dysfunctional State institutions. All of these
efforts have been geared towards laying the foundation
for medium- and long-term national recovery, and have
enhanced the State’s capacity for effective delivery of
public services to the citizenry and resulted in positive
outcomes for human development.
To date, my Government has worked with the
United Nations, in collaboration with our bilateral and
multilateral partners, to restore State and local
government institutions across the country, completing
two presidential and parliamentary elections, as well as
local government elections. In 2007, national elections
saw the opposition dislodge the ruling party from
power. I can say, with great pride, that, although not
perfect, most of the strides being made in the ongoing
democratization process in Sierra Leone are
unparalleled in post-conflict situations in many parts of
the world.
The establishment of the Peacebuilding
Commission in 2005 as an advisory body and as a
forum for mobilizing resources and support for the
consolidation of peace in countries emerging from
conflict, and its subsequent addition of Sierra Leone to
its agenda, occasioned a turning point in our
peacebuilding efforts. The considerable gains achieved
from the engagement with Sierra Leone have clearly
enhanced the importance of the Commission’s role as a
medium for securing resources and galvanizing support
for peacebuilding initiatives that are comprehensive,
coherent and coordinated and which reflect countryspecific realities.
Since the engagement of the Peacebuilding
Commission, Sierra Leone has made significant
progress in the areas of governance issues, inter-party
dialogue, the protection of human rights, and
addressing the security threats posed by endemic
corruption, drug trafficking and cross-border organized
crime.
Security across the country has greatly improved
thanks to the vigilance of joint police and military
patrols. Several legislative enactments and a
constitutional review process have been undertaken to
address these and other factors that could potentially
threaten the ongoing peacebuilding efforts and the
long-term quest for national development, as
envisioned within the framework of the Government’s
national strategy, known as the Agenda for Change.

10

While we continue to be indebted to the United
Nations architecture currently engaged in Sierra Leone
and to other development partners for the advances
mentioned above, challenges still abound in addressing
a number of development, human rights and
governance issues. Perhaps most vexing of these
concerns are the exceedingly high infant and maternal
mortality rates, which are reportedly among the highest
in the world, as well as burgeoning youth
unemployment in my country. The fact is that, despite
all of these efforts, coupled with the engagement of the
international community, Sierra Leone remains close to
the bottom of the human development index on many
key indicators. This is a worrying concern for us.
This brings me to the nexus between security and
development and the imperative of addressing the
enormous economic and social challenges that beset
post-conflict peacebuilding. It is in appreciation of this
synergy that my Government has spared no effort in
embarking upon a robust sector-wide reform regime,
with a view not only to taking advantage of the
multiplier effect, but, more important, to enabling us to
invest in the development of infrastructure and public
finance management. Similarly, we have resolutely
pursued efforts to invest in the development of human
capital for the furtherance of our social and economic
recovery programme, a vital precondition for
consolidating peace.
As I conclude my intervention, I wish to reiterate
that as much as peacebuilding is a national imperative,
there must be a holistic approach to conceiving and
managing peacebuilding and preventive efforts, with
local ownership, including through regional and
subregional actors, playing a pivotal role.
However, it is important to note that, at this
juncture,
despite
the
overwhelming
interest
peacebuilding has generated in the past decade,
mobilization of resources for peacebuilding and
preventive efforts still remain grossly inadequate when
compared to the corresponding commitments to
peacekeeping. Of particular importance in this regard
is the recognition of the catalytic role that can be
played by a meaningful and sequential allocation of
financial resources in the early stages of the transition
period.
The issue of accessibility to funding for
peacebuilding initiatives should be of particular
concern as the major assisting nations and financial

10-31721

S/PV.6299

institutions all continue to recover from the shocks of
the current global financial crisis and economic
slowdown, which has occasioned declining support and
remittances from donors across the spectrum. Given
this stark reality, the international community must
urgently consider new approaches and methodologies
for
allocating and sustaining
financing
for
peacebuilding and national post-conflict reconstruction.
The President: I now give the floor to Ms. Lucia
Lobato, Minister of Justice of Timor-Leste.
Ms. Lobato (Timor-Leste): It is indeed an honour
for me to represent my Government and my beloved
country in this important debate and to present our
Timorese experience in recovering from conflict over
the past 10 years. I will keep my statement within the
time limit, but I have circulated a more detailed text to
representatives for the record.
As Minister of Justice, I am able to present a
perspective on the development of peace through the
legal institutions and the rule of law in my country. But
I also wish to discuss some broader aspects of
reconciliation, economic development, security and
political stability, which are essential. I intend to focus
more on the solutions we are providing to our problems
than on the problems themselves. Let me share our
experience.
This debate is particularly timely for us, as we
have just hosted the Dili International Dialogue
conference, which served as an opportunity to
exchange experiences and find common ground among
the so-called g7 Plus — the “small g seven plus” of
fragile States. There was strong consensus among
fragile countries and development partners to move
from fragility to agility and seek greater and more
focused engagement with development partners.
We have found that Timor-Leste has much to
offer and to gain in the discussions about
peacebuilding strategies. While eight years is but a
short time since our national independence, we have
made many achievements. We addressed some burning
issues in the short term that were indeed critical to our
recovery. Important social security measures were
introduced, including recognition for the heroes of our
nation who made sacrifices so that we could be free.
Our relationship with Indonesia has been strengthened
through initiatives such as the Truth and Friendship
Commission and the ongoing dialogue between our
leaders. Camps for internally displaced person were

10-31721

gradually and sensitively decommissioned and people
were assisted in relocation and rebuilding. The
Government intervened to ensure food security when
rising rice prices threatened to limit supply.
The police and defence forces began to define
their peacetime mandates and work together on joint
operations when the internal security of the nation was
threatened. The success of this was evident following
the 2008 attacks on the Prime Minister and the
President of the Republic. Thanks to sound leadership,
this crisis inspired our security forces and provided a
platform to pursue further security sector reform,
greater professionalism and independence from
political interference. The police are now adopting a
community policing ethos, an approach by which the
police serve and work together with the community to
identify potential conflicts and to solve problems
before they escalate to violence.
Timor-Leste is fortunate to be blessed with
income from natural resources managed by the
Petroleum Fund, a success story in transparency and
good governance. Our Government believes that we
need to invest the income we make back into our own
country to improve the lives of our citizens. It is hard
to explain the sense of keeping money in the bank
while our people suffer. We need to create a dividend
for peace and stability.
Yes, we have come a long way, but we have also
learned many lessons, including some painful ones. We
have learned that, without exception, countries can
recover from conflict only if they can create a window
of time in which they are free from further conflict. In
Timor-Leste, we at last have that window, but we are
not taking peace for granted. As our Prime Minister,
Xanana Gusmão, has recently said,
“It can be easy to breathe a sigh of relief when
you begin to show signs of progress, when you
achieve a level of apparent stability, because in
times of peace we can forget the hardships of
conflict”.
We were not only emerging from a violent
conflict; we were also, for the first time in our history,
creating a new, independent State. In this spirit, I
would like to share three observations on
peacebuilding from our perspective, grounded in the
recent history of Timor-Leste and enriched by pertinent
themes from the Dili International Dialogue
Conference.

11

S/PV.6299

In regard to the need for an inclusive political
dialogue, in Timor-Leste we are aiming for a new
maturity in political relations. Following independence,
the Government set about addressing the roots of
conflict. The world will remember that, at the birth of
our new nation, our country lay in ruins. We were
building our new country on a destroyed infrastructure,
a limited economic sector and problematic social
cohesion between ourselves and our neighbours. Our
people had independence, but its benefits of it were as
yet unfelt by many in their daily lives.
Not surprisingly, we faced conflict again in 2006.
This conflict set back our development, but also
presented valuable lessons. Our political actors learned
that the way to our future was not through violence but
through positive and active leadership, professionalism
and commitment to development. From the 2006
conflict, we arose stronger as a nation, less afraid of
expressing political differences, in a process enriching
our political maturity without the need to revert to
violent conflict. We confront each other every day, but
we do so in our national Parliament. In addition, the
parliamentary opposition is regularly included in
public debates to forge a truly national consensus about
issues of common interest to all Timorese, such as the
package of major security laws that was approved last
month.
As to setting the right national priorities within a
flexible and long-term vision, in 2006 Prime Minister
Xanana Gusmão and the fourth constitutional
Government set about changing the course of TimorLeste’s future. Continued stability depends on our
success not only in managing crises but also in forming
respected State institutions that address all the needs of
our society, from ensuring basic services to reducing
poverty. In 2008, we realized that the only way to
achieve sustainable development was to coordinate all
our efforts. That same year, we presented a set of
national priorities for the country.
Those priorities are consistent with the five areas
identified as recurrent peacebuilding objectives in the
Secretary-General’s 2009 report on peacebuilding in
the immediate aftermath of conflict (S/2009/304). In
addition, we include a specific national priority area
dedicated to access to justice and another to good
governance and accountability, as well as one that
deals with human resource development. A focus on
youth and gender is mainstreamed into all our priority
areas because we have a rapidly growing population

12

which we want to be productive members of society,
not alienated or frustrated over a lack of jobs.
We have reviewed our national priorities on an
annual basis to ensure that we are adaptable to the
changing situation. With the improvement in the
security situation since 2008, we have been able to
shift our priorities for 2010 to infrastructure and rural
development. To provide an umbrella for this and
prepare us for the long term, the Prime Minister is
finalizing a strategic development plan for 2011-2030
that will ensure the coordination of all development
activities in the country for the next 20 years.
Concerning justice and the rule of law, we know
that one of the foundations of a stable and secure
society operating within the rule of law is a respected
justice system, whereby the rights and obligations of
the State and its citizens are understood by citizens and
are enforceable. We aim to give particular attention to
the voices of vulnerable groups, especially women and
children. Timor-Leste has also consistently prioritized
the building of strong institutions of justice that
complement the work done in policing and security
sector reform. Justice cannot be neglected in our
progress towards long-term security, peace and
economic development.
A fortnight ago, the Council of Ministers
endorsed a strategic plan for the justice sector,
following a highly participatory process. This process
informed and subsequently took account of the
recommendations
of
the
2009
independent
comprehensive needs assessment, facilitated by the
United Nations. The justice sector strategic plan can be
explained by its motto, “Bringing justice to the
people”, and in order to achieve that we have addressed
five thematic areas, which are covered in more detail in
the written version of this statement: institutional
development; the completion of Timor-Leste’s legal
framework; the development of human resources;
creating an infrastructure and applying information and
communication technology; and providing access to
justice.
We see justice as a fundamental part of this
debate on peacebuilding and the prevention of conflict.
Let me quote Pope John Paul II, in his address for the
2002 World Day of Peace, when he said that there is
“no peace without justice, no justice without
forgiveness”. Forgiveness is not the opposite of justice.
In fact, true peace is the work of justice. We are

10-31721

S/PV.6299

working on a justice system that safeguards the rights
of all citizens, including by providing legal remedies
where their rights have been violated. We also
acknowledge that there is no justice without
forgiveness. While our country ensures the rule of law,
we want to tell the Council that we suffered for many
years, and in some cases the wounds are still fresh. We
need to help heal these wounds, and we need to do so
in our own way and in our own time.
As there is no peace without justice, there is also
no peace without development. To conclude, I would
like to share some important points.
Concerning the question of quality over
expedience in capacity-building, in Timor-Leste we
were criticized many years ago for choosing quality
over expedience in preparing judicial actors, but we
can now show results, and we encourage this principle
to be applied as the only way of achieving confidence
in State institutions.
On the alignment of all foreign development
support to our development plans, in order to reach a
lasting peace we still need support. Initiatives such as
the United Nations Peacebuilding Fund could help us
enormously. We highly appreciate the assistance of our
development partners, including the United Nations
Development Programme, all of which are now
working with us as close associates rather than as faraway donors. We know that we are not alone. In order
to achieve development, we cannot allow the existence
of uncoordinated or competing implementation
mechanisms. The only way to create confidence among
our people and sustainable progress is to ensure that
the development agenda is led by the Timorese
leadership, taking the national dialogue to all parts of
the country. Peacebuilding must be a genuinely
national process if it is to be a productive element for
stability and reconciliation. A process of national
consultation led by the Prime Minister will begin in
rural areas next month.
Concerning the adoption of modern, user-friendly
technology, we need to automate Government services
and make them more accessible to the public, more
transparent and more accountable. Developing
countries may at times be offered clumsy, outdated
solutions, as we were in Timor-Leste, because people
think we are not ready for modern technology. We do
not agree with that thinking. We need to jump into the
future. Recent advances in technology have resulted in

10-31721

systems that are more intuitive and easy to use, and we
need to go straight to these solutions. Many of our
people are already comfortable with technology, and
we are working with our partners to ensure that they
are trained to develop, support and adapt systems
owned by Timor-Leste. In addition, we need to use
environmentally friendly technology. Here, we can
learn from the mistakes of our development partners.
We can keep the beauty and the resources of our
countries while advancing towards peace and stability.
With regard to strengthening the partnership
between Government and civil society, the growth and
progressive impact of our civil society organizations
have demonstrated the engagement of the people of
Timor-Leste. Timorese civil society has evolved from
providing humanitarian support to representing the
voices of the most vulnerable. It is inspiring to see
more and more young people volunteer to serve their
communities and join the fight for peace and justice.
To achieve peace, we must fight not conflict, but
the causes that might lead us to conflict. While some
States have taken centuries to build their State
institutions and achieve social and economic
development, we must do it in decades. As our Prime
Minister has stated,
“To unite an entire people who have been scarred
from conflict in the struggle for peace is more
difficult than to achieve unity in times of conflict.
As we know, there are so many legitimate
expectations from people who have fought for so
many years for the ideals of freedom, equality
and development that we can say that achieving
true peace also means freeing people from
poverty.”
In Timor-Leste we believe that peacebuilding and
development are not abstract words or theories, but as
tangible and real as a hand to hold. My friends and
colleagues in the Security Council took my country’s
hand when we reached out to them at the start of our
journey and helped pull us out of war. Our famous
Timorese spirit survives and grows, and I now offer
our hand again and ask for theirs as true partners in
development, so that we can walk together along the
road to a lasting peace and a brighter future in TimorLeste.
The President: I now give the floor to Mrs. Ngozi
Okonjo-Iweala, Managing Director of the World Bank.

13

S/PV.6299

Mrs. Okonjo-Iweala: I bring greetings to all
present from the President of the World Bank, Bob
Zoellick, who regrets that he could not be here today. I
particularly want to thank you, Mr. President, for
bringing us together to discuss this most important
issue and for inviting the World Bank to contribute. I
also wish to thank the Secretary-General for his strong
leadership of the United Nations family on this issue.

building and development do not happen in a
mechanical linear sequence, but are closely interlinked
and overlapping. Such a complex landscape calls for
cooperation and coherence among actors. It challenges
us to address the short-term demands of a deeply
damaged society while making sure that our actions do
not compromise the longer-term goal of building an
effective State.

As 2015 fast approaches, the world’s attention is
turning to progress in achieving the Millennium
Development Goals. The analysis that the World Bank
has commissioned to inform its 2011 world
development report on conflict and fragility confirms a
disheartening fact — countries that are wracked by
conflict and that suffer endemic fragility are not
making the progress they need if the Millennium
Development Goals are to become a reality for their
people.

Against this background, I would like to propose
one overarching principle that must inform all that we
do — results matter. By this, I mean that all that we do
must contribute directly to results on the ground.
Whether we are working in our headquarters offices to
shape a new policy, engaging with a partner
Government on a national development plan, or
rebuilding a road for a war-ravaged community, we
must constantly ask a single question: How will these
actions provide people with a better life now and in the
future?

We are all aware of the desperate needs of these
countries. Our research suggests that fragile States and
those recovering from fragility account for only 37 per
cent of population of developing countries if we
exclude China, India and Russia. However, they
account for 58 per cent of poverty in the developing
world, as well as 67 per cent of infant deaths and 69
per cent of the deaths of children under five. Our
analysis indicates that no fragile State has yet achieved
a single Millennium Development Goal. By 2015, only
10 per cent of fragile States are expected to achieve the
goal of halving poverty and hunger.
Against this backdrop, today’s debate is a most
timely one. These findings are a stark reminder of the
enormous and complex challenges that lie ahead, but
they are also a call to mobilize our combined resources
on behalf of the poor and powerless.
Violent conflict is one of the most profound
development challenges. Without peace and security,
there can be no sustained development, as we have
heard from our colleagues who spoke earlier. However,
focusing on peacebuilding alone is not sufficient. Just
as development cannot occur in the absence of peace,
peace without development is a peace that may not
last.
In recent years, the international community’s
discourse addressing violent conflict and its
consequences has become more nuanced. We
increasingly recognize that humanitarian action,
peacemaking, peacekeeping, peacebuilding, State-

14

The Government of Burundi clearly understands
the importance of results. In 2006, with the support of
the World Bank Institute, it introduced a rapid-results
approach. This approach, which breaks down long-term
development plans into manageable 100-day chunks, is
now applied in 80 Government projects. A pilot project
in the Ministry of Education resulted in the distribution
of 250,000 textbooks to primary schools in 60 days,
when previously this had required an entire school
year. As part of a health care pilot project, 482
pregnant women visited health centres and were
subject to HIV/AIDS screening in one month — far in
excess of the previous monthly average of 71.
As we debate here on some of the best ways to
get results, I would like us to focus on three crucial
areas: country context, partnership and accountability. I
believe that if we pay attention to these three areas, we
will be able to contribute something substantial and
enduring towards the immense challenges of helping
countries create an environment of peace and security.
Let me briefly elaborate on these three points.
First, it is about country context. Of course, we
must learn from and build on our experience but, in the
urgency of a post-conflict environment, it is often too
tempting to simply apply a solution that worked
elsewhere. We must guard against trying to replicate
what we have done in the past without ensuring that it
is appropriate to the present context. We must guard
against any prescription that prevents adaptation and

10-31721

S/PV.6299

flexibility. We need to do a better job of understanding
the drivers of conflict and to understand the structure
of elite incentives. We must also identify each
country’s fundamental strengths, comprehend the limits
of its capacity to absorb change and act on what that
knowledge tells us.
The World Bank-supported Justice for the Poor
programme works to support the development of
context-specific approaches to improving access to
justice in South-East Asia, Africa and the Pacific. In
Sierra Leone, the programme, along with other national
and international efforts, is helping to scale up
grassroots justice services. Trained community
paralegals employ a combination of mediation,
education and advocacy, and occasionally litigation, to
seek redress for violations of rights. They engage both
customary and formal institutions and provide a
flexible, cost-effective method for delivering justice
services that is tailored to Sierra Leone’s particular
socio-legal context. The Government is establishing a
legal aid board, which will recognize and certify the
paralegals, and it is expected that, within five years,
about 100 community paralegals will serve all 154
chiefdoms in the country.
Our coordination efforts must be driven by our
need to deliver meaningful results. I know that some
see comfort in predictability — that our response in
post-conflict situations would be improved by
predetermining who does what. I must challenge that
notion. While it is important that we recognize where
our overall comparative advantage may lie, it is
essential that our response should be determined by the
dictates of the situation and our relative capacity to
deliver in the particular context of the partner
countries. Predetermination could easily result in
inflexibility at a time when adaptability and nimbleness
are most needed. Decisions must be delegated to where
the best information is and be made at the lowest
effective level. That means that we need to put our best
people into the field, for it is our field staff who are
best placed to decide, in consultation with their country
partners, who should do what, when and how.
Secondly, partnerships are key. We must
recognize that achieving a sustainable peace and
setting in train a broad-based agenda for development
are ultimately the work of a State and its citizens. We
at the World Bank and in the development community
need to be humble and to remind ourselves that we
play a supporting role. We provide our resources,

10-31721

expertise and security assistance so that a people may
be able to take back the reins of Government. The only
credible coordinator of a State-building process is a
legitimate sovereign Government. Our assistance must
be shaped to support the country in mobilizing the
human and material capacity that it has at its disposal
to provide the services that its citizens need. That will
mean many things for us. For example, we must pool
our funding wherever possible to maximize coherence
and reduce the burden on the Government, such as
through multi-donor trust funds. We must support and
work through the national budget and strengthen
national fiduciary systems. We must use our
comparative advantages and tailor our efforts to local
needs and preferences, and we must reach agreement
with our country partners on when it is appropriate to
press for change and when we should stand back to
allow a population to determine the need for reform.
Just as we need to strengthen our partnership with
the countries that we seek to assist, we need to look too
at our own partnerships. Are we working together
effectively to achieve the results expected of us? The
World Bank has recently appointed a senior envoy to
Haiti, and a similar appointment to the Sudan is
expected soon. Those will strengthen our partnerships
in the field in countries in particular need. We are
heartened by the support that we and the United
Nations have received from the Swiss Government,
which will enable us to exchange senior officers
between the United Nations Peacebuilding Support
Office and the World Bank’s Fragile and ConflictAffected Countries Unit to help facilitate and deepen
our complementary efforts.
My third point is that we are all accountable.
While Governments must ultimately be accountable to
their citizens for what they do, we must do everything
that we can to reinforce that line of accountability.
Running a parallel service delivery programme may
give us results in the short term but it will not
contribute to, and may even undermine, efforts to build
the social compact that lies at the heart of a wellfunctioning State.
Shifting accountability also requires us to change
the way that we monitor our efforts. We must get away
from our traditional preoccupation with tracking inputs
and focus our attention, and that of our partners, on
achieving outcomes. Confronted by an uncoordinated
and poorly performing health-care system, the Afghan
Ministry of Public Health has established a basic

15

S/PV.6299

package of health services, delivered through
community health workers and health centres. For the
first time in many years, Afghans, particularly in rural
areas, are seeing the delivery of valued health services
made possible by a committed partnership between
Government and local providers. Access for the people
living in districts where the programme is being
implemented has increased from 9 per cent in 2003 to
over 80 per cent now. The most recent data for 2008
shows a fourfold increase in the number of outpatient
visits to a level three times higher than in a
neighbouring country. The programme has also seen a
decrease in the under-five mortality rate from 257 per
1,000 in 2000 to 161 in 2007 to 2008.
In the spirit of mutual accountability, we too
should be held accountable for what we deliver. For
example, if we demand transparency in our partners,
we should expect to provide it ourselves. In that
regard, I am pleased to report that the World Bank has
adopted a new Access to Information Policy that will
open up the Bank’s work even further, enhance public
ownership of the development agenda, strengthen
partnerships and encourage greater participation in
Bank-supported operations.
So, as we turn to our deliberations today, I would
ask us all to keep those three points in mind: the
importance of the country context, true partnerships
and appropriate accountability. I know that such ideas
may sit uncomfortably with our limited appetite for
risk and our need to demonstrate to our domestic
constituencies the quick wins expected in an immediate
post-conflict period. It is clear to me that addressing
the challenges of development through such lenses will
require fundamental changes to the way in which we
do business.
Fortunately, the next few months will bring a
number of opportunities to reshape and improve the
way in which we do business. For example, the
Secretary-General will report on progress since
launching his report on peacebuilding in the immediate
aftermath of conflict (S/2009/304) last June, and, at the
end of the year, the World Bank will present its World
Development Report on the themes of conflict and
fragility.
Let us make no mistake. If we are to deliver real
results for the people living in fragile and conflictaffected situations, those areas deserve our full
attention. We know that the costs of failure are great,

16

but let us bear in mind that the benefits that flow from
success can be even greater. Starting with our
deliberations here today, let us take every opportunity
to ensure that success.
The President: I shall now give the floor to the
members of the Security Council.
Mr. Alkalaj (Bosnia and Herzegovina): At the
outset, I would like to commend you, Minister Okada,
for convening this meeting to discuss the topic of
peacebuilding in post-conflict countries. I am confident
that our deliberations today will significantly
contribute to one of the most important items on the
Security Council’s agenda. I would also like to thank
the Secretary-General, Mr. Ban Ki-moon, as well as my
colleagues, Foreign Ministers, for being here today,
and we all anticipate valuable contributions. It is my
honour to speak on behalf of Bosnia and Herzegovina,
a country that has travelled the painful and difficult
road from recipient of to active participant in United
Nations peacekeeping and peacebuilding efforts.
We recognize the importance of peacebuilding
operations as a means of strengthening peace and
security in the host country, thus contributing to
creating conditions conducive to achieving sustainable
and irreversible peace. In order to realize this goal,
peacebuilding operations should be based on an
integrated, coordinated and comprehensive approach to
include the establishment of good governance, the rule
of law, the promotion of human rights, institutionbuilding,
security
sector
reform,
economic
reconstruction and development. The right to return to
pre-conflict homes and the full reintegration of
refugees and internally displaced persons through
sustainable returns programmes must be an integral
part of each and every peacebuilding strategy.
Peacebuilding activities require active interaction
among all stakeholders, including the host country,
donor countries, troop- and police-contributing
countries, international financial institutions and the
private sector. Furthermore, although we are of the
view that all relevant national and international actors
should be involved in the process of peacebuilding, we
consider the political will of the host country and
national ownership to be sine qua non conditions for
the success of peacebuilding operations, given that the
peacebuilding process is primarily the challenge and
national responsibility of post-conflict countries.

10-31721

S/PV.6299

In that regard, we believe that it is of the utmost
importance to promote dialogue between the parties to
a conflict, particularly among decision-makers and
civil society organizations, in order to move the
peacebuilding process forward and away from
recurring conflict. Such a dialogue is critical to
national institutions and capacity-building, as well as
to confidence-building and the reconciliation process.
Holding accountable all those who have committed
crimes during a conflict and bringing them to justice is
of equal importance to confidence-building and the
reconciliation process, and hence could contribute
significantly to the success of the social aspect of
peacebuilding operations.
Organizing free, fair and transparent elections
could be an important part of the process of creating
political stability and establishing a democratic system,
the main preconditions for reconciliation and
reintegration processes, as well as for achieving
sustainable and irreversible peace. Therefore, the
utmost attention ought to be paid to their thorough
preparation, including by facilitating the registration
and full participation of voters, particularly internally
displaced persons and refugees.
Bosnia
and
Herzegovina
stresses
that
restructuring the security sector requires balance
between international support and national ownership.
Sustainable security involves strengthening institutions
and processes, while a well-governed security sector is
vital to overall peacebuilding and reconstruction
efforts, as well as to development. Building a wellmanaged security sector that is sustainable requires not
only police and military reform, but also impartial and
accessible judicial and law enforcement sectors that
must rely on transparency, equality, civilian protection,
democratic norms and respect for human rights.
The
disarmament,
demobilization
and
reintegration (DDR) of former combatants are
indispensable elements of all peacebuilding operations.
The availability of arms and alienated and dissatisfied
former combatants represent a permanent risk of
recurrence of conflict. Hence, DDR programmes
should be a broader part of planning for development
and reconstruction. Furthermore, in a situation where
an early peace dividend is evident and generally
accepted, the security sector is well managed and
democratic norms are in place, there is also a window
of opportunity for development in the true sense. Job
creation measures, vocational education and retraining

10-31721

programmes for such vulnerable sectors such as
returnees, youth, national minorities or demobilized
combatants, as well as activities aimed at empowering
women, should be in place. The role of women and
their involvement in peacebuilding efforts should be
strengthened in post-conflict societies.
Bosnia and Herzegovina emphasizes that
peacebuilding strategies should be defined and owned
by national stakeholders, with a clear implementation
plan and benchmarks. In this context, the role of
various agencies, funds and programmes should be
defined and coordinated and best practices established.
It is of key importance that external actors do not
prescribe but advise, and this can be done only through
a transparent and open process, with the assistance of
the international community.
Political stability and security together, with
social stability, will reduce the risk of recurring
conflict only if it is integrated into a comprehensive
peacebuilding strategy. Bosnia and Herzegovina
welcomes the strengthened regional and international
cooperation in addressing issues of drug-trafficking,
organized crime, terrorism and trafficking in human
beings. A coherent and integrated approach is essential
not only in terms of combating these threats to peace
and security, but also with regard to building
reconciliation, coexistence, trust and stability at the
regional level.
Finally, the road from an initial peace agreement
to sustainable peace is long and winding. Travelling it
requires an integrated and comprehensive approach,
country-specific planning and strategy, as well as
coherent implementation and the strong and steadfast
commitment of both the host country and the
international community. The peacebuilding initiatives
that worked in Bosnia and Herzegovina were marked
by synergy among multiple actors and, most important,
between civilian and military endeavours.
I should like to conclude by saying that, in our
work, we should focus more on preventive diplomacy
and lessons learned in order to prevent conflicts, rather
than dealing with post-conflict situations, which are
always more costly in terms of human life and physical
and economic destruction. On behalf of my country, I
would like to reiterate our readiness to share the
knowledge, experience and lessons learned regarding
post-conflict peacebuilding in every situation where

17

S/PV.6299

our country’s first-hand experience can be seen as
relevant, reliable and useful.
Mr. Churkin (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We are pleased to welcome you, Sir, to the
presidency of the Security Council.
We have listened with interest to the statements
made today. The difficult challenge to Governments in
post-conflict crisis situations requires the development
of balanced strategies to resolve them, based on the
interrelationship between the issues of security, socioeconomic development and the protection of human
rights. We need a comprehensive approach that enables
the achievement of sustainable peace and ensures that
conflicts do not recur. There is no other alternative.
There is no doubt, however, that peacebuilding
activities must be based on the principles of national
responsibility for identifying the priorities and
approaches to implementing the strategy.
Assistance in any form from the international
community should be extended with the agreement of
national Governments and in respect for the principles
of sovereignty and territorial integrity. Ultimately, the
specific characteristics of each country must be taken
into account.
In successful post-conflict peacebuilding, it is
very important to strengthen national institutional
capacities. The United Nations undoubtedly plays a
special role in coordinating international efforts in
post-conflict
socio-economic
development.
We
understand very well that such activity presents many
difficulties and that the United Nations Secretariat,
programmes and funds, Member States, regional
organizations and international financial institutions
must be involved. In that respect, we support the
Secretary-General’s
resolve
to
improve
the
Organization’s effectiveness in post-conflict response,
to strengthen the Secretariat’s organizational
mechanisms and to coordinate its work.
Many early peacebuilding tasks — such as
security
sector
reform,
disarmament
and
demobilization — are currently undertaken by United
Nations peacekeeping operations. In assuming the main
task of facilitating peace processes, United Nations
peacekeepers play a critically important role in
establishing
conditions
conducive
to
more
comprehensive peacebuilding. We must bear in mind
that peacebuilding is a long-term and multifaceted
process that extends far beyond the framework of

18

peacekeeping operations. In the light of the
increasingly complex and multifaceted nature of
peacekeeping mandates, it would be desirable for
peacekeepers to be assigned only the primary task of
peacekeeping.
We should draw upon the Peacebuilding
Commission, regional organizations, the international
financial institutions and donors and involve them in
post-conflict peacebuilding. Here, we consider that the
Peacebuilding
Commission
should
focus
on
coordination, especially in areas that need particular
attention in a post-conflict context. Its work should be
complemented by mechanisms for cooperation with
national Governments. We trust that the ongoing
review of the Peacebuilding Commission will facilitate
strengthening its coordinating role.
We support measures for enhancing strategic
coordination between the United Nations and the
World Bank, which is an important partner for the
Organization in the peacebuilding sphere. We attach
importance to the Peacebuilding Fund as an emergency
financing mechanism in support of long-term
peacebuilding mechanisms.
Peacebuilding requires close cooperation among
the Security Council, the General Assembly and the
Economic and Social Council. We consider that the
draft presidential statement prepared by the Japanese
delegation will facilitate the strengthening of that kind
of partnership, and we support its adoption.
Mrs. Viotti (Brazil): Mr. President, we are
honoured by your presence today. It is also an honour
to welcome Ministers from Bosnia and Herzegovina,
Afghanistan, Sierra Leone and Timor-Leste, as well as
the Managing Director of the World Bank.
I would like to thank the Japanese presidency for
having organized this thematic debate and for having
prepared the draft presidential statement that we will
adopt later today. We fully support it.
This debate comes at a very timely moment, as
we engage in the review of the Peacebuilding
Commission and move forward in the implementation
of the recommendations of the Secretary-General’s
report on peacebuilding and early recovery
(S/2009/304).
The peacebuilding architecture of the United
Nations aims at integrating political stability, security
and socio-economic development. That integrated

10-31721

S/PV.6299

approach is a solid foundation for our work. However,
while this premise is well established in our discourse,
it still needs to be made fully operational in our
practice.
We are learning by doing. In the work of the
Guinea-Bissau configuration of the Peacebuilding
Commission, which I have the honour to chair, the
need for an integrated approach to simultaneously
tackle those three dimensions of peacebuilding is
evident. In order to surmount the recurrent political
instability in that country, security sector reform stands
as a matter of utmost priority, alongside the
strengthening of State institutions. At the same time,
efforts to revitalize the economy are indispensable: at
the end of the day, they will ensure the much needed
jobs to allow for stability to take hold and the fiscal
revenues that will enable the State to function in an
autonomous manner and provide basic services to the
population.
We welcome Foreign Minister Okada’s proposal
that, in peacebuilding strategies, high priority be
attached to the creation of youth employment.
Another sine qua non condition for effective
peacebuilding is the notion of national ownership. In a
country emerging from conflict, however, ensuring
national ownership can be particularly challenging. On
the one hand, it is essential for the State to take the
lead in the peacebuilding process; on the other,
capacity constraints usually get in the way, making it
necessary to build institutional capacity as the process
moves forward. In that regard, we welcome ongoing
efforts aimed at establishing pools of civilian capacity
to be expeditiously deployed on the ground. Needless
to say, such pools should not replace existing local
capacity, ought to resort to experts from developing
countries as much as possible, especially from the
region of the country concerned, and must help to
develop national capacity in post-conflict countries.
Our collective experience in peacebuilding
suggests that such efforts must not only be undertaken
simultaneously in different domains, but must also start
very early in the post-conflict process. There is an
emerging
consensus
that
peacekeeping
and
peacebuilding are not sequential forms of engagement,
but rather a continuum. In this regard, we welcome the
potential
contribution
of
the
Peacebuilding
Commission to countries in early recovery and
encourage greater coordination between the Security

10-31721

Council and the Commission. The potential role the
Commission can play in early post-conflict situations
should be explored more actively, especially with
regard to the linkages between security and socioeconomic development.
Peacebuilding
is
a
collective
and
multidimensional effort. Adequate coordination is
therefore central to effective peacebuilding, but it
remains a formidable challenge. The first task is to
share information among actors on the ground
concerning the activities that are being undertaken.
Such information-sharing should lead to a distribution
of labour to ensure coherence in plans and actions,
both in the field and at Headquarters. This is, of
course, easier said than done. The challenge is to
persuade donors and partners to participate in a
coordinating exercise under the leadership of the
country concerned and to align their assistance to
national priorities. Overcoming this challenge will
greatly enhance the effectiveness of our individual and
joint endeavours in peacebuilding, to the benefit of
post-conflict countries.
Another important aspect of peacebuilding efforts
has to do with developing strategic partnerships with
regional and subregional organizations, in the light of
the inherent regional nature of many situations that
need to be addressed. Engagement with international
financial institutions is also very important, given the
mutually reinforcing role of the activities of those
institutions and of those related to peacebuilding.
Greater involvement of the World Bank and the
International Monetary Fund in peacebuilding and their
growing partnership with the United Nations system
are most welcome.
Peacebuilding efforts will not bear fruit if they
are not supported by effective financing mechanisms. It
is imperative to envision funding arrangements capable
of channelling substantial resources in a timely
manner. We welcome the role played by the
Peacebuilding Fund in providing catalytic support to
post-conflict countries, which must be complemented
by other sources of longer-term financing. In this
regard, we believe the activities of the Fund can benefit
from greater synergy with the work of the
Peacebuilding Commission.
We look forward to the results of the ongoing
review of the Commission. The review process has
been an excellent opportunity to take stock of the

19

S/PV.6299

progress achieved thus far and discuss ways to improve
the Commission’s work. We hope it can lead to a
Commission that is placed at the centre of the United
Nations peacebuilding architecture, endowed with a
strong secretariat, capable of garnering all the available
expertise within and outside the United Nations
system, able to foster coordination among various
actors and flexible enough to deal with the manifold
challenges related to peacebuilding processes.
To some extent, peacebuilding is a new frontier
for the multilateral system, as we still have to set up or
improve institutional arrangements, establish adequate
procedures and create political constituencies around
the globe. Formative periods can be challenging, but
they are also promising. We are at this precise moment
in peacebuilding. The single most important factor to
determine our success will be our ability to effectively
integrate stability, security and development into
coherent actions adjusted to the concrete needs of each
situation. This is no small challenge, but it is one that
is worth embarking on.
Mrs. Ogwu (Nigeria): My delegation wishes to
express its profound appreciation to the delegation of
Japan for convening this timely debate on the
important theme of post-conflict peacebuilding. We are
also honoured by the presence here today of ministers
from Afghanistan, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Sierra
Leone and Timor-Leste and the Managing Director of
the World Bank.
Mr. President, your choice of theme has provided
an opportunity for the Security Council to contribute to
the series of events targeting the review of the
Peacebuilding Commission (PBC) five years after its
establishment. We believe that the outcome of this
debate can make an important contribution to the
mandated review of the United Nations peacebuilding
architecture.
The year 2010 is a pivotal one for peacebuilding.
First, the African Union has declared 2010 the Year of
Peace and Security in Africa. Secondly, the World
Bank’s World Development Report 2010 will focus on
the issues of conflict and fragility. It is also the year
that the Secretary-General will issue his first progress
report on peacebuilding in the immediate aftermath of
conflict. These activities, combined with the Council’s
previous discussions on this subject, will, we hope,
underline the importance of peacebuilding as an
integral pillar of peace and security.

20

I would like to highlight five main points in this
debate. First, national capacity and ownership are vital
to ensuring lasting peace. We stressed this point a few
days ago in the context of the presence of the United
Nations Organization Mission in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo in that country and ardently
believe in its applicability to other countries emerging
from conflict. Ensuring ownership on the basis of
capacity is a challenge that we all recognize and should
strive to meet.
Although peacekeepers are often called upon to
support this effort, their role is essentially a gap-filling
measure. It is important, therefore, for national
Governments and other actors in peacebuilding to
better understand the very thin line between
peacekeeping and peacebuilding responsibilities.
Secondly, a comprehensive approach to
peacebuilding requires partnership, consistency and
coherence among the various actors. For a partnership
to be strong and effective, it must be grounded in a
shared vision and common objective. As Member
States engaged in peacebuilding, we need to be
consistent and coherent in the policies that we promote
and, indeed, speak with one voice on this issue,
regardless of the setting and place of discussion.
Nowhere is there greater need for this approach
than in the interactions between the United Nations,
World Bank, the International Monetary Fund and the
World Trade Organization aimed at enhancing the
goals of peace, security and development in the
aftermath of conflict. In our opinion, our shared vision
of and common objective for peacebuilding should
guide the various programmatic activities and enable
the different actors to adapt and respond to emerging
challenges, notwithstanding their operational mandates
and reporting lines.
Thirdly, threats to peace have cross-border
implications and linkages, often demanding broader
efforts and mechanisms at the regional and subregional
levels. This is not only true of conflicts in West Africa,
but is the case in most regions of the world. For this
reason, we would like to emphasize the need to pay
due attention to the regional dimensions of
peacebuilding. Peacebuilding cannot be achieved using
a short-term strategy. It requires a comprehensive and
integrated strategy responsive to needs and priorities,
as well as the long-term commitment of all actors at
the national, regional and international levels.

10-31721

S/PV.6299

Fourthly, the PBC should have a central role in
sustaining a monitoring commitment to peacebuilding
activities. Monitoring for its own sake will be of little
use if it does not seek to focus attention on an endstate. Consequently, the PBC should aim to keep
international focus on the end goals of peacebuilding.
The PBC is not an abstract entity. In essence, it is made
up of member States with a political will. As such, we
should demonstrate through our words and our deeds
that we truly own and cherish the institution. Its
strength or weakness will be measured in large part by
the quality of our political commitment to the
institution and its cause.
I believe that we should seize the moment in
2010 following the PBC review to regenerate
momentum around peacebuilding. We would also need
to alert our individual Governments to the need to
invest in peacebuilding if we are to help countries
emerging from conflict to sustain their peace. The
review should help us reinvigorate the vision of 2005
on the basis of the experience gained from engaging
countries on the PBC’s agenda.
Lastly, if the PBC is to serve its intended
purpose, it will require substantive support, expertise
and institutional linkages within the United Nations
system and beyond. Strengthening the capacity and
role of the Peacebuilding Support Office (PBSO)
should be the first step in the direction of positioning
the Office to provide such support and build such
linkages. The PBSO could also assist the PBC in
promoting partnerships for peacebuilding.
Let me conclude by reiterating our support for the
delegation of Japan’s initiative to convene this debate
and the critical importance of feeding its outcome into
the PBC review. We support the draft presidential
statement to be adopted at the end of today’s debate.
Mr. Araud (France) (spoke in French): I would
like to thank His Excellency Mr. Okada, Minister for
Foreign Affairs of Japan, for being here with us today,
and Japan for having organized this open debate on the
wide-ranging subject of peacebuilding. I also thank
Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon, the Ministers for
Foreign Affairs of Afghanistan and Bosnia and
Herzegovina, the Minister of Defence of Sierra Leone,
the Minister of Justice of Timor-Leste and the
Managing Director of the World Bank for their
presence and statements this morning.

10-31721

France associates itself with the statement to be
made by the representative of the European Union.
The United Nations is devoting all its political,
military, humanitarian and development instruments to
developing an effective strategy to prevent countries
that have been weakened by war from reverting to
conflict.
First of all, peacebuilding strategies should be
defined on the ground in cooperation with local
authorities. National ownership is an essential aspect of
their success. As emphasized by the Secretary-General
in his report of June 2009 (S/2009/304), these efforts
should be based on the efforts of the countries
involved, taking into account local, national and
international capacities available.
The London Conference on Afghanistan in
January thus restated the international community’s
long-term commitment to the Afghan people and
authorities on the basis of a road map to accelerate
their assumption of sovereign responsibility.
The establishment of lasting peace in a country
emerging from conflict involves greater consistency in
strategies and the participation of all peacebuilding
actors, including United Nations agencies, international
financial institutions, non-governmental organizations,
national Governments or civil society organizations.
However, the coordination role falls first and
foremost to the Peacebuilding Commission, which we
created five years ago. This subsidiary advisory body
should ensure that actors and resources can be better
coordinated. Today, we must note that the outcomes
achieved in this regard could and should be improved,
and that will be the challenge of the review process
that we have initiated.
Indeed, the United Nations peacebuilding
architecture should be able to respond to the realities
on the ground and to meet the expectations of Member
States by setting out the priorities areas to be dealt with
by all of the actors on the ground. The Peacebuilding
Commission should become this central, recognized
element that we all hope for, both in New York and on
the ground, and both within the United Nations and in
the international community as a whole.
The Peacebuilding Fund, which was established
in parallel with the Commission, could play a
catalysing role by mobilizing bilateral and multilateral
donors. However, we must meet not only immediate

21

S/PV.6299

needs but also more long-term ones, and that is one of
the main difficulties that faces us in terms of
peacebuilding. We must be able to simultaneously
anticipate, act and develop our strategies in order to
ensure that countries do not relapse into conflict.
Beyond the cases that the Commission has before
it, we can work on improving coordination between all
the actors within the United Nations family,
particularly in countries where peacekeeping
operations or special political missions are deployed.
This is the case with the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, for instance. New, custom-made tools, such as
integrated strategic frameworks, enable us to better
coordinate the efforts of all actors for the benefit of the
countries where peacebuilding remains necessary.
To conclude, I would like to recall that
peacebuilding does not necessarily depend on an
official emergence from conflict. The unfortunate
example of Timor-Leste has revealed that drawing
down a peacekeeping operation too rapidly and not
managing the transition process carefully enough can
lead to a resumption of conflict. In order for durable
strategies that are applicable in the immediate and long
term to be implemented, peacebuilding should be
clearly understood as one dimension of peacekeeping
and not just as the step that follows it.
The Council debate that France organized on
12 February 2010 highlighted the importance of
including the peacebuilding dimension from the outset
of a peacekeeping operation. Stepping up relations
between the Peacebuilding Commission and the
Security Council might also bring about a
strengthening of the relationship between peacekeeping
and peacebuilding. The Commission review process
will make it possible to enhance the Commission’s
efforts and furnish the United Nations with a truly
effective tool to ensure that countries do not relapse
into conflict.
Mr. Rugunda (Uganda): Let me begin by
thanking you, Foreign Minister Okada, and the
delegation of Japan for organizing this high-level
debate on the important issue of post-conflict
peacebuilding. I also thank the Secretary-General, the
honourable ministers of Afghanistan, Sierra Leone and
Timor-Leste and the Managing Director of the World
Bank for their statements. We also welcome the
participation of the Foreign Minister of Bosnia and
Herzegovina.

22

This debate, which is taking place during the
review of the work of the Peacebuilding Commission,
is both useful and timely. The United Nations, regional
and subregional organizations and the wider
international community continue to be preoccupied,
and rightly so, with issues of post-conflict
peacebuilding.
Uganda underscore the importance of developing
comprehensive peacebuilding strategies so that
countries emerging from conflict are supported in their
move towards sustainable peace, economic recovery
and development. This comprehensive approach is
essential if post-conflict countries are to avoid a
relapse
after
peacekeeping
operations.
For
peacebuilding strategies to be successful, they must be
designed to address a particular conflict situation. We
can never have a one-size-fits-all approach, although
broad parameters for most conflict situations have been
identified.
What is critical is that a comprehensive strategy
should, first, be nationally owned; secondly, address
the root causes of the conflict; thirdly, leverage
national, regional and international resources to
support in a coordinated way the implementation of
identified peacebuilding priorities; and fourthly,
address the provision of peace dividends, including
basic services.
Our experience in Uganda has shown us the
importance of identifying national priorities based on
the country’s unique situation and conditions.
One of the lessons we learned is that it is
important to prioritize and sequence peacebuilding
activities, starting with the most urgent and critical
elements,
including
security
sector
reform,
reconciliation, economic recovery and reconstruction.
To ensure sustainability, building and strengthening
national institutions and developing local capacity are
key prerequisites.
Peacebuilding is a collective endeavour and a
shared responsibility, in which national authorities,
regional and subregional organizations, the United
Nations and the wider international community have
important roles to play. The need for mobilization of
adequate, flexible and timely funding for peacebuilding
activities does not need to be emphasized again. We
therefore welcome the ongoing strengthening of
strategic partnerships between the United Nations, the
World Bank and other financial institutions.

10-31721

S/PV.6299

In conclusion, we reiterate the need to ensure that
peacebuilding activities are considered at an early
stage in conflict situations and that all actors work
within a well-coordinated and coherent framework.
Uganda supports the adoption of the draft presidential
statement on peacebuilding.
Sir Mark Lyall Grant (United Kingdom): I
would like to welcome you, Mr. President, to the
Security Council today and to thank you, both for
presiding over this important debate today and for the
excellent contribution that Japan’s delegation makes to
the Council’s work. I would also like to thank the
Secretary-General and the ministerial and other
participants today for sharing their particular insights.
It has been especially valuable to hear the perspectives
of countries taking important steps on the long and
challenging path to rebuilding themselves.
Peacebuilding is at the heart of this Council’s
work. In some senses, everything we do in this Council
is about building peace. We give it different labels,
depending on the specific task at hand. But conflict
prevention and peacekeeping are all part of this broader
goal of sustainable peacebuilding, and it tests every
resource — political, security and development — that
the United Nations can deploy. As the minister from
Sierra Leone said earlier today, we need to look at the
rebalancing of resources between conflict prevention,
peacebuilding and peacekeeping. The ultimate goal for
us should be to strengthen the capacities of countries
emerging from conflict to drive forward their own
recovery processes and address the very difficult
governance, security and development challenges they
face.
As we discussed in the Council debate in January
under the French presidency, the transition from
peacekeeping to peacebuilding is not a linear one.
Countries at risk of relapsing into conflict need to be
able to provide sufficient security and access to justice,
and be able to resolve conflicts peacefully to allow for
the departure of peacekeeping troops. International
support for that process is not just about offering
barracks and boots. Integrating combatants who were
previously fighting each other in a new army, ensuring
the discipline of that new army and then putting it
under proper civilian oversight can be daunting tasks
for a new Government overseeing a fragile peace
process.

10-31721

Those elements alone are insufficient. Successful
peacebuilding needs real progress on providing basic
services and economic recovery. That must start as
soon as possible after a peace agreement is reached.
Delivering that requires leadership and vision from
within the country itself. The United Nations, and
in particular the Special Representatives of the
Secretary-General, has a key role in bringing the
United Nations system and the wider international
community systems — political, security and
development efforts — behind a common nationally
owned strategy.
So how can the United Nations and the broader
international community deliver more effectively? In
the coming months, I believe, we should focus on three
issues. First, we need to improve the speed and quality
of deployable civilian experts to help build national
capacities. As the Secretary-General said earlier today,
the recently launched review of civilian capacities
needs to generate practical solutions.
Secondly, we need greater clarity on the roles and
responsibilities within the United Nations and a
strengthened partnership with the World Bank. That
will allow us to make the right investments in order to
achieve more timely and predictable responses in such
areas as support for re-establishing the basic functions
of a State.
The conclusions of both those strands of work
need to be included in the Secretary-General’s followup report on peacebuilding. That report should include
a frank assessment of what is, and what is not, working
on the ground.
Thirdly, we need a Peacebuilding Commission
(PBC) that has real impact on the ground. The PBC’s
focus should be on helping countries to address the
barriers to peacebuilding and on getting clear
commitments from Governments and the international
community about what needs to be done in a defined
period of time to help achieve that. And we need the
PBC to have a much more distinctive voice when
providing advice. The Council should have an
opportunity to listen to that advice when discussing
peacebuilding and peacekeeping issues. The PBC
review provides an opportunity for us to establish that
practice.
The Council was due to visit the Democratic
Republic of the Congo this weekend. Unfortunately,
that has had to be postponed for climactic reasons. But

23

S/PV.6299

we hope we will be able to reinstate that visit soon. We
think that the Democratic Republic of the Congo will
be a real test of the international community’s ability to
move from a primarily peacekeeping presence to a
broader peacebuilding role. That will require the
United Nations system, the international financial
institutions and the wider international community to
play a more significant role in helping to restore a State
and to support it in addressing critical peacebuilding
needs.
History is littered with collapsed or faltered peace
processes, some of which are due to underlying
governance and rule of law issues not being addressed.
When such threats emerge, the Council needs to be
able to react rapidly to prevent further deterioration.
The United Kingdom supports the draft presidential
statement that is before the Council.
Mr. Apakan (Turkey): First of all, I wish to
welcome you, Sir, and to commend Japan’s presidency
for organizing this meeting. I would also like to thank
the Secretary-General and the Managing Director of
World Bank for their substantive briefings, which
included valuable assessments and recommendations
on how to develop post-conflict peacebuilding
processes. We are particularly honoured by the
presence of the Ministers for Foreign Affairs of
Afghanistan and Bosnia and Herzegovina, as well that
of the Ministers of Sierra-Leone and Timor-Leste.
The concept note provided by Japan (S/2010/167)
includes pertinent questions that encompass a wide
range of issues on the peacebuilding agenda. It also
provides food for thought for future discussion. In that
respect, I shall today limit my intervention to four
points that we deem to be of particular importance.
Moreover, the draft presidential statement that is before
us includes a number of measures relevant to postconflict peacebuilding. We fully support it.
The challenges we are addressing today are not
new. For over a decade, we have grappled with how to
bring peacebuilding upstream and how to mount a
more rapid and effective response in the immediate
aftermath of a conflict. Although the challenges
aggravated by global resource constraints remain
formidable, the renewed enthusiasm on the part of
Member States and the international community, as
well as the impetus gained so far through the reform of
United Nations peace operations, have brought about
added optimism for a new peacebuilding agenda.

24

In our view, the new peacebuilding agenda
requires, first and foremost, recognition in practice, not
just in rhetoric, of the substantive and inherent linkages
between peace, security, stability, development, human
rights and the rule of law. That, in turn, compels us to
take complementary, integrated and properly
sequenced actions in all those areas, so as to achieve a
catalytic impact on the outcome of our peacebuilding
endeavours.
Indeed, peacebuilding requires well-calibrated
action, not only in various policy areas but also with
regard to short-term, medium-term and long-term
goals. That was also one of the messages of the
Secretary General’s report last year (S/2009/304). We
agree with the Secretary-General’s conclusion that
decisions taken in the short term should not prejudice
medium- and long-term peacebuilding, but that they
should be mutually reinforcing.
Recognizing the nexus between peace, security
and development leads me to the second important
element, which is the necessity of deciding upon a
comprehensive strategy and a political-strategic
compass that is designed to support viable peace
processes and political, economic and social stability.
In other words, that strategy should be an integrated
one that merges the tools of peacemaking,
peacekeeping and peacebuilding. It should also be
coherent, adapted to the needs of a situation and wellcoordinated vis-à-vis the various actors involved in
peacebuilding.
The lessons learned from various peacebuilding
challenges reveal that, where such an integrated
strategy is missing, the international peacebuilding
agenda is bound to be ad hoc, piecemeal or even
contradictory, if not outright counterproductive. In the
Balkans, for example, the shared peacebuilding
framework involving military, diplomatic, economic,
legal and social instruments of the European Union,
NATO, the Organization for Security and Cooperation
in Europe and the United Nations made collective and
concerted action possible; whereas in some regional
conflicts in Africa, the absence of such a framework at
times hinders the success of the peacebuilding project,
despite continuous international assistance and high
volumes of aid.
This brings us to the third important element,
which is ownership of the process. Undoubtedly,
peacebuilding is ultimately a home-grown project and

10-31721

S/PV.6299

the realization of its goals requires the active
engagement of local stakeholders. This would not only
avoid the criticism that it has been imposed on the
national Government and population, but also would
increase the chances of its success.
Therefore, any mechanism for building durable
peace and justice must be applied with the active
participation of all local stakeholders, including civil
society,
marginalized
groups,
ex-combatants,
professional associations and women’s organizations.
This is particularly significant in terms of social
reconciliation efforts, where grass-roots structures play
a catalytic role.
At the regional level, neighbouring countries and
regional factors should also be brought into the picture.
Given that many conflicts have cross-border
dimensions
beyond
the
domestic
political
circumstances, the scope of conflict analysis and
response has to be broadened, not only conceptually
but also geographically. Of course, the concept of
ownership will remain abstract, unless it is
accompanied from the very beginning by capacitybuilding support on the part of the international
community.
While the components of any peacebuilding
strategy should be tailored to specific situations, the
basic pillars on which the international community can
lend its support remain more or less the same. Four
important elements come to fore for the realization of
sustainable peace in a post-conflict situation:
restoration of a functioning State, i.e. ensuring basic
safety, security and services; rebuilding the legitimacy
of the State by ensuring the democratic accountability
of political leaders to their citizens and strengthening
the rule of law; promoting social reconciliation to heal
the wounds of conflict; and revitalizing of the
economy.
This leads me to my fourth point, namely, that the
United Nations has a unique role to play here, one that
could merge the State-centred and human-centred
approaches in all these areas and coordinate the work
of various stakeholders to deliver as one on the ground.
The Peacebuilding Commission, with its unique
position allowing it to explicitly address the nexus
between security and development, could play a
critical role in this respect. Furthermore, the United
Nations can also serve as a clearing house for financial,
in-kind and technical support at the bilateral and

10-31721

multilateral levels, where all the stakeholders could
interact with each other on their individual projects and
programmes. The Security Council also has an
important role to play in signalling strong international
attention and support for the peace process and for the
initiation of peacebuilding.
I would like to conclude my remarks by
emphasizing that the new peacebuilding agenda
highlights the need to operate at many levels, from the
micro community to the macro political level, from the
national and regional levels to the global level. This is
why we should go beyond State-centric concepts of
security and move to multi-faceted and multi-level
strategies that can help address the multiple causes of
conflict from a long-term developmental perspective.
Mr. Puente (Mexico) (spoke in Spanish): Like
other delegations, I would like to begin by welcoming
your presence here, Mr. President, and express our
gratitude for your country’s initiative in organizing this
open debate on a subject that is of utmost importance
to this Organization, namely, peacebuilding and,
particularly, in adopting a comprehensive global and
strategic approach. I would also like to greet and thank
Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon, the Ministers Zalmai
Rassoul, Alfred Palo Conteh, Lucia Maria Lobato and
Dr. Okonjo-Iweala for their illuminating statements
and thank the Minister of Foreign Affairs of Bosnia
Herzegovina for his presence.
Today’s session affords us a fine opportunity to
consider the importance of avoiding relapses into
conflict in post-conflict situations. We firmly believe in
post-conflict prevention and reconstruction and in the
importance of strengthening the link between security
and development in the transition to peace from a
conflict situation, taking into account the key elements
established by the countries themselves. A positive
advance in this regard, is the recognition by the
Security Council that it is necessary to incorporate
coherence and integration into the establishment of
peace,
peacekeeping
and
peacebuilding
and
development in order to ensure a prompt and efficient
response to post-conflict situations and avoid a relapse.
We support peacebuilding measures that will be
incorporated in a timely fashion in the mandates of
peacekeeping operations.
The peaceful settlement of a conflict does not, in
itself, guarantee that the risk of a resumption of
violence will be eliminated. It is essential to establish

25

S/PV.6299

the necessary conditions to guarantee lasting stability
and security. It is as important to initiate peace, as it is
to maintain it and ensure that it is sustainable.
Security sector reform is an important priority,
since it allows for the prevention of new outbursts of
instability and relapses in violent conflicts and makes
it possible to strengthen the human rights framework,
which, in turn, contributes to economic and social
development. For my country, peace and justice are
inextricably linked in an integral solution to conflict.
Therefore, no crime should go unpunished, and
mechanisms should be established to investigate and
clarify possible violations of international law by any
of the parties involved in conflicts. This is an essential
component in achieving national reconciliation and
durable peace.
Security and justice, however, should be built on
a political foundation. We recognize that the holding of
elections is an important aspect of conflict prevention,
peacebuilding and establishing permanent peace. This
certainty has been reflected in our participation in
Lebanon, Timor-Leste, Haiti, Iraq and Bosnia and
Herzegovina, with an effort to back the efforts of the
Governments of these countries to strengthen their
electoral institutions. If we fail to acknowledge that the
structural factors of a conflict, such as poverty, social
and economic inequality, are severe obstacles to
achieving sustainable development, then we loose sight
of important tools for achieving lasting peace,
eliminating poverty and promoting development and
equal opportunity. It is also necessary to incorporate
into early action attention to basic needs, such as
housing, education, health, food and jobs as part of the
tools of peacebuilding.
We consider it essential that all these aspects be
based on the understanding that the primary
responsibility pertains to the country involved.
Therefore, it is important that any strategy be aligned
with the national priorities of each country. The
international community has a crucial role to play in
the first post-conflict stages, but it is necessary that the
application of these principles be adapted to the
existing realities in each case, in particular, the
political, economic, institutional, social and cultural
conditions that prevail in the country in question.
We have frequently underscored the importance
of establishing national peacebuilding strategies
formulated through a broad-based advisory process

26

involving all national, regional and international
stakeholders, both within and outside the United
Nations system, including donor countries and
financial organizations, in order to ensure greater
consistency in peacebuilding efforts.
However, the coordinated implementation of
these efforts has been somewhat neglected, despite its
great importance in guaranteeing a lasting peace. In
this context, a body like the Peacebuilding Commission
has enormous potential. With a view to contributing to
these matters, my delegation, together with our
colleagues from Ireland and South Africa, will
facilitate the 2010 review of the Peacebuilding
Commission — an exercise which we hope will have a
positive impact on peacebuilding processes.
In conclusion, I express the support of my
delegation for the draft presidential statement that we
will adopt at the end of this meeting.
Mr. Salam (Lebanon): At the outset, I should like
to thank you, Mr. President, for having organized this
open debate, and the Minister for Foreign Affairs of
Japan for having honoured us with his presence. I
should also like to join my colleagues in welcoming
the Ministers from Bosnia and Herzegovina,
Afghanistan, Sierra Leone and Timor-Leste, and the
Managing Director of the World Bank. I should also to
thank the Secretary-General for his insightful remarks.
After 15 years and a dozen major operations,
peacebuilding remains a vast, complex and only
partially successful experiment. Important lessons have
been learned along the way, yet there is still much that
we need to learn about building the conditions for a
durable peace in war-torn States.
A commonly agreed upon element of
peacebuilding is the need for a coordinated and
integrated strategy that defines critical peacebuilding
priorities. Such strategies should be forged at the
country level through dialogue with national actors.
The alignment of action and the resources behind it is
critical to successful peacebuilding. Due to the
increased complexity of post-conflict reconstruction
processes, it is fundamental that this strategy be
flexible and subject to timely review according to
evolving peacebuilding priorities and developments on
the ground.
Perhaps the most common criticism of
peacebuilding to date has been that international

10-31721

S/PV.6299

agencies are not sufficiently sensitive to the unique
characteristics of each host country. Indeed, a
particular institutional solution or sequence of events is
not necessarily appropriate in one country simply
because it has been used with relative success in
another conflict-affected country. Countries have
unique histories and traditions of social organization,
which create different challenges and opportunities for
conflict resolution. Therefore, it is not possible to
develop a generic blueprint for peacebuilding
engagement. Such engagement should be contextsensitive and address the underlying causes of the
conflict.
The main objectives of peacebuilding are
establishing security, building confidence in a political
process, expanding core national capacity and
achieving socio-economic development, as we all
know. It is important, however, to identify the activities
which best contribute to achieving these objectives
according to the country-specific situation and its
actual needs. Since these objectives are interdependent
and mutually reinforcing, it is of fundamental
importance that the peacebuilding framework be
clearly articulated and ensure coherence among the
objectives, whether at the level of planning or of
implementation.
Ensuring security and preventing new eruptions
of violence are the foremost goals of any peacebuilding
process. Without the reasonable assurance of physical
security for the bulk of the population, there is little
hope of achieving progress on institution-building,
inter-community reconciliation, reconstruction or
development. Therefore, security sector reform is
essential and should be nationally owned from the
outset. Effective security sector reform requires
effective disarmament; the creation of security forces
that are well trained, disciplined and politically neutral;
and a security sector that is under the civilian oversight
of a democratic Government.
A basic level of political will and commitment on
the part of national actors is a precondition for
peacebuilding. Political issues that remain unaddressed
or only partially addressed by peace agreements may
call, after such an agreement is signed, for sustained
mediation efforts as part of a coherent approach to
peacebuilding. Successful peacebuilding efforts require
the promotion of a participatory process of healing and
reconciliation through inclusive dialogue.

10-31721

Initiating change in the political culture of a
society is one of the most difficult aspects of any postconflict transition. It requires long-term strategies
involving large segments of society and could include
extensive education, sensitivity campaigns and
consensus-building within society. These more
intangible aspects of peacebuilding are frequently
overlooked in favour of more technical rebuilding and
assistance. Nonetheless, they are essential to long-term
change. The people must be at the heart of any search
for solutions to conflict and efforts to consolidate
peace.
A poor governance framework will undermine the
sustainability of peace. Thus, it is essential that the
peacebuilding process advance and support the
establishment of democratic, transparent and
accountable governance and the reconstruction of wellfunctioning State institutions. The delivery of early
peace dividends includes the provision of basic
services. Countries in conflict often experience a
serious deterioration in or even the complete
destruction of their systems of governance, service
delivery and economic production. Successful
peacebuilding requires helping societies to reverse
these trends.
Peacebuilding also requires coherent responses to
the needs of vulnerable people through programmes
and services to reintegrate repatriated refugees and
ex-combatants into civil society, to resettle internally
displaced persons and to assist war-affected
populations in general. Women, in particular, are key to
peacebuilding. Their full participation in the
peacebuilding process, both as victims of conflict and
as important drivers of recovery and development, is
essential.
But how do we ensure that peacebuilding efforts
are perceived as legitimate in the eyes of those they are
trying to help? The answer is to maximize local
ownership by involving populations as quickly and
extensively as possible in their own governance.
National actors are the engines and the drivers of the
peacebuilding process. They are able to identify the
most pressing needs of their society and the most
effective means of addressing them. Hence, national
authorities must take primary responsibility for reestablishing the key institutions of security, governance
and economic recovery, with the support of the United
Nations and international partners.

27

S/PV.6299

Since the greatest resources for a durable peace
are always rooted in the local people and their culture,
this peace should be built from the bottom up by
enhancing sustainable citizen-based peacebuilding
initiatives and by opening up public political spaces in
order to allow institutions of civil society to flourish.
To this end, peacebuilding efforts should promote
initiatives that incorporate citizen-based activities,
including community peace projects and other
grassroots initiatives, in order to empower civil society
and to deepen its capacity for non-violent social
change.
Financial resources are, of course, essential
prerequisites without which effective leadership,
common strategies and more predictable support
capacity remain only theoretical paradigms.
Finally, when large-scale violence ends, the
challenges facing the leadership and people of a
country are enormous, and peace is often very fragile.
International support in such complex and rapidly
evolving situations is of fundamental importance and
requires Member States and international organizations
to align their assistance and engagement in support of
an early and prioritized peacebuilding framework in a
flexible and predictable manner.
Civil wars, by definition, are fought primarily
within the boundaries of a single State, but they are
rarely isolated from political and economic dynamics
in the surrounding region. Violence in one country is
often part of a larger, regional constellation of conflict.
Hence, the importance of cooperation with regional
organizations, given the transnational nature of many
peacebuilding
challenges.
The
Peacebuilding
Commission is the main United Nations platform for
international engagement in post-conflict countries; we
look forward to this year’s review, which will provide
an opportunity to improve the Commission’s
effectiveness in fulfilling its mandate and enhancing its
relationship with the Council.
Lebanon supports the adoption of the draft
presidential statement on peacebuilding.
Mr. Mayr-Harting (Austria): My delegation is
grateful to Japan for having organized this important
debate under the presidency of Foreign Minister
Okada. We are also grateful for the presence and
statements of the Secretary-General, the Foreign
Ministers of Afghanistan and Bosnia and Herzegovina,
the Minister of Defence of Sierra Leone, the Minister

28

of Justice of Timor-Leste and the Managing Director of
the World Bank.
Austria associates itself with the statements to be
delivered by the representatives of the European Union
and the Human Security Network later in this meeting.
How to make the best possible use of the window
of opportunity in the immediate aftermath of conflict is
not only the critical challenge for countries emerging
from conflict, but also a critical challenge for the
international community at large. It is crucial to longterm peace and stability and the realization of early
peace dividends. Decisive action aimed at achieving
durable peace and long-term sustainable development
must be undertaken from the earliest stages onwards
and go hand in hand with the possible deployment of
integrated peacekeeping missions.
In order for peacebuilding measures to prove
successful, generating national ownership must be at
the centre of all efforts. Peacebuilding activities should
therefore draw on existing national capacities while at
the same time assisting the development of effective
civilian capacities, including the identification of
opportunities and capacity-building for local private
sector engagement. A stronger involvement of the local
private sector should also be considered in the context
of procurement activities for peacekeeping operations.
This would support the provision of social stability
through economic opportunity, thus contributing to the
irreversibility of the peacebuilding process.
Key priorities in the immediate aftermath of
conflict include the protection of human rights, the reestablishment of the rule of law, the inclusive
implementation of peace processes, the reintegration of
refugees and internally displaced persons, effective
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration —
including of children associated with armed groups —
as well as security sector reform. The establishment
and support of effective and independent justice and
reconciliation mechanisms is a precondition for
ensuring accountability for past abuses. They will
contribute to justice and long-term peace, as well as to
the reconciliation of war-torn societies, thereby
minimizing the risk of future outbreaks of violence.
We are convinced that peacebuilding can be
successful only if all sectors of society are included. In
accordance with Security Council resolutions 1325
(2000) and 1820 (2008), all activities in the field of
peacebuilding must be mindful of the vital role women

10-31721

S/PV.6299

play in re-establishing post-conflict societies. In this
regard, I also fully support what was just said by my
Lebanese colleague. The specific needs of women must
be reflected in peace agreements and their involvement
in participation in the development and implementation
of post-conflict strategies assured. This should be
complemented by the allegation of gender-specific
funds.
Civil society should play a greater role in the
early stages of peacebuilding. We will focus on new
concepts of cooperation between military and civilian
actors at the forthcoming 3C Conference to be held in
Vienna on 5 and 6 May. Enhanced coordination at the
national, regional and international levels, as well as
ensuring mutual accountability, are prerequisites for
avoiding duplication and ensuring efficiency. To secure
the success of our engagement, we must coordinate
with all partners having a comparative advantage on
the ground. Cooperation with regional and subregional
organizations, such as the European Union and the
African Union, as well as with the international
financial institutions, must be intensified.
Austria acknowledges the crucial role of the
Peacebuilding Commission in addressing a country’s
post-conflict needs. The experiences of countries on its
agenda underline the necessity of involving the
Commission from the outset. Peacekeeping and
peacebuilding must be considered in a coherent and
parallel manner rather than sequentially. In this
context, we welcome the fact, for instance, that the
United Nations Integrated Mission in Timor-Leste,
which is a peacekeeping operation, is already
integrating peacebuilding aspects into its work, thus
helping to bridge a potential gap between peacekeeping
and later peacebuilding efforts there.
We would welcome increased interaction between
the Security Council and the Peacebuilding
Commission, more particularly when the Council
works on mandates for United Nations missions. We
are confident that the ongoing review process will
strengthen this relationship and enable the Commission
to make full use of its advisory role and the important
contributions it can make to this process. In this
context, we believe that Sierra Leone — and that is a
point that has already been made a number of times —
is a model case for peacebuilding with the support of
the Peacebuilding Commission. The Government’s
commitment to creating long-term peace and stability,
with the firm support of the international community

10-31721

aligned behind the country’s agenda for change, as well
as the United Nations Joint Vision, emphasizes the
principle of national ownership and helps to avoid
duplication through enhanced coordination.
Finally, I would like to thank the Japanese
presidency of the Security Council for preparing the
draft presidential statement, which has Austria’s full
support.
Mr. Wolff (United States of America): My
Government is pleased to participate in this debate on
post-conflict peacebuilding. Foreign Minister Okada’s
personal participation and the Secretary-General’s
direct involvement illustrate the importance of this
debate. We are also pleased that the Managing Director
of the World Bank joined this discussion. We strongly
support closer cooperation between the United Nations
and the World Bank in the field of peacebuilding. We
also welcome the Foreign Minister of Bosnia and
Herzegovina, and we are especially honoured by the
presence of the Foreign Minister of Afghanistan, the
Defence Minister of Sierra Leone and the Justice
Minister of Timor-Leste. We thank them for sharing
their insights. It is entirely fitting that the Security
Council should begin its debate by listening to those on
whose shoulders the success of peace processes rests:
the national authorities and peoples of conflict-afflicted
countries themselves.
National authorities in post-conflict countries
face some of the most difficult challenges on Earth.
They need to govern in ways that win the confidence
not only of their supporters but also often of their
former enemies. They must protect their citizens and
uphold the rule of law in situations emerging from
violence, where impunity and abuses have often been
the norm. They need to provide basic services and
economic opportunities for their population, while
often relying on poorly equipped and inadequately paid
staff. Like so many of our colleagues, we believe that it
is essential for peacebuilding agendas to be nationally
led and nationally owned.
Given the magnitude of the challenges that postconflict Governments so often face when they seek
assistance from the United Nations and other
multilateral and bilateral actors, we need to respond
more rapidly, more effectively and more efficiently.
The Secretary-General’s June 2009 report (S/2009/304)
presented an agenda for doing just that, and we look
forward to receiving his progress report and further

29

S/PV.6299

concrete proposals on how to move forward. We look
forward to his forthcoming report on the role of women
in peacebuilding, and the review of the Peacebuilding
Commission will afford us a further opportunity to
reflect on the issues raised during this timely debate.
I would like to highlight three areas today:
personnel, peacekeeping transitions and the politics of
peacebuilding. First, we need to ensure that the
international personnel we send into post-conflict
environments, especially at senior levels, have the right
qualifications, arrive when needed and stay long
enough to make a difference. National authorities must
be able to count on the good offices of a wise special
representative and United Nations team to help keep a
political transition on track and to provide advice on a
comprehensive, long-term peacebuilding strategy. They
should be able to turn to development experts
experienced in post-conflict situations to advise them
on the best way to jumpstart an economy ravaged by
war. They should be able to call in experts to get a
district office, police station, local court, prison or
government payroll system up and running, to name
just a few of the governance and early recovery
challenges that require specific expertise.
The United Nations has seasoned experts in many
critically needed areas, but it does not have enough of
them. Recruitment systems are not nimble enough to
tap the potential found both inside and outside of the
United Nations system. Several Member States, mine
included, are developing national civilian response
capabilities. These respective efforts need to be
harmonized, and we are encouraged that the SecretaryGeneral has convened a senior advisory group to
review
international
civilian
capacities
for
peacebuilding. We look forward to the review’s results,
which we hope will be fully synchronized with the
ongoing discussions on the global field support
strategy and continuing reform of the United Nations
human resources management system.
Secondly, we need to focus on peacebuilding
activities that pave the way for the responsible
departure of international peacekeepers and related
personnel. Last week in Dili, post-conflict countries
issued a declaration asking us to respect their unique
paths to lasting peace and to work with them to build
the national capacities to achieve just that.
We often hear, as we did from our speakers today,
that when national authorities seek external aid, they

30

do so within the context of achieving self-sufficiency.
In particular, post-conflict Governments prefer to
rebuild their own criminal justice sectors and security
institutions as quickly as possible, rather than rely on
the indefinite presence of even warmly-welcomed
peacekeepers and outsiders.
United Nations peace operations, United Nations
agencies, international financial institutions, regional
organizations and bilateral donors all play an important
role here. But we must do more to learn the lessons of
past successes and setbacks in our efforts together in
Afghanistan,
Sierra
Leone,
Timor-Leste,
the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, Liberia, Haiti and
elsewhere, and improve the coherence of our collective
response.
Thirdly, international peacebuilders can better
support national authorities when they understand the
political context in which they operate — another
theme we have heard from others today. Even in
countries far removed from armed conflict, the
adoption of a national budget, the financing of new
roads and bridges, or the overhaul of the defence sector
can be a complicated and contentious political
exercise. It can be even more so in ones where disputes
over national identity, wealth and power may have
recently triggered outright violence.
It is tempting to approach institutional reforms or
resource allocation only as a technical exercise, but in
doing so one risks provoking conflict rather than
reducing it. When national actors warn us of lurking
dangers, we must listen. Similarly, the international
community must have the courage to share its own
concerns with our partners about ways in which their
actions could undermine a peace process or threaten
regional stability. To remain in a position to offer
critical yet constructive advice, United Nations
personnel, donors and Council members must pay more
attention to the political dimensions of peacebuilding.
I thank you, Sir, and the Government of Japan for
convening this important and timely debate.
Mr. Issoze-Ngondet (Gabon) (spoke in French):
At the very outset, I wish to tell you how delighted I
am, Sir, to see you preside on behalf of your country,
Japan, over this ministerial debate on a comprehensive
peacebuilding strategy to prevent the recurrence of
conflict. I also welcome Secretary-General Ban
Ki-moon, who wished to participate personally in this
debate, and thank him for his significant contribution.

10-31721

S/PV.6299

I also thank the Ministers of Afghanistan, TimorLeste and Sierra Leone, for their illuminating
statements,
which
showcased
the
significant
achievements of their respective countries. Finally, I
welcome the participation in this debate of Mrs. Ngozi
Okonjo-Iweala, Managing Director of the World Bank,
and fully appreciate the valuable support of her
institution for the Peacebuilding Commission.
We appreciate the relevance and timeliness of this
debate, at a time when the danger to countries
emerging from conflict of relapsing into a continuous
cycle of violence has become even greater. This
approach to preventing the recurrence of conflict ties in
with our philosophy in terms of crisis prevention, as
reaffirmed by the President of the Gabonese Republic,
His Excellency Mr. Ali Bongo Ondimba, in the
statement he made on 8 March here in New York on
conflict prevention in Africa.
The decision taken by the heads of State and
Government at the 2005 World Summit to establish the
Peacebuilding Commission resulted from their
observation of gaps in the transition from activities to
re-establish security and post-conflict reconstruction.
Thus, at a time when the Peacebuilding Commission is
engaged in reform and in evaluating post-conflict
experiences, it may be wise to rethink the
comprehensive peacebuilding strategy based on an
integrated, coordinated and coherent approach.
Drawing from post-conflict experiences in
several African countries, I should now like to share
with the Council some thoughts on the main elements
of a potential new post-conflict comprehensive
peacebuilding strategy.
One of the key conditions for ensuring an
exemplary transition from a situation of war to a
situation of peace is helping countries emerging from
conflict to take responsibility for their own affairs in
the political, legal and institutional, security, economic
and social spheres. It is therefore critical to create an
enabling environment for the peace process by
promoting dialogue and reconciliation between the
various political actors.
The examples of Sierra Leone, Liberia and
Timor-Leste illustrate post-conflict success. Such
results are possible only if countries emerging from
conflict have the means to achieve the objective of
peace. It is in that context that the good offices and
assistance of the international community, in particular

10-31721

the United Nations and regional organizations, are
necessary.
I should like here to commend the considerable
support of the United Nations to the process of
restoring peace in several post-conflict countries in
Africa. In Liberia, for example, the Economic
Community of West African States and the United
Nations Mission in Liberia together monitored the
elections that marked the end of the terrible civil war
in that country. The African Union, which will soon
establish a framework for post-conflict reconstruction
and development, has made significant efforts in this
area, in cooperation with the subregional economic
communities, by initiating and concluding numerous
peace negotiations, as witnessed by the peace
agreements concluded in Burundi, the Comoros, the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, Somalia, the Sudan
and the Central African Republic.
Gabon has always promoted dialogue as the best
way of resolving situations of crisis and conflict. For
many years now it has been involved in the political
processes of national reconciliation. For example, in
the Central African Republic, Gabon successfully
headed the inclusive political dialogue in December
2008 with the involvement of the main political forces
of the country, which led to the establishment of a
national reconciliation Government and an electoral
timetable. The signing of peace agreements among the
parties to a conflict is not enough to ensure that a peace
process is permanent. It is also necessary to strive to
ensure the respect and effective implementation, in
good faith, of those agreements by the signatories.
In that regard, Gabon welcomes the operation,
since 2006, of the Peacebuilding Fund, established to
support the efforts of countries emerging from crises to
rebuild, to strengthen peace and to respond to
immediate threats to post-conflict peace processes.
In Africa, ethnic tensions are frequently among
the main causes of conflict. In that context, in countries
emerging from conflict, dialogue with the various
ethnic groups must be maintained in order to preserve
both national cohesion and territorial unity. Indeed, it
is when all the ethnic characteristics are taken into
account in drawing up a joint development project that
the aspirations of populations, recently divided, can
crystallize around a national ideal that contains the
seed of a shared future. The example of Rwanda, which
emerged from a genocidal crisis, is the perfect

31

S/PV.6299

illustration of a country of post-conflict internal
reconciliation.
In order to achieve such a goal, peace processes
must take into account security concerns, including by
effectively implementing disarmament, demobilization
and reintegration programmes. Likewise, it is
important to ensure constant control of borders that,
because they are porous, have become the scene of
illicit activities and sources of conflict, such as drug
trafficking, organized transnational crime and the
unchecked and destabilizing circulation of small arms
and light weapons.
In Central Africa, such illicit activities have a
significant impact on the peace and security of our
countries, in particular those emerging from conflict. In
that regard, we welcome the fact that the Security
Council, under Gabon’s presidency, addressed such
issues during its open debate on 19 March 2010 (see
S/PV.6288).
In our view, a key element of a comprehensive
peacebuilding strategy is for countries emerging from
conflict to take on the political and security process.
That is all the more evident as the other aspects of
post-conflict reconstruction — promoting the rule of
law, organizing free and transparent elections and
economic and social governance — are largely
dependent on a stable political and security climate.
As we routinely say, development is another
name for peace and stability. A comprehensive postconflict peacebuilding strategy must address the root
cause of conflicts, which is poverty. From that
standpoint, it would be desirable for the international
community, in particular donor countries and
international financial institutions, to further focus its
financing on development programmes in those
countries. The European Union is already doing that by
setting up development hubs in some African countries,
including the Central African Republic and GuineaBissau.
The economic and social development of
countries weakened by conflict is absolutely crucial in
order to put them back on the path of growth and to
ensure the well-being of their populations, who have
long suffered the agonies of war.
The Gabonese delegation supports the draft
presidential statement to be endorsed following this
debate.

32

Mr. Li Baodong (China) (spoke in Chinese): At
the outset, I would like to thank the Foreign Minister
of Japan for having travelled to New York to preside
over today’s meeting. I would like to thank SecretaryGeneral Ban Ki-moon for his statement. I welcome
Foreign Minister Rassoul of Afghanistan, the Minister
of Defence of Sierra Leone, the Minister of Justice of
Timor-Leste and the Managing Director of the World
Bank and thank them for their statements. I would also
like to welcome the presence of the Foreign Minister of
Bosnia and Herzegovina at this meeting.
For some 12 years, the United Nations has
actively contributed to post-conflict peacebuilding in
the countries and regions concerned. It has achieved
evident results and accumulated rich experience. Since
the Security Council first discussed the issue of a
comprehensive peacebuilding strategy in 2001, the
international
community
has
increasingly
acknowledged that peacebuilding is a complex
systemic project that involves the political, security,
economic and social spheres, as well as many others,
and that only a comprehensive strategy can produce
effective results. Here, I wish to make the following
points.
First, in promoting and implementing a
comprehensive peacebuilding strategy, it is necessary
to genuinely respect the ownership of the relevant
country. As the party shouldering the primary
responsibility for peacebuilding in its own country, the
country concerned is not only the recipient of
assistance, but also an equal partner with the donors in
dialogue and cooperation, and its voice should be fully
heard and heeded in setting priority areas of assistance.
The international community should take into full
consideration the priorities set by the country
concerned
and
formulate
a
corresponding
peacebuilding strategy based on the situation on the
ground. There can be no uniform norms for
peacebuilding, and donors should not impose their own
standards on a recipient country. In implementing a
peacebuilding strategy, attention should be paid to
capacity-building and personnel training in the country
concerned and to fully utilizing that country’s available
human resources and expertise.
Secondly, in promoting and implementing a
comprehensive peacebuilding strategy, it is necessary
to coordinate peacemaking, peacekeeping and
peacebuilding efforts. The Security Council should

10-31721

S/PV.6299

invest more energy in preventive diplomacy so as to
prevent the outbreak of conflicts in order to reduce the
need for peacekeeping operations and post-conflict
reconstruction. To secure a smooth transition from
peacekeeping to peacebuilding, the Security Council
should consider peacebuilding issues as soon as it
deploys a peacekeeping operation. At the same time,
the division of labour between a peacekeeping
operation and peacebuilding should be clear so as to
avoid duplication of effort.
Thirdly, in promoting and implementing a
comprehensive peacebuilding strategy, more attention
should be paid to addressing the root causes of
conflicts, in particular economic and social
development. This year marks the tenth anniversary of
the establishment and implementation of the
Millennium Development Goals (MDGs) by the United
Nations. Judging from the current situation, achieving
the MDGs is still a difficult task for many countries
emerging from conflict: instead of seeing their
economies improve, they find themselves lagging
further behind other countries. That poses a new
challenge in our peacebuilding efforts. In discussing
comprehensive peacebuilding strategies, we should
address not only security sector reform, justice and the
rule of law, but also development. Only by helping
countries emerging from conflict achieve sustainable
development as soon as possible so that their
populations can enjoy the peace dividend can we
provide a solid political basis for peace processes.
Fourthly, in promoting and implementing a
comprehensive peacebuilding strategy, coordination
between multilateral institutions and donor countries
must be strengthened. The United Nations should build
stable cooperative relations with the World Bank, the
International Monetary Fund and other international
partners so as to effectively integrate the resources of
all players. The relevant United Nations organs, such
as the Security Council, the General Assembly and the
Economic and Social Council, should clarify their
division of labour and strengthen cooperation. As an
important body of the United Nations system
responsible for post-conflict peacebuilding, the
Peacebuilding Commission should play a greater role
in coordinating the international community’s
peacebuilding efforts.
The Chinese delegation supports the adoption of
the draft presidential statement at the end of this open

10-31721

debate, and I wish to thank the Permanent Mission of
Japan for the efforts that it has made in that regard.
The President: I now give the floor to His
Excellency Mr. Peter Wittig, Chairperson of the
Peacebuilding
Commission
and
Permanent
Representative of Germany, who will be the last
speaker for this morning.
Mr. Wittig: I wish to thank you, Mr. President,
for organizing this debate and for inviting me to
participate in my capacity as Chairperson of the
Peacebuilding Commission (PBC). Japan, in its earlier
capacity as Chair of the PBC, contributed immensely
to building a strong case for the need for a
comprehensive, integrated and multidimensional
approach to peacebuilding. I will be brief, as I do not
want to keep Council members any longer from their
well-deserved lunch.
The Security Council should consider ways to
maximize the use of the Peacebuilding Commission’s
advisory role. To this end, a stronger, organic and more
dynamic linkage between the Council and the
Commission is required throughout the various phases
of the Council’s consideration of certain situations on
its agenda. Concretely, the Commission’s advice on
early peacebuilding activities carried out by
peacekeepers could help the Security Council to clarify
and monitor progress in the implementation of the
mandates of peacekeeping missions.
By capitalizing on this viable mechanism for
advice and monitoring, the Council would be able to
focus on the most immediate threats to international
peace and security while maintaining a closer and
substantive watching brief on countries which have
moved ahead on the continuum of peace. In doing so,
the Council would be able to capitalize on the PBC’s
flexible working methods, thus enabling the Council to
reach out more broadly to relevant actors at the country
level.
Today, I would like to be put into practice some
form of the Commission’s advisory functions to the
Council by sharing with the membership a few points
emanating from the most recent activities undertaken
by the PBC at the policy level.
A peacebuilding approach should be based on a
common vision among the multiple actors usually
engaged in a post-conflict situation. In promoting a
common vision, and in addition to strengthening its

33

S/PV.6299

linkages with the Security Council, the PBC is
increasingly focused on forging partnerships with the
international financial institutions and major regional
actors in order to help build coherence. We need to
promote longer-term political and financial support
that bolsters the nexus between security and
socioeconomic development, and to ensure the delivery
of concrete peace dividends. We need to support
national ownership by focusing early attention on
national capacity development, particularly in core
Government functions. We need to deepen analysis of
critical peacebuilding challenges and consistently
identify potential threats to peacebuilding processes.
And we need to focus attention on and address
complex regional challenges to peacebuilding, such as
narcotics and small arms trafficking.
Around each of these objectives, we need to take
forward the work and tailor our responses to the
specific needs of the country concerned and the will of
its people. Our actions need to be demand-driven and
their results must be nationally owned. For example,
we will focus on and divide labour around critical such
peacebuilding priorities as the security sector, the rule
of law, reintegration, economic revitalization and youth
employment.
The PBC will therefore continue to explore
concrete measures to deepen the United Nations
collaboration with the main actors at the country level.

34

It will promote mutual accountability between host
Governments and partners, and monitor progress
towards meeting critical peacebuilding objectives. This
work will require visible and sustained support from
the Security Council, the general membership and the
United Nations leadership. To this end, the PBC will
continue to improve its working methods, sharpen and
diversify its tools of engagement, and promote broader
and more coherent engagement by its individual
members.
We all know by now that peacebuilding is not a
linear process and that it takes many years to build the
national will, capacities and institutions needed to
sustain peace. The lack of a common vision and
coherence among the multiple actors in post-conflict
situations is a real challenge that undermines our
collective efforts to support countries on the path of
sustainable peace. While the United Nations is only
one among these actors, it carries the legitimacy and
political weight that confer leadership upon its role in
many post-conflict situations. We must live up to this
image and to that expectation.
The President: There are still a number of
speakers remaining on my list. I therefore intend, with
the concurrence of the members of the Council, to
suspend the meeting until 3 o’clock this afternoon.
The meeting was suspended at 1.25 p.m.

10-31721
