S/PRST/2004/33

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
22 September 2004
Original: English

Statement by the President of the Security Council
At the 5041st meeting of the Security Council, held on 22 September 2004, in
connection with the Council’s consideration of the item entitled “Civilian aspects of
conflict management and peace building”, the President of the Security Council
made the following statement on behalf of the Council:
“The Security Council met at ministerial level on 22 September 2004 to
consider ‘Civilian Aspects of Conflict Management and Peace Building’.
Ministers recognized the increasing importance of civilian aspects of conflict
management in addressing complex crisis situations and in preventing the
recurrence of conflict. They affirmed the importance of conflict resolution in
accordance with the relevant provisions of the United Nations Charter.
“Ministers also acknowledged the importance of civilian-military
cooperation in crisis management. Military and police components are
essential to address and stabilize certain serious crisis situations and to
guarantee security. Moreover, the participation of a strong civilian component
is key to the provision of humanitarian assistance, the re-establishment of
public order, functioning public institutions, reconstruction, rehabilitation and
peace building for longer-term sustainable development. A substantial civilian
participation in crisis management is also essential for a strategy of military
disengagement and plays a crucial role in the phase of post-conflict peace
building. In this context, it is important that there is coordination between the
civilian and military components in crisis management from the first phase of
integrated mission planning. In addition, there should be significant
coordination with actors involved in longer-term reconstruction and
development, including in particular the other organs of the United Nations
system in accordance with their respective mandates and the international
financial institutions, as well as cooperation with the business sector.
“Ministers recognized the increasing role of some regional and subregional and other international organizations in crisis management. They also
recalled that articles 52 and 53 of the United Nations Charter set forth the
contribution of regional organizations to conflict management, as well as the
relationship between the United Nations and regional organizations. They
encouraged these organizations, whenever possible, to continue to develop
their crisis management capabilities, including in the civilian field, in close
coordination with the United Nations and in accordance with the provisions of
article 54 of the United Nations Charter. When applicable, clear schemes for

04-51880 (E) 220904

*0451880*

S/PRST/2004/33

joint operations should be developed. Also, greater coordination and
interoperability among those organizations, as well as developing and sharing
common strategies, operational policies and best practices in civilian crisis
management would enhance efficiency and coherence in crisis management.
Continued internal coordination in this field among all relevant United Nations
organs and agencies should also be strengthened.
“Ministers supported the efforts by Member States to continue to
develop, as appropriate, their own civilian crisis management capabilities,
including, inter alia, rapid civilian response teams, and they also supported
their initiatives to make these capabilities available to the United Nations and
other relevant regional or sub-regional organizations, as a contribution to their
efforts in the maintenance of international peace and security. Adequate
capabilities should be developed in key areas of civilian crisis management,
such as police, justice and the rule of law, preparation of electoral processes
and electoral observation, civil protection and public administration. The
Security Council should consider the nature and availability of these
capabilities when approving the necessary mandates for United Nations
operations.
“Adequate and flexible means for transitional peace support and crisis
management activities, such as protection of civilians, including United
Nations and humanitarian personnel, disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration of former combatants, the end of impunity, public institutionbuilding and transitional justice, as well as the promotion and protection of
human rights and the integration of a gender perspective are essential to ensure
lasting peace after a conflict. Also, the involvement of local actors in the
policy-making process and a fruitful relationship with civil society should be
among the priorities of any post-conflict strategy.
“The Security Council commends the efforts of the Secretary-General in
addressing all relevant issues relating to the civilian aspects of crisis
management and invites him, other institutions and agencies of the United
Nations system, regional and sub-regional organizations and Member States to
continue to give serious consideration to this matter, with a view to making
further progress in this field.”

2
