TWENTY-FOURTH

YEAR

th
MEETING: 29 MARCH 1969
NEW

YORK

CONTENTS
Page

Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/ 1470) . . . . . . . . , . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . , . I .

1

Adoption of the agenda . . , . . . , . . . . . , , , . . . . , . . . . . . + . . . . . . . s . . .

1

The situation in the Middle East:
Letter dated 26 March 1969 from the Permanent Representative of Jordan
addressed to the President of the Security Council (S/9 113) . . . . . . . . . . . .

1

The situation in the Middle East:
Letter dated 27 March 1969 from the Permanent Representative of Israel
addressed to the President of the Security Council (S/91 14) . . . . . . . . . . a .

1

S/PV. 1470

-

NOTE
Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined with
figures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United Nations document.
Documents of the Security Council (symbol S/. . .) are normally published in quarterly
Supplements of the OfYkial Records of the Security Council. The date of the document
indicates the supplement in which it appears or in which information about it is given.
The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a system
adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of Resolutions and Decisions of the
Security Council. The new system, which has been applied retroactively to resolutions
adopted before 1 January 1965, became fully operative on that date.

FOURTEEN

HUNDRED

Held in New York

AND

SEVENTIETHMEETING

on Saturday, 29 March 1969, at 12 noon

President: Mr, Karoly CSATORDAY (Hungary),

At the invitation

of the President, Mr. M. El-Farra

(Jordan) Mr. Y. Tekoah (Israel) and Mr, J. M. Baroody

Present: The representatives of the following States:
Algeria, China, Colombia, Finland, France, Hungary, Nepal,
Pakistan, Paraguay, Senegal, Spain, Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland, United States of America and Zambia,

(Saudi Arabia) took places at the Council table.
3. The PRESIDENT:
Jordan.

I call on the representative of

4. Mr. ELFARRA (Jordan): We have listened with great
attention to the statements delivered around this table and,
while we fmd a measure of consolation in the unanimous
condemnation of the savage Israeli attack against our
people and civilian targets, we regret the apparent tendency
on the part of some members to find justification for this
act of international banditry. We are sorry that a few
delegations have preoccupied themselves not with the
substance of the question before the Council, but with side
issues maliciously injected into our deliberations by
Mr. Tekoah with the intention of perpetuating present
cease-fire arrangements-which are, of course, temporary in
nature-and to undermine the effects of the efforts of the
Big Four.

Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/l470)
Adoption of the agenda.
The situation in the Middle East:
Letter dated 26 March 1969 from the Permanent
Representative of Jordan addressed to the President of
the Security Council (S/9 113).
The situation in the Middle East:
Letter dated 27 March 1969 from the Permanent
Representative of Israel addressed to the President of
the Security Council (S/9 114).

5. The complaint of Jordan presents specific crimes
committed against innocent civilian citizens of Jordan and
civilian targets. The allegations of Mr. Tekoah about incidents committed within the occupied territories can only
be considered together with the oppressive measures taken
by the Israelis against the people. What I want to emphasize
is that these Israeli acts of repression and the reaction of
the people under occupation should be considered as a
separate item, especially since the question was inscribed as
a separate item and under a separate heading. I should like
to emphasize this because, as I said earlier, occupation
brings oppression and oppression leads to resistance. After
all, what do we expect the people to do when The Hague
Conventions of 1899 and of 1907, the Geneva Protocol of
1925 and the Geneva Conventions of 1949 are violated
every single day by the Israelis? What should be the action
of the people when the prisoners are tortured and coerced
and citizens are deprived of their property?

The PRESIDENT: We have had a slight delay in starting
this morning’s meeting because very intensive consultations
are going on, and they are still continuing at this very
moment, I beg the understanding of members of the
Council for the delay.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in the Middle East
Letter dated 26 March 1969 from the Permanent Reprcsentative of Jordan addressed to the President of the
Security Council (S/91 13)
The situation in the Middle East

6. only two days ago-and this is reported in The New
York T&es of today-a thirty-year-old Jordanian citizen,
Kassem Tamimi, met his death while in prison suspected-I
repeat suspected-of sabotage. Hundreds of mourners were
stopped by the Israeli police the day&before yesterday and a
mounted water cannon was turned on them; and later they
were beaten by the police and several were injured; four
women were arrested, Our people believe that the suspect
was beaten to death in prison. Notables led by Anwar
Nusseibeh, former Jordanian Defence Minister, and
Ambassador to Great Britain, demanded an autopsy con-

Letter dated 27 March 1969 from the Permanent Representative of Israel addressed to the President of the
Security Council (S/91 14)
2. Th$ PRESIDENT:
In accordance with the decisions
previously taken by the Council, I propose now, with the
consent of the Council, to invite the representatives Of
Jordan, Israel and Saudi Arabia to take seats at the Council
table in order to participate, without the right to vote, in
the discussion.
1

colleague from the Soviet Union and by the Ambassador of
Saudi Arabia.

ducted by neutral examiners. This request was refused by
the Israeli authorities, It was also revealed that four victims
of the Israeli attack on Ein Hazar were truck drivers who
were residents of the West Bank. They will be buried in
their cities of Nablus, Ramallah and Bethlehem, possibly
today. They had not been buried yesterday.

12. And above all, let us ask ourselves the question: What
should the Security Council do when its decisiom about
dispatching a representative of the Secretary-General to
visit the occupied territories, to meet the people and report
on all charges brought before the Council by the delegation
of Jordan and other delegations, are completely rejected by
Israel? What should the Council do when its injunction
concerning the annexation of Jerusalem is ignored by
Israel? That annexation wasdeclared illegal by the Council,
but when the Council called on Israel to rescind all
measures taken, that injunction was rejected by Israel. What
should the Council do about its decisions which are flouted,
ignored, defied and utterly violated?

7. What should be the reaction of the people under
occupation when the wounded and the sick, the infirm and
pregnant women are given no protection; when hospitals
are converted into offices for the Guuleiters of Israel who
supervise these crimes and endorse their continuation? The
confiscation of the newly.built Jordanian Government
hospital in Jerusalem’s Sheikh Jarrah Quarter and its
transformation into an Israeli police headquarters is just an
example. Blood banks, Government medical laboratories,
tuberculosis ’ sanatorium centres and the Department of
Health have been closed down.

13. Elementary rules of humanity require that those who
speak about the reaction of the people should also be fair,
if not to Jordan then to the effectiveness in the future of
this august body. The above-mentioned four Conventions
specifically demand that civilian populations should1 not be
subjected to attack from the air, and that ill-treatment and
reprisals be prohibited. Those points and many others are
endorsed by the very jurisprudence of the Security Council,
which Mr. Tekoah mentions only for the purpose of
distorting and confusing the issues before the Council.

8. How should people under occupation react when
doctors are arbitrarily imprisoned for no valid reason? I
have already reported last week to the Council-as I always
do, hoping against hope, that the Security Council will one
day take effective measures and take the initiative of
convening a meeting ,to bring peace to the land of
peace-the arrest of Dr. Nabih Muammer, the only surgeon
in Makasid Philanthropic Hospital, whose services are
indispensable. Another doctor, Subhi Abu Ghosheh, has
also been arbitrarily arrested.

14. Much has been said about the reaction of the people in
the occupied areas. I had a chance to explain that the
Palestine resistance movement is no different from the
movements of liberation in many parts of the world where
there is occupation and oppression. It is’ the spontaneous
expression of a people denied the most elementary human
rights.

9. What do you, all of my colleagues around this table,
think in, all honesty that these people under occupation
should do, when day in and day out they hear about or
witness more expulsions, and arrests and are subjected to
oppressive and repressive measures? I have already cited
the arrest of the Anglican Reverend Eba Khoui_ in Ramallah
and the closing down of the Anglican Church there. People
from all walks of life protested against this. Women in
Jerusalem, Ramallah, Bethlehem and Beit Zahur took
refuge in their churches and protested against such measures. That also was reported to the Security Council.
Hunger strikes have taken place in churches and mosques in
many other parts of the occupied territories. Christian and
Moslem leaders, some of whom had been expelled from
Jerusalem, sent a cable of protest to His Excellency
U Thant, our dedicated Secretary-General [S/9102,

15. Mr. Tekoah referred yesterday to certain African and
European newspapers for the purpose of undermining the
resistance movement. He also referred to two conferences
held in Europe that he claimed condemned the Palestinian
resistance. Let me remind Mr. Tekoah that many conferences representing Governments and peoples and held in
many capitals of the world have also supported the
Palestinian resistance.

16. The conference of the representatives of freedom
fighters in Africa, Latin America and Asia representing over
fifty countries and a number of international organizations,
annex I],
held in Khartoum last February supported the heroic
struggle and resistance of the Palestinians against occupa10. What should the reaction of the people be when they
tion. The conference emphatically supported their legitisee their leaders being arrested and expelled? I have already ! mate rights in Palestine.
reported to the Council the cases of Anton Attallah, our
former Foreign Minister, Mr. Rouhi El-Khatib, the Mayor
17. The Conference of African Ministers of Labour which
of Jerusalem, who appeared before this Council to present ~ met in Algiers this month, March 1969, called upon .African
the case of Jerusalem, Ibrahim Bakr, Kamal Nassar,
workers to boycott Israeli goods as they are boycotting
Dr. Daoud El-Husseini, Kamal Dajjani and Dr. Yasir Amre.
South African and Portuguese goods.
Those are some of the many names.
18. Yesterday Mr. Tekoah referred to a newspaper in
Nairobi which deplored the Palestinian resistance. Let me
remind Mr. Tekoah that the Nairobi
Government
-Kenya-at the last session of the General Assembly voted
against Israeli violations of human rights in the occupied
territories.

11:’ One should ponder the question, what are the just&
cations for killing and murdering, in a similar air-raid
against Syria, six innocent children, together with many
other people whose names are listed in a document
submitted to the Security Council and mentioned by my
2

19. There is even more reason for the Council to accept
the resistance as a movement for liberation because, today,
the occupied Arab territories are subject to the same
military martial law that the British Mandate applied in
Palestine prior to 1948. Those same laws were termed by
Dr, Dov Yusuf, former Israeli Minister of Justice, as “laws
which no respected citizen should abide by”. Those same
laws were also deplored by the present Minister of Justice,
Samson Shapiro, “as laws that do not exist in any civilized
country; even Nazi Germany did not have such laws”.
Those laws which the Jewish lawyers in Palestine condemned on 7 February 1946, before the creation of Israel,
and which the present Israeli Minister of Justice described
as laws which even Nazi Germany did not apply, are today
being applied in the occupied Arab territories. Does not this
call for resistance? Is resistance to such laws, which they
themselves said that no respected citizen should abide by,
unlawful, and is it logical to term such resistance as terror?
I would like the two delegations that volunteered to give
this definition to ponder it, to compare their definition
with that of the Minister of Justice of Israel, and then see
which of the definitions should be endorsed by the Council.
20. Resistance to occupation, annexation, expulsion,
deportation, settlements, intimidation,
imprisonment and
torture is legitimate. What should be condemned is the
Israeli aggression that brought about this situation. What
the Security Council and the whole world should condemn
is occupation itself.

Zionist terrorist organizations, when he was a Zionist
himself, now has the publication I; F. Stone’s Weekly,
which is well known here. In an article he wrote on 13
Jmmy 1969 on this very question of resistance, he said:
“One [unpleasant truth] is to recognize that the Arab
guerrillas are doing to us what our terrorists and saboteurs
of the Irgun, Stern and Haganah did to the British.
Another is to be willing to admit that their motives are as
honourable aswere ours,”
Mr. Stone adds:
“The best of Arab youth feels the same way, They
cannot forget the atrocities committed by us against
villages like Deir Yassin, nor the uprooting of the
Palestinian Arabs from their ancient homeland, for which
they feel the same deep ties of sentiment as do so many
Jews,however assimilated elsewhere.”
He then continues:
“We made the Palestinian Arabs homeless to make a
home for our own people. That is the simple truth as
history will see it, and until we make amends and resettle
the refugees and create a new political framework in
which Jew and Arab can live together in a new and
greater Palestine there will be no peace.”
24. Uri Avnery, a one time member of the Irgun gang and
at present a member of the Israeli Knesset, wrote in his
book Israel without Zionism:

21. It is not true that European leaders who resisted
occupation in their own countries are condoning Israeli
occupation. I refuse to believe that. Let me cite a great
leader of our time, General cle Gaulle, who said in his Press
Conference of 27 November 1967 that all the manifestation
of an occupation could now be seen in the territories
occupied by Israel after the June war, “occupation which
never goes without oppression, repression and expulsions
-as well as the usual resistance that Israel now in its turn
qualifies as terrorism”.

“We distributed leaflets describing the glorious deeds of
our older comrades who had planted a bomb in a
crowded Arab market. . .”
I repeat, “who had planted a bomb in a crowded Arab
market”, He continued:
“We demonstrated against the British by burning
government offices when the British published in May
1939 the White Paper that put an end to Jewish
immigration.”

22. In the Second World War, when France was occupied
by the Nazis and an armistice was signed, teachers, scholars,
students and people from all walks of life left France to
prepare for resistance. General de Gaulle left Bordeaux for
England by a small plane in order to organize the French
resistance. Winston Churchill called him the man who
“carried with him in that small aeroplane the honour of
France”. Those leading figures saw that only resistance
could restore France’s freedom and sovereignty. And today
France is leading the world as a great nation with great
values.

25. Terrorism is not and has never been part of our
traditions or values. It was imported by the terrorist gangs
of Israel.
26. My Government would like to emphasize once again
that it would like to help all United Nations peaceful
efforts. We also welcome the meeting of the four permanent members of the Security Council. But we do hope that
the Israeli attempts to frustrate their efforts will not be
permitted to succeed, We all remember that the Israeli
criminal attack against Jordan was preceded by a campaign
of vicious propaganda against the Council intended to
frustrate its efforts. It follows, therefore, that lack of
effective action by the Council will lead to the very result
Israel sought to accomplish.

23. Mr. Tekoah has often spoken of terror and sabotage
against Israel committed by Arab commandos and has
repeatedly referred to those freedom fighters as terrorists
and saboteurs, Let me remind him that terror and killings
have been a systematic policy adhered to by the Zionists in
erecting the State of Israel. The Arab freedom fighters of
today are the victims of Zionist terror and killings. They are
those same people whom the Zionists have expelled from
their homeland through the means of terror and killing. I.
F. Stone, a writer and scholar of the Jewish faith, an
American who, at one time was a member of one of the

27. We maintain that by not taking a firm stand the
Security Council would not help the efforts of its four
permanent members, and this alone would weaken both
3

7”’

7

I

I

36. We deeply regret the loss of lives, whether firab or
Israel, and our feeling of grief is great and sincere. We are
distressed at the material losses, all the more because the
sufferer, Jordan, is a developing country which for that
very reason has an essentially weak economic: infrastructure. The losses of life cannot be made good, and the
mate,rial damage can only be repaired by great additional
sacrifices imposed on a population which by its nature has
almady endured great hardship from problems of underdevelopment aggravated by those due to a recent war.

those efforts and this organ of’ the United Nations itself.
There has been too much delay since the French initiative
was taken, motivated by a noble goal.

,’

i
,:

I

1

28. The fact that there will be a meeting of the Big Four
makes it imperative that the Council should check the
unabated.Israeli attacks, That will prepare the ground for
fruitful and peaceful results, We do not expect the Big Four
to have one meeting and settle the problem, nor two
meetings. We know that those meetings will take quite
some time. Unless, right here and now, we check future
aggressions of Israel, Israel will be encouraged, while the
meetings are going on, to attack Jordan every time Israel
feels that that will suit its purpose.
.S!
29. My Government #hasinstructed me to put the following before the members of the Security Council.

37. We have never been, nor are we now, prepared to
condone the .violent incidents and other serious violations
of the cease-fire, and we do not believe that the members of
the Council or the Council as a whole are prepared to do so.
We do not accept the doctrine of the right of reprisal
whereby a State can presumably arrogate to itself tlhe right
to carry out military operations of the kind now being
considered by the Council in the territory of the other
State. We deplore all those incidents, but at the same time
we distinguish between the two types of action ‘because
their nature is essentially different. This consistent and
unchanging principle has led us to vote in favour of all the
resolutions relating to the Middle East adopted by the
Council during 1968, the first year in which we took: part in
its deliberations.

30. First, there is no justification for equating the individual acts of national resistance within the Arab-occupied
territories with a well-planned, premeditated, indiscriminate
and large-scale air attack.
31. Secondly, the Israeli attack aimed at centres of
civilians and farmers, some of whom came from the West
Bank, and Israel arrogantly confessed having committed
that crime.

38. The harsh truth is that, as a result of those violent
incidents and reprisals, the first and most numerous victims
are members of the innocent civilian population.

32. Thirdly, any hesitation on the part of the Security
Council in taking effective measures, or any underestimation of the grave and serious situation that has
resulted from this Israeli attack, can only have the
following effects: (a) deterioration of the situation and
obstruction of the possibilities of peace in the area;
(b) weaken the possibilities of progress in the efforts of the
Big Four; (c)encourage Israel to carry out further attack
and on a large scale; (d) loss of faith: by peoples and
Governments in the effectiveness of this body.

39. The history of the Middle East, particularly during the
last few decades, presents a tragic spectacle of untold war,
death and desolation. And we wonder whether the time has
not come for an end to be put to those sufferings, or at
least a glimpse for hope of better days to come.
40. Deeply distressed by this heart-breaking spectacle of
the very recent past and of a present dark with ill-omen, we
believe that it is more urgent than ever to take concerted
individual and collective action to prevent the deterioration
in the present situation from leading to another explosion
the violence of which may involve not only the States in
the Middle East but also many others in a disastrous
conflagration.

33. Let me reiterate that the victim, Jordan, cannot be
equated with the aggressor, Israel, and that a resolution
reflecting this reality of the situation is what we hope will
be adopted by the Security Council.
34. Mr. SOLANO LOPEZ (Paraguay) (translated from
Spanish): During the many meetings held by the Security
Council in 1968 to consider the situation in the Middle East
and, in particular, serious and repeated violations of the
cease-fire, with the resulting deaths, destruction and huge
material losses, my delegation has repeatedly stated its
views with frankness and sincerity. Those views have always
been stated in unequivocal and consistent terms because the
concept on which they are based is always the same and
consistent.

41. With this concern foremost in our minds we are
following closely all the promising and unhelpful events
that are occurring in the Middle East. Among the latter-the
really and truly unhelpful-are those which are the cause
for this meeting. Their unhelpfulness has been even further
aggravated by their timing. The parties to the conflict and
the United Nations itself have at their disposal a basic
instrument through which a just and lasting peace can be
achieved. I am, of course, referring to resolution
242 (1967), which was unanimously adopted by the Coup
cil on 22 November 1967 and whose provisions and
principles provide the essential elements of the muchdesired peace. The United Nations and the parties also have
the means to implement the resolution by putting their
trust in the tenacity, perseverance and ability of the
Secretary-General and of his Special Representative
Mr. Jarring. I need not repeat our views on re;solution
242 (1967), which is based on the draft resolution which

35. Now that the Council is dealing with new and very
serious developments of identical nature with some of the
I events of last year, it would suffice if I were to quote my
own past statements to establish my delegations’s position.
However, I am convinced that a mere reference to those
statements, even if succinct, would not be sufficient and
that, on the contrary, it is necessary to state our views
again.
4

we, with the other States of Latin America, had the honour
to submit to the General Assembly at its fifth special
emergency session and which represents the tradition, spirit
and philosophy of our continent.

view of the incident. This kind of air raid across national
boundaries cannot but be viewed as clear violation of the
cease-fire and, as such, stands to be condemned by the
Council. The use of force is prohibited under the provisions
of the United Nations Charter.

42. I have said that the unhelpfulness of the events that
led to our meeting today was unavoidably aggravated by
their timing. We are all aware of the contacts now taking
place between the four permanent members of the Security
Council to intensify the quest for a just and lasting peace
based on resolution 242 (1967). We know that this quest isi
being carried out within our Organization and that its aim is
to strengthen any action taken through the machinery set
up and the resolutions adopted by the Council.

50. The Permanent Representative of Israel, in his statement before the Council on 27 March 11467th meeting/,
described this action taken by Israel as an act of selfdefence. My delegation has no quarrel with the right of
self-defence, a right recognized by Article 51 of the United
Nations Charter. In the present case, however, it is not so
much self-defence aspunitive action. Israel seems to believe
in the effectiveness of armed action as a means of redress. If
it does, it apparently has not attached sufficient importance
to the urgency and desirability of pursuing conciliatory
policies. To force the pace of achieving peace through the
application of superior force would prove not only to be
futile, but could destroy whatever headway might have
been made towards peace and could jeopard’ize the prospect
for a just andlasting settlement.

43. The structure of the Security Council, laid down in
the Charter, confers special rights on its permanent members but also assigns special duties to them, It is therefore
right that they should assume those special duties without
further delay. The barriers preventing such contacts have
existed too long, but we note with satisfaction that they are
breaking down. Furthermore, we would be sinning by too
much innocence if we ignored the influence that these
permanent members can bring to bear on the parties to the
conflict.

51. In saying this, my delegation is not unaware of the
fact that acts of violence and counter-violence have become
a daily routine, and frequent exchanges of fire continue
unabated across the cease-fire line, especially in the Suez
area, The consequence is misery and death for the very
neonle in whose name these warlike acts are perpetrated.
Whitever the motivation or rationalization may-be, and
whenever and wherever they occur, all forms of violence are
to be deplored. It is high time to realize that it is only
through peaceful means that the cause of justice can be
served enduringly and the ultimate goals of the people of
the region attained.

,.
* ?‘. 44. All those efforts, including and supported by our own,
- .rwould however not suffice. All our goodwill would not be
. sufficient, The full co-operation of the parties themselves is
.- required, and the best co-operation consists in strict
compliance .with the cease-fire. I have often said that the
situation resulting from compliance with the cease-fire must
. be regarded as purely temporary by its very nature,, until a
lasting, and just and final peace replaces it. At least,
however, the right atmosphere must be created so that the
quest for that peace, the efforts of the Secretary-General
and his Special Representative, and the contacts between
the four permanent members of the Security Council can
achieve the results which we anxiously await.

52. The basis for a just and lasting settlement has already
been provided by Security Council resolution 242 (1967)
of 22 November 1967. The Secretary-General’s Special
Representative is currently in the Middle East to explore
further the possibilities for such settlement. The peace
efforts initiated by the interested Powers have barely
started. This is no time to rock the boat. My delegation,
therefore, earnestly appeals to all parties to give Ambassador Jarring every assistancein. the search for peace, which
can only be brought about with the co-operation and by
the common consent of all the States in the Middle East
area.

.45. My delegation therefore does not hesitate to make a
new and brotherly appeal for wisdom and caution in the
hope that it may result in strict compliance with the
cease-tire, for the benefit of the peoples directly concerned
and of the international community, which is greatly
troubled by the present situation in the Middle East.
46. The PRESIDENT:

53. The PRESIDENT: There are no more names of
speakersinscribed on my list for this morning.

I recognize Mr. Liu Chieh.

47. Mr. LIU (China): I have to remind the President again
that I am speaking in my capacity as a representative on the
Council.

54. I give the floor to the representative of Israel.
55. Mr. TEKOAH (Israel): No rancour and no passion and
no abuse can veil reality. The facts are known to all. The
Arab States, repulsed in their attempt to. destroy Israel in
1967, have resorted again to the old method of terror
warfare, and this was in accordance with the decision
adopted by the Heads of Arab States Lt the Khartoum
Conference in September 1967. It was reaffirmed at the
Arab Conference of Foreign Ministers held in Cairo in
September of last year, and since proclaimed repeatedly by
Arab leaders.

48. We are called’ upon once again to deal with the
situation in the Middle
East, with special reference to the
charge by Jordan that on 26 March Israeli aircraft attacked
Jordanian villages and civilian centres in the areas of
Es Salt, resulting in heavy casualties and consider.able
damage to property.
49. The substance of the charge has not been denied by
Israel. There is only the contention that the targets of the
attack were centres of armed elements hostile to Israel.
Whatever the case may be, my delegation takes a serious

56. The Arab States try in vain here to find pretexts and
justification for this warfare. They call it a popular war; but
5

authorities to conceal this fact after 26 March is not
unusual in the light of past Jordanian behaviour; nor is it
difficult. The Ein Hazar camp consisted, as I reported at
our first meeting on 27 March, of a few buildings for
commandos and storage depots, a canteen or twlo, and tents
for the rank-and-file members of El-Fatah. At that meeting
I also described the roadblock at Ein Hazar manned by the
marauders, at which travellers from the West Bank are
stopped, checked and interrogated. The four truck drivers
killed on 26 March were unfortunately Victims of that
roadblock.

it is in fact carried out by about 4,000 marauders,
organized, armed, trained and paid by the Arab Governments, operating from outside territory under Israeli
control. They call it resistance to the consequences of the
1967 hostilities. In fact, it is the same method of warfare
against civilians which the Arab States had pursued in the
fifties and the sixties, long before June 1967. They call it a
war of liberation; but the world knows and has not
forgotten that the same description was given by the Arab
States to their invasion of Israel in 1948 and to the acts of
belligerency which they conducted against Israel during the
entire period of the Armistice. Nothing has changed since
1948 except that the Arab States have failed again in their
sinister design to destroy Israel, but have apparently not
realized that the time has come for peace.

65. The representative of Jordan has referred to a report
of the death of a saboteur in prison. Tlhe medical
examination has refuted the allegations he has voiced here.
Since June 1967 this is the only case in which death of an
Arab terrorist has occurred in an Israeli prison. I would
suggest to Ambassador El-Farra that he examine the records
of Jordanian prisons and other Arab prisons, the records of
tortures, mental and physical cruelty and deaths that occur
in them repeatedly, I would suggest to him that he examine
fie records of the deaths of Jews killed since June 1967 in
Egyptian concentration camps, Jews barbarically hanged in
Baghdad, Jews tortured in Damascus.

57. What is it precisely that Jordan expects us to: do?
Allow it to continue its twenty-one years’ war against Israel
without defending ourselves? Sit back while terror warfare
is pursued from Jordanian territory? Acquiesce in the
wanton murder of Israeli citizens’? The world does not
expect us to act in this manner. It is time that Jordan
should not. Let us all remember the ancient proverb: “He
that diggeth a pit shall fall into it.”

66. The representative of Jordan is also unhappy with a
number of demonstrations that hnw occurrod in areas
under Israeli control. Are demonstrations unusual in the
Middle East? Has he forgotten the record of riots and
unrest in areas under Jordanian administration and occupation? Let us look at just one single year-the year
preceding the June 1967 hostilities. In January 1966,
following demonstrations and riots in Jericho, the Jordanian authorities arrested 200 persons there. In April,
following widespread unrest on the West IBank, they
arrested 2,000 persons on the West Bank. In May, mass
demonstrations took place in East Jerusalem, Hebron,
Ramallah. The police used force, closed down schools,
arrested hundreds of persons. In July of that year,
disturbances and mass demonstrations broke out in Nablus.
The Jordanian police used tear gas; twelve persons were
wounded, 250 arrested. November saw a seric:sof stormy
disturbances and clashes between civilians and Jordanian
police and army forces, with numerous casualties. On 21
November, shop and business strikes broke out in tfle
Rarnallah area. The army was called in to intervene and
employed tanks. The Jordanian authorities imposed a
curfew and closed down all the schools, Similar events
occurred through November and December in most other
towns. On 24 November the Jordanian army again employed
tanks and tear gas. Twenty demonstrators were killed,
Ambassador El-Farra, by Jordanian army forcc,s and many
more were wounded. On 8 December 1966, a general
business strike wasput down by force by the police and the
Jordanian army. On 13 January 1967 the population of
Nablus rose up; barricades were put up in the streets. The
Jordanian army had to surround the entire city and
suppress resistance by force,

58. The representative of Jordan has tried again to shed
responsibility for terror warfare. He and his Government
would obviously try to do that in a debate in the Security
Council.
59. In previous meetings, however, I’ have established
Jordan’s juridical and practical responsibility for this
warfare. It is only in the Security Council that Jordan
negates this responsibility. In the Middle East, Jordan
prides itself on it.
60. In an interview to Al-A/warn. thlished iust a few davs
ago, on 18 March 1969, King Husse’in said: “After 1967, \;e
actually started fedayeen operations. We opened the gates
for operation and resistance to the occupation started in
the occupied territories.”

61. Jordan’s new Prime Minister Rifai, in a telephone
interview with AZ-Jarida of Lebanon on 25 March 1969,
stated: “We slqll continue with the resigned Government’s
policy to support the fedayeen. ”
62. In a note to King Hussein, Prime Minister Rifai stated
on 24 March 1969: “With full admiration and appreciation
we remember the wonderful co-ordination between our
armed forces and the Arab forces and our beloved
resistance fighters.”
63. There can be no doubt whatever about the direct
involvement and, therefore, responsibility of the Jordanian
Government for terror warfare waged against Israel from
Jordanian territory.
64. The representative of Jordan persists in his denials that
Ein Hazar served as an El-Fatah base. However, as I
demonstrated yesterday, this fact is generally known and
has been widely reported in the world press by foreign
correspondents who visited the area before the Israeli
action on 26 March. The attempt by the Jordanian

67. In tile AZ-Muhark

of Beirut of 5 July 1966, we read:

“According to one reliable source, the number of
Persons arrested in Jordan from the last week:in June till
now comes to 500 , . . The arrests were made in Nablus,
6

Amman, the Old City of Jerusalem, Ramallah, Hebron,
Irbid, Jericho, Jerash . . . (There follows a long list of
names of persons who were arrested.)

75. All are aware of the history of the Security Council
deliberations on the Israel-Arab conflict; all know. that the
veto has prevented any constructive handling of this issue
since 1953: All know that the present composition of the
Council is such that, no matter how extreme and unjust a
text may be, it is always assured of the automatic support
of a majority of members.

“Also arrested was Kamel Nefa, lecturer in philosophy
and sociology at the University of Jordan. He was
severely tortured”-1 am reading from a Lebanese newspaper-“and finally transferred to the Falastin Hospital in
Amman All the teachers of the Jebel el-Hussein refugee
camp school were placed under arrest, as were several of
the students. Similar round-ups were carried out at the
Jericho and El-Arub camps and in the town of Ma’an”

76. Under these circumstances, a resolution of the kind
that is sought by Jordan and its supporters can have only
one effect on the situation: to increase tension and decrease
the prospects of understanding and peace. Only understanding between the parties themselves can bring about
such a solution. If Jordan is really desirous of achieving it,
Jordan will seek such understanding with Israel, and not an
addition to the list of unbalanced, unconstructive texts.

68. The Jordan representative has mentioned a number of
persons arrested by Israel for acts of violence against
civilians. He has not mentioned, however, that most of
these people are professional troublemakers and that some
of them had been arrested by the Jordanians for the same
crimes. Daud el-Husseini, mentioned by Ambassador
El-Farra, was arrested by the Jordanian authorities on 23
April 1969, together with another 120 politicians.
69. According to the Lebanese newspaper Al-Muharir
10 May 1966:

77. The PRESIDENT:
Jordan.

78. Mr. ELFARRA (Jordan): It so happens that whenever
I want to answer Mr. Tekoah I find myself at the
disadvantage of racing with time. I realize that it is almost
1.45 p.m.; I feel I would be imposing on the Council if I
were to take the time to answerevery single point raised by
Mr, Tekoah this afternoon. I shall therefore confine my
observations to two or three points, reserving my right to
speak again at a later stage.

of

“The number of persons arrested by the Jordanian
Government has reached several dozens, and they include
Ayub Abibi and Dr. Subhi Gosha”-mentioned
again by
Ambassador El-Farra today.

79. Let us start with the last point raised by Mr. Tekoah,
the question of the resolutions. Mr. Tekoah said that a
resolution is not binding on Israel simply because, I think,
it does not meet the desires of Israel.

70. According to Radio Baghdad on 27 October 1963:
“ 1 . . two days ago at midnight, Dr. Khaled el-Darzi was
arrested at his work at Nablus hospital,”
71. A well-known Arab authority,
Khalidi writes :

I call on the representative of

80. It is not a question of Jordan’s friends, because the
resolutions which condemned Israel on the question of
Jerusalem were endorsed and supported by ninety-nine
votes in the Assembly, and by thirteen votes in the Security
Council, Not a single delegation-be it a friend of Israel or
not-voted against those resolutions, which called the Israeli
annexation of Jerusalem invalid.

Professor Walid Al-

‘6. . . the West Bank has become a Jordanian colony
occupied by the ‘Forces of the Desert and mercenaries’,
where the Palestinians are prohibited from organizing
themselves; the Gaza Strip is administered as occupied
territory by an Arab Government . . .”

81, But Israel would like the Security Council to behave in
accordance with Israeli goals. When the Council took a
decision last December, what was the reaction? Mrs. Meir,
who is now the Israeli Prime Minister, said: “I am beginning
to feel very sorry for this family of nations that sits there
and discussesouractions. It would be more justified if the
Knesset were to debate the United Nations and the Security
Council,” Israel would like the Knesset to be the supreme
organ of the world, telling the Security Council what and
what not to do, The present Prime Minister of Israel says
that “it wou1.dbe much more justified if the K.nesset”-the
Israeli parliament-t‘were to debate the United Nations and
the Security Council”: That statement appeared in the
Jerusalem Post of 6 January 1969, the semi-official newspaper of Israel.

72. The Jordanian representative, in referring to old
British mandatory laws applied by Israel, has forgotten to
mention, as he frequently does, the decisive fact in this
picture-these laws are also Jordanian laws, applicable on
the West Bank, applied by Israel in accordance with
generally accepted principles of international law:
73. Indeed, I have no hesitation in saying that when the
citizens of Arab States-Jews, and non-Jews alike-begin to
enjoy even partially the freedom of thought, freedom of
expression, freedom of assembly and freedom of movement
and the personal security enjoyed by the Arab inhabitants
in areas under Israeli control, the Arab States will have
made considerable progress towards democracy.

82. Mr, Allon, the Israeli Deputy Prime Minister-number
two in rank-said: “The United Nations Security Council
has turned into an.insecurity council, encouraging terrorist
activity,” That is the Deputy Prime Minister speaking.

74. The representative of Jordan pleads for another
one-sided, inequitable resolution. Yesterday he recited an
entire list of such resolutions. Have those decisions made
any constructive contribution to a solution of the Middle
East problem? Can one-sided resolutions make any such
contribution?

83. I could go on and cite General Dayan, who said almost
the same thing. So it is not a question of the so-called
7

I’

90. Mr. BAROODY (Saudi Arabia): I would have elected
not to speak at this late hour, the more so becabse it is past
lunch time. However, I should remind the members of the
Council that this meeting was scheduled for 11 o’clock this
morning. In the last few years it was a habit to hold
consultations not at night, not in the early hours of the
morning, but immediately before the time that a me’eting
had been scheduled. This was so for many years. Tho’se of
us who are not consulted come here on time. In fact, this is
not an apology, but a few remarks so that those of USwho
are prompt may be given a chance to participate without
trying to interfere in the time-table of others, whether for
meals or any other duties or obligations they may have,.

inequitable distribution in the Council. The Council is
constituted pursuant to the Charter, in a fair and just way.
But it is the Israelis’ lust, their cupidity and their desire to
have more and more and more, every day and every week,
if they can, which is involved here.

84. Mr. Tekoah referred to what is going on in the East
Bank but forgot one thing: What goes on in the East Bank

is a matter of domestic jurisdiction. The question is: What
are the Israelis doing in the West Bank? Why are they
there? Why are they occupying the West Bank? IS not
their continued presence in the West Bank-on the territory
of Jordan-a continued act of aggression, condemned by
the jurisprudence of the United Nations? That is the
question.

91. I cannot remain silent after having heard Mr. Te:koah
cite such proverbs as “He that diggeth a pit falls into :it”. I
think he should have quoted the proverb correctly because
it is an old Semitic one: “He that diggeth a pit for his
brother falls into it”., I should like to remind him of a
proverb that says: “He who takes by the sword is taken by
the sword”. Both acts, digging a ditch and taking by the
sword are deplorable in the era of the United Nations,. But
the facts of life confront us and we have no choice but to
deal with the tragedies and tribulations of people regardless
of their race, sex or religion.

85. But when they expel people-and there are 460,000
people who have been expelled by Israel to the East Bank
of the Jordan after the six-day war-they should not expect
those people to send them a 1“thank-you note.” If they
expect that they are mistaken; if they. expect the people
expelled not to go back and fight they are mistaken. Those
people are citizens of Jordan, whether they are on the West
Bank or the East Bank. They belong to one territory,
recognized by the United Nations, a State Member of the
United Nations having the assurancesof all its friends that
its territorial integrity will be protected. So what are the
Israelis doing in the West Bank, and in Sinai, for that
matter, and in the Gaza Strip, and in the Golan Heights?
.That is the question.
86. I shall take only two minutes more. Mr. Tekoah said
that Arab terrorists operate from outside the occupied
territories. That is not true. Resistance is from within. But
we do know that the Israeli behaviour in the West Bank
gives every proof that they are after the annexation of that
part of Jordanian territory. I do not have to go far to get
you the evidence. Here is General Dayan, the hero of Israel.
This is what he is saying to get more popularity-it
is
something which reflects the thinking of Zionism, He said:
“I see the Jordan River as our frontier”-the Jordan River,
the frontier of future Israel-“and the mountain range west
of the River”-the area which is now being shelled but is
not occupied yet, the heights between Syria and the
northern part of the East Bank of Jordan-“as bases to
protect our frontier”.

92. Mr. Tekoah said that the Arab States had ganged up,
so to speak, to destroy Israel in 1948. The Arab State,s did
not desire to destroy anyone in Palestine. It was an alien
people, who happened to be Jews, that hailed from Eastern
and Central Europe, using Judaism as a motivation for
political and economic ends, that came into Palestine, and
there was resistance.
93. The Mandatory Power of the United Kingdom failed
in trying-to bring peace in the Holy Land right from the
time it was declared the Mandatory Power at the time of
the Treaty of Versailles in 1919 up to 1939 a period of
twenty years noted for massacres between the Arabs and
the Jews. The British themselves had their share of so.rrow
as many of their troops, who were supposed to be the:re to
maintain peace, were killed and insulted and spat upon.
94. Those alien people from Eastern and Central Europe
who happened to be Jews-but more so, I would say, who
happened to be Zionists-are at the root of all these
tragedies. They talk of atrocities and say that the Arabs are
aping the Nazis, having forgotten that even in Lidice, in
Czechoslovakia, the Nazis spared the old men and women
and children when they retaliated because the valiant Czech
people in that small town tried to fight to liberate
themselves from the Nazis. When I addressed myself to this
question in one of the organs of the United Nations years
ago, I checked with none other than my Czech collealgue.
He told me that the Nazis did not kill the boys and that no
man over fifty, if my memory serves me correctly, and no
women were touched. Those were the Nazis,

87. That is the hero of Israel speaking, He started this
whole war, and here he tells you what he wants. Allon
wanted to have part of the occupied territory as security;
then Dayan wanted more, *to secure the security-to have
more area to secure the other occupied area.
88. This has no limit. So the question which the Council
should turn to and discuss at this time is: my, after
twenty-two .months, are the Israelis still there? I think
withdrawal is the answer; and as long as there is no
withdrawal there will be resistance. I have no apology to
make to Mr. Tekoah; there wiu be resistance because this is
the spirit of the day, the spirit of liberation and human
rights. When people are oppressed they will resist, until
they get rid of the conquerors. And the Israelis are the
conquerors.

95. What did the Zionists do? Deir Yassin was wiped off
the map of Palestine and every creature-not only human
beings-was killed and murdered at dawn, surrounded by
machine-guns. By whom? By the gangs to which my
Jordanian colleague referred. You talk, Mr, Tekoah, of,
digging ditches. That was the cause of the panic of the Arab

89. The PRESIDENT: I call on the representative of Saudi
Arabia.
8

people of Palestine-the indigenous people-forget that they
are Arabs! They got so frightened that they left for Jordan
and they became refugees.

regard to the resolutions of the Security Council and the
United Nations and involving the duties and obligations of
not only the four major Powers but also of the’parties to
the dispute in Palestine ? It so happens that Israel has
flouted all the resolutions that were adopted. Israel has
gone beyond the partition lines of 1947; it has flouted the
right of the Palestinian refugees to return to their homeland, ashas been brought out by my colleague from Jordan.
The actions that Israel has taken, even through its legislative
body, with regard to Jerusalem should be considered as null.
and void; they were considered as invalid by this Council.
Why do the big Powers not equate Israel’s violation of all
these resolutions with the alleged infringement of an
agreement by one party in the Far East? There are 450,000
or more troops, alien to Asia, in the Far East because one
of the countries thought that the Geneva Agreement was
infringed upon or violated; but here, m this case, a ce&.in
country, none other than Israel, has systematically infringed upon and violated an agreement among five, six or
seven States-I do not remember exactly how many. The
States appended their signatures to the Geneva Agreement
in 1954, but when that Agreement was allegedly violated
by one of the parties, there was a big war, one which could
involve us all one day in a holocaust if it is not stopped.

96. You talk of Jordanian atrocities, Egyptian atrocities,
Syrian atrocities. They are all deplorable. I think you
should bear that in mind, Mr. Tekoah, not to mention
atrocities by others when it was you who started them
when the land of Palestine was the Land of Peace, before
the European Zionists usurped it. There were practically no
crimes in the Holy Land during the time of the Ottomans.
There were perhaps personal crimes such as happen
everywhere, but there were indeed very few crimes. The
Arabs did not desire to destroy anyone in Palestine. It was
those alien Eastern European Zionists who started this
whole tragedy. How true it is, unfortunately, that those
who take by the sword are taken by the sword, inasmuch as
we are here to prevent such tragedies,
97. And who is it that is equating Jordan with Israel here
in acts of. aggression, but the representative of a Power that
has upheld Israel ever since its inception? Why? It is
understandable; it is because that Power, that State which is
supporting Israeli aggression, is to a large extent under the
influence of the Zionists, who have wormed themselves into
the Covernment of that State and to a large extent control
its media of information
and can tip the balance in the
economic and social fields inside that country-and, I dare
say, in many other Western countries as well.

100. But the Council pronounces itself and the General
Assembly of the United Nations pronounces itself on the
partition of Palestine, in resolutions that need no interpretation because they are clear-partition
anyway, was
illegal-but never mind the illegality of the partition-and
on the fact that Israel has gone beyond the partition line
and has refused to have the refugees go back to their
homeland. I shall not give a list of all those resolutions; but
what about the resolution on Jerusalem? Why does not one
of those major Powers send a warning, like the warning sent
to one of the parties in the Far East, “If you do not obey,
there will be war”, Of course it is not a declared war, but in
essence there is war. Why do not the big Powers equate
us-because we are Asians.

98. And why does Israel begin such action on the very eve
of the day when the major Powers are trying to meet in the
hope of finding some solution? It is to sow dissent among
the four major Powers, and-let me be frank-especially
between the United States, on the one hand, and France
and the Soviet Union on the other, whether jointly or
separately, just because the Chiefs of State and the
Governments of France and the Soviet Union do not allow
the Zionists to sway their policies. The Zionists think they
should be subject to the policies of Zionism. The Zionists
think that they should come and tell the United States,
“You are right in your support of Israel”-leave aside this
rceven-handedness”-“and,
by consensus, let us sell the
Palestinians down the river”-the Palestinian people who
have never been mentioned in this Council except during
the last three or four years, even then only haphazardly, as
an entity, as a people that has a personality and that should
have been liberated a long time ago, after the British
relinquished the responsibility of their Mandate in Palestine.

101. Where is Lord Caradon today? In Anguil& The
United Kingdom sent a police force; it sent a part of the
navy to that tiny island of Anguilla. Why does not the
United Kingdom, along with its allies, send a police force or
an army to the shores of Palestine? We do not expect them
to; we do not want them to. But why is there this double
standard? To Anguilla they send a force; with respect to
Palestine, it has been a tennis ball between the big Powers
and other Powers for them to play with throughout all
these years. At the expense of whom? Of the indigenous
people of Palestine and the poor innocent people too who
are being killed in Israel, the Jews. Do not think we are so
inhuman as not to value human life as such, even of the
Jews.

99. My brother from Jordan mentioned this morning how
certain Powers-he did not name them; I suppose he is more
polite than I am, he uses the diplomatic modalities-how
certain Powers are trying to equate Jordan with Israel in the
latest act of aggression. May I remind my good friend the
Ambassador of the United States, none other than
Mr, Yost, why the United States is involved in a war in’bthe
Far East. Why? Because, we have been told time and again,
the United States thought that the Geneva Agreement was
infringed upon by one of the parties to that Agreement.
Which is more important,
and should there not be an
equation, even if one dispute is not moresimportant than
the other-should
there not be an equation made with

102. If the big Powers meant business they indeed would
have acted with dispatch to see that justice was done,
justice that is enunciated in the Charter.
103. Someone has just reminded me that the United
States is not even, a signatory to the Geneva Agreements.
But the United States has a moral responsibility like the
Soviet Union, like France, like the United Kingdom, to see
to it that Israel obeys the United Nations resolutions. I am
9

-

not talking about the foolish resoiutions condemning one
side or the other or criticizing one side or the other. They
are not worth the paper and the ink, because if the major
resolutions of the Security Council and the General
Assembly are not heeded by Israel, what are you doing
here, gentlemen? Are you dealing in platitudes, semantics
and rhetoric? Of course you are all under instructions, but
I hope that what I say will carry through to your
Governments. Indeed injustice is being perpetrated and
strife is continuing, and tragedy has become the order of
the day, whether it is inside Jordan or Egypt or Syria or
so-called Israel itself.
104. I say “so-called Israel” because I should like this
Council to know that not all the Americans here in this
country are on the side of Zionism. I shall quote from the
declaration of a Jewish organization that numbers thousands upon thousands, but they are not as articulate as the
Zionists. They say that those Americans of the Jewish faith
want full and equal national rights not only in the United
States :

and of Eastern Europe, if they SO desire. DO not
confuse the issue before the Security Council, because I
shall bring more arguments from your own Zionist scholars
to show that you are using this for propaganda purposes
and to play on the sentiments of American Jews who are
loyal
citizens of the United States. But the media of
information, which you control, try to brainwash them and
to play on their sentiments, which is quite natural.
Europe

107. Mr. Tekoah talks of freedom of thought. He talks of
free association. He talks about the Arabs inside that State
as enjoying freedom and democracy which he alleges are
wanting in Arab countries. We do not want the Periclean
type of democracy, with all due respect to the Greeks.
108. If Pericles’ bones have not crumbled beca.useof the
passage of centuries, they must stir in his tomb when some
of you around here begin to talk about democracy as if it
were a monopoly of Western countries. Democracy has
existed in Asia, without the name; it has been in the
institutions of Asia, in the tribal systems of Asia, where
kings and chiefs of tribes are subject to the law and are not
immune. What are you talking about when you speak of
democracy? A perverted democracy in whose n,ame many
crimes have been committed. Once Thomas Paine said, in
this country of the United States: “Oh liberty, how many
crimes are committed in thy name? ” Democracy-with
machines, ballots, trying to influence the sublimiinal minds
of prospective voters, bribing them with tangibles and
intangibles, the spoils system.

“Zionism is a philosophy of despair. It states that all
Jews share a common nationality linked to Israel. It
works for the in-gathering of the Jews in Palestine . . .“Is there any wonder that the Arabs are fearful and that
many of them are in panic? “
and produces the self-segregation of Jews from
fell;; Americans. Zionism seeks to invest every Jew with
a nationalistic relationship to all other Jews and with a
Zionist national commitment to Israel. Judaism is a
religion, not ‘a nationality. We are not anti-Zionist.”
-These are Jews’who are talking.-“We urge Americans of
all faiths to reject the Zionist concept that the State of
Israel is a fulfilment of the Biblical prophecy of the
homeland of the American Jew.”

109. You can have your democracy! Leave our institutions intact and let us evolve them into something better!
But do not try to use such fetish, such a stereotyped word
as democracy. It is outmoded. The people in almost every
country are being brainwashed by such slogans. But the
youth has awakened. They do not believe that there is
democracy in spirit, except perhaps in certain communities.
In the modern world, in the name of democracy wars are
being waged.

105. The famous correspondent Bob Considine, who paid
many visits to Israel, was asked time and again, “Why do
the Americans hesitate to come to Israel? ” Mr. Ben Gurion
posed that question. Bob Considine wrote: “ Why do they
hesitate? ‘, David Ben Gurion once asked me. ‘Can’t they
understand that we need their skills, we need doctors,
engineers, scientists, teachers and farmers desperately? ’ ” I
am quoting from Bob Considine. “The old man.. .”
-meaning Ben Gurion; I would have said “the venerable
man”, but this is the American way of saying “the old
man”; they call their father ‘(the old man”-“. . . did not
like my answer, ‘I guess they feel they have already found
the promised land.’ ” -meaning here in America.

110. Somebody said something the other day about
bigotry. I do not want to mention his name in order not to
embarrass the representative of the host country. He is a
legislator. He said: “Adam and Eve, if I had my choice,
would have been born in the United States”. T.he Americans have power now. They think that the who:le civilization, the whole creation should begin here. I think that
Eden was in Iraq, at one time Mesopotamia. Maybe,
because now Iraq is Arab, it was a mistake to have Eden
there; it should have been located in some country which
can wield power. “Even-handed treatment”. What evenhanded treatment? What have we done to you? You went
into our part of the world when we opened our doors for
You to come and trade and prospect for natural resources.
What have we done to you that from a distance of
thousands of miles you want to shape our destiny? And
here, because of the might of the big Powers, and the
bounty which they can distribute to all, under all kinds of
epithets-technical aid and I do not know what else, loans
without interest, and so on-you can buy som,e of our
politicians, but you cannot buy our people,

106. Mr. Tekoah wants all the Jews to go to his promised
land, Palestine, and that is at the root of all the trouble. Do
not equate Jordan with the acts perpetrated by your
people, Mr. Tekoah-not the Jews from my part of the
world. They are my people. You talk about your people
and I talk about my people. The oriental Jews are my
people. They spoke Arabic, they ate Arabic food, their
customs were Arabic. they were with me at school, we
never had any barriers on account of their being Jews. Do
not confuse the issue and never say “my people”, because
they are not your people. Your people are those of Central
I

111. Leave us alone, for heaven’s sake, to evolve our
respective countries, in Asia and in Africa, in peace, Do not
10

be. supercilious and self-righteous, as you were during
colonial days. I wish the Zionists had a sort of classical
colonialism in our part of the world. It would come to an
end like all colonial systems are coming to an end. I am
referring to this usurpation of a people, the Palestinian
people, the usurpation of their homeland. They own 65 per
cent of the orchards in Palestine, the citrus orchards. Israel
is selling the citrus fruit for $175 million or so a year. I do
not know the exact figure, I may be mistaken. But it is
millions of dollars worth of citrus fruit, gathered from the
orchards of the indigenous people of.Palestine for twenty
years. It would not matter if it were even $50 million or
$10 million. The Zionists do not allow the United Nations
to appoint a custodian. Have you ever heard of any such
tyranny?
112. You Western countries fought the Germans in two
world wars. You never confiscated the private property of
the Germans. Ah, you might say-Israel might say-“There
were m,any Jews in Arab countries that had to flee for their
lives”, The Zionists set themselves up as if they had a power
of attorney from those Jews. They even exacted a power of
attorney from those Jews to deduct from Arab accounts
the value of such property. It is all confusion leading to
tragedy.
113. I do not believe that anything will come out of it in
my lifetime, unless, by a sort of change of heart, or
miraculously, the European Zionists come to their senses
and realize that there is no future for them in Palestine in
the long run. They cannot pit themselves against a hundred
million Arabs, leaving aside the indigenous people of
Palestine. The door is open for them to come to their
senses, and you gentlemen here, especially those who are
responsible, may be able to persuade them that if they want
to live in peace in the Middle East they could do so as
human beings-they could be of the Jewish faith-but not
as an exclusive society setting themselves up apart from the
rest of the world, as’ if indeed they were the chosen people
of God, taking the letter of certain passagesin the Bible
with a fundamentalistic interpretation.
114. They should know very well that King David said: “I
look up to the hills.” And one of those hills is Mount Zion.
It is a spiritual looking up to the hills, to the Invisible, to
the Unknown, which, I must say in praise of Judaism, is
God, the Invisible, the Ineffable. It is so in Islam’s
Ninety-Nine Epithets describing God. ,Nb’ one can define
Him. Those outside the pale of monotheistic religions also
consider the creative force-the Brahmin, for instance, as

ineffable. And in the twentieth century the Zionists come
and tell us that God gave the British-and My. Truman-a
power of attorney to transfer Palestine to them and that
Sion, from which Zionism is derived, is something terrestrial and that they should occupy it. This is the twentieth
century; whom do they think they are fooling? They are
not fooling themselves because they are secular-the
leaders-with all due respect to those Jews who have
religious sentiment. Wake up from that nightmare! It is our
nightmare too. It will be a nightmare for everybody in the
area. Face the facts! Be human! Do not set yourseIves up
as an exclusive people-with all due respect to your
prophets, who are also our prophets. And then there will be
peace in Palestine. The whole world is awakening to the
fact that a world Jewish problem is being created; and I
would hate to see Jews or any other minority become the
scapegoat whenever trouble flares up and somebody wants
to punish the innocent.
115. Saudi Arabia has never sought a .seat on this Council
or any other in the United Nations, and if we sometimes
allow ourselves the liberty of being expansive about any
subject it is becausewe feel that this item is very vital to us.
And as a Member of the United Nations, signatory to the
Charter, it is incumbent on us to make our views clear to
every member of the Council and every Member of the
United Nations, including Israel, so that there may be no
misunderstanding in the future as to our stand.
116. Only recently his Majesty King Faisal, in a speech at
el Hadj-the pilgrimage-declared that he and the Saudi
Arabian people are prepared to make martyrs of themselves
to retrieve Jerusalem. It is my duty to mention this in
concluding my statement. And I hope, Mr. President, that
you will give me the floor when any draft resolution is
tabled.
117. The PRESIDENT: There are no more names on the
list of speakersfor this meeting.
118. I wish to inform the Council that .great efforts are
being made to accelerate cdnsideration of the problem on
the agenda of the Council today. For the proper assessment
of the case, and in view of circumstances beyond the scope
of the Council, I propose that we should meet this
afternoon. On the basis of private consultations with
members of the Council, it seems that for the majority of
members it would be suitable to meet at 4.30 p.m.
The meeting rose at 2.35 p.m.

HOW

TO OBTAIN

UNITED

NATIONS

PUBLICATIONS

United Nations
publications
the world.
Consult
your
or Geneva.

may
bookstore

COMMENT

LES PUBLICATIONS

SE PROCURER

be obtained
or write

from bookstores
and distributors
to: United
Nations,
Sales Section,

DES NATIONS

throughout
New York

UNIES

Les publications
des Nations
Unies
sent en venla
dons ICI librairier
et les ogences
dCpositaires
du monde
entier.
Informez-vous
aupr&s de votre librairia
ou adresrex-vous
b:
Notions
Unies, Section
des venter,
New York ov Genbve.
KAK

IlOllY’iMTb

MBAAHHR

OPI-AHHlA~HH

06bEAHHEHHblX

HAuL4i-i

11:1~~111r111 Oprllllll:lnr(nIl
@h?~nIlcI1I1I~IX
~IaI{Ilii
J1oiIiIIo
IWlIITb
n PlllIXIII~IS
wuwtiitax
i\l'C'IITI'TIlllS
110 III'CS ~.llll"lOll~X
Jlll~Kt.
.&llO,!(IlTC
t'll~tllW11
(;6 ll:1~~llllllX
II IIaUIP31 lillllilillOM
Wll'LMlllC
Il.-Ill lllllllllTC
II0 a;rllN'y:
Op~alln3aI~llfl
06ze~nucnubn
Ilal~llil.
CCIiIIIIH
llpOxa;liC
II3~alIlll"l,
fIblO-fiOpli
II.lll 53teClleBa.
COMO

CONSEGUIR

PUBLICACIONES

DE LAS NACIONES

Los publicacioner
de Ior Nociones
Unidor
est6n
en todas partes
del mundo.
Consulte
a su librero
Ventas, Nueva York o Ginebra.

en venta
o dirijare

11
uo

UNIDAS
en libreriar
y cosos distribuidoras
ai Naciones
Unidor,
Secci6n

de

Litho

in United

Nations,

New York

Price:

$U.S. 0.50 (or equivalent

in other

currencies)

82035-November

1972-2,,050
