United Nations

S/PV.6754

Security Council

Provisional

Sixty-seventh year

6754th meeting
Thursday, 19 April 2012, 3 p.m.
New York

President:

Mr. DeLaurentis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(United States of America)

Members:

Azerbaijan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Colombia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Germany . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Guatemala . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
India . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Morocco . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Pakistan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Portugal . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
South Africa . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Togo . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . .

Mr. Musayev
Mr. Wang Min
Mr. Osorio
Mr. Briens
Mr. Wittig
Mr. Rosenthal
Mr. Hardeep Singh Puri
Mr. Loulichki
Mr. Tarar
Mr. Portas
Mr. Pankin
Mr. Sangqu
Mr. Menan
Mr. Parham

Agenda
The situation in Guinea-Bissau

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the
delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-506.

12-30011 (E)

*1230011*

S/PV.6754

The meeting was called to order at 3.15 p.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in Guinea-Bissau
The President: In accordance with rule 37 of the
Council’s provisional rules of procedure, I invite the
representatives of Angola, Côte d’Ivoire and GuineaBissau to participate in this meeting.
On behalf of the Council, I welcome the
participation at this meeting of the Minister of External
Relations of Angola, the Minister of Foreign Affairs
and International Cooperation of Guinea-Bissau and
the Minister of State and Foreign Affairs of Portugal.
Under rule 39 of the Council’s provisional rules
of procedure, I invite Mr. Joseph Mutaboba, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General and Head of
the United Nations Integrated Peacebuilding Office in
Guinea-Bissau, to participate in this meeting.
On behalf of the Council, I welcome
Mr. Mutaboba, who is joining today’s meeting via
video teleconference from Bissau.
Under rule 39 of the Council’s provisional rules
of procedure, I invite Her Excellency Ambassador
Maria Luiza Ribeiro Viotti, Permanent Representative
of Brazil, in her capacity as Chair of the Guinea-Bissau
configuration of the Peacebuilding Commission, to
participate in this meeting.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I now give the floor to Mr. Mutaboba.
Mr. Mutaboba: Thank you, Sir, for this
opportunity to brief the Security Council on the most
recent developments in Guinea-Bissau.
Following the 12 April military coup, which was
unanimously condemned by the international
community, including the Secretary-General and the
Security Council, on 13 April some members of the
armed forces claiming to be a military command took
responsibility for the coup and provided, as justified
reasons, the alleged existence of a secret agreement
between the Government and Angola to legitimize,
through a mandate of the African Union Peace and
Security Council, an intervention by the Angolan

2

armed forces. The military command stressed it did not
want power and had been forced to act in self-defence
by attempts by the Government to annihilate the armed
forces. A document was later circulated by opposition
parties on 18 April purporting to be a copy of a letter
from the Prime Minister to the Secretary-General,
requesting an extraordinary meeting of the Security
Council to discuss the internal situation following the
non-acceptance of the election results, and the
deployment of a peacekeeping force.
The military command, on 13 April, also outlined
its immediate goals as, first, removing obstacles to
security sector reform; secondly, fighting drug
trafficking and consumption so as to restore the
internal and external image of the country, and
consequently attract foreign investment; thirdly,
tackling the culture of impunity; and finally, ensuring
continuity of the process of building a democratic State
based on respect for basic human rights and freedom of
speech.
Responsibility for the coup, although claimed by
a military command, has been endorsed by the armed
forces general staff and its positions exclusively
conveyed by the spokesperson of the armed forces and
chef de cabinet of the chief of general staff, Lieutenant
Colonel Daba Na Walna.
On 13 April, the military command invited the
political parties to consultations on restoring
constitutional normality. Twenty-three political parties
accepted the invitation, including the Party for Social
Renewal and extra-parliamentary parties. The ruling
African Party for the Independence of Guinea and
Cape Verde (PAIGC) has not attended any of the
meetings. Two propositions were put forward, first, a
constitutional
transition
envisaging
restoring
constitutional order through appointing the current
interim president of the National Assembly as interim
President and asking the majority parliamentary party,
the PAIGC, to nominate a Prime Minister and form a
Government inclusive of other parties; and secondly, a
non-constitutional transition involving the dissolution
of Parliament and the creation of a national transitional
council, the appointment of a transitional President and
a national unity Government under a transitional Prime
Minister. On 15 April, 16 of the 23 parties opted for the
non-constitutional proposition and some abandoned the
table. A major point of discord was the period of the
transition, with some arguing for a two-year transition,

12-30011

S/PV.6754

while others wanted it to last until November 2012,
when legislative elections were planned.
The PAIGC issued a statement on 14 April
condemning the coup and calling for the unconditional
release of its leaders and their reinstatement. On
16 April, the five presidential candidates contesting the
electoral process also issued a statement condemning
the coup.
There have been some attempts by the population
and civil society to protest, but marches by youth and
women have been met with a harsh reaction from the
military, which has restricted freedom of assembly and
expression by forbidding public marches and closing
down private radio stations. A march on 15 April was
violently dispersed, with at least one demonstrator
seriously injured when a military officer slashed his
legs with a bayonet. Freedom of speech — through the
radio — and freedom of assembly have been restricted.
On 15 April, the two trade union confederations, the
National Workers’ Union of Guinea-Bissau and the
General Confederation of Independent Trade Unions,
condemned the coup and called on all workers to stay
away from work until constitutional order had been
restored.
Overall, while Bissau and the rest of the country
appear calm, with life apparently returning to normal,
the environment remains tense and volatile, leading to
a reportedly unusual exodus of people from Bissau to
the countryside. While shops on the whole remain
open, the banks have been closed since the coup, but
may reopen soon. It is unclear how the military
authorities hope to pay civil service salaries in a few
days’ time, although the military command has
announced that banks will reopen on Monday. A
continued crisis would fatally impact the cashewtrading season, which is crucial to the economy and the
livelihood of the population. A humanitarian crisis is a
distinct possibility.
There have been strong voices of condemnation
of the coup d’état from multilateral and bilateral
partners of Guinea-Bissau. The Economic Community
of West African States (ECOWAS), the Community of
Portuguese-speaking Countries (CPLP), the African
Union (AU), the European Union (EU) and the
International Organization of la Francophonie have
joined the Secretary-General in condemning the
unconstitutional coup in Guinea-Bissau. They are all
unanimous in calling for the restoration of the

12-30011

constitutional order and the release of the detained
leaders. Many have also called for the conclusion of
the interrupted electoral process.
The CPLP and the African Union have further
suggested that targeted individual sanctions be applied
to the military and political leaders associated with the
coup. The AU and the International Organization of la
Francophonie have suspended Guinea-Bissau from
participation in their organizations until constitutional
order has been restored, while the African
Development Bank and the World Bank have
announced the suspension of their development
programmes in Guinea-Bissau.
At the bilateral level, a number of countries have
also issued strong statements condemning the coup.
The ECOWAS position was further reiterated by a
mission visiting Bissau on 16 April. The mission, led
by the President of the ECOWAS Commission, met
with the military command, the five candidates
contesting the election process, and a PAIGC
delegation. The mission said that it had transmitted a
clear message that ECOWAS stood by its zerotolerance policy towards the unconstitutional takeover
of power. ECOWAS also clarified that Guinea-Bissau
would be suspended from the organization should it
fail to restore constitutional order.
The President of the ECOWAS Commission said
that the military had undertaken to comply with the
requests and that ECOWAS stood ready to assist them
with the modalities. A few hours after the departure of
the ECOWAS mission, the armed forces spokesperson
ruled out the return of Carlos Gomes Júnior to power
and said that there would be no presidential run-off.
On 18 April, an agreement between the armed
forces and the political parties was signed for a twoyear transition, the dissolution of Parliament, the
destitution of the Government and of the interim
President, and the maintenance of the military
leadership.
With regard to the Angola military technical
assistance mission, whose withdrawal was announced,
I have learned that consultations between the military
command and the Government of Angola on
withdrawal are ongoing. The Government of Angola,
through its embassy in Bissau, promised to notify
international partners when the mission departs. On
that note, I would like to pay tribute to Angola for a
successful mission, which, unfortunately, became a

3

S/PV.6754

casualty of the deep-rooted political and military
conflicts in Guinea-Bissau. Angola has not only
contributed to the maintenance of stability in GuineaBissau over the past year, but it has also provided
infrastructural support for the armed forces as part of
its contribution to implementing the security sector
reform road map.
This is clearly a political-military coup.
Irrespective of the motives of the perpetrators, this act
will go into the history books as one more coup that
took place under the eyes of the United Nations and
hence those of the whole international community. It
will also be described as an act of military
insubordination to the democratically elected civilian
authorities almost two years after the ECOWAS/CPLP
road map was adopted. We could have done more, and
I believe that we can do more.
I also hope that all Bissau Guinean partners will
learn from this latest setback that time is critical in
whatever we intend to do in Guinea-Bissau. Had we
moved quicker in providing the necessary resources for
security sector reform, which would have allowed for
the demobilization and retirement programmes to take
off, we might not be discussing this matter this
evening.
Finally, I would like to note that one of the
problems of the Bissau Guinean polity is exclusionary
solutions. The negotiations that are under way today
are again based on the exclusion of an important actor
in the political life of Guinea-Bissau, the current
parliamentary majority PAIGC party. Other political
forces, though minor, have not subscribed to the
negotiations or their outcome. I believe that the
parliamentary parties should be closely involved in any
solution based on commitment to the restoration of
constitutional order and addressing the question of
inclusion.
It is therefore extremely important that the
international community not be seen to be endorsing
solutions that exclude part of the population or
important national stakeholders. I call attention to the
fact that any solution that excludes the PAIGC and
other parliamentary parties would be a recipe for a
future crisis and a negation of the will of the people as
expressed through elections in 2008.
The President: I thank Mr. Mutaboba for his
briefing.

4

I now give the floor to His Excellency
Mr. Mamadú Saliu Djaló Pires, Minister for Foreign
Affairs and International Cooperation of GuineaBissau.
Mr. Pires (Guinea-Bissau) (spoke in Portuguese;
English text provided by the delegation): Allow me to
express my deepest appreciation for this opportunity to
convey to this highest entity of the coalition of nations,
on behalf of the Government legitimately established
for the eighth legislature and chosen by the majority of
the Guinean people, current realities in Guinea-Bissau,
and to request approval for a targeted resolution aimed
at facilitating the country’s return to democratic
normality.
As the Council is aware, on the night of 12 April
a self-proclaimed military command decided to carry
out a violent takeover of the presidency of the country,
after having made an attempt on the life of the Prime
Minister and presidential candidate, imprisoning him
along with the interim President of the Republic. The
latest news indicates that their intention is to dissolve
all institutions of sovereignty and establish new
transitional structures in the country.
At any time and in any circumstances that would
constitute a flagrant violation of the law and would
thus run counter to the universal principle of the
subordination of defence and security forces to a
democratically established political regime. In the case
of Guinea-Bissau, this rebellion is particularly serious
because it is the result of a known pattern of behaviour
that the armed forces have exhibited several times;
because it is designed to reverse the will of the
Guinean electorate regarding their choice for the new
President of the Republic; and because it masks the
unstated intention of promoting certain political
elements.
Although they have not claimed official
responsibility for this action — a perfect illustration of
the nature of those involved — as is well known to all,
the current military leadership are the perpetrators,
headed specifically by the Chief of Staff of the armed
forces, Lieutenant General Antonio Indjai. The
motivation behind it is to undermine the ongoing
process of reform and assure his continuing
collaboration with organized crime and drug trafficking
in Guinea-Bissau. No less serious is the lack of moral
and political authority of the main opposition party and
its leader, who, aware of their inability to attract the

12-30011

S/PV.6754

popular vote, resorted to this tactic to subvert order and
attempt to impose their will on the Guinean people.

Supreme Court itself should be ignored in favour of an
assessment and decision by the Chief of Staff.

As I stand here before the Council, we do not
know where and under what conditions the interim
President of the Republic and its Prime Minister, the
leader of the largest political party and recipient of
49 per cent of the votes in the first round of
presidential elections, are being held. But the wave of
persecution and fear created by the military junta since
the night of 12 April is not limited to them. The
President of the Supreme Court has taken refuge in a
diplomatic mission; the whereabouts of various
Government members, heads of other institutions and
individuals opposed to this oppression are uncertain,
while their homes are looted by uniformed and armed
elements and their families are attacked.

The second accusation of the perpetrators of the
coup d’état against the Government concerns the
existence of a secret agreement aimed, they said, at
destroying the armed forces of Guinea-Bissau. That is
a ridiculous claim, since the alleged agreement is a
letter addressed to Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon, in
which the Government requests and justifies the need
for the Security Council to establish a peacekeeping
force for Guinea-Bissau. That letter supports an earlier
one sent to the Secretary-General a few days before by
the President of the ECOWAS Commission, requesting
virtually the same thing. Is a claim that the United
Nations would provide forces to destroy the armed
forces of a State to be taken seriously?

For informational purposes, let me give a brief
and concise account of the main arguments of the selfproclaimed military command, the political parties
supporting them and the opponents of the abruptly
interrupted electoral process.

However, the list of insubordinate and
undisciplined acts by the military towards the political
regime is much longer. I invite the Council to refer to
the memorandum supplied on this subject. So as not to
waste members’ time, I will summarize them here.

Concerning the elections, there have been
allegations of fraud and that the process left out a
considerable number of voters who turned 18 years of
age after the last census. According to established
practice in Guinea-Bissau, the elections were observed
by national missions from civil society and several
international institutions, notably the Economic
Community of West African States (ECOWAS), the
African Union (AU) and the Community of
Portuguese-speaking Countries (CPLP), as well as a
group of British parliamentarians. All declared that the
process was free, transparent and fair, and that any
imperfections in no way compromised the results of the
first round.

On 1 April 2010, in a display of force and a clear
act of disrespect for the institutions of the Republic,
Lieutenant General Antonio Indjai invaded the
premises of the United Nations in Bissau to “liberate”
Rear Admiral Bubo Na Tchuto. He subsequently
kidnapped the Army Chief of Staff, General Jose
Zamora Induta, and imprisoned Prime Minister Carlos
Gomes Júnior for several hours, in order to later put
pressure on the Government and President Bacai Sanhá
to appoint him and Bubo Na Tchuto chiefs of staff of
the army and navy, respectively. They were confirmed
in office through coercion and threats to the country’s
civil authorities, the Prime Minister and President of
the Republic.

Concerning the exclusion from voting of some
young people, the dissenting parties’ commitment to
the truth should compel them to recognize that they
themselves demanded that the 60-day period allowed
for the scheduling of elections, at the end of hearings,
be strictly observed. Furthermore, that position of the
dissenting parties cannot be dissociated from the
statement made by the Chief of Staff at a conciliation
meeting convened by the interim President, in which
he said that he reserved the right to be the arbiter of the
electoral process due to the lack of consensus among
the candidates. In other words, the decision of the
National Electoral Commission and the ruling of the

The President of the Republic João Bernardo
Vieira, General Tagme Na Wai, General Ansumane
Mané, General Verissimo Correia Seabra, Commodore
Lamine Sanhá, Deputy Hélder Proença, Governor
Baciro Dabó and, more recently, Colonel Samba Djaló,
were summarily executed without benefit of a serious
investigation.

12-30011

Police in Bissau were beaten for intervening in a
traffic accident caused by the son of Chief of Staff
Antonio Indjai. On the eve of the most recent elections,
police were publicly beaten and humiliated, in front of
representatives of the national and foreign press, for
having dispersed, without any use of violence, an

5

S/PV.6754

unauthorized demonstration in front of the National
Electoral Commission.
Following that incident with the police, General
Antonio Indjai, in a clear demonstration of force and
with unclear intentions and without consulting the
Government, ordered all police to surrender their
weapons. They were thus prevented from pursuing
their mission of maintaining public order in GuineaBissau.
In terms of financial management and the
payment of military salaries, the military has never
accepted the rules of transparency already in place
across the public service. In that connection, there is no
knowledge of the exact number and names of
recipients and they never deigned to justify the
exorbitant sums regularly withdrawn from the public
treasury, presumably for food for the military.
With regard to the judicial police investigation of
drug trafficking, various military members were
arrested and put in judicial police jails on several
occasions, but military leaders then forced their
transfer to military prisons where they were
immediately released. Their cases remain pending.
Aircraft belonging to drug dealers land on various
improvised tarmacs, with the authorization of the
military leadership and with total disregard for the
legitimate civil authorities of Guinea-Bissau. Recently,
it was reported that an aircraft landed on the
Jugudul/Bambadinca road, counting on the protection
of the military, under the orders of the Army Chief of
Staff.
This is not even remotely the first time that the
Council has convened a meeting to discuss the political
situation in Guinea-Bissau. It is important to note that
the Council’s attention and commitment, combined
with the action of the international community, has
allowed substantial progress in recent years, despite the
difficulties, not only in terms of governance but also in
the creation of social and political structures capable of
stabilizing the country permanently. That is seen by
certain elements, particularly by the current head of the
military, as a threat to their excesses and arbitrariness,
and is leading them to commit the barbarous acts that
are being carried out in Guinea-Bissau.
It is therefore urgent that concrete steps be taken.
There is a need to affirm the democratic rule of law in
Guinea-Bissau and that, in the current context,

6

inevitably requires immediate and mandatory reform of
those involved in the coup. It also requires a
re-launching of the defence and security sector reform
programme, under the coordination of the United
Nations and with the participation of the partners of
Guinea-Bissau, in particular the ECOWAS, the African
Union and the CPLP. It also requires the restoration of
legitimately established constitutional bodies and the
completion of the electoral process to elect the
President of the Republic.
I take this opportunity to welcome the clear,
specific and unambiguous manner in which the
international community, with a unified voice,
condemned the 12 April coup d’état, with particular
emphasis on the pronouncements of ECOWAS, the AU,
the CPLP, the United Nations, the European Union, the
International Organization of la Francophonie and
many countries at the bilateral level.
We testify to the extraordinary performance of
the Angolan Technical and Military Assistance Mission
in Guinea-Bissau, in the framework of military and
technical cooperation with the sisterly Republic of
Angola, which has been widely acclaimed throughout
Guinean society, at first by the military authorities
themselves. In that context, we welcome the openness
and willingness of the CPLP, ECOWAS and the AU to
coordinate, under the umbrella of the United Nations,
the provision of the operating units necessary for the
continuation of that mission and the implementation of
the memorandum of understanding between the CPLP
and ECOWAS for the reform of the defence and
security sectors.
In the light of those Dantean events that have
occurred over recent years, perpetrated exclusively by
the military in Guinea-Bissau, the Government and
people of my country have no doubt as to the way
forward. I stand before the Council on their behalf and
I beg for the deployment of a peacekeeping force to
Guinea-Bissau, authorized by the Security Council,
with a broad mandate and over an extended period of
time, in order to definitively turn the page and allow
for the establishment of a legitimate democratic State
in the Republic of Guinea-Bissau.
The President: I now give the floor to His
Excellency Mr. Georges Rebelo Chikoti, Minister of
External Relations of Angola.
Mr. Chikoti (Angola) (spoke in Portuguese;
English text provided by the delegation): I have the

12-30011

S/PV.6754

honour to address the Security Council on behalf of the
Community of Portuguese-speaking Countries (CPLP)
and its member States, namely, Angola, Brazil, Cape
Verde, Guinea-Bissau, Mozambique, Portugal, Sao
Tome and Principe, and East Timor, while fully
endorsing the statements made by the representative of
Guinea-Bissau at this important and timely debate on
the situation in that country.
Allow me to thank you, Mr. President, for
scheduling this emergency meeting, as well as to thank
all members of the Security Council for their
willingness to deepen the debate on the serious
situation that afflicts a member of the Community,
namely, the Republic of Guinea-Bissau, a country
bound to the CPLP by linguistic ties and with which
we share a historical and cultural legacy, supported by
a multifaceted cooperation between our countries.
The reasons that brought us to the Security
Council to participate in this debate are extremely
serious for Guinea-Bissau and for its people, and are
also important for the African continent and for the
international community as a whole.
The 12 April military coup has interrupted the
most positive period in the country’s recent history,
one of relative political stability, good governance and
significant economic growth, which augured a
promising future for the country, the pursuit of which
was being encouraged and rewarded by the
international community, as evidenced by the relief of
the country’s debt and by the positive assessments
made by international organizations.
The military coup d’état, which has already been
categorically condemned by the Council, the SecretaryGeneral, the Peacebuilding Commission, the CPLP, the
Economic Community of West African States
(ECOWAS), the African Union, the European Union,
the International Organization of la Francophonie and
by other national and international organizations, is of
exceptional seriousness because it took place in the
middle of the electoral process, which reflects a total
disregard for the democratic will and sovereignty of
the people of Guinea-Bissau. The military coup has
therefore violated all the principles of democratic life
and constitutes the most basic violation of article 25 of
the African Charter on Democracy, Elections and
Governance. It cast its authors and accomplices under
political condemnation, sanctions and prosecutions.

12-30011

The history of Guinea-Bissau has been very
tragic, marked by several coups d’état in recent years
in which a President, a presidential candidate, three
chiefs of staff and several other military and civilian
authorities died. Given that situation, it was with
extreme concern that the CPLP member States,
meeting at a summit of heads of State in Luanda on
22 July 2010, after extensive consultations with the
partners from ECOWAS, agreed on a road map for the
implementation of the defence and security sector
reform programme.
The CPLP’s solidarity with Guinea-Bissau has
been ongoing and active. Portugal and Brazil, through
various development programmes, have supported the
country in maintaining social services and economic
recovery. It was also in the context of that assistance
that, in 2010, the Governments of Angola and GuineaBissau signed a bilateral cooperation agreement that
included a programme of financial assistance for
Guinea-Bissau’s budget and a military-technical
cooperation agreement to support the country’s reform
of its defence and security sectors.
Angola, like all members of the CPLP and the
international community, wants to see Guinea-Bissau
consolidate peace, stability and development. That is
why we joined the combined efforts of all, because we
think that only through concerted actions on an
ongoing basis and through ideas can we help the
brotherly people and country of Guinea-Bissau to
overcome the current crisis, as it has in the past. In that
connection, Angola, in its capacity as President of the
CPLP, has been holding open consultations with
various international partners, such as the United
Nations, the African Union, in which it presides over
the Peace and Security Council, and ECOWAS, with a
view to finding a lasting solution for Guinea-Bissau.
Guinea-Bissau
has
deep-rooted
problems
affecting a large part of its political and military class.
The increase in drug trafficking in the country can
affect not only the neighbouring nations but also the
entire region, with consequences for regional stability
and security. The ongoing instability that GuineaBissau faces, marked by successive military uprisings,
which affect not only the institutions but also the entire
political class in the country, is the result of longstanding impunity and the absence of functioning
institutions, particularly the judicial system, due to the
intervention of military authorities in public life. That
makes the country hostage to military power. It is also

7

S/PV.6754

the result of the increase in drug trafficking, with the
risk of turning the country into a platform for
international drug trafficking.
Guinea-Bissau
therefore
needs
adequate
assistance, with the aid of the Council and the
Peacebuilding Commission, the African Union,
ECOWAS, the CPLP and other actors, in order to find a
lasting solution for the country. We call on the Security
Council to consider adopting appropriate measures
with a view to restoring constitutional order, ensuring
the unconditional release of the arrested leaders,
creating a peacekeeping force for stabilizing GuineaBissau, concluding the electoral process and providing
a system of penalties for breaches of the measures
adopted.
For the implementation of those measures and to
help the people of Guinea-Bissau, time is of the
essence. We cannot afford to wait and make the people
of Guinea-Bissau suffer — people who are constantly
at the whim of military power. The challenge to the
international community is serious enough that if we
fail to find appropriate solutions in due time, with the
efforts of all, we will be again putting the people at the
whim of the military, as they have been in the past.
The CPLP reaffirms the decisions contained in its
resolution resulting from the eighth meeting of its
Council of Ministers, held in Lisbon on 14 April, as
well as all of the resolutions that have recently been
issued by various bodies, namely the African Union’s
Peace and Security Council, ECOWAS and the
Security Council, which on 13 April called for the
restoration of constitutional order in Guinea-Bissau.
We encourage the Security Council to do all that
it can to support all of the measures that can be taken
collectively to help the Republic of Guinea-Bissau to
emerge from this crisis created by the military class,
which has brought about extremely difficult problems.
I appreciate the attention that has been given me
and the opportunity that I have been given to transmit
those thoughts to the Council on behalf of the CPLP.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Côte d’Ivoire.
Mr. Bamba (Côte d’Ivoire) (spoke in French): As
this is the first time that I take the floor under your
presidency, Sir, I would like to convey to you the
sincere congratulations of my delegation on your
election to the presidency of the Council for April.

8

(spoke in English)
It is my honour, on behalf of His Excellency
Mr. Alassane Ouattara, Chairman of the Authority of
Heads of State and Government of the Economic
Community of West African States (ECOWAS), to
express to the Security Council the gratitude of the
15 heads of State of the Community for taking up for
deliberation today the serious and disturbing matter of
Guinea-Bissau, only days after the situation in Mali
was discussed in the Chamber.
The Chairman of the Authority of Heads of State
and Government of the Economic Community of West
African States also expressed his gratitude to the
Secretary-General for his abiding interest in, and
concern over, the fate of West Africa and for the
support that he has unfailingly given to the region’s
efforts to stabilize the peace and security environment
there.
I would like to thank you, Mr. President, for the
able manner in which you are presiding over today’s
meeting. I would also like to acknowledge the speakers
before me, in particular Mr. Joseph Mutaboba, Head of
the United Nations Integrated Peacebuilding Office in
Guinea-Bissau, for his comprehensive presentation on
the situation in Guinea-Bissau.
Over the past two decades, the efforts of West
African leaders and ECOWAS led to the progressive
entrenchment of democratic culture and the
consolidation of stability and, as a consequence, steady
economic growth and a bright outlook in the subregion.
However, ECOWAS has been under no illusion as to
the fragility and reversible nature of the situation.
Unfortunately, the unfolding developments in Mali and
Guinea-Bissau are confirming our worst fears.
It should be recalled that the electorate in GuineaBissau went to the polls on 18 March to choose a
successor to President Malam Bacai Sanhá, who passed
away on 9 January. The period following the
inconclusive first round of the election was marked by
mounting tensions that were notably characterized by
the following factors: the decision of five of the
candidates led by Mr. Kumba Yala, leader of the Party
for Social Renewal and the second-placed candidate, to
boycott the run-off; malfunctioning State institutions
amid rancour within the political class; fear among
members of a section of the political class for their
safety and fear of a possible military intervention; and
rising suspicion and animosity between the Guinean

12-30011

S/PV.6754

military and the Angolan Technical and Military
Assistance Mission in Guinea-Bissau (MISSANG).

immediate relinquishing of power to the legitimate
authorities.

It was against that background that President
Ouattara of the Republic of Côte d’Ivoire, as Chairman
of the ECOWAS Authority, dispatched an ECOWAS
mission to Guinea-Bissau on 31 March. Led by the
President of the ECOWAS Commission, together with
representatives of the African Union and the United
Nations, the mission was undertaken with a view to
calming the situation, persuading the five candidates
not to boycott the run-off election, and assessing the
role of MISSANG in the evolving situation and making
appropriate recommendations to the Authority.

Only last Monday, 16 April, the Chairman of the
Authority dispatched a second ECOWAS mission to
Guinea-Bissau, where the delegation held intensive
discussions with the junta; the ruling African Party for
the Independence of Guinea and Cape Verde; the five
opposition candidates; ECOWAS ambassadors and the
representatives of the African Union and the United
Nations in Bissau. From the deliberations with the
different stakeholders, the following issues and
concerns were raised.

The mission presented its report to an
extraordinary session of the Authority on 2 April. The
Authority, having become convinced of the seriousness
of the matter, appointed His Excellency Mr. Alpha
Condé, President of Guinea, as mediator of the crisis,
and warned the military once more to resist any
temptation to disrupt the electoral process.
Furthermore, the Chairman convened an extraordinary
session of the ECOWAS Mediation and Security
Council on 12 April to discuss the situation, along with
the disturbing constitutional crisis and security
situation in the north of Mali.
Among the pertinent decisions taken at that
session, the ECOWAS Mediation and Security Council
called on the opposition candidates not to boycott the
run-off election, cautioned the military against
interference in the electoral process and took the
decision to request the withdrawal of MISSANG from
Bissau within two months, to be replaced by an
ECOWAS force. Unfortunately, neither the opposition
nor the Guinea-Bissau military heeded the advice from
ECOWAS. On 12 April 2012, just as the Mediation and
the Security Council meeting was coming to a close,
the Guinea-Bissau military began operations that soon
developed into a coup d’état.
The military detained key political figures,
including the Prime Minister and front-runner in the
election, Mr. Carlos Gomes Júnior, and the interim
President, Mr. Raimundo Pereira. It took over State
institutions and designated the military command as
the ruling body. The Chairman of the Mediation and
Security Council immediately condemned the coup,
while the President of the ECOWAS Commission
issued a statement on the same day, reiterating the
Council’s denunciation of the putsch and demanding an

12-30011

First, since independence, the political class and
the democratic institutions in Guinea-Bissau have
evolved under persistent political instability, to the
extent that no elected President has ever served a full
term in the country.
Second, governance institutions in Guinea-Bissau
have often been dysfunctional, leading to constant
paralysis in Government. That was particularly the case
in the run-up to the last election. Also, corruption and
drug trafficking have permeated the fabric of politics
and the military.
Third, reversing that trend requires a very
sophisticated approach that combines the fast-tracking
of the ECOWAS-developed defence and security sector
reform programme, constitutional and electoral reform,
deep economic reforms to root out corruption, and a
conscious and determined effort to root out drug
trafficking and impunity.
Fourth, based on the statement of the junta and
statements from some key interlocutors, Angola’s
military build-up in Guinea-Bissau through MISSANG
served as the immediate trigger for the coup. In the
period immediately after the 18 March election,
tensions rose exponentially between the two forces,
with the Guinea-Bissau Chief of Defence Staff
accusing MISSANG of secretly boosting its force size
and stockpiling combat weapons, which, according to
him, contravened the bilateral agreement under which
Angola deployed MISSANG. He went on to order
MISSANG to withdraw within 48 hours.
Fifth, at the meeting with the military command,
the spokesperson of the junta produced a letter
ostensibly signed by the Prime Minister under the
instructions of Angola and addressed to the SecretaryGeneral, requesting authorization for the deployment

9

S/PV.6754

of a peace enforcement mission to Guinea-Bissau by
the Community of Portuguese-speaking Countries
(CPLP) and its allies. According to the spokesperson,
the Bissau military had acted to pre-empt that
eventuality and the establishment of a counterforce in
the country. The junta was threatening a showdown
with MISSANG if the latter did not pull out within
48 hours.
Sixth, the psychosis generated by the threat of an
Angola-led intervention and the possible confrontation
between MISSANG and the Guinea-Bissau army had
led to acute fear and an exodus of the population from
the capital towards Senegal and other neighbouring
countries.
Seventh, Bissau and other cities no longer have
access to basic necessities and banking services, as
businesses have begun shutting down.
The ECOWAS mission managed to secure an
undertaking by the military command to restore
constitutional order with immediate effect. The junta
requested ECOWAS to assist in the development of the
modalities for the transition, which is currently being
handled by the mediator. Furthermore, ECOWAS
demanded the immediate release of the Prime Minister,
the interim President and other political detainees.
The situation in Guinea-Bissau is serious and
complex. It threatens to undo the progress made in the
subregion over the past few years. It also threatens
international peace and security. Now is the time to
take urgent and appropriate measures to defuse this
time bomb. Having carefully reviewed the situation,
ECOWAS intends to immediately deploy a military
contingent, under the United Nations principle of
subsidiarity.
The ECOWAS mission will ensure the protection
of institutions and eminent persons, as well as the
envisaged transition and electoral process. In the
medium term, the mission will ensure the protection of
witnesses during the investigation of acts of impunity
and the commencement of the implementation of the
defence and security sector reform programme.
The Chairman of the ECOWAS Authority will
convene an extraordinary summit a week from now, on
Thursday, 26 April, in Abidjan to further consider the
situation in Guinea-Bissau, with particular emphasis on
the restoration of constitutional order and the
deployment of ECOWAS troops. The Chairman of the

10

Authority also plans to dispatch a high-level ECOWAS
delegation to Bissau on Monday, 23 April to engage all
stakeholders in the transition process.
In accomplishing those tasks, ECOWAS shall
work in close cooperation with the African Union, the
United Nations, the CPLP and other partners, whose
support will greatly enhance efforts aimed at
re-establishing the rule of law and maintaining peace
and security in Guinea-Bissau.
ECOWAS requests the Council to support those
initiatives, which seek to contribute to international
peace and security in accordance with the relevant
provisions of the Charter of the United Nations.
The President:
Mrs. Viotti.

I

now

give

the

floor

to

Mrs. Viotti: I thank you, Mr. President, for the
invitation to brief the Security Council in my capacity
as Chair of the Guinea-Bissau configuration of the
Peacebuilding Commission. I would like to extend a
warm welcome to the Minister of Foreign Affairs and
International Cooperation of Guinea-Bissau, His
Excellency Mr. Mamadú Saliu Djaló Pires; the
Minister of Foreign Affairs of Portugal, His Excellency
Mr. Paulo Portas; and the Minister of External
Relations of Angola and Chair of the Community of
Portuguese-speaking
Countries
(CPLP),
His
Excellency Mr. Georges Rebelo Chikoti. I also
welcome Ambassador Youssoufou Bamba, Permanent
Representative of Côte d’Ivoire and Chair of the
Economic Community of West African States
(ECOWAS). And I thank the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General, Mr. Joseph Mutaboba, for his
briefing.
It is most unfortunate that, 20 days after I briefed
the Council (see S/PV.6743) on the progress that
Guinea-Bissau had been making in the implementation
of its peacebuilding priorities, I have to return here to
brief the Council on the forcible seizure of power from
the legitimate Government of Guinea-Bissau that took
place on 12 April. I will not dwell on the details of the
recent developments of the electoral process and the
coup d’état, since they were ably presented by previous
speakers.
The Guinea-Bissau configuration of the
Peacebuilding Commission has condemned in the
strongest terms the forcible seizure of power in
Guinea-Bissau and the arbitrary detentions of the

12-30011

S/PV.6754

interim President, the Prime Minister and other senior
officials. The configuration, moreover, called upon all
parties to oppose any attempt to change the
Government through unconstitutional means. We have
encouraged the Government of Guinea-Bissau and all
stakeholders to continue to work together to pursue
political dialogue so as to preserve stability in the
country and promote national reconciliation.
The solution to the current crisis requires the
immediate release of all of the authorities presently
detained by the military, the return of the armed forces
to their barracks and the resumption of the electoral
process.
We welcome the engagement of regional and
subregional organizations and key international
partners, notably the CPLP, ECOWAS and the African
Union. We must continue to support their efforts
towards the restoration of constitutional order without
delay and a lasting and peaceful solution to the current
political crisis in Guinea-Bissau.
This is not the first time that constitutional order
has broken down in Guinea-Bissau. The recent history
of the country has been, unfortunately, marked by
upheavals and crises. However, the 12 April coup
d’état is particularly regrettable because it happened at
a moment in which progress towards a more stable and
prosperous society was under way in Guinea-Bissau.
The people and the Government of Guinea-Bissau
were implementing reforms to steer the country in the
right direction. Political stability, improvement in
governance and management reforms had led to
economic recovery and the revival of trust in the
country on the part of national stakeholders and foreign
partners.
Stability had brought about important gains to
Guinea-Bissau, allowing it to move from a situation of
financial disarray into a more stable position, thanks to
greater control of public spending, increased tax
revenues and a considerable reduction of public debt.
Due to such progress, the Government of GuineaBissau had managed to establish regularity in the
payment of salaries, an element that had caused
constant dissatisfaction and instability in the past.
With respect to security sector reform, GuineaBissau had adopted the necessary legal instruments and
had made efforts to put in place a special pension fund
in order to demobilize and reintegrate part of the

12-30011

current military and police personnel into civilian life
in order to pave the way for a more professional armed
forces.
Progress had also been made in the fight against
drug trafficking. The Government of Guinea-Bissau
had adopted an operational plan to combat drug
trafficking and established a transnational crime unit
within the West Africa Coast Initiative. The immediate
return to constitutional order is crucial to allow those
processes to move forward. Grave consequences will
ensue if the current situation is not reversed. The
military coup will certainly curb confidence and donor
support, thus compromising the efforts to address
security sector reform and drug trafficking.
The international community must urgently act to
avoid a continuation of the current scenario. It is very
important that the country’s hard-won socio-economic
gains brought about by stability in the recent past be
protected and built upon in an environment of respect
for the rule of law and democracy. The Council and the
international community as a whole must act with
resolve to assist Guinea-Bissau in breaking away, once
and for all, from the cycle of violence, coups d’état,
impunity and instability that has plagued the country
for so long.
The President: I shall now give the floor to those
members of the Council who wish to make statements.
Mr. Portas (Portugal): Thank you very much,
Mr. President, for expeditiously convening this
important meeting.
(spoke in Portuguese; interpretation provided by the
delegation)
We deeply appreciate the presence of Minister
Pires in the Council as the representative of the
legitimate and democratically elected Government of
Guinea-Bissau. I also welcome the relevant statements
by Minister Chikoti, in his capacity as Chair of the
Community of Portuguese-speaking Countries (CPLP);
by Ambassador Viotti of Brazil, in her capacity as
Chair of the Guinea-Bissau configuration of the
Peacebuilding Commission; by the Permanent
Representative of Côte d’Ivoire, on behalf of the
Economic Community of West African States
(ECOWAS), and by the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for Guinea-Bissau, who is playing
an important role in that country.

11

S/PV.6754

(spoke in English)
Let us be clear. One month ago, Guinea-Bissau
was on the path to complete a full democratic
legislature for the first time in decades. In the first
round of the presidential elections, which were
internationally recognized as regular, transparent and
free, Prime Minister Carlos Gomes Júnior received
49 per cent of the vote; the second round had been
scheduled. Today he is illegally detained, as is the
interim President. The electoral process was violently
cancelled; the Government was forcefully seized.
Ministers are in hiding and their families are under
threat. The house of our colleague Mr. Djaló was
pillaged. Journalists have been detained and beaten.
Looting by some military personnel is ongoing.
Had it nor been for the clear and united message
of the international community, the interim President,
the Prime Minister and other senior officials would
probably be dead by now and there would be no hope
of restoring basic freedoms.
The international community has spoken with one
voice. The Secretary-General, the Council, the African
Union, ECOWAS, the CPLP, the International
Organization of la Francophonie, the European Union
and many others have unreservedly condemned the
illegal seizure of power in Guinea-Bissau by some
elements of its armed forces. A few hours after the
military coup, the Council clearly set out three
conditions that are non-negotiable, namely, the
immediate release of the interim President, the Prime
Minister and all senior officials detained illegally; the
full and immediate restoration of constitutional rule
and of the legitimate Government; and the completion
of the electoral process.
It cannot be business as usual in Guinea-Bissau.
The time has come to draw the line. The time has come
to say no — no to the prominence of arms over votes.
The zero-tolerance principle regarding access to power
through unconstitutional means declared by the African
Union and ECOWAS and supported by the CPLP must
be fully upheld. Otherwise, what message would we be
conveying to the people of Guinea-Bissau and to the
region?
This crisis has wider and very relevant
implications related to the serious increase in the
instability of the situation in Western Africa. The
threats, which are connected, include increased
proliferation and trafficking in arms and drugs; the

12

growing threat of the Maghrebi version of Al-Qaida;
and indications of serious internal problems in other
countries in the region. Clearly, regional peace and
stability are at stake. This is not only an internal issue
for Guinea-Bissau, this is a regional challenge to
stability. If we do not take action, this will become a
problem for international security.
What is at stake in Guinea-Bissau is a choice
between a State based on constitutional rule or a failed
State based on the power of drug trafficking. The
people of Guinea-Bissau, who voted just four weeks
ago, are not responsible for this vicious cycle of
instability, trafficking and violence. I recall that since
1998 we have had one war, four military coups and the
murder of one President and four joint chiefs of staff of
the armed forces, in addition to the assassination of
several other senior officials. That is enough. We
cannot tolerate murder and military coups as political
means for solving problems.
The responsibility for those acts belongs to
certain elements of the armed forces and a few
politicians who keep fuelling instability to achieve, by
illegal means, the political power they could not win at
the polls, as well as the economic profits that arise
from illegal trafficking, in particular of drugs.
The people of Guinea-Bissau, as any other around
the world, aspire to overcome injustice and poverty, to
live in peace, dignity and prosperity and to be ruled by
a legitimate and democratic Government.
It is up to the international community to seize
this crucial moment in the history of Guinea-Bissau as
an opportunity to put an end to the spiral of violence
and disruption of constitutional order and to move
effectively forward with the reform of the security
sector. We cannot miss this opportunity. Conceding or
compromising in this context, allowing for anything
less than the full restoration of the constitutional order
and of the legitimate authorities — obviously including
the interim President and the Prime Minister — as well
as the completion of the electoral process would send a
terrible signal and set a dangerous precedent. There are
no transitional authorities, there are democratic and
legitimate authorities.
Among the tools that the United Nations Charter
and practice offer us, we should consider two, namely,
restrictive measures and the establishment of a United
Nations-mandated stabilization mission.

12-30011

S/PV.6754

An illegal seizure of power must not go
unpunished. Therefore, those responsible for the coup
and those who politically support it should be targeted
with restrictive measures, namely, visa bans and the
freezing of assets. That notwithstanding, we will
distinguish between those who persist in wrongdoing
and those who repent.
The European Union, beyond suspending its
cooperation with Guinea-Bissau, will be ready to move
forward with sanctions on individuals who continue to
obstruct peace, security and the normal functioning of
constitutional institutions. We call on the Council to
consider similar targeted measures.
We also believe that the Council should assume
its responsibility and seriously consider the call of the
legitimate Government of Guinea-Bissau for a United
Nations-mandated multilateral stabilization mission,
including contingents from members of ECOWAS, the
CPLP and the African Union — a comprehensive and
combined effort to tackle the root problems in GuineaBissau.
Allow me to conclude my remarks in Portuguese,
as I would like my words to be clearly understood in
Bissau.
(spoke in Portuguese; interpretation provided by the
delegation)
The international community is united on the
situation in Guinea-Bissau and speaks with one voice
in vehemently condemningly the coup perpetrated by
some military personnel.
The solution for this crisis is based,
unconditionally, on the release of all the officials
illegally
detained,
the
re-establishment
of
constitutional order and the conclusion of the electoral
process, which was internationally recognized as free
and transparent. Those who persist in unconstitutional
actions and those who actively support them will be
subject to restrictive measures and should be held
accountable. They should think twice about their
actions.
The international community, and Portugal in
particular, stands side by side with the people of
Guinea-Bissau and their legitimate Government in
pursuit of a resolution to this crisis to allow GuineaBissau to finally follow the path to peace, justice and
development. As we say in Bissau, we are together.

12-30011

(spoke in English)
As we say in the United Nations, let us act together.
Mr. Menan (Togo) (spoke in French): I wish to
thank you, Mr. President, for having convened this
meeting, which, given to the wide range of eminent
persons participating in it, provides us with an
important opportunity to consider the serious situation
prevailing in Guinea-Bissau as a result of the coup
d’état of 12 April. I would therefore like to welcome
the presence in New York of the Ministers for Foreign
Affairs of Angola, Guinea-Bissau and Portugal and to
thank them, as well as the Permanent Representatives
of Brazil and Côte d’Ivoire, for their statements. I
should like also to thank the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General for Guinea-Bissau for his
briefing.
As my delegation stated before the Council on
13 April, Togo rejects the resort to force as a means of
resolving political problems, in particular as a means
of taking power. Indeed, the coup d’état in GuineaBissau, which its perpetrators consider to be a solution,
itself has the potential to undermine the order that the
coup claims to establish. It is a not only a violation of
the constitutional order and of free democratic
expression but also a source of ongoing instability.
Our disapproval of the 12 April coup d’état,
which is in line with the position of the African Union
and of the Economic Community of West African
States (ECOWAS), as well as of other international
organizations, has its basis in the problems that it is
causing the people of Guinea-Bissau and in our
justified and sincere concern for the country, whose
prospects have nonetheless been promising given the
progress accomplished in recent years in the
framework of peacebuilding and stability. That
progress was made possible by the commitment of the
political class to respect basic consensual rules so as to
move forward, as well as by the support of the
international community, through the United Nations,
ECOWAS, the West African Economic and Monetary
Union and the Community of Portuguese-speaking
Countries, as well as various bilateral partners, whose
mobilization to assist the country is clear evidence of
their interest in the well-being of the people of GuineaBissau.
There can be no denying the tremendous amount
of work done by the United Nations Integrated
Peacebuilding Office in Guinea-Bissau (UNIOGBIS) in

13

S/PV.6754

the area of peacebuilding in that country, in its role as
coordinator of partnership assistance. It also provided
support to the electoral commission so as to ensure the
smooth functioning of the electoral process, which,
unfortunately, has just been abruptly halted.
By adopting resolution 2030 (2011), on
21 December 2011, which extended the mandate of
UNIOGBIS, the Security Council sent a strong signal
to Guinea-Bissau’s citizens by supporting their efforts
and by focusing on the challenges to be dealt with. The
Council has frequently expressed its concern about the
various threats facing the normal development of the
country. It has regularly asked all political leaders to
show moderation and the army to avoid interfering in
political life. It thus rightly condemned this umpteenth
coup d’état in the country.
But over and above the general, legitimate
disapproval of the international community, the events
of 12 April bring to the fore, for all of Guinea-Bissau’s
partners, the issue of the ongoing interference of the
army in the political life of the country. That is a
serious handicap for its economic development. People
who live in constant fear of instability cannot give
expression to their creative impulses for development.
The situation in Guinea-Bissau is of concern to us
because it poses a real threat to the country’s future
that could undermine the progress made in recent years
in areas where it is crucial to pursue reform in order to
prevent a step backwards into chaos. Those reforms
pertain in particular to that of the army and security
sector, the combat against drugs and transboundary
crime, in particular through the West Africa Coast
Initiative (WACI), and the establishment by ECOWAS
and the CPLP, with the support of the United Nations,
of a pension fund for the military.
My country, which is actively participating in the
quest for a solution in the regional framework,
welcomes the ECOWAS initiative to send a
stabilization force to Guinea-Bissau. It welcomes the
junta’s openness to a swift return to constitutional
order. Nonetheless, it is a fact that the coup d’état,
which came right after the one in Mali, is yet another
event that further undermines the precarious situation
in West Africa. Even worse, the putsch only adds to the
list of ills that the region is, unfortunately, already
facing, namely, trafficking and the movement of
weapons and drugs, organized crime, the activities of
radical Islamic groups, piracy in the Gulf of Guinea,

14

the humanitarian crisis, flows of thousands of refugees
as well as secessionist inclinations.
Given that very bleak picture, the responsibility
of the Security Council is significant, because there is
a need to find the best approach to ensure that each
coup d’état in Guinea-Bissau is not the next to last. We
believe that the Security Council must maintain a firm
stance regarding the militarist excesses that
institutions, in particular in Africa, are constantly
facing. We must do all we can to ensure that the
progress towards democracy and the significant
investments made by the international community in
countries such as Guinea-Bissau bear fruit, and
contribute to preventing unnecessary suffering from
being inflicted on peaceful people as a result of coups
d’état. Only thus will the Council shoulder its
peacebuilding and conflict-prevention responsibilities
and help to promote democracy, human rights and
development.
Mr. Sangqu (South Africa): I wish to thank you,
Mr. President, for having convened this timely
meeting. Let me join others in thanking the Foreign
Ministers of Guinea-Bissau, Angola and Portugal, as
well as Special Representative of the Secretary-General
Mutaboba, for their statements and briefings on
Guinea-Bissau today. We also thank the Permanent
Representative of Côte d’Ivoire for his statement on
behalf of the Economic Community of West African
States (ECOWAS), and we appreciate the useful
statement made by the Permanent Representative of
Brazil in her capacity as Chair of the Peacebuilding
Commission country configuration on Guinea-Bissau.
I will be brief in adding our voice in stating our
position on this African issue before us today.
The military coup in Guinea-Bissau that took
place on 12 April has created a serious setback in terms
of the progress made by the legitimate Government in
establishing democracy and ensuring stability over the
past few years. That unlawful act poses a threat to
peace and security. It completely undermines
international law and the principles enshrined in the
Constitutive Act of the African Union and the African
Charter on Democracy, Elections and Governance,
which rejects any use of force or unconstitutional acts
to assume power. It is critical that all efforts to address
the situation in Guinea-Bissau be conducted in a
manner that is coordinated, integrated and harmonized.
Such efforts must ensure that the interests of the

12-30011

S/PV.6754

country and its people remain paramount. Only a return
to constitutional order and the release of
democratically elected leaders will guarantee the
respect of the will of the people of Guinea-Bissau, as
expressed in the 2008 elections. The international
community must convey a strong message that it will
not tolerate disruptive military coups with impunity. In
that regard, the collective efforts of the international
community must further encourage, not weaken, the
notable gains made by the Government of GuineaBissau in recent years in consolidating democracy and
good governance.
The African Union (AU) and the Economic
Community of West African States, joined by the
Community of Portuguese-speaking Countries (CPLP)
and the International Organization of la Francophonie,
have all suspended Guinea-Bissau’s membership in
their organizations pending the restoration of
constitutional order in the country. By its swift
decision, the AU has demonstrated clear resolve on the
part of African leaders to condemn and reject any acts
of forced or unconstitutional change of Government on
the continent. Its decision is a strong expression of its
commitment to respecting and preserving democratic
principles, human rights, the rule of law and good
governance in Africa. Furthermore, it rejects impunity,
assassinations and other subversive acts.
South Africa therefore firmly rejects any further
attempt to undermine the constitutional framework and
the rule of law in Guinea-Bissau, and underscores the
AU’s call on its international partners to force the
perpetrators of the coup d’état and their supporters to

12-30011

accept the restoration of constitutional order. In that
regard, we call for the unconditional and immediate
release of the interim President of the country and all
other detained leaders. That should be followed by the
conclusion of the process for electing a new President
of the Government of Guinea-Bissau, in accordance
with the ruling of the country’s Supreme Court.
We support the coordinated efforts of the African
Union, the Economic Community of West African
States, the CPLP and bilateral partners aimed at
restoring constitutional rule and returning peace and
stability to Guinea-Bissau. The focus should turn
firmly towards the key challenges facing the country,
including the development of good governance, the
deepening of democracy and the implementation of
security and defence sector reform, as well as
combating drug trafficking and related activities. We
encourage the United Nations not only to support such
efforts but to ensure that they are conducted in a
coordinated and coherent manner. The perpetrators of
the coup d’état, as well as their supporters, are
ultimately responsible for the well-being and security
of the political stakeholders and leaders who have been
detained, the missing and captive ministers and the
Guinean people, and must be held accountable for their
deeds.
The President: There are no more names
inscribed on the list of speakers.
I now invite members to informal consultations to
continue our discussion on the subject.
The meeting rose at 4.45 p.m.

15
