S/PV.8531

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-fourth year

8531st meeting

Tuesday, 21 May 2019, 3 p.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Djani. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Indonesia)

Members:

Belgium. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Côte d’Ivoire . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Dominican Republic. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Equatorial Guinea. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Germany . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kuwait. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Peru. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Poland . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
South Africa . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Pecsteen de Buytswerve
Mr. Yao Shaojun
Mr. Ipo
Ms. Luna
Mr. Sipaco Ribala
Mrs. Gueguen
Mr. Heusgen
Mr. Alotaibi
Mr. Meza-Cuadra
Ms. Wronecka
Mr. Safronkov
Mr. Ntsoane
Mr. Hickey
Mr. Cohen

Agenda
The situation concerning Iraq
Twenty-second report of the Secretary-General pursuant to paragraph 4 of
Security Council resolution 2107 (2013) (S/2019/352)
Report of the Secretary-General on the implementation of resolution 2421
(2018) (S/2019/365)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

19-14769 (E)
*1908261*

S/PV.8531

The situation concerning Iraq

The President: The draft resolution received 15
votes in favour. The draft resolution has been adopted
unanimously as resolution 2470 (2019).

The meeting was called to order at 3.10 p.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.

I now give the floor to Ms. Hennis-Plasschaert.

The situation concerning Iraq
Twenty-second report of the Secretary-General
pursuant to paragraph 4 of Security Council
resolution 2107 (2013) (S/2019/352)
Report of the Secretary-General on the
implementation of resolution 2421 (2018)
(S/2019/365)
The President: In accordance with rule 37 of the
Council’s provisional rules of procedure, I invite the
representative of Iraq to participate in this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite Ms. Jeanine
Hennis-Plasschaert, Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for Iraq and Head of the United
Nations Assistance Mission for Iraq, to participate in
this meeting.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

Members of the Council have before them document
S/2019/416, which contains the text of a draft resolution
submitted by the United States of America.
I wish to draw the attention of Council members
to document S/2019/352, which contains the twentysecond report of the Secretary-General pursuant to
paragraph 4 of Security Council resolution 2107 (2013),
and document S/2019/365, which contains the report
of the Secretary-General on the implementation of
resolution 2421 (2018).
The Council is ready to proceed to the vote on the
draft resolution before it.
I shall put the draft resolution to the vote now.
A vote was taken by show of hands.
In favour:
Belgium, China, Côte d’Ivoire, Dominican
Republic, Equatorial Guinea, France, Germany,
Indonesia, Kuwait, Peru, Poland, Russian
Federation, South Africa, United Kingdom of
Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United States
of America
2/20

21/05/2019

Ms. Hennis-Plasschaert: I would like to begin
by recounting my recent visit to a mass grave in the
Samawah desert alongside President Barham Salih. That
burial site is a stark reminder of Saddam Al-Hussein’s
horrific crimes against many people — his own people,
in this case the Kurdish people. It was a deeply moving
experience, underlining once again that Iraq’s violent
and lawless past still impacts its present. Yet it also
made clear how extraordinary Iraq’s transition is in this
twenty-first century: from dictatorship to democracy.
In order to truly take root democracy needs time, a
great deal of time and much hard work.
We must recognize that the ongoing political
infighting is a costly obstacle. A full year after
national elections, ministerial appointments have yet
to be made to the key posts: Interior, Defence, Justice
and Education. Political parties have not yet shown
themselves willing to compromise. However, it should
be understood that political compromise is not a sign of
weakness. In fact, it is a sign of political maturity and a
requisite for resilience.
Slowly but surely, chairs, deputies and rapporteurs
are now being selected for parliamentary committees.
That is a critical hurdle to clear for parliamentary work
to get under way. We are not there yet although it is
indeed high time, as critical laws are still pending.
Turning to the negotiations on the formation of
the Kurdish regional Government, I am pleased to
report recent important progress. After 218 days of
negotiations, an agreement on the formation of a new
Kurdistan regional Government was signed on 5 May.
Barring further problems, the new Government could
be in place in June.
It is no secret that the Iraqi authorities, institutions,
mechanisms and systems continue to struggle with
deep-rooted problems, often hampering swift and robust
responses from the Government to pressing needs, such
as reconstruction, development and security. Those
problems can be schematized as a range of individual
interests and arguments, many of which arise from
long-standing grievances and differences between
communities, political parties, the federal Government
and the Kurdistan regional Government. That all
19-14769

21/05/2019

The situation concerning Iraq

becomes entrenched in the form of concealed private
networks of power that operate independently, pursuing
their own narrow objectives and goals. To a certain
extent, that also explains why the many opportunities
arising from so many reconciliation efforts are yet to
be fully embraced.
With that in mind, it is also necessary to touch
upon the scourge of corruption, pervasive at all levels
in Iraq. Corruption takes money that should be spent
on public services, placing it instead in private pockets.
It also deters economic activity, hindering business
development that would result in much-needed job
creation. As I stated the last time I briefed the Security
Council (see S/PV.8462), I am encouraged by the
Government’s obvious engagement on this issue. Prime
Minister Adil Abd Al-Mahdi made it very clear in
saying that corruption distorts the image of the State
and its reputation, both locally and on the world stage.
That is indeed very true, as it hampers not only Iraq’s
credibility but also its viability, responsiveness and
effectiveness. Change will not happen overnight. It is
therefore important to highlight the issue of corruption
again and again. Achieving tangible results will be
crucial in so many ways. Most importantly, it will
revive public trust, which is essential for the further
development of Iraq’s democracy.
The hydrocarbon sector is the backbone of Iraq’s
economy, with vast oil potential yet to be explored.
However, in order to attain that, significant challenges
will need to be addressed. Also in that regard and
in short, the common good should trump private or
partisan interests, enabling the whole country to benefit.
Accordingly, I look forward to renewed engagement on
the critical hydrocarbon and revenue-sharing laws.
Another point is that Iraq can achieve its full
potential only with the active political, social and
economic participation of women and youth. Recently,
we witnessed, organized and participated in a variety
of women and youth events throughout the country.
While they were meaningful experiences for all those
involved, I would like to warn a little against change
as mere window dressing. At the end of the day, it is
all about translating excellent intentions into positive
action. Regrettably, Iraq is yet to appoint its first
female minister.
On a different note but of great relevance to women
and girls is the anti-domestic-violence law, which is
an issue that is both sensitive and important for Iraqis.

S/PV. 8531

I would like to commend Iraq’s leadership in taking
important steps towards the enactment of the law. The
law would fully protect the legal rights and shelter
needs of all victims of domestic violence — and by all
victims, I mean á1l victims, not only women and girls.
I sincerely hope that legislators will proceed with a
law in line with the Iraqi Constitution that prohibits all
forms of violence and abuse within the family.
On an entirely separate and encouraging note,
Baghdad is opening up. Very soon the Green Zone will
no longer exist. Prime Minister Adil Abd Al-Mahdi
has lived up to his promise from day one by removing
T-walls and returning the city to its people. However,
the security situation will continue to require close
monitoring, not only in Baghdad but throughout the
country. Attacks continue, as seen with recent blasts
and suicide bombings. It is also very relevant in this
context that the threat of the Islamic State in Iraq
and the Levant (ISIL) is still present. As a coalition
representative recently said, ISIL is resurging. They
rested, moved and are active.
In that regard, I am keenly aware of the importance
of continued, wide-based international support to
ensure that Iraq leaves its violent past behind and that
it does not slip back into the turmoil from which it so
recently emerged. In other words, a long-term approach
is critical to prevent ISIL from regaining a strong
foothold in Iraq.
Equally important is the issue of returning ISILfighters from Syria to Iraq, along with their families. The
return of thousands upon thousands of people — Iraqis
and non-Iraqis — raises not only significant security
and capacity concerns, but also urgent human rights and
humanitarian protection concerns. All that is not just
an Iraqi problem. We know that certain States prefer to
maintain a strategic distance with regard to their own
nationals. But, once again, to be clear, that is not just an
Iraqi problem. If poorly managed, the issue will impact
us all in the region and far beyond. Moreover, if we
do not manage that adequately, we risk creating a new
breeding ground for the next generation of terrorists.
Another predominant security concern is the
issue of armed actors operating outside State control,
engaged in illegal or criminal activities and exerting
economic and social influence throughout the country.
Clearly, the activities of those actors undermine State
authority. They affect vulnerable communities, they
weaken the national economy and, sadly, they also

19-147693/20

S/PV.8531

The situation concerning Iraq

prevent the peaceful return of displaced persons. In my
conversations with the Iraqi Government, I welcomed
certain actions, such as the closing down of so-called
illegal economic offices, but the road will certainly be
long. It will therefore prove crucial to hold to account
all armed actors involved in criminal enterprises or
illegal activity.
More broadly, I welcome the Government’s efforts
with regard to security sector reform. However, much
work remains to be done, and the reconfiguration
of the national security architecture is particularly
important. That notably includes the future positioning
of the popular mobilization forces and the reform of the
Peshmerga into a single, regional security force.
As we saw during last summer’s protests in the
south, Iraq’s water shortages have the potential to ignite
social unrest, which, if unchecked, can reverse any
gains made. Although this past winter saw extensive
rainfall, including widespread catastrophic flooding,
simple reliance on generous rainfall is not a solid
national water strategy. In an era of severe climate
change, it is of the utmost importance to plan carefully
for all weather extremes and, therefore, to develop a
comprehensive programme of water collection and
management, as well as to strengthen the country’s
infrastructure and better prepare for floods.
I am pleased to report that Iraq’s leadership
continues to reach out to international and regional
counterparts, positioning itself as a reliable and capable
partner. Indeed, Iraq could well be a stabilizing factor
in a very turbulent region. Instead of an arena for
conflict, Iraq could well offer a space for regional
reconciliation, preparing the groundwork for a regional
security dialogue. At the same time, we cannot ignore
the fact that Iraq faces serious challenges in preventing
its territory from becoming the theatre for different
competitions. To all those feeling challenged, placing
a further burden on Iraq is truly the last thing that
it needs.
On 29 April, the United Nations launched its
2019 humanitarian response plan in alignment with
the humanitarian plans of Iraq. The needs remain
substantial. Many displaced citizens continue to face
serious obstacles to returning to their homes. Those
include the lack of civil documentation, an unstable
security situation owing, for example, to clashes
between armed groups and checkpoint harassment,
damaged and contaminated houses, inadequate basic
4/20

21/05/2019

services and discrimination, among other factors.
In other words, obstacles are varied, complex and
interlinked, painfully resulting in stalled returns on
the ground.
In addition to our humanitarian efforts, we continue
to support post-ISIL stabilization and rehabilitation
efforts in the worst-affected areas. Our Funding Facility
for Stabilization (FFS) reached a major milestone by
rehabilitating the first 1,000 out of the 15,000 houses
in Mosul’s Old City. That builds on previous successful
housing work in Al-Anbar, where thousands upon
thousands of houses have already been rehabilitated.
In addition, FFS completed the rehabilitation of several
structures, such as Mosul University, which currently
hosts more than 20,000 students. A third major bridge
in western Al-Anbar has also been restored, allowing
more than 75,000 people to access essential services,
such as hospitals and schools.
Allow me to now turn to the issue of missing
Kuwaitis, third-country nationals and missing Kuwaiti
property, including the national archives. I would like
to thank Member States of the Tripartite Commission
for coming forward with satellite imagery that, in
combination with witness testimonies, has been vital
in identifying potential locations for missing Kuwaitis.
After years of hard work by many, and on this occasion
I would like to flag recent efforts, in particular by the
Iraqi Ministry of Defence. I sincerely hope that we will
be able to announce positive results soon. Obviously, it
is important that Iraq continue its efforts, including the
identification of the missing Kuwaiti national archives
and other property. We all recognize their importance
as an integral element of Kuwait’s national heritage.
I would like to conclude by recalling my recent visit
to Sinjar, which brings together many of the points I just
made. In Sinjar, I saw the horrific destruction — the
work of ISIL of almost five years ago. Unfortunately,
little has changed since the liberation of Sinjar. Many
people are still living in tents on the mountain to which
they fled at the onset of the terror campaign. In August,
the world will commemorate the horrific events of five
years ago. But a single administration and the provision
of security, as the very basis for the reconstruction of
Sinjar, are yet to be realized. Frankly, continued failure
to make it happen is a clear injustice. Iraqi leadership,
both in Baghdad and Erbil, must now act with urgency
and decisively.
19-14769

21/05/2019

The situation concerning Iraq

Finally, the challenges for Iraq are manifold but,
in all of those challenges, I would like to express
once again our continued and strong commitment to
assist and support wherever we can. President Barham
Salih very recently stated that the situation in Iraq
is not good. Iraqis deserve far better. However, the
situation is improving. It will take time but, with great
determination and concerted, decisive action, we will
succeed. How right he is.
The President: I thank Ms. Hennis-Plasschaert for
her briefing.
I shall now give the floor to those members of the
Council who wish to make statements.
Mr. Cohen (United States of America): I
thank Special Representative Hennis-Plasschaert
for being with us today and for her helpful and
comprehensive briefing.
Today’s unanimous adoption of resolution 2470
(2019) to renew the United Nations Assistance Mission
for Iraq (UNAMI) once again underscores the strong
and continued commitment of the international
community to support stability, prosperity and security
in Iraq. As the Government of Iraq transitions from a
period of crisis to one of sustainable development and
political stability, UNAMI will be essential to enhance
those efforts. The transition is reflected clearly in this
year’s mandate renewal.
As Iraq begins a new chapter, efforts to stabilize
areas liberated from the Islamic State in Iraq and
the Sham, address the plight of internally displaced
persons and further integrate Iraq into the surrounding
region must also be accelerated. Taken together, those
efforts will help set Iraq on a path towards stability
and prosperity. It is important, however, to note that
the complexity of the challenges that UNAMI and Iraq
will face moving forward is great. We encourage the
Government of Iraq to fill the remaining vacancies in
its Cabinet and focus on delivering basic services to
the Iraqi people. Restoring key services, health care,
education and infrastructure is an important place to
start, as is addressing corruption and strengthening
viable and responsive State institutions. Those are
key components of Iraq’s own national Government
programme. The United States also encourages the
Government of Iraq to rein in all armed groups under
effective state control.

S/PV. 8531

The Funding Facility for Stabilization of the United
Nations Development Programme (UNDP) is essential
to stabilization, recovery and reconstruction efforts.
For its part, in March the United States announced a
$100 million contribution to the Facility for stabilization
efforts in Anbar. Other members of the international
community should consider similar contributions.
The Government of Iraq should also make good on its
pledge to the programme or to projects from UNDP’s
Facility list.
This year’s mandate once again underscores the
importance of supporting UNAMI’s efforts to help meet
the needs of all Iraqis, including women, children and
members of religious and ethnic minority groups. This
is an area of particular interest to the United States.
We continue to encourage UNAMI to work closely with
the Government of Iraq to address the unique needs of
these groups and individuals as part and parcel of the
broader national and community-level dialogue needed
in Iraq. We also encourage the Government of Iraq to
ensure the successful reintegration of the children of
alleged members of ISIS and the children of former
captives. Many of those children are indeed victims,
and we call on Iraq to offer them the same benefits
afforded to refugees and IDPs.
Today’s mandate renewal is another reminder of
the constructive role that the United Nations can play
around the world and especially in the Middle East. We
look forward to Iraq’s continuing to lead the way in
playing a positive role in its region, and we thank the
Special Representative and the entire UNAMI team for
their continued excellent work.
Mr. Safronkov (Russian Federation) (spoke
in Russian): We would like to thank Ms. HennisPlasschaert, the Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral, for her detailed and objective briefing. The
United Nations Assistance Mission for Iraq (UNAMI),
which she heads, is playing an important role in assisting
the Iraqi authorities in dealing with a range of issues
of national reconciliation and rebuilding the economy.
Based on that, we supported resolution 2470 (2019),
which extends UNAMI’s mandate for another year.
The stability of Iraq has historically been very
important to the entire Middle East, and strengthening it
is in the interests of the entire international community.
In that connection, we would like to note in particular
that attempts to draw the country into an artificially
stoked confrontation with regard to the Islamic Republic

19-147695/20

S/PV.8531

The situation concerning Iraq

of Iran are totally counterproductive, unacceptable and
can only have a negative impact on the situation within
Iraq and the region as a whole.
The escalation of the situation in the Persian Gulf
should be halted immediately, while confrontation
should give way to dialogue and negotiations aimed
at overcoming the existing concerns. Iraq has the
right to develop and build normal relations with all its
neighbours. We welcome Baghdad’s consistent policy
in maintaining good-neighbourly relations with all
its regional partners, including Iran, Syria and Saudi
Arabia, of course. The recent inter-parliamentary
conference held in Baghdad, which brought together
representatives of Saudi Arabia, Iran, Turkey, Jordan,
Kuwait and Syria, was very significant in that regard.
We see it as an excellent beginning that should be
consistently developed further. We particularly want
to point to the attitude and activity of the Iraqis and
Kuwaitis in the work of restoring historical justice,
particularly in dealing with the consequences of
the first Gulf War as soon as possible. We welcome
the progress in the work of closing the Iraq-Kuwait
humanitarian dossier with regard to the investigation
of the fate of missing Kuwaitis and Kuwaiti property. It
gives us hope that the parties are working together on
the issue as positively as possible. We are aware that the
Government of Iraq has a great deal to do to consolidate
positive momentum in this area.
The international community should work tirelessly
to support the Iraqi leadership’s efforts to restore the
economy and develop the social and economic front
generally. In that connection, we note the conference
held under Kuwait’s auspices in February 2018 on the
reconstruction of Iraq. What is essential is consistent,
focused work to overcome the differences among Iraq’s
various ethnic and religious components and strengthen
the unity of the Iraqi people and the integrity of the
State. We welcome the recent progress in restoring a
mutual understanding between Baghdad and Erbil,
which should be consolidated and developed.
We cannot allow yet another experiment, wherever
it may originate, to undermine the significant progress
that has been made, at considerable sacrifice, on the
counter-terrorism front, especially since security
challenges still remain. We want to see the threat from
the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant and terrorism
generally eliminated as soon as possible. We believe
firmly that we can effectively combat that challenge
only by coordinating our counter-terrorism efforts as
6/20

21/05/2019

broadly as possible. We believe it is essential to ensure
that all involved in fighting terrorism in Iraq respect
the sovereignty of the Iraqi State and coordinate their
efforts with the authorities in Baghdad. Action should
correspond to the stated aims of combating terrorism
and helping the Government of Iraq to stabilize the
situation. Russia will continue to give both political and
practical support to the efforts of the Iraqi leadership on
the security front and in the long-term normalization of
the situation in the country. Iraq and Russia have a long
tradition of military and technical cooperation aimed
at improving Iraq’s defence capability and general
potential, including its ability to counter terrorism. The
Baghdad information centre is doing important work
in combating terrorism and fostering regional security
with the participation of Russia, Iraq, Iran and Syria.
We are expanding our mutually beneficial trade and
economic ties, including in the areas of fuel and energy
and humanitarian assistance. The most recent meeting
of the Russian-Iraqi intergovernmental commission on
trade, economic, scientific and technical cooperation
was held in Baghdad at the end of April, and we will
continue to develop that cooperation going forward.
The latest contacts between Russia and Iraqi officials
at senior and top levels in Moscow, Baghdad and
other platforms have affirmed the similarity of our
Governments’ positions on many global and regional
issues. Above all, we share the view that it is essential to
resolve all crisis situations through dialogue, collective
efforts and a policy of good-neighbourly relations,
which Iraq has always maintained. We are open to
cooperation on a similar basis with all interested
regional and international partners. Our joint efforts
would be significantly furthered by progress on building
a Middle East architecture for security and cooperation.
In our view the Russian initiative in that regard on the
Persian Gulf has become even more relevant. We want
to remind the Council once again that the SecretaryGeneral has a mandate to work with regional parties
to develop confidence-building and security measures
in the region in accordance with resolution 598 (1987).
It is essential that we finally implement that mandate.
In conclusion, we would like to commend the
cooperation of the United Nations Assistance Mission
for Iraq with the counbtry’s authorities. I would like to
assure Ms. Hennis-Plasschaert that she can continue to
count on our support.
Mrs. Gueguen (France) (spoke in French): France
welcomes the unanimous renewal of the mandate of the
19-14769

21/05/2019

The situation concerning Iraq

United Nations Assistance Mission for Iraq (UNAMI)
for one year through resolution 2470 (2019). I would
like to assure Special Representative Jeanine HennisPlasschaert our full support and thank her for her very
informative briefing.
I would like to focus on three points: first, the
importance of building on the progress made by Iraq
in recent months; secondly, the many challenges
the country continues to face, which should not be
underestimated; and, lastly, the importance of the
ongoing and united support of international community.
Iraq has now entered a new phase of stabilization,
which the Council must encourage in order to enable it
to build on those gains. I would like to commend the
progress made by Iraqi authorities more than a year
after the announcement of the military victory against
Da’esh. The elections have deepened the democratic
process and ushered a new Government into power.
That Government has developed an ambitious work
programme to meet the needs of the Iraqi population,
in particular as it pertains to public services and the
fight against corruption. The Government is also
focused on improving Baghdad’s relations with the
Kurdistan Regional Government. We again call for
the continuation of dialogue within the framework of
a united, federal and democratic Iraq. That positive
momentum must be maintained. That is why we hope
that an agreement can be quickly reached regarding the
ministerial portfolios that remain vacant. Finalizing
the Government is essential if it is to be able to fully
meet the high expectations of its population in the postDa’esh period. In view of the many challenges faced by
Iraq, we believe that three priorities are essential.
The first priority is the fight against the terrorist
threat, as the battle is not yet over despite the end of
the so-called Da’esh caliphate. The continuing terrorist
threat in Iraq and on the Syrian border should encourage
us to be extremely vigilant.
The second priority is the humanitarian response,
stabilization and reconstruction of the country,
in particular in the areas regained from Da’esh.
Stabilization and reconciliation efforts are essential to
ensuring a lasting victory against the terrorist group
and to promoting reconciliation among the various
components of the Iraqi population. I welcome the fact
that that point is underscored in resolution 2470 (2019),
which we just adopted, in particular at the request of the
Iraqi authorities. Special attention should be paid to the

S/PV. 8531

plight of children — an issue on which an action plan
between the United Nations and the Iraqi Government
is being finalized. Equal importance must also be given
to the meaningful participation at all levels of women
and persons belonging to minority groups. The return
of internally displaced persons, the continuation of the
socioeconomic reforms announced by the Government
and the fight against impunity, as well as holding the
perpetrators of sexual violence to account, are also
important areas on which progress is needed in order to
promote reconciliation.
Lastly, the third priority concerns the regional
agenda, which is essential to Iraq’s stability. Recent
developments in the region are of particular concern.
France will continue to monitor developments closely
and call for de-escalation. We hope that a regional
dialogue will be established to address all of the many
legitimate concerns in a peaceful manner. In that
regard, I, too, welcome the balanced regional diplomacy
by Iraqi authorities and their renewed commitment
to dialogue.
To meet those challenges, the mobilization of the
international community in support of Iraq is more
necessary than ever. UNAMI’s work in support of the
Iraqi authorities at this critical juncture is essential.
The Special Representative has our full support in
the implementation of the three priorities set. We also
support her ongoing work on the people and property
reporting missing.
France will continue to give its full support to the
Iraqi authorities, as President Macron reminded Prime
Minister Adil Abd Al-Mahdi in Paris at the beginning
of the month. France will continue its support in the
area of security to combat the common threat posed
by Da’esh. We will also continue to provide support
in areas related to humanitarian, stabilization and
reconstruction efforts, as shown by our commitment to
the rehabilitation of Mosul. We will continue to support
not only the reconstruction of Iraq — the purpose of the
€1 billion reconstruction loan announced by the Minister
for Foreign Affairs in February in Baghdad — but also
the strengthening of its State institutions. We also call
on the Iraqi authorities and all our partners to fully
implement the commitments they made at the Kuwait
International Conference for the Reconstruction of
Iraq, held in February 2018.
Lastly, in keeping with a principle that can be found
in all of our support activities, France will continue to

19-147697/20

S/PV.8531

The situation concerning Iraq

work towards the inclusive and lasting reconciliation
of all Iraqis. As such, we will be organizing another
conference in the fall as a follow-up to the Paris Action
Plan on the Victims of Ethnic and Religious Violence in
the Middle East, which was launched in 2015.
Mr. Heusgen (Germany): First of all, I would like
to welcome and thank Ms. Hennis-Plasschaert, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for Iraq, for her
briefing. I would also like to thank her for her work and
that of her team. From her statement today, it was clear
to everyone that she is dedicated to the subject. We wish
her good luck. We are very happy that the extension of
the mandate of the United Nations Assistance Mission
for Iraq (UNAMI) was unanimous. It shows that the
Security Council is united in its support for the Special
Representative and her work.
Germany continues to be a partner of Iraq on its very
difficult path forward. I would also like to underline the
progress that has been achieved. Germany has been a
partner from the very beginning. Since 2014, we have
spent approximately €1.7 billion on Iraq’s stabilization
and reconstruction. We will continue to be a partner
in future.
With regard to the work of the Government, which
is difficult enough, I would like to underline that, first
and foremost, it is important that all of the remaining
posts be filled. With respect to the priorities, I would
like to echo the sentiments made by our American
and French colleagues concerning the fight against
corruption. That is key to ensuring that authorities
gain the trust and confidence of the people. In the same
vein, that also holds true for accountability for those
who have committed crimes against humanity and
other crimes, as that is very important for post-conflict
reconciliation. Germany fully supports the United
Nations Investigative Team to Promote Accountability
for Crimes Committed bey Da’esh/ISIL and its Special
Adviser, Karim Khan. In the various court cases and
proceedings, it is important that international law be
respected and standards met, as that is crucial in the
fight against impunity. It is also important that no new
crimes be committed in the fight against impunity.
Let me turn now to the positive developments.
After the tension we all witnessed between Baghdad
and Erbil, it is very good that the situation is now on
the right track. Some issues were resolved. The internal
customs checkpoints have been removed. The salary
issue has been resolved. We therefore hope that relations
8/20

21/05/2019

between Baghdad and Erbil are being normalized and
that sustainable solutions can be found for outstanding
issues. I would also like to praise UNAMI’s contribution
to Iraqi efforts to mitigate tensions in Kirkuk.
Iraq-Kuwait relations were also mentioned. There
again, it is very good that the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General follows and supports the
efforts undertaken between the Kuwaiti and Iraqi
Governments to pursue the process of reconciliation.
The tripartite mechanism’s activities are very welcome.
The return of all Kuwaiti and third-country nationals,
human remains and Kuwaiti property remain important
so that reconciliation can be completed.
With regard to the issue of women and peace
and security, we very much welcome the Special
Representative’s efforts to promote inclusiveness and the
participation of women at all levels of decision-making.
Her cooperation with the Women’s Advisory Group on
Reconciliation and Politics in Iraq is very important
in developing priorities for their work. We constantly
reiterate the importance of women being involved in
decision-making. I would like to commend Iraq on its
national action plan on women and peace and security.
It is the first country in the region to adopt such a plan.
I recall the Arria Formula meeting we held here four
months ago, together with Peru and the United Kingdom.
One can see that Iraq is a well-recognized example in
the region and beyond. The country is now working on
its second national action plan, and we welcome that.
We hope that the second national action plan will enjoy
the support of the new Government and that the means
to ensure that the objectives set out in the plan can be
achieved on the ground will be supplied. That requires
an adequate budget. Germany again stands ready to
support Iraq in the implementation of the plan.
We also encourage Iraq to continue its work on
accountability regarding sexual violence in conflict
and to adopt a survivor-centred approach in that regard.
In resolution 2467 (2019), the Security Council spelled
out in detail possible measures concerning how to
strengthen legislation, enhance investigations and
prosecute sexual violence in conflict. We encourage
Iraqi efforts to reform the justice sector, using the
examples provided in resolution 2467 (2019). We
would also like to support the remarks made by the
representative of the United States with regard to
children born of sexual violence, and the importance of
the work that has to be done in that regard.
19-14769

21/05/2019

The situation concerning Iraq

My last point concerns climate insecurity. Iraq is
one of the countries in the Middle East that is most
severely affected by severe climate change-related
security risks, such as prolonged heatwaves, increased
rainfall variability and prolonged periods of drought.
On 11 July 2018, Mr. Hassan Janabi, Minister for
Water Resources of the Republic of Iraq, discussed in
the Security Council (see S/PV.8307) the significant
negative impact of climate change in terms of
compounding the country’s security challenges. He
highlighted in particular the climate-intensified risks
associated with the absence of regional and international
frameworks for water sharing, which makes Iraq’s
security challenges even worse. Therefore, we would
welcome UNAMI’s support for a regional dialogue
and approach — not only on energy, the environment,
water and refugees but also on the adverse effects of
climate change and ecological changes on the stability
of the region. We emphasize the need for adequate
risk-assessment and risk-management strategies by the
Governments of the region and by the United Nations in
relation to such adverse effects.
Mr. Ipo (Côte d’Ivoire) (spoke in French): My
delegation commends Ms. Jeanine Hennis-Plasschaert,
Special Representative of the Secretary-General for
Iraq and Head of the United Nations Assistance Mission
for Iraq (UNAMI), on her comprehensive briefing.

S/PV. 8531

formation of the Government be resolved as soon as
possible. The Security Council must send a strong
message to the Iraqi parties to that effect, so that they
commit to agreements to permanently fill the remaining
ministerial posts. A fully functioning Government
will no doubt be one more step in the process of
strengthening the national institutional framework and
will accelerate the implementation of the governmental
programme for the period 2018–2022, which is aimed at
improving basic services and promoting reconstruction
and economic development throughout the country.
Côte d’Ivoire fervently hopes that the commendable
efforts of the international community will help
restore the social fabric and strengthen Iraq’s security
institutions. On the other hand, the progress made in the
normalization of the political situation must continue
as outstanding issues in the relations between Baghdad
and Erbil are resolved. They require bold compromises
from both parties, including the promulgation of a
national hydrocarbon law, the implementation of the
relevant provisions of the 2005 Iraqi Constitution and
the adoption of a law on revenue sharing. Côte d’Ivoire
encourages the federal Government and the Kurdistan
Regional Government to respect their respective
commitments following the adoption of the 2019 federal
budget law.

Côte d’Ivoire welcomes in particular the gradual
improvement in the security situation in Iraq and the
military defeat of the Islamic State in Iraq and the
Levant (ISIL), thanks to the full backing of the Council.
My country very much hopes that this unified dynamic
will continue, with a view to determining appropriate
collective responses to the remaining challenges to
peace and security in Iraq.

On the humanitarian front, Côte d’Ivoire believes
that special attention must be paid to the situation of the
1.75 million persons who have been displaced, almost
500,000 of whom live in camps and face difficulties
related to access to livelihoods, social protection
programmes and humanitarian assistance. Addressing
the health and education needs of the most vulnerable
segments of society, including women and children,
should provide further impetus for the voluntary, safe
and dignified return of displaced persons. In that regard,
Côte d’Ivoire welcomes the continued strengthening of
the strategic partnership between the Government and
international partners, including the United Nations,
the World Bank and the European Union, through the
Executive Committee for Recovery, Reconstruction
and Development.

To bear fruit, the efforts of the international
community must resonate with the willingness and
commitment of the Iraqi authorities to address, as
soon as possible, persistent political, security and
humanitarian challenges, with a view to strengthening
the legitimacy and the effectiveness of State action.
In that respect it is important that the question of the

Echoing presidential statement S/PRST/2019/1,
adopted on 19 February, my country encourages
cooperation between the Iraqi and Kuwaiti authorities
in order to diligently and definitively provide an answer
to the question of missing Kuwaiti nationals and seized
property, including the Kuwaiti national archives.
Côte d’Ivoire remains convinced that a successful

Côte d’Ivoire welcomes the renewal of the mandate
of the United Nations Mission in Iraq, which once again
illustrates the convergence of views of the members of
the Security Council and their continued support for
the efforts to restore peace, security and stability in that
country since the adoption of resolution 1770 (2007).

19-147699/20

S/PV.8531

The situation concerning Iraq

conclusion of this dispute will strengthen trust between
the two parties.
Regarding the massive human rights violations
committed by the Islamic State between 2014 and 2017,
including against the Yazidi ethnic minority of Sinjar,
Côte d’Ivoire, which is committed to the principle of
accountability, believes that those offences against
human dignity cannot go unpunished. I therefore
express the full support of Côte d’Ivoire for the United
Nations Investigative Team to Promote Accountability
for Crimes Committed by Da’esh/Islamic State in Iraq
and the Levant, which collects, stores and preserves
evidence of ISIL’s crimes in Iraq. Côte d’Ivoire
encourages the Iraqi authorities to cooperate with the
Team to ensure that it carries out its tasks successfully.
Mr. Alotaibi (Kuwait) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, I express my sincere thanks and gratitude to
Ms. Jeanine Hennis-Plasschaert for her informative and
comprehensive briefing at the beginning of this meeting.
We welcome the adoption of resolution 2470 (2019),
on the renewal of the mandate of the United Nations
Assistance Mission for Iraq (UNAMI), based on the
request and desire of Iraq. It would be remiss of me
not to commend UNAMI and its efforts throughout
Iraq. The Mission is providing advice in support of
national efforts led by the Iraqi Government to build
a promising future for Iraq. That includes creating
the necessary conditions for achieving security and
stability and responding to the humanitarian needs
of the brotherly Iraqi people, in addition to creating
the necessary foundation for recovery and attaining
sustainable development and reconstruction.
I stress that the State of Kuwait will continue its
full support to, and cooperation with, UNAMI and
the country team in order to carry out their tasks to
the fullest. We believe that it is high time for Iraq to
recover after the painful events it experienced during
its fight against the terrorist group Da’esh. We reaffirm
our solidarity with the leadership, the Government and
the people of Iraq in their fight against that scourge. We
underscore the importance of consolidating national
unity and maintaining the independence, sovereignty
and territorial integrity of Iraq.
We call upon all Member States that participated
in the Kuwait International Conference for the
Reconstruction of Iraq to fulfil their commitments
undertaken during the Conference, especially those
pertaining to the reconstruction of the regions that
10/20

21/05/2019

were occupied by Da’esh. We look forward to the
establishment of a follow-up mechanism, in cooperation
and coordination with the Iraqi Government, to ensure
the fulfilment of those commitments in order to
alleviate its burden of fighting Da’esh and enable Iraq
to realize its vision for the future towards building a
new and unified Iraq.
Concerning
the
outstanding
international
commitments and the remaining humanitarian issues
related to the missing Kuwaiti and third-country
nationals and Kuwaiti property, including the national
archives, we share the regret expressed by the SecretaryGeneral in his latest report (S/2019/352) that 369 cases
of missing Kuwaiti and third-country nationals remain
unresolved and that no human remains have been
exhumed since 2004. We call upon Iraq to continue its
efforts in that regard so as to achieve tangible results
on the ground. We hope that Iraq will continue its
constructive cooperation within the framework of the
Tripartite Commission and its technical committee,
under the able leadership of the International Committee
of the Red Cross, in order to resolve this humanitarian
issue as required.
We commend the commitment of Security
Council members to this issue, as they have kept this
humanitarian issue on the agenda of the Council for
many years. Council members are also following up
on the implementation of the various commitments set
in the relevant Security Council resolutions, especially
those main commitments that remain outstanding.
We stress once again that the State of Kuwait will
spare no effort in working to determine the fate of
the missing Kuwaiti and third-country nationals. We
commend the commitment of the brotherly Republic of
Iraq to fulfilling its international obligations towards
the State of Kuwait. We are fully willing to provide
assistance to accelerate the implementation of the
obligations set out in the relevant Security Council
resolutions. At the same time, we call upon the UNAMI
to continue carrying out its mandate concerning
missing persons and the return of property, including
the national archives, in keeping with resolution 2107
(2013). The Kuwaiti property and national archives
constitute a historical heritage for the State and the
people of Kuwait. It is unfortunate that we have not
received any information on the whereabouts of the
national archives since the liberation of Kuwait in 1991.
19-14769

21/05/2019

The situation concerning Iraq

In conclusion, both brotherly countries are keen
to promote and develop their relations at all levels and
in all domains. Against that backdrop, Kuwait hosted
members of the Iraqi Government for two days during
the seventh meeting of the Joint Kuwaiti-Iraqi highlevel committee. We reached many understandings and
agreements on all issues of common interest, thereby
overcoming the circumstances that had prevented us in
the past from achieving integration and convergence as
two neighbourly countries and brotherly peoples that
have historical relations based on good-neighbourliness.
Mr. Ntsoane (South Africa): We thank the Special
Representative and Head of the United Nations Assistance
Mission for Iraq (UNAMI), Ms. Jeanine HennisPlasschaert, for her briefing. South Africa supports the
mandate renewal of UNAMI in its current format, as it
promotes the strengthening of the Government of Iraq
and its subsequent electoral processes.
South Africa further calls for an inclusive
Government that will bring together all of the diverse
aspects of Iraqi society into governance structures.
National reconciliation and unity in Iraq are vital in
order to avert future challenges stemming from the
fracturing of Government policies and actions. Peace
and security are fundamental for Iraq to develop its
infrastructure, grow its economy and provide basic
services to all of its citizens. In this regard, South
Africa supports the full consolidation of control of the
Iraqi army over its territories, and continued support
for the efforts of the Government to eradicate the threat
posed by Da’esh.
South Africa would like to suggest the use
of the Peacebuilding Commission to support the
inclusive efforts of the Government, especially in
institution-building and post-conflict and reconstruction
development in Iraq. Alongside the report on missing
Kuwaiti nationals (S/2019/352), South Africa would
like to advocate for assistance and information on those
of its citizens who went missing after 2003.
We also welcome the increased involvement of
regional organizations in the political process and
reaffirm their role in assisting the Government of
Iraq in the reconstruction of the country. We further
welcome the renewed cooperation and talks between
the central Government of Iraq and the Kurdistan
regional government and encourage both parties to
continue to seek consensus on areas of concern. We also
share the views of regional actors that the formation

S/PV. 8531

of a Government in Iraq is an important step towards
building a stronger and more balanced relationship
among the countries in the Middle East region. In this
regard, we welcome the summit recently held by Iraq,
which brought together the countries of the region as
part of broader efforts by Iraq in spearheading regional
integration with its neighbours.
In conclusion, South African reiterates its support
for the sovereignty and territorial integrity of Iraq, in line
with the principles of the United Nations Charter, and
will continue to support UNAMI in the implementation
of its mandate. Furthermore, we continue to support
the work of the United Nations Investigative Team
to Promote Accountability for Crimes Committed by
Da’esh/Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant as part of
UNAMI’s mandate, and we emphasize the importance
of the independence and impartiality of the mechanism,
in accordance with the principles of the Charter, United
Nations policies and best practices.
Mr. Sipaco Ribala (Equatorial Guinea) (spoke
in Spanish): My delegation wishes at the outset to
thank Ms. Jeanine Hennis-Plasschaert, the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General and Head of the
United Nations Assistance Mission for Iraq (UNAMI),
for her very detailed, clear and comprehensive report.
At our most recent meeting, held in February (see
S/PV.8463), on the situation in Iraq, we expressed our
warm congratulations to the Iraqi people, Government
and political leaders, who, despite the setbacks, were
able to successfully navigate the major political events
of 2018, which led to the creation of a new Government,
a process that is about to be completed.
We believe that this is the right direction to take
and that the Iraqis should follow up as an important step
forward towards full democracy, political stability and
the creation of a sustainable and safe environment. We
welcome the role of UNAMI throughout this process,
as reflected in the continuing support it is providing
to the local authorities in the various aspects of the
process of the reconstruction of the Iraqi State.
However, in order to be more effective, before
anything else the process of forming the Government
must be finalized. To that end, all stakeholders must
overcome their internal differences and fill the vacant
Government department posts as quickly as possible.
Here we hope that the Government will consider
appointing women and minorities, who can also play an
important role throughout this process.

19-1476911/20

S/PV.8531

The situation concerning Iraq

We are also concerned that the delay in completing
the formation of the Government could lead to neglecting
the regular implementation of the governmental
programme for 2018-2022, whose goal is to guide the
Government’s activities in response to generalized
public concern regarding poor living conditions, the
lack of basic services, unemployment and requirements
for reconstruction.
We welcomed the announcement in March by
Prime Minister Adil Abd Al-Mahdi regarding his
Government’s development of a comprehensive national
anti-corruption strategy. We hope that the discussions
in the Supreme Council for Combating Corruption on
the challenges and priority areas for achieving greater
transparency will produce results that can in practice
be a true success and will gain public trust.
As brothers, politicians in Baghdad and Erbil
must recognize and accept that dialogue is the normal
channel for dealing with matters that relate to them, and
that the commitments between them must be fulfilled
voluntarily in order to promote trust. In that regard, we
hope that the adoption of the 2019 federal budget law
will not be problematic for their relations.
We welcome the initiative of the current Iraqi
Government to strengthen relations with countries in
its region for the sake of mutual political, economic and
security benefits, which would help to promote not only
the positioning of Iraq but also that of the other States. In
that regard, we encourage all countries in the region to
promote the development of good-neighbourly relations
based on the fundamental principles of respect for the
sovereign equality and territorial integrity of States.
The Government of Iraq now faces the problem
of taking in the large number of returning fighters
from the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant and their
families, including women and children. They all have
different needs to be met. Obviously, the international
community must support the Government in that
arduous task. However, Member States must take
responsibility for their own nationals and attempt to
deal with them according to the law, such as through
prosecution, rehabilitation or reintegration.
Finally, my delegation would like to encourage
the Iraqi Government to strengthen cooperation with
Kuwait and other States on the issue of missing Kuwaiti
citizens and third-country nationals and the return of
Kuwaiti property, including the national archives.
12/20

21/05/2019

Ms. Luna (Dominican Republic) (spoke in Spanish):
We would like to thank Ms. Hennis-Plasschaert for
her valuable briefing and the work she has been doing
since her appointment, in December, as Head of the
United Nations Assistance Mission for Iraq (UNAMI).
We also thank the Permanent Mission of the United
States for drafting and facilitating the recently adopted
resolution 2470 (2019), on the renewal of UNAMI’s
mandate. We strongly support UNAMI’s work to help
Iraq achieve stability, development, peace and security
in a sustainable manner.
First, we would like to commend the Iraqi authorities
for last year’s conduct of a democratic, transparent
and peaceful electoral process, which included the
participation of various sectors of the country, followed
by a smooth transfer of power.
With regard to the political aspect, we regret that
no agreement has been reached in Parliament on the
election of the persons who would occupy leading
ministry posts that remain vacant, which has delayed
the full formation of the Cabinet and, in turn, the
implementation of the Government programme.
We appeal to political actors to reach the required
consensus and take a decision with a view to setting up
a Government with efficient institutions, and for those
institutions to seek to ensure the security, prosperity
and progress of their people.
We call for that political will to be extended, in
turn, to the establishment of the Kurdistan Regional
Government and to the implementation of the Iraqi
reconstruction plan drawn up at the International
Conference on the Reconstruction of Iraq, held
in Kuwait.
Among the governmental measures taken by
the Basra Provincial Council, we can highlight the
implementation of various programmes on water
and electricity services in order to address the water
shortage that is negatively impacting the health of the
population and the economy.
We hope that the Government will continue
to develop inclusive policies where women have a
significant role in decision-making in various aspects
of society, including the management of public
institutions. In that regard, we welcome the fact that
four women were elected as chairpersons and four
as deputies of committees of the Kurdistan Regional
Parliament. Similarly, Iraq has adopted the first action
plan on women and peace and security in the Middle
19-14769

21/05/2019

The situation concerning Iraq

East, being the first country of the region to submit
its report on the implementation of resolution 1325
(2000) on the participation of women and the inclusion
of a gender perspective in peace negotiations, conflict
prevention, peacekeeping operations and governance.
We also call for concrete action to ensure
accountability and end impunity for grave human rights
violations, such as exploitation and sexual violations,
particularly those perpetrated against women and
children, including those affiliated with the Islamic
State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL). In addition, we call
for the development and adoption of a plan of action with
the United Nations to end and prevent the recruitment
and use of children by the popular mobilization forces.
We also condemn the use of torture and coerced
confessions of children and call for the investigation
and prosecution of those responsible of such acts.
With regard to security, we highlight the successful
efforts of the Iraqi Government and allied countries
in combating terrorism and defeating ISIL. However,
we note with concern that terrorism continues to pose
a latent threat to the peace and security of citizens
in various parts of the country. That is why security
agencies must revitalize their current counter-terrorism
mechanisms and strengthen border security measures.
To that end, Iraq requires regional and international
support and solidarity, as well as continued assistance
from UNAMI in the areas of logistics and capacitybuilding. We cannot allow violent insurgency by any
group, or the unspeakable acts committed by ISIL
against the Iraqi people to be repeated.
On another note, with regard to the issue of
unfinished business with Kuwait, we welcome the
activities and meetings held with the authorities of
the respective nations, as well as with representatives
of UNAMI, to discuss ways forward concerning the
search for prisoners and missing persons reported by
Kuwait, and the return to Kuwait of human remains,
assets and the national archives. We also note with
satisfaction that the Iraqi Government returned to the
Kuwaiti authorities, in accordance with resolution
2107 (2013), numerous objects of value, including
thousands of books from the National Library of the
State of Kuwait. That step demonstrates the willingness
of the Iraqi Government to strengthen relations with a
neighbouring country and comply with the provisions
of the tripartite agreement on resolving outstanding
issues that date back 28 years.

S/PV. 8531

In reviewing the reports on the humanitarian
situation in Iraq in the current context, we underscore the
importance of continuing to meet the multiple needs of
the millions of Iraqis who remain displaced and provide
them with the conditions to gradually rebuild their
lives in a voluntary, dignified and safe manner. In that
connection, we stress the need to bolster the protection
mechanisms for those populations, in particular women
and children, who continue to be exposed to great risks.
We are concerned about the impact of the conflict on the
entrenchment of poverty and on national infrastructure,
which poses great challenges to achieving sustainable
development in the country.
Finally, we would like to express our solidarity
with the Iraqi people and support them in their efforts
to resume the course of their history towards stability,
peace and prosperity. About 4.1 million people have
returned to their homes following the end of the
conflict, with the desire and determination to rebuild
their communities. That is testament to the admirable
level of resilience they possess and their firm resolve to
rebuild the country and live in dignity.
Mr. Hickey (United Kingdom): I would like to begin
by thanking Special Representative Hennis-Plasschaert
for her very thoughtful and comprehensive briefing. I
think today’s unanimous adoption of resolution 2470
(2019), which renews the mandate of the United Nations
Assistance Mission for Iraq (UNAMI), shows the
strong support of the Security Council for her work and
that of her Mission.
I think it is significant that this is our first Security
Council meeting on Iraq since the liberation of the last
of the Da’esh-held territory in the region. While it is
only natural for us at the Security Council to tend at
times to focus on the risks and the threats, I think that it
is very important that we also reflect on the significant
progress that has been made in Iraq to date, and also
that we thank the Iraqi Government, the Iraqi security
forces and the Iraqi people for the immense sacrifices
that they have made in defeating Da’esh.
While a territorial defeat is a very important
milestone, the path to reconciliation and stabilization
will be long and complex. Erasing the ideology of Da’esh
will take time and require our sustained and collective
efforts. In that regard, we recognize the important
role that UNAMI continues to play in supporting the
Government of Iraq and its post-conflict recovery and
stabilization efforts. Looking ahead, the immediate

19-1476913/20

S/PV.8531

The situation concerning Iraq

focus must be on ensuring that the conditions that first
gave rise to Da’esh do not re-emerge. In the near term,
we believe that means focusing on three areas, namely,
reconstruction, reconciliation and representation.
First, reconstruction and the provision of basic
services are clearly essential for Iraq’s long-term
stability. We all heard the staggering figures mentioned
today by the representative of Côte d’Ivoire, with over
1.75 million Iraqis remaining displaced, unable or
unwilling to return to their homes. The Government
of Iraq, the United Nations and the international
community should continue to work urgently to
address that situation, including by recognizing and
tackling underlying concerns and through the full
implementation of the pledges made at the Kuwait
International Conference for the Reconstruction of
Iraq, referred to earlier by the Russian Ambassador.
Ensuring that all Iraqi citizens are able to access
civil documentation must also be a priority, especially
for internally displaced children who face disruption to
their education. Underpinning all of this is the need for
strong State institutions and inclusive and representative
Government. In that regard, we support Prime Minister
Adil Abd Al-Mahdi’s efforts to reach agreement in the
Council of Representatives to fill the remaining four
Cabinet positions and ensure the broadest possible
representation of women and minorities in all levels
of Government.
Secondly, as Iraq continues to rebuild following
years of conflict, reconciliation at all levels of society
must be front and centre — a point raised by the French
Ambassador. In that regard, we welcome UNAMI’s
continued engagement with the Government of Iraq as
it advances an inclusive political dialogue. We further
welcome the important role that the United Nations
plays in supporting an effective and accountable Iraqi
security sector, one that is able to effectively counter
the ongoing threat from Da’esh and provide security for
all Iraqis.
Accountability is important too, as the representative
of Germany highlighted, and we thank the Government
of Iraq and the United Nations Assistance Mission for
their ongoing support to the United Nations Investigative
Team to Promote Accountability for Crimes Committed
by Da’esh, as it continues to carry out its vital work to
ensure justice for survivors.
Thirdly, turning finally to representation, the
United Kingdom welcomes the United Nations
14/20

21/05/2019

Assistance Mission’s focus on gender across all of its
activities, including its work to promote the enactment
of the anti-domestic-violence law. We strongly agree
with Germany that women’s protection and meaningful
participation will support reconciliation and longterm stability. As we are approaching the twentieth
anniversary of resolution 1325 (2000), next October,
we will continue to support Iraq to ensure that its next
national action plan on women and peace and security
is budgeted, implemented in collaboration with civil
society and coordinated at the local and national levels.
We would welcome the opportunity to hear from more
female civil society briefers in future Council meetings
to learn from their experiences and expertise.
The United Kingdom remains steadfast in its
commitment to, and its support for, the important work
of UNAMI and for the people of Iraq as they work to
build a more stable and prosperous future.
Ms. Wronecka (Poland): At the outset, I would
like to thank Ms. Jeanine Hennis-Plasschaert for
her comprehensive briefing. Let me reiterate our
appreciation for the tremendous work that the United
Nations Assistance Mission for Iraq (UNAMI) has
been doing in assisting the Iraqi authorities. We
welcome the extension of the Mission’s mandate. It is
vital that UNAMI continue to provide support to the
Government of Iraq as it embarks upon implementing
new programmes and strategies to overcome challenges
and pave the way for sustainable peace and development.
Iraq has emerged from a period of turmoil and
undertaken efforts to restore stability and prosperity in
the country. The current phase is crucial and requires
addressing persistent challenges by promoting electoral,
economic, social and security-sector reforms, tackling
corruption and building strong State institutions, as well
as advancing stabilization and reconstruction. We would
like to express our concern about the lack of progress
on decisions related to the vacant ministerial positions.
We therefore urge the political parties to ensure the
swift completion of the Government-formation process
and effectively address the public concerns.
We encourage the Iraqi authorities to concentrate
their efforts on the delivery of basic public services and
developing the means to meet the needs of all Iraqis,
including women, youth and members of all religious
and ethnic groups, by accelerating the implementation
of the 2018-2022 governmental programme. We also
encourage the Iraqi authorities to ensure effective and
19-14769

21/05/2019

The situation concerning Iraq

inclusive governance and live up to their commitments
to guarantee the equal participation of women at all
levels of decision-making structures.
The issue of social protection for vulnerable
groups requires special attention. In our view, it is
vital to increase efforts to prevent violence against
women and girls and implement effective response
measures that would ensure protection for the victims
of gender-based violence, including through the full
implementation of Iraq’s national action plan on women
and peace and security. We are also concerned about
the situation for children, in particular those detained
on national-security-related charges for perceived
affiliation with armed groups. Those children must be
treated primarily as victims. We urge Iraq to guarantee
UNAMI’s access to detained children, develop
non-judicial measures as alternatives to prosecution
and detention and ensure the reintegration of children
formerly associated with armed groups.
The stabilization of the country will also entail
promoting national reconciliation, including by
assisting with the voluntary, dignified and safe return of
internally displaced persons, their local integration or
resettlement. It is vital that internally displaced persons
be treated in a non-discriminatory manner irrespective
of their perceived affiliation and that they be provided
with the assistance they require.
We wish to express our concerns that the ongoing
tensions in the Gulf may negatively influence the
security situation in Iraq and further destabilize the
country. At the same time, we appreciate Iraq’s balanced
policy with regard to its neighbours in the region.
In conclusion, I would like to stress the need to
support Iraq in its efforts to restore stability after years
of conflict, in full respect for its unity, sovereignty
and territorial integrity. It is paramount to preserve the
security of Iraq through the de-escalation of tensions.
Mr. Meza-Cuadra (Peru) (spoke in Spanish): We
thank the President for convening today’s meeting and
Ms. Jeanine Hennis-Plasschaert for her enlightening
briefing. We welcome the valuable work she is doing
with her United Nations Assistance Mission for Iraq
(UNAMI) team.
Peru is closely following the progress made towards
fully forming of the Government of Iraq as well as the
valuable efforts of its political class to find points of
convergence through dialogue and compromise. We

S/PV. 8531

especially hope that the completion of that process will
lead to an increase in women’s participation in political
life, which will undoubtedly contribute to the ongoing
process of national reconciliation.
Other challenges include the urgent need to
provide better services to the public, rebuild basic
infrastructure and reactivate the economy. To achieve
that, the Government programme for the period 20182020 must be implemented, the impact of which will be
strengthened upon the full completion of the process of
establishing the various Government agencies.
Along those lines, we welcome the progress made
in the fight against corruption by developing a national
strategy against that scourge, as well as the priority that
Parliament has given to fighting it. That momentum
should be harnessed for greater efforts to promote
the rule of law and strengthen the people’s trust in
their authorities.
The international community’s support is key in all
those phases, including its contribution to development
aid, the promotion of investment and the monitoring of
the actions of the remnants of Da’esh, which continue
to constitute pockets of destabilization, including
global accountability for acts that may constitute
atrocity crimes.
In that regard, we underscore the progress made in
the past six months by the United Nations Investigative
Team to Promote Accountability for Crimes Committed
by Da’esh/Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant, in
coordination with UNAMI. We commend the Team’s
efforts to engage in dialogue with religious communities
within Iraq, such as the Yazidis in Sinjar and Christians
in Mosul. We also encourage the Investigative Team
to redouble its efforts to consolidate its operational
capacity to allow for the appropriate use of evidentiary
material in domestic jurisdictions.
Another positive development, in our view, is the
rapprochement of Iraq with its neighbours in order
to bolster cooperation and consensus initiatives that
enable a regional space free of conflict and in support
of sustainable peacebuilding.
However, Peru reiterates its concern about the
extremely vulnerable situation that the 1.75 million
internally displaced persons are facing. According to
the report of the Secretary-General (S/2019/365), they
are hesitant to return to their areas of origin in the short

19-1476915/20

S/PV.8531

The situation concerning Iraq

term. That represents a challenge that the Government
must immediately address.
We stress the importance that UNAMI has to play
on the various fronts of its mandate. We underscore its
support for the development of an operational plan for
the provincial council elections, as well as its work as an
observer in trials and investigative hearings to ensure
due process and respect for human rights, thanks to the
collaboration of the Supreme Judicial Council of Iraq.
Lastly, we would like to highlight the Mission’s
efforts to locate and identify missing Kuwaiti persons
and property, given the willingness of the Iraqi
Government and Kuwait’s continued support for
that process.
Mr. Pecsteen de Buytswerve (Belgium) (spoke in
French): I would first like to thank Ms. Jeanine HennisPlasschaert for her briefing. We are pleased that the
Security Council has unanimously adopted resolution
2470 (2019), on the renewal of the mandate of the
United Nations Assistance Mission for Iraq (UNAMI),
which we fully support. Iraq is at a critical juncture.
Much progress has been made, as our British colleague
mentioned, but there are still many challenges, in a
context that remains difficult at the security level, given
the significant threat that Da’esh continues to pose.
At the outset, Belgium supports the speedy
formation a federal Government. We encourage the
various parties to support a common vision for the
country and to find compromise. In that particular
context, the establishment of strong State institutions is
essential to meet the challenges.
We support the Iraqi Government in its
reconstruction, economic development and reform
efforts with a view to fostering the private sector’s
participation. We also welcome the Iraqi Government’s
strong commitment to the fight against corruption.
However, economic reconstruction alone will not
be enough.
We commend the Government’s efforts, together
with the international community, to clear explosive
ordnance in order for the stabilization and reconstruction
operations to continue, as well as to enable families to
return to their communities and resume their lives.
Moreover, at a time when Iraq must look to the future,
reconciliation is of paramount importance. That can be
achieved only by including all sectors of Iraqi society
and the various communities.
16/20

21/05/2019

We support UNAMI’s important mission to promote
justice, the protection of human rights and judicial and
legal reforms and strengthen the protection of children.
We encourage the Government to make greater efforts
to address the issue of the right of every detainee to
a fair trial, particularly children and minors. We also
encourage the Iraqi Government to develop an action
plan on children and armed conflict, with the support
of UNAMI and the United Nations country team, which
is already working towards that goal, together with
the Government.
Lastly, we support Iraq’s efforts to open up to
neighbouring countries, with a view to strengthening
bilateral and regional relations based on the fundamental
principles of respect for sovereign equality and
territorial integrity.
Mr. Yao Shaojun (China) (spoke in Chinese):
I thank Ms. Jeanine Hennis-Plasschaert, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, for her
briefing. We also welcome the Security Council’s
unanimous adoption of resolution 2470 (2019), which
reflects the Council’s important support for the work
of the United Nations Assistance Mission for Iraq
(UNAMI) and the Iraqi Government.
China acknowledges UNAMI’s effective execution
of its mandate and its important role in supporting
the Iraqi Government in promoting inclusive political
dialogue, national reconciliation and reconstruction,
among other things. We appreciate the host country’s
close cooperation with UNAMI, which has yielded
positive results. The Council’s extension of UNAMI’s
mandate for one year is significant. The international
community should continue to support UNAMI in
carrying out its work as mandated.
The Government and the people of Iraq have
recently been properly addressing both internal and
external challenges, achieving positive outcomes inthe
fight against terrorism, gradually restoring security
and stability and steadily pushing its economic
reconstruction forward. China commends those steps.
China welcomes the Iraqi Government’s policy of
openness and friendly relations towards its neighbours.
We appreciate that the Government has formulated its
2018-2020 national programme and a comprehensive
national anti-corruption strategy.
We furthermore commend that the Government
is striving to resolve the outstanding issues that exist
between the central Government and the Kurdistan
19-14769

21/05/2019

The situation concerning Iraq

Regional Government through dialogue, consultations,
the removal of internal customs checkpoints and the
resumption of salary payments to the civil servants
of the Kurdistan Government. The country is at a
crucial moment in consolidating its counter-terrorism
results, achieving peace and security and advancing
its national reconstruction. I would like to make the
following points.
First, we should support Iraq in continuing to
fight terrorism and strengthening results in that
regard. The country has made immense sacrifices
in the international fight against terrorism. It is still
threatened by terrorist remnants. It needs the support of
all sides for the repatriation of foreign terrorist fighters
and their families. The international community should
fully respect the sovereignty of Iraq and its jurisdiction
and support Iraq in its efforts to bring terrorists to
justice, in accordance with the relevant domestic laws,
and to curb the return and spread of terrorist forces
and activities. We support the efforts of the United
Nations Investigative Team to Promote Accountability
for Crimes Committed by Da’esh/the Islamic State in
Iraq and the Levant, in close consultation with the Iraqi
Government, to actively carry out its work based on
its mandate.
Secondly, we should actively promote the economic
recovery and accelerated reconstruction of Iraq.
Development is essential to ensuring the achievement
of peace. The Government should focus on developing
infrastructure, promoting economic reconstruction
and progress, enhance its capacity to provide public
services and improve the living standards of the
population, including internally displaced persons. The
international community should honour its pledges by
continuing to provide support and assistance to Iraq,
helping to ease its humanitarian situation, assisting
in its economic recovery and creating a favourable
environment for its reconstruction.
Thirdly, we should continue to support inclusive
political dialogue and the national reconciliation
process in Iraq. The international community should
respect the sovereignty, independence, unity and
territorial integrity of Iraq and promote inclusiveness,
reconciliation and harmonious coexistence among all
Iraqi parties in line with the fundamental interests and
development needs of all Iraqis. It also has a positive
influence on regional peace and stability.

S/PV. 8531

China supports any effort that helps to maintain
peace and stability and to combat terrorism in Iraq. We
will continue to provide humanitarian and economic
assistance to the country and our efforts to improve the
humanitarian situation. We will actively participate in
Iraq’s economic reconstruction and help it to achieve
peace, stability and development.
The President: I shall now make a statement in my
capacity as the representative of Indonesia.
I would first like to thank Ms. Jeanine HennisPlasschaert, Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral for Iraq and Head of the United Nations
Assistance Mission for Iraq (UNAMI). I will focus on
three points.
First, on UNAMI’s work, we are pleased to join
Council members in welcoming the adoption of
resolution 2470 (2019) on the renewal of the mandate
of the United Nations Assistance Mission for Iraq. I
would like to thank the Iraqi delegation for the excellent
cooperation, as well as the United States of America,
as the penholder, for its work on the resolution. We
applaud the essential work done by UNAMI, which, I
believe, is perceived positively in various areas of Iraqi
society. We extend our thanks to Special Representative
Hennis-Plasschaert and the entire UNAMI team for
their continued excellent work. We also commend the
good cooperation between the Government of Iraq
and UNAMI.
The resolution adopted today not only renews
but also improves the mandate of UNAMI. It shows
the unity of the Council in assisting Iraq to achieve
political stability and sustainable development. A
strong UNAMI with the capacity to assist the people
and the Government of Iraq in addressing the complex
challenges is more relevant than ever, and we look
forward to the full implementation of its mandate.
Secondly, on developments in the country,
Indonesia commends Iraq on the formation of the new
Government and looks forward to the appointment of the
remaining ministerial positions. The swift and effective
completion of the formation of the Iraq Government is
an essential prerequisite for the new Government to
gain the trust and support of the people. The stability
of Iraq is important not only for its people but also for
the region as a whole. We need to continue to support
Iraq’s reconciliation and development efforts. We
support efforts to strengthen Iraq’s State institutions
and the acceleration of the Government programme

19-1476917/20

S/PV.8531

The situation concerning Iraq

21/05/2019

for 2018 to 2020 to improve the basic services and
promote reconstruction and economic development
throughout Iraq.

of the United Nations Assistance Mission for Iraq
(UNAMI), whose presence has been noteworthy from
the beginning of her mandate.

It is incumbent upon us as the international
community to support Iraq in its endeavours. Like
others, we welcome the Government’s announcement
of its development of a comprehensive national
anti-corruption strategy as well as Parliament’s priority
to fight against corruption, as also mentioned in the
report of the Secretary-General (S/2019/365).

My Government welcomes the adoption of
resolution 2470 (2019) to renew the UNAMI mandate
for another year. We appreciate the support provided by
the United States of America and other Member States
on the Security Council, as well as the collective efforts
and cooperation with which the negotiations on the
renewal were carried out. We also express our gratitude
to all members of the Security Council for their support
for the resolution.

Thirdly, on the issue of security challenges, we
took note of Ms. Hennis-Plasschaert’s briefing with
regard to the issue of returning fighters of the Islamic
State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL) and their families,
which must be managed in the right way, in particular
with respect to women and children. The issue of
rehabilitation and reintegration is certainly not an easy
task. Nevertheless, efforts should be undertaken so
as not to create a resurgence of radicalism and a new
breed of terrorism. We commend the tireless work of
the Iraqi security forces for their continued search for
the remnants of ISIL, which threaten the security of
the entire population and hinder the ongoing process.
We believe that there is a need for a comprehensive
approach to addressing the security challenges and
ensuring durable peace. In that regard, enhanced
international and regional cooperation is critical.
Lastly, the issue of humanitarian assistance should
also be our priority. Issues of the return of internally
displaced persons, socioeconomic development and
the achievement of the targets of the Sustainable
Development Goals are important.
At this stage, Iraq needs all the support and help
of its brothers and sisters in the United Nations. Rest
assured of Indonesia’s commitment in support of Iraq’s
stability, development and lasting peace.
I now resume my functions as President of the
Council.
I now give the floor to the representative of Iraq.
Mr. Bahr Aluloom (Iraq) (spoke in Arabic): Allow
me at the outset to congratulate the Republic of Indonesia
on its assumption of the Security Council presidency
in a wise manner for this month. We also thank the
Federal Republic of Germany for its efforts during its
presidency last month. I would like to welcome the
briefing by Ms. Jeanine Hennis-Plasschaert, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General and Head
18/20

My country’s Government had submitted a request
to extend the mandate in order to meet the requisite
needs of all its citizens, which the United Nations
can help Iraq to fulfil, while maintaining the main
responsibilities and tasks of the Mission. That is what
happened with the adoption of resolution 2421 (2018),
in which the mandate was simplified and the text itself
was reduced in accordance with Iraq’s needs at that
time (see S/PV.8285).
My country’s Government hopes to work closely
with UNAMI to meet Iraq’s needs in the upcoming
phase. We encourage the Mission to coordinate closely
with other United Nations agencies in Iraq, including
the United Nations Development Programme and the
United Nations Human Settlements Programme, in
order to ensure coordination and achieve progress in
humanitarian work, reconstruction and development at
the local, Government and national levels.
Despite the incomplete formation of the Cabinet,
my country’s Government, which was formed based on
the independence and competence of its members, is
now able to implement its programme. There has been
progress on many issues, which are now being followed
up on, including in the areas of security, the military,
culture, the economy, social and human rights, as well
as opening up to neighbouring countries and States in
the region. Our efforts include the following.
First, we are safeguarding the gains made by the
Iraqi people with regard to security and stability,
proceeding with reconstruction projects, consolidating
unity and meeting needs by promoting service provision,
development and economic prosperity. The situation
is evolving positively at all levels in Iraq. When the
security situation improves, the political situation also
improves, which is related to the current consensus in
Iraq. If not for the cooperation shown by everyone, we
19-14769

21/05/2019

The situation concerning Iraq

would not have defeated terrorism. We stand ready to
preserve that consensus, which reflects the political
unity in the country, including with regard to relations
between Baghdad and Erbil, which today are better
than ever and continue to be marked by cooperation.
Second, Iraq is experiencing security and stability,
especially in the liberated governorates. Security forces
have almost reopened all the roads in Baghdad that had
been closed since 2003, including in the Green Zone.
Third, the three presidencies and the Minister for
Foreign Affairs have been eagerly working to translate
the close relations between Iraq, its neighbouring
States and countries of the region into opportunities
and practical programmes. We have also reached
understandings based on common interests to set up
joint projects that will strengthen the economy and
promote investment in agriculture and industry and
generate large-scale job creation. Iraq will spare no
effort to promote security and stability in the region.
In an environment marked by rising tensions in our
region, we adhere to a policy of positive neutrality. We
have based that policy on our national security goals of
consolidating and maintaining the gains made in the
war against the Da’esh terrorist gangs.
Fourth, the number of displaced persons from
areas once controlled by the Da’esh terrorist gangs
has decreased from nearly 5 million to 1.8 million
The number of returnees to Nineveh governorate
has reached approximately 1.4 million, followed by
Al-Anbar governorate with 1.2 million returnees,
while approximately 534,000 people have returned to
Salahadin governorate.
Fifth, at the initiative of the President of the
Republic, the Council of Representatives is working on
the adoption of a law on Yazidi female survivors, aimed
at compensating them materially and morally as well as
ensuring their rehabilitation and providing them with
a secure and dignified life. In addition, it will take all
the steps necessary to reintegrate survivors into society
and rebuild infrastructure in their regions. The Council
of Representatives is also working on the adoption
of a law on combating domestic violence, which will
provide full legal protection for all victims of domestic
violence. The law is in line with the Iraqi Constitution,
which prohibits all forms of violence and abuse within
the family, as well as in line with international human
rights standards.

S/PV. 8531

Sixth, cooperation continues with the United
Nations, in particular UNICEF and the country task
force on monitoring and reporting, in order to develop
a joint action plan to safeguard the rights of children
who have been affected by terrorist acts. Moreover,
we are cooperating with the Office of the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General on Sexual
Violence in Conflict to implement the action plan that
was launched in 2018.
Seventh, efforts are under way to mitigate the
effects of climate change through the use of national
and international resources that guarantee food and
water security, both of which are priorities for my
Government, owing to the impact of climate change on
both.
My Government is fully aware that much remains
to be done in order to meet the aspirations of the Iraqi
people. They aspire to achieve political reform, stability,
security and putting an end to corruption, which
Ms. Hennis-Plasschaert termed “private networks”.
They also aspire to end illegal earning activities, while
providing equitable economic opportunities for all.
Despite the defeat of Da’esh’s terrorist gangs in Iraq
and Syria, the threat they pose remains. My Government
is working to combat their abhorrent ideology through
a comprehensive approach encompassing security,
ideology, development and legislation aspects. We are
working tirelessly to facilitate the prosecution of Da’esh
criminal terrorists and issue legal sentences against
them for their crimes of genocide, crimes against
humanity and war crimes perpetrated in Iraq.
With regard to my Government’s efforts to counter
terrorism, we have submitted a request to the Office
of Counter-Terrorism for assistance from the United
Nations programme related to prohibiting the travel
of foreign terrorists, with the aim of building Iraqi
State institutions and enabling them to overcome
the challenges and difficulties that Iraq has faced
pertaining to the collection of data and identification of
foreign travellers entering Iraq. Coordination involving
that request is still under way.
We have also adopted a strategy to combat violent
extremism leading to terrorism in order to eliminate
extremism and hatred, so as to lead to a society that
believes in coexistence, moderation and tolerance. We
urge all friendly and allied countries to develop new
legal systems to prosecute returning foreign terrorist
fighters. If a practical solution is not found, the Da’esh

19-1476919/20

S/PV.8531

The situation concerning Iraq

terrorist group could re-establish its capabilities, undo
the status quo and launch large-scale terrorist attacks
throughout the world.
My Government also focused on developing KuwaitiIraqi relations during the period under consideration.
With the goal of overcoming obstacles emanating from
the past, we have built bridges and communicated with
our brothers in Kuwait to strengthen relations between
the two countries. In that context, meetings of the
seventh session of the Iraqi-Kuwaiti Joint Committee
were held on 12 and 13 May. We reviewed cooperation
between the two sides in all areas, in particular with
regard to promoting the economic and development
spheres. We also agreed to solve many pending issues
in the context of bilateral relations between our two
countries. Prime Minister Adil Abd Al-Mahdi will visit
the sisterly State of Kuwait tomorrow.
Iraq
welcomes
presidential
statement
S/PRST/2019/1, on prisoners, missing persons and the
return of the Kuwaiti property. Our delegation worked
side by side with our brothers in the Kuwaiti delegation
to draft the statement, which demonstrates that Iraq is
committed to the implementation of resolution 2107
(2013). We attach great importance to the search for
missing Kuwaitis and third-country nationals and to
the return of their remains to their countries, as well as
the recovery of missing Kuwaiti property, including the
national archives.

20/20

21/05/2019

In that context, a mass grave has been discovered
in the city of Samawah, with human remains having
undergone preliminary tests. We have shared the
results with the International Committee of the Red
Cross and the competent Kuwaiti authorities. We hope
those results will be positive.
In conclusion, we highly value the role of the United
Nations in supporting Iraq in all areas, particularly
with regard to displaced persons, projects to support
women and children in liberated and affected areas
and ensuring basic services, health care, education and
reconstruction. My country’s Government is committed
to providing good working conditions for the UNAMI
and to ensuring cooperation with it by all the relevant
Iraqi authorities. We also look forward to continued
support for Iraq from sisterly, friendly and allied
countries in the upcoming recovery and reconstruction
phase. We again thank Ms. Hennis-Plasschaert and
her team for their commitment to cooperating with
my country’s Government in carrying out UNAMI’s
mandate in order to serve the interests and needs of
Iraq. We wish them every success in their endeavours.
The President: There are no more names inscribed
on the list of speakers.
I now invite Council members to informal
consultations to continue our discussion on the subject.
The meeting rose at 5.05 p.m.

19-14769
