United Nations

S/PV.6614

Security Council

Provisional

Sixty-sixth year

6614th meeting
Wednesday, 14 September 2011, 10.25 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Salam . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Lebanon)

Members:

Bosnia and Herzegovina . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Brazil . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Colombia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Gabon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Germany . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
India . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Nigeria . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Portugal . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
South Africa . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . .
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Mr. Barbalić
Mrs. Viotti
Mr. Li Baodong
Mr. Osorio
Mr. Bonne
Mr. Messone
Mr. Wittig
Mr. Hardeep Singh Puri
Mrs. Ogwu
Mr. Moraes Cabral
Mr. Pankin
Mr. Sangqu
Sir Mark Lyall Grant
Mr. DeLaurentis

Agenda
The situation in Somalia
Report of the Secretary-General on Somalia (S/2011/549)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the
delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-506.

11-49644 (E)

*1149644*

S/PV.6614

take this opportunity to acknowledge the presence of
The Honourable Prime Minister of Somalia, His
Excellency Mr. Abdiweli Mohamed Ali.

The meeting was called to order at 10.25 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in Somalia
Report of the Secretary-General on Somalia
(S/2011/549)
The President (spoke in Arabic): Under rule 37
of the Security Council’s provisional rules of
procedure, I invite the representative of Somalia to
participate in this meeting.
On behalf of the Council, I welcome His
Excellency Mr. Abdiweli Mohamed Ali, Prime Minister
of the Transitional Federal Government of Somalia,
and request the Protocol Officer to escort him to a seat
at the Council table.
Mr. Ali, Prime Minister of the Transitional
Federal Government of Somalia, was escorted to
a seat at the Council table.
The President (spoke in Arabic): Under rule 39
of the Council’s provisional rules of procedure, I invite
Mr. Augustine P. Mahiga, Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for Somalia, to participate in this
meeting.
Under rule 39 of the Council’s provisional rules
of procedure, I invite His Excellency Mr. Boubacar
Gaoussou Diarra, Special Representative of the
Chairperson of the African Union Commission for
Somalia, to participate in this meeting.
Under rule 39 of the Council’s provisional rules
of procedure, I invite His Excellency Mr. Pedro
Serrano, Acting Head of the Delegation of the
European Union to the United Nations, to participate in
this meeting.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I wish to draw the attention of Council members
to document S/2011/549, which contains the report of
the Secretary-General on Somalia.
I now give the floor to Mr. Mahiga.
Mr. Mahiga: Please accept my congratulations,
Sir, on your assumption of the presidency of the
Security Council on behalf of your country, Lebanon. I

2

Thank you, Mr. President, for giving me the
opportunity to present the report of the SecretaryGeneral (S/2011/549) to the Security Council on the
latest developments in the Somalia peace process. At
the outset, I would like to pay tribute to the Council for
its continued support to the peace process in Somalia.
Since I last briefed the Council, on 10 August from
Mogadishu (see S/PV.6599), there have been positive
developments in Somalia, even as difficult times still
lie ahead. Let me begin with the humanitarian crisis,
which is still hitting the world headlines.
On 5 September, a sixth district in the Bay region
was declared a famine zone, in the area controlled by
Al-Shabaab. More people are at immediate risk.
Assistance is now coming in from the international
community. The African Union held its first-ever
pledging conference on 25 August, raising $350 million in
cash and in kind. But more is needed to cover the next
five months. The moral authority of the Council and
the entire international community needs to be brought
to bear to facilitate life-saving assistance in the faminestricken areas of Somalia and to address the overall
challenge of drought in the Horn of Africa.
On the political side, the peace process has just
taken a great step forward. The game has
fundamentally changed. In the spirit of the Transitional
Charter and the Djibouti Agreement, the long-awaited
consultative meeting on ending the transition in
Somalia was convened successfully in Mogadishu from
4 to 6 September. While the situation remains tenuous
and unstable, holding the meeting in Mogadishu was
itself a notable achievement and a testimony to the
much improved security situation in the capital. Two
months ago, the Islamist insurgency group Al-Shabaab
held much of Mogadishu, and threatened the rest. A
week ago, we held a meeting with all stakeholders at
the Somali Parliament building, in the heart of
downtown Mogadishu.
The consultative meeting brought together highlevel representatives of the Transitional Federal
Institutions, the regional States of Puntland and
Galmudug, the Ahlu Sunnah Wal Jama’a and most
international partners. The meeting in Mogadishu was
a milestone in the peace process, but the light that the
road map now sheds on our path forward shows clearly

11-49644

S/PV.6614

just how far we have to go. We have now officially
launched the implementation of the transitional tasks
that are to be completed in the next 11 months, which
offers a real opportunity to end the transition in a
responsible and productive manner. It is different from
previous efforts because this time there is broad-based
consensus and political commitment to end the
transition.
In addition, there are agreed upon benchmarks
and timelines to be fulfilled. In the United Nations
Political Office for Somalia (UNPOS), we have
established a dedicated unit to manage the
implementation mechanisms. The implementation will
be undertaken under the close supervision of the
monitoring mechanisms, which are both regional and
international in composition.
The constructive atmosphere at the consultative
meeting also enabled UNPOS to facilitate an
agreement between the regional States of Puntland and
Galmudug after several days of fighting at their
common border in the town of Galkayo.
The meeting immediately followed Somali
Transitional Federal Government President Sheikh
Sharif Sheikh Ahmed’s historic trip to Puntland on
28 August. It is our hope that the groundbreaking visit
will herald a new chapter in relations between the
Transitional Federal Government and the regional
administrations and set a positive tone for national
reconciliation and improved outreach with a wide
range of other entities and individuals across Somali
civil society, both inside the country and in the
diaspora. This issue will be further discussed and
reflected in the next constitutional consultations, to be
held in another location inside Somalia, which will
include a wide cross-section of civil society groups.
In my political advocacy for a more inclusive
peace process, I have reiterated the presidential
statement issued by the Council on 11 May, which
indicates that those groups and individuals in the
armed opposition should renounce violence and join
the peace process (see S/PRST/2011/10). The changing
security dynamic may help us in that regard.
As we move forward on the implementation of
the road map, the international community must
redouble its engagement and strike that most delicate
of balances between inducement and compliance. Here
I need to be crystal clear: the benchmarks and timelines
enshrined in the road map will simply not be realized

11-49644

in the absence of commensurate resources. Those
providing oversight must play their role effectively to
ensure that the implementation is done on schedule. We
are looking into a range of measures to be invoked in
case of non-compliance.
I have consistently reminded the leadership that
future assistance will be contingent upon the timely
implementation of the road map. Ultimately, though,
the Somalis need our assistance right now. The
international community must immediately provide
resources to the Transitional Federal Institutions and
other implementing partners in order to ensure that we
capitalize on the substantial political investment that
has earned us all this moment of optimism and hope.
The improvement in the security situation in
Mogadishu is an important step towards stabilizing all
of Somalia. Security is a central element of the road
map, as a secure environment is a precursor to the
effective implementation of other transitional tasks.
The withdrawal of Al-Shabaab from Mogadishu has
offered the Government an opportunity to expand
territory under its control and enhance its legitimacy by
delivering services to its population. We must prevent
warlords from re-emerging in Mogadishu by not
allowing a security vacuum to develop. The prospect of
peace and stability in Mogadishu has also attracted
400,000 internally displaced persons fleeing Somalia’s
drought-stricken areas under Al-Shabaab control,
which is creating additional pressure on the still-fragile
Government to provide security and support for the
new arrivals.
In addition to those security challenges, the
extremists are likely to resort to terrorist tactics in
Mogadishu and elsewhere. Forces of the African Union
Mission in Somalia (AMISOM) and the Government
forces must be equipped to respond to this new threat,
which will require agility, enhanced mobility, expanded
surveillance and a greater tactical capability around
Mogadishu and beyond. The military plan must be
accompanied by a civilian strategy designed to
stabilize and rehabilitate Mogadishu. Together with the
Transitional Federal Government and the United
Nations country team, we have prepared the
Mogadishu stabilization plan, which requires
$5 million in initial funding. Somalis must see a
tangible difference between their lives under
Government authority and their lives under
Al-Shabaab.

3

S/PV.6614

As I pay tribute to the African Union and
AMISOM, I wish to recognize the presence of the
Special Representative of the Chairperson of the
African Union Commission, Ambassador Boubacar
Diarra.
I would again like to take this opportunity to
commend the Governments of Burundi and Uganda for
their continued and unflinching support to AMISOM
and their readiness to provide additional troops to it.
The report of the Secretary-General expresses
support for the rapid deployment of a guard force as
part of AMISOM. That force would provide protection
for AMISOM civilians and United Nations personnel
and assets, relieving pressure on the main AMISOM
force and enabling it to focus on its core mandate. The
guard force is essential for enabling my Office to
facilitate the effective implementation of the road map.
I would therefore welcome the Council’s support in
that regard. UNPOS and the United Nations Support
Office for AMISOM are ready to expedite the
deployment of staff to Somalia, especially in
Mogadishu, as accommodation and logistical support is
made available.
As I said at the outset, this is a remarkable
moment for Somalia. The situation remains fragile and
tenuous, but we have a golden opportunity to end the
transition and stabilize Somalia. I appeal to the Council
to send an unequivocal message of encouragement to
the Somali leaders while simultaneously putting them
on notice that there can be no return to political
bickering. There will be no more extensions and we
must all work together to end the transitional period by
August 2012. The seeds of hope and progress have
begun to sprout, but they will need to be carefully and
generously nurtured if they are to bloom into
sustainable peace.
The President (spoke in Arabic): I thank
Mr. Mahiga for his briefing.
I now give the floor to Mr. Diarra.
Mr. Diarra (spoke in French): At the outset, I
should like to congratulate you, Sir, on your
assumption of the presidency of the Council. I also
express my respect and gratitude to His Excellency the
Prime Minister of Somalia.
I should like to thank you, Mr. President, on
behalf of the Chairman of the African Union
Commission, His Excellency Mr. Jean Ping, for this

4

opportunity to inform the Security Council regarding
recent developments in Somalia and, in particular, our
efforts to support the Transitional Federal Institutions
in Somalia in strengthening security with a view to
creating conditions conducive to the delivery of
humanitarian aid and the implementation of the
political road map to bring the transition to an end.
I also convey the regret and apologies of
Commissioner Lamamra for his inability to participate
in this meeting today. Commissioner Lamamra will
attend the summit to be held on Somalia on
23 September.
I wish to reiterate the African Union’s
appreciation to all members of the Security Council for
their support for our efforts to reverse the insecurity
and instability in Somalia. Over the past two years, and
especially since the African Union Mission in Somalia
(AMISOM) was deployed, we have received crucial
support from the Security Council. That precious
support has contributed to the positive, tangible results
that we are seeing on the ground in Somalia.
I am sure that Council members are well
informed of the recent positive developments in the
political and security situation in Somalia. Before
turning to those developments, let me address the
humanitarian situation, which remains a cause of great
concern for all of us.
Millions of Somalis are suffering from hunger
and malnutrition. For its part, the African Union took
the initiative to organize a donors conference in Addis
Ababa on 25 August in order to mobilize resources for
the victims of the famine in Somalia and the Horn of
Africa. More than $350 million were mobilized. The
African Development Bank alone pledged $300,000.
An additional amount of $28 million was also pledged
in kind, including food, medicine and other forms of
aid. While it recognized the crucial need to respond to
the current humanitarian emergency, the conference
also called on the international community to
demonstrate renewed commitment to and support for
medium- and long-term strategies to ensure food
security and mitigate the negative impact of climate
change on the African continent.
Somalia is at a crossroads. That country, which
has enjoyed no peace or security for 20 years, is
regaining stability little by little. On the political front,
the African Union is particularly encouraged by the
speed and determination with which Somali political

11-49644

S/PV.6614

leaders, through an inclusive and consensual approach,
are working towards the implementation of the
Kampala Accord signed on 9 June under the aegis of
President Yoweri Museveni of Uganda.
We also welcome the outcome of the consultative
meeting held in Mogadishu from 4 to 6 September
2011. This meeting was very significant as it brought
together the Somali Government, the transitional
Parliament, Puntland, Galmudug and Ahlu Sunnah Wal
Jama’a, and thus allowed for agreement to be reached
on tasks whose completion would allow the Somali
people to strengthen the legitimacy of State institutions
through free and transparent elections and establish the
rule of law needed for lasting peace to take hold.
The African Union calls on all Somali
stakeholders, including the Somali diaspora, to provide
the necessary support to the Transitional Federal
Institutions in this regard. The African Union will
continue to support the efforts of Ambassador Mahiga
to fully implement the road map so that a new political
order can be inaugurated on 20 August 2012, as we
have so long called for and which will meet the
aspirations of the Somali people.
On the military and security fronts, the
Transitional Federal Government (TFG) and AMISOM
control almost 95 per cent of the capital, Mogadishu.
With the retreat of Al-Shabaab, AMISOM forces, in
collaboration with Somali Government forces, now
control the city and are deployed in all districts of
Mogadishu, with the exception of Daynile-Huriwaa.
AMISOM will deploy forces in that area as soon as
additional troops are made available.
These gains represent an important victory. This
is the very first time since the fall of the Siad Barre
regime that a central administration has been able to
take control of Mogadishu. We must build on this
progress and extend the authority of the TFG beyond
Mogadishu, create the space needed for dialogue and
reconciliation, allow the TFG to interact with local and
regional administrations, and create an enabling
climate for political efforts stemming from the road
map.
The humanitarian crisis facing the country has led
to additional obligations for AMISOM. The Mission
must now ensure the security of camps for internally
displaced persons, of which there are many in
Mogadishu; assist in the delivery of humanitarian aid;
and — a new responsibility — ensure the protection of

11-49644

the many dignitaries visiting Mogadishu since its
liberation. It is therefore crucial for the international
community to transform this moment of hope in the
country by providing to the Somali Government all the
support it needs to meet its commitments. It is also
imperative that the recent security gains made in
Mogadishu following the withdrawal of Al-Shabaab be
strengthened through an appropriate increase in
resources for AMISOM.
This is the thrust of the report submitted by the
Chairperson of the African Union Commission, which
includes the recommendations made by the technical
consultative workshop on AMISOM convened from
17 to 18 August, with the participation of the
Intergovernmental Authority on Development (IGAD),
the permanent members of the Security Council, the
European Union, countries contributing troops to
AMISOM and many other partners.
The report authorizes support for the following
measures, including first and foremost the acceleration
of the deployment of additional troops in order to
strengthen AMISOM and swiftly achieve the
authorized strength of 12,000 personnel pursuant to the
United Nations support package. African countries
have made necessary troops available. Djibouti, Sierra
Leone and Guinea have already expressed their
willingness to contribute troops. The main obstacles
for those countries include a lack of military equipment
and predictable measures to ensure that such
equipment is paid for.
Secondly, the United Nations support package
must be strengthened pursuant to resolutions 1863
(2009) and 1964 (2010) in order to fill the gaps
identified in the next few months, in the understanding
that AMISOM is a multidimensional mission with
military, police and civilian components. Support
priorities should include independent support for
troops;
reimbursement
for
contingent-owned
equipment; the provision of appropriate force enablers,
including among others utility and attack helicopters;
maritime capacities; military engineering equipment,
and support to the Mission’s civil component.
Thirdly, a police unit constituted in Mogadishu to
support the rule of law and order and to allow
AMISOM to concentrate on its military tasks must be
deployed.
Fourthly, a battalion-size protection force must be
created within AMISOM and under its leadership in

5

S/PV.6614

order to assist the deployment of civilian personnel and
guarantee the security of the African Union, the United
Nations and the Transitional Federal Institutions in
Mogadishu. That force should supplement the 12,000
military personnel authorized by the United Nations.
Despite the progress made in Somalia, the
African Union wishes to emphasize that Al-Shabaab
remains capable of destabilizing and undermining our
efforts. Consequently, we must continue to focus on the
big picture and maintain a far-reaching view that goes
beyond Mogadishu. I therefore wish to underscore the
validity of the other requests made to the Security
Council, including those contained in the text of the
African Union Peace and Security Council
communiqué of 15 October 2010, in particular with
respect to measures necessary to prevent the entry of
foreign elements into Somalia. We must prevent the
theft and transport of cargo containing weapons and
ammunition for the armed groups carrying out attacks
against the TFG, AMISOM and civilian populations.
Looking to the future, we believe it important
that the Security Council, in its wisdom, reiterate its
commitment to deploying a peacekeeping operation in
Somalia to take over from AMISOM and immediately
set a timeline for that deployment. In that respect, the
Commission proposes that the United Nations
Secretariat undertake a joint mission to assess the
progress made to date by AMISOM on the ground and
to identify all additional criteria to be fulfilled and the
relevant resources to be provided by the United
Nations in order to prepare for the transformation of
AMISOM into a United Nations peacekeeping
operation.
In conclusion, I reiterate that the African Union
and all peace-loving Somalis and Africans thank the
Security Council for its tireless and courageous efforts
to settle the situation in Somalia. I also wish to express
our gratitude to the Secretary-General, to the various
departments of the Secretariat, in particular the United
Nations Support Office for AMISOM (UNSOA), for
the exceptional quality of their partnership with the
African Union and AMISOM. The results achieved on
the ground are due in large part to the unfailing support
of UNSOA.
On the ground, I also welcome the high quality of
relations
with
Ambassador
Mahiga,
Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for Somalia.
The political and military progress achieved is the

6

result of daily close cooperation with the IGAD
facilitator for Somalia.
In that regard, new dynamism is necessary to
maintain the strategic partnership between the African
Union and the United Nations. The African Union
Commission strongly urges the Council to take into
account in its future resolutions the Commission’s
contributions and updates on the situation, in particular
the requests set forth above, as well as the conclusions
of the mini-summit on Somalia to be convened in New
York on 23 September, at the initiative of the
Secretary-General.
The President (spoke in Arabic): I thank
Mr. Diarra for his briefing.
I now give the floor to Prime Minister Ali.
Mr. Ali (Somalia): It is an honour for me to be
here before the Council today and to update members
on the developments that have recently taken place in
Somalia. This is the first time I have had the
opportunity to address the Security Council since my
appointment as Prime Minister in June. In the
intervening period, the humanitarian, security and
political landscape has altered, and it is my intention to
demonstrate the steps that the Transitional Federal
Government (TFG) is taking to address the new
challenges and opportunities that face us today.
Let me begin by welcoming the report of the
Secretary-General on Somalia (S/2011/549) which is
now before the Council and which notes the positive
political and security developments that have occurred
in the past three months. A month and a half after my
appointment as Prime Minister, Al-Qaida-affiliated
extremist insurgents were forced to withdraw from the
capital under pressure from the Somali National Army,
with the support of the African Union Mission in
Somalia (AMISOM).
On 10 August, the Special Representative of the
Secretary General, Mr. Augustine Mahiga, updated the
Council (see S/PV.6599) on the situation in the capital
following this withdrawal by Al-Shabaab, noting that
this presented both opportunities and challenges for the
Transitional Federal Government as we strived to
consolidate security in the city, provide public services
to the population and tackle the enormous
humanitarian emergency enveloping our country. We in
Somalia recognize, as the report of the SecretaryGeneral notes, that failure to do so would fatally

11-49644

S/PV.6614

undermine the legitimacy and popular support that the
Government currently enjoys. My Government is doing
the best it can within our limited resources to exploit
those opportunities.
Immediately following the extremists’ withdrawal,
a ministerial committee was set up, visited vacated
areas and came up with plans for dealing with the
situation. The immediate concern was to re-establish
security and fill the vacuum with legitimate State
authorities. A state of emergency has been declared in
these districts, as well as in camps for internally
displaced persons (IDPs) across the city, in order to
prevent crime as well as to deter the return of warlords
and militias.
The Cabinet has established two task forces, one
with the responsibility to provide armed escort to
humanitarian convoys, and the other — a mobile patrol
unit — to tackle crime. District security committees
have been established in all 16 districts of the city and
are engaging local communities to determine their
priorities and needs. The security forces continue to
search for weapons and booby traps in the
neighbourhoods formerly occupied by the extremists.
Once those have been cleared, citizens will be
encouraged to return to their homes.
However, we must remain realistic as we enter
the next phase. Stabilizing security inside the capital
has been a determined focus of my Government over
the past month. The plan for Mogadishu is starting to
work. We cannot, however, afford to be complacent.
We are aware that pockets of insurgents remain in the
city who are intent on launching a campaign of terror
against the population using suicide attacks and
improvised explosive devices (IEDs). Already, our
security and intelligence agencies have foiled a number
of such attacks. The two largest IDP camps, Babaado
and Rajo, which provide shelter and food for tens of
thousands of the most needy, have both been targeted.
Last week an IED was discovered planted within the
Rajo camp. Two weeks earlier, a man wearing a suicide
vest and disguised as a woman was arrested before he
could detonate his explosives at the Babaado camp. A
car bomb was also recently found and defused at the
populous Kilometre 4 junction. At the same time, it
will be imperative to ensure that the Somali State is
able to keep clan rivalries and warlordism at bay.
TFG

The Secretary-General’s report notes that the
and Somali security forces are currently

11-49644

overextended. It is essential that we work together to
enlarge and improve the Somali National Army and the
Police Force of the Somali Government as a matter of
grave urgency. In order to consolidate and build on the
security gains, it is essential to enlarge the force of the
African Union Mission in Somalia (AMISOM) —
which has sacrificed so much and worked so hard — in
the near future with the required air and maritime force
components that it badly needs. To support this united
effort, I look forward to announcing the national
security and stabilization plan in the near future, which
is a key part of the road map.
The fact that the extremists would target innocent
and hungry Somalis is an indication that they care
nothing for the fate of the citizens of the country.
Somalia is on the frontline in the global defence
against the plague of terrorism. The terrorists are
looking further afield. They have sought to export their
noxious extremism across the region, recruiting and
sponsoring acts of terror in countries such as Uganda,
where last year they murdered 76 innocent people. It is
a well known fact that they are focusing their
recruitment and radicalization efforts on Somali
diasporas in Australia, Canada, Europe and the United
States of America.
As the world marks the ten-year anniversary of
the 11 September 2001 attacks here in New York and in
Washington, D.C., it is critical that we learn the lessons
of the past. The struggle to stabilize Somalia and deny
terrorists a foothold on the Horn of Africa is one in
which we all have a stake, and therefore one in which
we all have responsibilities. At this juncture, I would
like to thank the Council for the generous support it
has given to both the transitional federal institutions
and to the AMISOM peace support mission, without
whose assistance much of the progress that I have
outlined here would not have been possible. I also join
the Secretary-General in paying tribute to the
Governments and people of Burundi and Uganda for
their continued sacrifice and commitment to the cause
of peace in Somalia, as well as in extending
condolences to the families of those who have lost their
lives in this worthy cause, including Somali forces.
The support of the international community is
critical if we are to continue to protect civilians, ensure
the safe and timely delivery of aid and prevent the
extremists from using our territory as a base from
which to plot terror attacks. The immediate deployment
of the extra 3,000 AMISOM troops already authorized

7

S/PV.6614

by the Council is urgently needed to prevent a security
vacuum in the areas of Mogadishu vacated by
Al-Shabaab. As the Secretary-General notes, without
international support for equipping and outfitting
additional troops, troop-contributing countries will
continue to face difficulties in deploying their forces in
a timely manner. Going forward, more will be required
if we are to expand the zone of safety that has been
created in the capital to encompass the rest of the
country. In that regard, I ask the Council to urgently
reconsider the recommendation of the African Union
Peace and Security Council to increase the mandated
strength of the AMISOM force to 20,000 troops from
the current ceiling of 12,000, and to provide it with key
enablers and force multipliers, including air and
maritime components.
On the humanitarian front, as all are aware, the
United Nations has declared famine in a sixth region of
Somalia, which means that up to half the population, or
4 million souls, are now facing the prospect of
starvation. Many of those continue to come to the
capital seeking refuge. The United Nations estimates
that over half a million have already arrived. To deal
with this situation and to oversee the delivery of
humanitarian assistance, a high-level Cabinet
committee has been created and, as per its
recommendations, the Government has established
several camps to house and feed them. A disaster
management agency, comprising members of civil
society, has also been established. We are working with
United Nations agencies — such as the Office for the
Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs, the Office of the
United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees and
the World Food Programme — to synchronize our
efforts to deal with the famine.
On behalf of the entire Somali nation, I wish to
express my gratitude for the pledges of assistance that
have been received from Governments and
humanitarian agencies around the world. It is a matter
of urgency that we seek to better coordinate and
increase the humanitarian relief. There can be no
competition, only concerted effort, in a humanitarian
crisis of this scale, between what are known as
traditional and non-traditional donors. All estimates
predict that we will see the crisis deepen in the country
and the suffering of my kinsfolk worsen. I have
welcomed the proliferation of support and donors who
are seeking to help. It will be essential to ensure that
we play our part, within our limited capacity, in

8

securing and helping the delivery of assistance to a
larger number of Somalis who are in such dire need.
We are indebted to the United Nations and its
agencies, which have so far delivered tons of food to
Mogadishu and other areas. Coupled with our measures
to ensure security, those deliveries have had a
considerable impact in Mogadishu and the surrounding
areas. According to a recent report by the Food
Security and Nutrition Analysis Unit, cereal prices for
August in the Banadir region, although still
unacceptably high, have come down by up to 20 per
cent compared to previous months.
The greatest need, however, continues to be felt
within areas still under the effective control of the
extremists, where access by international humanitarian
agencies is severely restricted. The insurgents are also
hampering the freedom of movement of millions who
are trying to reach help either in Mogadishu or in
neighbouring countries. Without urgent interventions to
change the situation, it is estimated that up to three
quarters of a million people may perish in the next few
months. Although normal to above-normal rainfall is
expected to return in the next three months, that is
unlikely to result in a significant easing of the crisis in
the short term, as the harvest would not be expected
until February. In any case, the production from the
short rainy season only accounts for a third of total
annual cereal production. The displacement of farmers
by the current famine will only further reduce the
expected yield. In fact, the United Nations has
indicated that it expects the famine to spread to the rest
of the South by the end of the year.
It is therefore critical that we accelerate efforts to
reach those in Al-Shabaab-controlled areas before the
crisis spirals out of control, threatening the security
and political gains made. The international community
must urgently reinforce our efforts to extend the zone
of safety for aid workers beyond Mogadishu and into
those areas. In the meantime, my Government will
continue to work closely with humanitarian agencies to
collect and share information on needs. We stand ready
to cooperate with all actors to ensure that aid gets to
the most critically affected populations, wherever they
may be.
I now turn to the political progress. In May, we
informed the Council of our intention, together with
the United Nations Political Office for Somalia, to hold
a consultative meeting in Mogadishu with the aim of

11-49644

S/PV.6614

generating consensus on how to bring the transition
process to a successful conclusion. At the time, there
existed critical disagreements among the transitional
institutions on how that was to be achieved. However,
with the generous help of both the Secretary-General’s
Special Representative for Somalia, Augustine Mahiga,
and the President of Uganda, His Excellency
Mr. Yoweri Museveni, we were able to bridge the gaps
and to come to a common agreement on the way
forward in the form of the Kampala Accord. As a
result, it is today my privilege to report that the
consultative meeting on ending the transition was
successfully held in the capital just over a week ago,
and concluded with the adoption of a road map,
complete with specific timelines and benchmarks, to
ensure the return of a permanent Government in
August next year. The conference was the culmination
of Somali-led reconciliation initiatives dating back to
the Arta Declaration of May 2000, which established
the Transitional National Government — the first
Somali Government since 1991 to secure a measure of
international recognition, enabling Somalia to
reoccupy its seat at the United Nations and in regional
bodies.
Over the course of more than a decade, the
transition process has expanded to include many who
had initially opposed it, bringing on board the Somalia
Reconciliation and Restoration Council in 2003 to
form the Transitional Federal Government, as well as
the moderate wing of the Islamic Courts Union in 2008
and the Ahlu Sunnah Wal Jama’a, two years later. It is
therefore clear that while the peace process has not
always been smooth, it has nonetheless proven to be
inclusive and locally driven.
Critically, my Government is committed to
implementing the road map and delivering the priority
tasks of security, the Constitution, reconciliation and
good governance by 20 August 2012. In the run-up to
the conference, President Sheikh Sharif Sheikh Ahmed
and I visited Puntland and Galmudug. Those visits
created a strong foundation for good working relations
between the Federal Government and regional
administrations. We have signed an agreement with the
President of Puntland, which will help us further
develop the relationship. Further steps to enhance
reconciliation efforts at the national, regional and local
levels will be made in the coming months.
We in Somalia are grateful for the encouragement
and support of the international community in the

11-49644

peace process, which has been critical to ensuring its
progress. We welcome the many statements issued by
the Council over the years expressing support for the
Somali people as we strive to achieve our dream of
lasting peace. In the next phase, my Government will
work hard to come together to make progress on the
road map so that we can hope to see united and
committed international support to the Transitional
Federal Institutions. A resource mobilization plan,
agreed with our international partners, will generate the
momentum to drive forward the implementation of the
road map.
The principles underpinning the road map
agreement in Mogadishu earlier this month were to
foster inclusivity and build Somali ownership. It will
be essential to follow-up the Mogadishu agreement
with a meeting, also in Somalia, that reaches out to a
wider group of stakeholders, incorporates the views of
more Somalis from around the country and maintains
momentum towards implementing the road map.
I also welcomed the formation of a technical
committee, which will work from Mogadishu, to
support the implementation of the road map. I look
forward to ensuring that future engagement with
international partners takes place in Somalia, as far as
possible, to help us meet the array of road map targets.
As required by the road map, we are now in the
process of identifying and appointing a committee of
experts to oversee the drafting of a new constitution.
They will soon embark upon consultations with all
relevant stakeholders, including civil society and
human rights organizations, to resolve any contentious
issues. We are also liaising with the parliamentary
leadership to ensure that the Transitional Federal
Charter is amended to provide a legal framework for
the constitutional process.
Transparency is a key element to providing
effective and legitimate governance. That is why we
have embarked on the process of identifying nominees
to
the
Interim
Independent
Anti-Corruption
Commission, as well as formulating a national fiscal
budget for the period 2011-2012. In the meantime, with
the assistance of our partners in the United Nations and
in the international community, we will continue to
provide services to the population as our current
capability allows. Those include, as has been
mentioned, the provision and protection of
humanitarian aid, policing and crime prevention and

9

S/PV.6614

modest infrastructure development, such as road
repairs, street lighting and the refurbishment of
schools, markets and hospitals. We are also working
with our neighbours in the region to address the root
causes of desertification and famine, as articulated in
the Nairobi action plan adopted at the recent summit on
the Horn of Africa crisis.
Today, Somalia faces two alternative futures. One
entails humanitarian relief being stepped up and
growth in the AMISOM international peace support
force so that it can support the Somali Police and Army
in building on the security gains made so far. At the
same time, that will enable embarking on a political
journey to revitalize and strengthen the Somali State.
The alternative, however, spells dire consequences for
the State. Worsening famine, together with the cholera
and measles epidemics, will destroy the country’s
social fabric and ruin economic livelihoods for a
generation. All the while, seriously overstretched TFG
and AMISOM forces are unable to stop Al-Shabaab
from regrouping. Allied with the enemies of peace in
Somalia, they attack the fragile security in the capital
and fatally undermine all efforts to rebuild the
Government.
A week ago, I signed the road map on behalf of
the TFG — in cooperation with the Transitional
Federal Parliament, the Puntland State of Somalia,
Galmudug and Ahlu Sunnah Wal Jama’a — because I
am confident that we can lead Somalia towards
growing social, economic and political stability.
However, Somalia’s future hangs in the balance. We
therefore cannot take this journey alone. As I stand
here today and pledge my commitment to delivering
the priority tasks laid out in the road map, I ask for the
international support necessary to deliver the
humanitarian relief and security that are vital
components of stabilizing Somalia.
Let me conclude by saying that, while efforts to
ameliorate the effects of famine will continue to
demand our attention in the short term, we will not lose
sight of the fact that the progress made on the security
and political fronts is laying the groundwork for a
secure Somali State that is representative of and
capable of delivering to its own people. With the
increased and concerted commitment of the
international community, I am confident that Somalia
will overcome present difficulties and take the path
towards peace and stability.

10

The President (spoke in Arabic): I thank the
Prime Minister of Somalia for his statement.
I shall now give the floor to members of the
Council.
Sir Mark Lyall Grant (United Kingdom): This is
an important opportunity for the Security Council to
discuss Somalia. I would like to thank the SecretaryGeneral for his latest report (S/2011/549) and for the
briefing from his Special Representative Augustine
Mahiga. We greatly appreciate the work of the Special
Representative, his team and all the United Nations
agencies active in Somalia. I would also like to
welcome to the Council this morning His Excellency
Prime Minister Abdiweli Mohamed Ali of Somalia. I
thank him for his important comments. I would also
like to thank Mr. Boubacar Diarra for his contribution
to the debate today.
I would like to make four key points — on the
humanitarian situation, the political situation, security
and the United Nations presence in Mogadishu.
First, the situation faced by many Somalis today
is one of almost unimaginable suffering. Twenty years
of civil war and its consequences have left an appalling
legacy, one that is being most acutely felt by the
Somali people — with 4 million needing emergency
assistance and 750,000 facing famine. Tens of
thousands have already died. Thousands more have
been displaced. The United Kingdom stands shoulder
to shoulder with the Somali people at its time of acute
need.
We have already provided $80 million of support
for the relief effort in Somalia, providing relief to over
1 million people. It is vital that we, the international
community, do all that we can to support those parts of
Somalia where suffering is the worst. I call on others to
give timely and generous support. The crisis will not
end in the short term. It will go on into 2012. We need
to ensure that our relief efforts are similarly sustained.
Secondly, what greater incentive could there be
than the prospect of famine stalking the land for
Somalia’s political leaders to demonstrate their
commitment to deliver a better future for the Somali
people? To that end, the United Kingdom welcomes the
adoption of the road map to end the transition, as well
as the work by Ambassador Mahiga to facilitate its
adoption. However, we should remember that the road
map was required precisely because of the lack of

11-49644

S/PV.6614

progress on the transitional tasks. The parties to the
road map therefore need to ensure that the key tasks set
out in it are delivered on time and that the transition
comes to a successful conclusion in August 2012. That
will of course require the support of the international
community, and we are ready to give it. But above all,
it requires the political will and commitment of
Somalia’s leaders. I welcome the Prime Minister’s
encouraging comments this morning on that score.
I urge the Transitional Federal Institutions of
Somalia to demonstrate that they are furthering
reconciliation efforts across the country. We expect the
Transitional Federal Institutions to demonstrate
improved accountability and transparency, in particular
around the allocation and management of resources, to
remain united and to refrain from any further internal
disputes. There should be no doubt that the Security
Council will stick to its commitment to making future
support contingent on progress against the road map.
Thirdly, I would like to welcome the recent
successes of the African Union Mission in Somalia
(AMISOM) and the Somali National Security Force in
Mogadishu. I pay particular tribute to the continued
commitment and bravery of the Ugandan and
Burundian troops. Al-Shabaab’s almost complete
withdrawal from Mogadishu is a mark of their success,
but it also raises new challenges for AMISOM. As
ever, it is vital that we give AMISOM the support it
needs to deliver greater protection to the people of
Mogadishu. The United Kingdom contributed over
$5 million earlier this year, and now provides more
than 50 per cent of the funding for the United Nations
Trust Fund in Support of AMISOM. My Government
calls on other international partners to step up and
make contributions without caveat to the AMISOM
Trust Fund.
Finally, I welcome the continued efforts to
increase the United Nations presence across Somalia,
and in Mogadishu in particular. The United Nations has
a vital role to play in supporting the Transitional
Federal Institutions with expertise and technical
assistance in delivering on their road map
commitments. It will need to do so in a coordinated
and integrated manner, working as one with the other
United Nations agencies and partners both in Nairobi
and on the ground in Somalia. I would also like to
welcome moves by other members of the international
community to increase their presence in Mogadishu,
and reiterate my Foreign Minister’s commitment to

11-49644

opening a British embassy in Mogadishu once local
conditions allow.
Now more than ever, the United Nations, the
international community and the Transitional Federal
Institutions must come together to demonstrate our
collective commitment to ending the transition and to
building stability in Somalia. The lives of thousands of
ordinary Somali men, women and children depend on
it. We cannot let this opportunity slip, and we cannot
fail the Somali people at their time of need. We must
hold ourselves and each other to account and deliver
real progress over the coming months.
Mr. Sangqu (South Africa): My delegation
thanks the Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral, Mr. Augustine Mahiga, for presenting the
report of the Secretary-General (S/2011/549) and for
his update on the political developments, as well as the
security and the humanitarian situations, in Somalia.
We also welcome the presence of His Excellency
Mr. Abdiweli Mohamed Ali, Prime Minister of
Somalia, and Ambassador Boubacar Gaoussou Diarra,
Special Representative of the Chairperson of the
African Union (AU) Commission for Somalia, and we
thank them for their encouraging statements this
morning.
South Africa welcomes the political progress
made in the implementation of the Kampala Accord
signed on 9 June, and commends the efforts of Special
Representative Mahiga and President Museveni to
facilitate this important agreement. We welcome the
appointment of Mr. Ali as the new Prime Minister of
Somalia, and the approval by Parliament of the Cabinet
appointed by him.
Equally commendable is the outcome of the
consultative meeting held in Mogadishu from 4 to
6 September and the agreement reached by the Somali
stakeholders on the road map to implement the key
transition tasks over the next 12 months. We encourage
all Somali’s to take ownership of the road map, which
sets out clear benchmarks, timelines, responsibilities,
resources and compliance structures for the key
priority areas that must be achieved before the end of
the transition. These positive political developments
are critical, as the unity of the political leadership of
Somalia is indispensable to addressing the security and
humanitarian challenges that confront the people of
that country. We echo the call by the AU and regional
leaders for the international community to provide

11

S/PV.6614

timely support and resources for the implementation of
the road map.
South Africa commends the recent military
successes achieved by the African Union Mission in
Somalia (AMISOM) and the forces of the Transitional
Federal Government (TFG) and the subsequent
withdrawal of Al-Shabaab from large parts of
Mogadishu, as announced on 6 August. The tide has
turned and every effort must be employed to ensure
that the control of the TFG forces and AMISOM over
Mogadishu is maintained and expanded.
The control of the TFG in Mogadishu has
stretched the resources of AMISOM and the TFG
forces. In this regard, the full deployment of AMISOM
to its authorized strength of 12,000 would be critical to
consolidating the military gains achieved thus far. We
commend the Governments of Uganda and Burundi for
their contribution to AMISOM.
South Africa fully supports the request of the
African Union Peace and Security Council in its
communiqué of 13 September for the United Nations
to reaffirm its commitment to authorizing the
deployment of a United Nations operation to take over
from AMISOM in Somalia. In the meantime, we
reiterate the call of the Peace and Security Council for
the United Nations to authorize the enhancement of the
support package provided in the areas of selfsustainment of troops, the reimbursement of
contingency-owned equipment, the provision of
requisite
enablers,
including
helicopters,
the
deployment of formed police units, logistical support
for the civilian component, as well as the creation of a
guard force of 850, in addition to the 12,000 authorized
personnel of AMISOM. We cannot allow a security
vacuum to develop in Mogadishu. We must keep the
momentum and strengthen the security capacities of
the TFG forces and AMISOM to prevent any reversal
of the security gains.
On the humanitarian front, we note with concern
the sad and deadly impact of the drought in the Horn of
Africa region, and in Somalia in particular, where an
estimated 4 million people face starvation and its
impact on the whole region. We call on the
international community to contribute generously to
the appeals funds to enable humanitarian organizations
to respond adequately to the hunger crisis in the Horn
of Africa region. In this regard, we commend the recent
African Union pledging conference convened on

12

25 August, which raised over $350 million to respond
to the relief effort in that region. South African
continues make its contribution to the response to the
humanitarian crisis confronting Somalia.
With regard to piracy off the coast of Somalia, we
note the reduction in hostages and ships held. Despite
this positive development, the international community
must continue its efforts to holistically address the
challenge posed by the scourge of piracy, including its
underlying causes relating to the collapse of State
authority, the illegal exploitation of marine resources
and the dumping of toxic waste.
In conclusion, South Africa encourages Special
Representative Mahiga to continue to work with the
AU and regional leaders as we collectively seek to
bring peace and stability to Somalia. South Africa
appeals to the international community not to abandon
Somalia in this critical period. Despite its immense
challenges, Somalia today offers the international
community a window of opportunity that should be
exploited to consolidate the political and security gains
recorded in recent times. Failure to do so and to exploit
today’s opportunities will merely postpone and
compound these challenges in the future. The time to
act is now.
Mr. Osorio (Colombia) (spoke in Spanish): It is a
pleasure to see you, Madame, presiding over today’s
meeting. I take this opportunity to welcome the Prime
Minister of the Transitional Federal Government of
Somalia, Mr. Abdiweli Mohamed Ali, and to thank him
for his briefing and update on the situation in Somalia
and recent events there. We also welcome and thank
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General,
Ambassador Augustine Mahiga, and Mr. Boubacar
Gaoussou Diarra, Special Representative of the African
Union Commission for Somalia, whose briefings were
most enlightening on the situation in Somalia.
Since our most recent meeting on Somalia
(S/PV.6599), we have seen significant positive political
developments in the area of security. The unity
agreement adopted by the Transitional Federal
authorities at the consultative meeting of 6 September
is undoubtedly a political milestone of great
importance. We would like to highlight the work
carried out by Mr. Mahiga and his efforts to facilitate
the consultations that led to this important agreement
between the parties.

11-49644

S/PV.6614

The road map adopted by the various parties and
the four tasks identified as priorities in ending the
transition period in 2012 constitute a solid basis for the
process of stabilization and unification. The federal
authorities must lead its implementation, consolidate
the security gains and make progress towards the
adoption of the Constitution, which should occur
alongside a dialogue for reconciliation.
Transparency and good governance are also
essential to national reconstruction and will help to
strengthen its legitimacy and credibility and maintain
the firm support of the international community. The
achievements in terms of security will be sustainable
insofar as the Transitional Federal Government is able
to strengthen its political management.
We are alarmed by the continuing deterioration of
the humanitarian situation. The news reaching us every
day is truly dramatic. International agencies are
reporting that that current crisis is one of the most
serious to affect the region for the past two decades. It
is important that we continue to work to guarantee
security and access for aid organizations and ensure
that aid reaches the populations most in need. We
reiterate that the parties to the conflict must respect
humanitarian principles, guarantee protection for the
civilian population and cooperate to ensure efficient
logistics.
With famine having been declared in six of the
eight regions of southern Somalia, the transitional
federal authorities must show that they are able to deal
with the situation and that their primary goal is
meeting the immediate needs of the population. We
urge them to employ every means at their disposal to
guarantee the security of the civilian population and do
everything possible to help and protect them.
We agree with the Secretary-General that it is
crucial for the international community to support the
Transitional Federal Government so that it can assume
its responsibility of protecting civilians and play a
coordinating role in providing assistance. While the
Transitional Federal Government has the responsibility
of demonstrating such leadership, the United Nations
and the international community must also continue to
contribute so that, through a comprehensive approach,
emergency assistance is increasingly linked to creating
conditions conducive to sustainable development and
the recovery capacity to ensure food security and
livelihoods in the long term, while contributing to the

11-49644

development of sustainable structures after the crisis
and to the prevention of future emergencies.
We must continue to strengthen State institutions,
recognizing their primary responsibility in the
restoration of security, political stability, the rule of
law and economic development. The Secretary-General
warns that, as the end of the transitional period
approaches, there has been a proliferation of entities
that claim to be regional administrations. This requires
Organization and the international community to
maintain a unified dialogue within the framework of
the commitments and goals contained in the road map,
and thereby prevent the fragmentation of the State and
contribute to its stabilization.
The work and presence of the African Union
Mission in Somalia is crucial to the stabilization of
Somalia. We must therefore urgently ensure that it has
the necessary resources and appropriate equipment to
fulfil its mandate and improve the troops’ living
conditions. My country supports the efforts undertaken
to that end.
To conclude, I urge the Transitional Federal
Institutions to comply with the terms agreed in the road
map with respect to both the principal tasks and
priorities and to the deadlines and implementation
mechanisms for the next 12 months. The role of the
United Nations Political Office for Somalia and of the
joint international coordination committee will be
crucial in this regard.
Mr. Moraes Cabral (Portugal): Let me, too,
thank the Secretary-General for his report (S/2011/549)
and Special Representative Augustine Mahiga for his
very useful briefing, and commend him and his team
for their constant efforts. Allow me also to welcome
the presence of His Excellency the Prime Minister of
Somalia, Mr. Abdiweli Mohamed Ali, and to thank him
for his presentation, as I thank Mr. Diarra for his
contribution to today’s debate.
There has been some encouraging progress in
Somalia. Within the framework of the Kampala
Accord, Parliament has endorsed a new Prime Minister
and a new Cabinet has been appointed. The Mogadishu
consultative meeting also took place and met its main
objective, which was the endorsement of the road map.
Despite these important steps, there are still
significant challenges ahead, as Ambassador Mahiga
outlined. It is therefore essential that the Somali

13

S/PV.6614

institutions build on the progress achieved so far and
on the existing consensus. Throughout the remaining
transition period, the Kampala Accord must be
implemented, as must the road map, in compliance
with the agreed benchmarks and timelines. We call on
the signatories of the Kampala Accord to ensure
cohesion, unity and focus on the completion of the four
priority tasks set out in the road map for ending the
transition — security, constitution, reconciliation and
good governance — so that the transitional period may
indeed come to an end in August 2012.
As Portugal has stressed before, ensuring respect
for human rights and paving the way for a better future
for Somalis, including for their economic and social
development, are also of paramount importance. We
underline in this respect the very positive role that
women can play in conflict resolution, and we
encourage all parties in Somalia to remove obstacles
and challenges to the participation of Somali women in
public life. In this endeavour, it is of the utmost
importance that regional and international partners
continue to be committed and to lend support to the
Somali people in helping it to address all the
challenges Somalia faces, the most recent of which is
at the humanitarian level.
We remain deeply concerned by the situation, and
we are particularly distressed by its terrible impact on
the lives of the Somali population, especially on
children, who have been severely affected by famine.
We are nevertheless encouraged by the efforts being
made on the ground by all the agencies, funds, regional
and local non-governmental organizations and
humanitarian partners against a background of very
challenging security conditions. We are also
encouraged by the mobilization of the international
community so far, and we welcome the holding of the
summit on the humanitarian response to the Horn of
Africa on the margins of the general debate of the
General Assembly at its sixty-sixth session. But these
combined efforts will be fruitful only if the aid reaches
those in real need. We therefore urge all parties and
armed groups to ensure full, safe and unhindered
access for the timely delivery of humanitarian aid to all
persons in need of assistance across Somalia.
At the security level, the Transitional Federal
Institutions should also capitalize on the recent
improvements in Mogadishu by ensuring the delivery
of basic services and providing good governance to all
of its citizens. By doing so, it will also be honouring

14

the efforts and sacrifices of the African Union Mission
in Somalia (AMISOM) and of the Somali National
Security Forces, which we commend.
As the context on the ground is changing, new
challenges arise for the Mission and for the
Transitional Federal Government. In order to respond
to the immediate needs, we encourage the
strengthening of the Somali National Security Forces,
as the Government bears the primary responsibility for
safeguarding peace and security in Somalia. This is an
endeavour to which we are glad to continue to
contribute, including through the European Union’s
training mission in Somalia.
Nevertheless, AMISOM remains a crucial
element to support and protect the Transitional Federal
Institutions. We therefore reiterate our support to the
Mission, endorsing its mandate renewal, and echo the
Secretary-General’s call for the acceleration of the
deployment of additional troops to fill the security
vacuum created by the withdrawal of Al-Shabaab from
Mogadishu. We will also favourably consider
expanding the scope of its support package and the
development of a guard force to provide security to
personnel from the international community.
But new challenges also arise for the United
Nations. In this regard, we welcome the efforts being
made to fulfil the Secretary-General’s commitment to
the full structural integration of the United Nations
family in the country in the shortest possible time
frame.
Despite recent developments, the overall situation
in Somalia remains fragile. It is therefore important to
comprehensively address all the challenges Somalia
faces at the political, security, humanitarian, human
rights and socio-economic development levels. This
also means pursuing our joint efforts to combat piracy
through a multidimensional response to the problem.
In the strong commitment, engagement and close
cooperation of all Somali parties lies the main ground
for a successful path towards peace and stability in
Somalia. Portugal will pursue its efforts, within the
different forums, to assist the Somali people in
addressing the challenges before them.
Before concluding, let me once again extend a
word of sincere appreciation to the continuous
engagement of the Secretary-General’s Special
Representative, Ambassador Mahiga, the African

11-49644

S/PV.6614

Union,
the
Intergovernmental
Authority
on
Development and other regional organizations in the
Somali process. In this context, we naturally share the
position of the European Union that will be expressed
later in this debate.
Mr. Hardeep Singh Puri (India): At the outset, I
would like to join others in thanking the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, Augustine
Mahiga, for his comprehensive briefing on recent
developments in Somalia and for the SecretaryGeneral’s report. I would also like to welcome
Mr. Mohamed Ali, Prime Minister of the Transitional
Federal Government of Somalia, to the Council and to
thank him for his statement outlining his perspective
on the situation in Somalia and the plans of the
Transitional Federal Government (TFG) for the future.
I would also like to thank the African Union (AU)
Special Representative for Somalia, Mr. Diarra, for his
statement.
The worsening humanitarian situation in Somalia,
caused by the famine, is cause for serious concern. As
the Secretary-General’s report notes, more than half of
the Somali population is in the grip of this
humanitarian crisis. While the international community
has undertaken emergency measures to provide aid to
those in need, nearly 2.8 million people are living in
the hardest-hit areas controlled by Al-Shabaab, where
access of humanitarian agencies is severely restricted.
We urge all Somali groups to provide unfettered access
to the humanitarian agencies and to facilitate the
delivery of aid to all those in need. India has decided to
provide humanitarian assistance of $8 million to the
countries afflicted with severe famine and drought in
the Horn of Africa — that is, Somalia, Kenya and
Djibouti — through the World Food Programme
(WFP). This is in addition to our contributions of
$1.5 million to the AU trust fund for Somalia and
$0.5 million to the United Nations Trust Fund in
Support of the African Union Mission in Somalia
(AMISOM), both for augmenting the AU Mission in
Somalia. We appreciate the key role played by the
Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs,
WFP and other United Nations organizations in the
delivery of humanitarian assistance. We join others in
calling upon Member States to join the efforts of the
United Nations and the African Union by responding
positively to the humanitarian appeal.
While the international community has been
battling the humanitarian crisis, there have been some

11-49644

positive developments on the political and security
fronts. The signing of the Kampala Accord and its
subsequent approval by the Somali Parliament and the
formation of a new Government have imparted a
positive momentum to the political process that needs
to be maintained in the extended transition period. We
also welcome the high-level consultative meeting on
ending the transition in Somalia, held from 4 to
6 September in Mogadishu, and the adoption of a road
map as a result. We reaffirm our support for this
process and hope that the Transitional Federal
Institutions (TFIs) will implement the road map in a
time-bound manner and complete the pending
transition tasks. This alone would enable a genuine,
inclusive and comprehensive national reconciliation to
take place in Somalia so as to end the two-decadeslong instability and insecurity.
In this connection, we appreciate the engagement
of the President and the Speaker of Somalia with the
international community. We also thank Special
Representative of the Secretary-General Mahiga for his
persistent efforts and cooperation with the Somali
leaders and with the AU, the East African Community,
the Intergovernmental Authority on Development and
other stakeholders.
The opportunity presented by the withdrawal of
Al-Shabaab from Mogadishu should be utilized by the
TFG to increase its effective presence all over
Mogadishu through the delivery of basic services. This
will not only enhance the TFG’s legitimacy but also
help the political process. There is an urgent need to
bring AMISOM’s strength to 12,000, as mandated by
the Security Council. In this connection, we commend
the Governments of Uganda and Burundi for their
contributions to AMISOM and for the sacrifices made
by their peacekeepers.
AMISOM is the mainstay of international efforts
to re-establish security in Somalia. It is therefore
imperative for the international community to urgently
bridge the resource gaps that have an adverse impact
on AMISOM’s effectiveness in fulfilling its mandate.
As the Secretary-General has reported, without
international support for equipping and outfitting
additional troops, troop-contributing countries will
continue to face difficulties in deploying peacekeepers
in a timely manner. Member States should contribute
promptly to the United Nations and AU trust funds for
AMISOM without caveats. As already mentioned,
India has contributed $2 million for AMISOM

15

S/PV.6614

operations through the AU and UN trust funds without
any caveats. We also support the extension of the
mandate of AMISOM.
There is also a need to expand the TFG forces
and strengthen their capacities for long-term stability
and security in Somalia. New recruitments have to be
undertaken and full training and proper equipment
provided.
Piracy off the coast of Somalia remains a serious
problem facing the international community. As at
31 August, Somali pirates held 19 ships and
405 hostages. Combating maritime piracy is therefore
an important issue that is intrinsically linked to the
security situation in Somalia. So far, the TFIs have not
paid adequate attention to this problem. We hope that
in the extended transition period, the TFIs will fully
implement the benchmarks concerning piracy
contained in the road map adopted on 6 September,
including the adoption of a legal framework against
piracy, hostage-taking, payment of ransom, the
demarcation of an exclusive economic zone, the
establishment of an operational coastguard, the
appointment of a counter-piracy coordinator, and so on.
In addition to the benchmarks in the road map, the
TFIs should expeditiously implement the provisions
contained in the relevant Security Council resolutions
for restricting port revenues for Al-Shabaab. In this
connection, we will engage constructively with the
members of the Security Council on the draft
resolution on a legal mechanism for the prosecution
and detention of pirates. We also stand ready to help in
capacity-building for the TFIs and the States of the
region for effective measures against piracy off the
coast of Somalia.
Further, given the growing scope and expanding
coverage of the problem, the international community
has to think about adopting a comprehensive counterpiracy strategy. In our view, such a strategy should
involve: a United Nations-led anti-piracy force to
conduct naval operations, which would help achieve
greater coordination in anti-piracy operations by
various naval forces; the enactment of national laws on
priority to criminalize piracy as defined in the United
Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea; the
effective sanitization of the Somali coastline, along
with the identification of safe corridors and buffer
zones.

16

India has already taken several steps, including
anti-piracy patrols in the Gulf of Aden since 2008 and
has also deployed its ships in the eastern and northeastern Arabian Sea. This has helped to neutralize
several attempts at piracy. While we will continue our
counter-piracy operations, there is also an urgent need
for the international community to address the serious
problem of hostage-taking by pirates and the
consequent humanitarian problems faced by the
hostages and their families. We hope that the
Secretary-General’s report on piracy, which is due in
October, will contain concrete recommendations on all
aspects of the problem of piracy, including hostagetaking and the plight of hostages.
Mr. DeLaurentis (United States of America): Let
me also thank Special Representative Mahiga and
African Union (AU) Special Representative Diarra for
their informative remarks. We also welcome the Prime
Minister of the Transitional Federal Government (TFG)
of Somalia to these proceedings.
Somalia continues to present some of the most
complex and urgent humanitarian, political and
security concerns in Africa and the world. The Security
Council should continue to pay close attention to these
interwoven challenges, as we are doing today.
The United States is gravely concerned about the
severe drought and humanitarian crisis in Somalia and
across the Horn of Africa. More than 11 million people
urgently need emergency assistance, including as many
as 4 million Somalis in need of food. Inside Somalia,
the famine has spread alarmingly. A sixth region has
now been affected, and we expect the situation to
continue to decline. Without urgent action, more than
750,000 people could die in the months ahead. We
welcome the upcoming humanitarian summit on
Somalia and the larger Horn of Africa region, which is
to be held during this session of the General Assembly.
The need is vast and the time is short.
The United States is providing approximately
$102 million in humanitarian relief assistance for
Somalia, and more than $600 million to the entire Horn
of Africa in response to the crisis. We join the
Secretary-General in calling on our fellow Member
States to contribute generously to the programmes
outlined in the consolidated appeal for Somalia. We
must fully fund the ongoing emergency response so
that the most desperate can receive the food, water,
medicine and shelter that they need to survive.

11-49644

S/PV.6614

Humanitarian actors in Somalia must coordinate in
order to maximize the impact of aid efforts throughout
the country.
At this hour of crisis, the United States condemns
the callous actions of Al-Shabaab, including the
targeting of civilians and the blocking of humanitarian
aid for millions of Somalis. Al-Shabaab continues to
block access to the populations hit hardest by the
famine. Its cruelty has severely impeded international
efforts to tackle the growing humanitarian crisis. All
armed groups must respect human rights and protect
civilians, especially women and children. Rape and
sexual violence against innocent women and children
are unconscionable and must stop. All parties in
Somalia share responsibility for protecting civilians
and enlarging and preserving the humanitarian space.
All armed groups in Somalia must adhere to
international humanitarian law.
Let me turn now to the political situation. The
United States welcomes the signing of the Kampala
Accord on 9 June and the outcome of the high-level
consultative meetings in Mogadishu in early
September. We commend Special Representative
Mahiga for his efforts to spur political reconciliation
and progress, including through an agreed upon road
map with benchmarks and timelines. It is now up to the
Transitional Federal Government to improve
governance by working with responsible regional and
local administrations, civil society groups and clan
leaders, on the basis of shared goals of peace and
stability, to achieve the benchmarks laid out in the road
map.
To that end, we remind the Transitional Federal
Institutions that future international support will be
contingent upon the completion of the tasks in the road
map. Now is the time for sustained and vigorous
peacebuilding efforts by the Transitional Federal
Government.
The Somali people deserve a responsible and
credible Government. We urge the Transitional Federal
Government to take advantage of the new security
environment to extend the writ of the police, the
criminal justice system and other civilian institutions
into the newly liberated areas of Mogadishu. The TFG
must provide improved governance, essential services
and fiscal transparency and responsibility, and it must
hold credible elections in August 2012.

11-49644

On the security front, the United States welcomes
the significant military achievements of the African
Union Mission in Somalia (AMISOM) and the Somali
Security Forces. The coordinated AMISOM offensive
against Al-Shabaab that began in February has
achieved impressive results. It contributed to
Al Shabaab’s withdrawal from nearly all of Mogadishu
on 6 August. Nonetheless, Al-Shabaab remains a threat,
and we urge AMISOM and the Somali Security Forces
to persevere in their counter-insurgency efforts. For its
part, the TFG must make further progress on the agreed
road map, and must begin providing services in as
much of Mogadishu as possible in order to solidify
recent security gains.
The United States commends the Governments of
Burundi and Uganda for their commitment to
AMISOM. We thank Major General Mugisha for his
leadership and all of AMISOM’s brave peacekeepers.
We welcome further troop commitments from other AU
partner nations so that AMISOM can reach its
mandated strength to quickly secure its expanded area
of operations.
The United States intends to continue our strong
bilateral support to AMISOM troop-contributing
countries. Since 2007, we have obligated more than
$258 million worth of training equipment and logistic
support to AMISOM and its troop-contributors. We
have also provided more than $85 million for security
assistance to the TFG to develop a professional and
capable Somali security force. We urge other Member
States to fund, without caveats, the United Nations
Trust Fund for AMISOM, including the urgently needed
reimbursement of contingent-owned equipment.
The United States also commends the work of the
United Nations Support Office for AMISOM and the
significant contributions that it has made to improving
AMISOM’s logistical operations and quality of life. We
urge the United Nations to expand its presence and
activities in Somalia as the security situation allows.
Relocating United Nations personnel to Mogadishu is
key to the long and difficult effort to defeat Al-Shabaab
and to restore stability and decent governance in
Somalia.
Finally, let me turn to piracy off the coast of
Somalia — a scourge that began because of the
instability and lack of governance on land that now
threatens the peace, security and stability of Somalia.
Piracy, and the illicit and lucrative economy that it

17

S/PV.6614

brings with it, contribute to corruption and corrode
sustainable political and economic development. The
only sustainable long-term solution to piracy, which
will also advance Somalia’s long-term economic
development, political stability and humanitarian
situation, is security and good governance.
The United States is deeply committed to
supporting humanitarian relief efforts and to the
security and stability of Somalia. We will continue to
partner with the international community to help end
the worsening humanitarian crisis and bring relief to
the suffering people of that troubled land.
Mr. Messone (Gabon) (spoke in French): On
15 August in the Council we adopted a press statement
(see SC/10360), in which we stated our support for the
holding of the consultative meeting on ending the
transition in Somalia. As we now hold this meeting, I
would like to thank you, Mr. President, for having
organized this debate on the development of the
situation in Somalia, which remains of concern.
We welcome the presence among us of His
Excellency Mr. Abdiweli Mohamed Ali, Prime Minister
of Somalia. We are grateful to him for his important
statement. We would like first of all to express our
satisfaction at the information that he has given us with
regard to the commitment of the Transitional Federal
Government (TFG) to doing its utmost to implement
the road map adopted during the meeting at the
beginning of September.
We thank Mr. Augustine Mahiga, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for Somalia,
for the information that he gave us in presenting the
report of the Secretary-General (S/2011/549). Finally,
we would like to welcome the presence of Ambassador
Boubacar Diarra, who represents the Chairperson of
the African Union Commission, and we thank him for
his statement.
Like all members, Gabon remains concerned
about the severity of the humanitarian crisis that
continues to prevail in Somalia. It certainly remains a
major challenge for the country and for the
international community. Today, five regions in
Somalia are affected by the famine. Children die every
day from malnutrition, disease and the lack of
appropriate care. The humanitarian efforts and the
funding provided have made it possible, however, to
provide greater assistance to the most vulnerable
populations, in particular those in the capital and in the

18

refugee camps in Kenya and Ethiopia. In addition, the
African Union conference held on 25 August in Addis
Ababa mobilized some $350 million for efforts to help
the Horn of Africa.
These actions demonstrate the willingness of
Africa and the international community to provide an
urgent response to the humanitarian crisis. For its part,
Gabon has contributed to those efforts by making a
modest contribution of $2.5 million.
Despite all these efforts, the needs on the ground
remain significant. In that regard, Gabon wishes to
reiterate the Secretary-General’s call for sustained
assistance. We must move beyond emergency
assistance and create support mechanisms for
agriculture in Somalia. Since this is an urgent matter,
we have an opportunity to think about systemic longterm actions to prevent food insecurity. We therefore
welcome the upcoming meeting of the Group of
Twenty, which will give the international community
an opportunity to mobilize its efforts to fight food
insecurity.
The onset of rains in southern Somalia should be
an opportunity for the international community to help
Somalis acquire better seeds and fertilizers, which
would in turn boost agricultural production. Thus, we
would be able to offer a sustained response to the
humanitarian crisis plaguing Somalia and the Horn of
Africa.
Regarding the political situation, we join other
Council members in noting the progress made. We can
never repeat this enough: the Somali crisis is above all
a political and institutional crisis, which is why a
sustained solution can be found only if greater
emphasis is placed on reconciliation among all
Somalis. In that regard, we reiterate the appeal made
by the representative of the African Union.
The solution also involves restoring State
authority and bolstering the peace process. We
therefore welcome the 6 September adoption of the
road map for the final stages of transition in the
country. That step will help to further build
cohesiveness among the Transitional Federal
Institutions. The road map is a basic document and a
further landmark in the implementation of the Djibouti
Agreement.
We are encouraged by the establishment of new
regional administrations comprised of former armed

11-49644

S/PV.6614

militia groups who stand ready to work with the
Transitional Federal Government. The willingness of
the armed movements to become political parties
exemplifies the positive evolution of the peace process
in Somalia.
Gabon stresses the need to consolidate this
political progress. We encourage the Transitional
Federal Government and the Federal Parliament to
carry out all tasks set out in the road map as soon as
possible. The drafting of the constitution, the
improvement of security and national reconciliation are
essential to efforts to end more than 20 years of
instability in the country. Thus, it is important for the
Security Council and, more generally, the international
community to continue supporting the Transitional
Federal Government with a view to strengthening its
authority throughout the country.
On the security front, Somalia has made
substantial progress, as evidenced by the withdrawal of
the Al-Shabaab militias from Mogadishu. Nevertheless,
threats to security persist. Attempted attacks against
humanitarian workers, continued fighting in southern
Somalia and the attacks of last July in Kenya remind us
of that fact.
In that regard, Gabon calls on the international
community to mobilize even further. The presence of
the African Union Mission in Somalia (AMISOM)
remains essential. It must enjoy predictable funding
and achieve the force strength authorized in resolution
1964 (2010).
My delegation welcomes the announcement made
by Djibouti and Sierra Leone, which, despite their
difficult conditions, have agreed to provide troops to
AMISOM. We also wish to thank all countries that are
contributing in various ways to the viability of this
operation. However, as pointed out by the African
Union in its communiqué of 13 September, the United
Nations bears the primary responsibility for
maintaining international peace and security. That is
why we should consider the deployment of a genuine
United Nations peacekeeping mission, the modalities
of which could be determined in cooperation with the
African Union.
For the time being, we should attempt to improve
the United Nations support system for AMISOM.
Delayed
reimbursements
for
contingent-owned
equipment and shortcomings in logistical support have
enormously hindered the timely deployment of

11-49644

additional troops. My delegation remains prepared to
consider any proposal made by the Secretary-General
in that respect. We should continue to train the Somali
Police Force and the National Security Force. Peace
and stability in Somalia are first and foremost the
responsibility of the Somali people themselves. All
those measures are even more urgent and necessary as
they will help us to capitalize on the security gains of
recent months.
In conclusion, my delegation would like to
highlight one point regarding the threat that piracy
represents to the entire coastline of Somalia. Every
time the issue has been raised in the Council, Gabon
has consistently stressed the importance of a global
approach, which must include efforts to address the
security and humanitarian threat on the mainland. We
therefore look forward with interest to the upcoming
report of the Secretary-General on this matter.
Finally, we take this opportunity to once again
welcome the effective partnership between the United
Nations and the African Union in support of peace and
stability in Somalia.
Mr. Barbalić (Bosnia and Herzegovina): At the
outset, allow me to express our gratitude to the
Secretary-General for his comprehensive report
(S/2011/549) on Somalia and to thank Mr. Augustine
Mahiga, Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral for Somalia, for his useful and informative
briefing this morning. We also thank Mr. Boubacar
Gaoussou Diarra for his contribution to today’s debate.
We also welcome His Excellency Mr. Abdiweli
Mohamed Ali, Prime Minister of Somalia, and thank
him for his remarks.
Bosnia and Herzegovina notes with satisfaction
the recent security developments in Somalia. It is of
crucial importance that this window of opportunity be
used in the right manner. The consolidation of
authority, delivery of basic services to its people and
fighting corruption, as well as the process of national
reconciliation, are essential for the success of the
Transitional Federal Government. Strengthening State
institutions, particularly the National Security Force
and the Somali Police Force, should be accelerated
with the assistance of the international community.
We reiterate our full support to the Transitional
Federal Government and the Djibouti peace process.
We also welcome the signing of the Kampala Accord,
which overcame the political impasse that had

19

S/PV.6614

paralysed and endangered the peace process in
Somalia. We are pleased to note the timely
implementation of the Kampala Accord to date, and we
encourage the Transitional Federal Institutions to
continue their efforts in that regard.
Bosnia and Herzegovina strongly welcomes the
holding and outcome of the consultative meeting
organized and facilitated by Special Representative
Mahiga. The adopted road map, with clear timelines
and benchmarks for completing the current 12-month
transitional period, should be implemented in a timely
manner, bearing in mind that the future support of the
international community for Somalia depends on its
realization. We call upon the Transitional Federal
Institutions to demonstrate unity, cooperation and
commitment in carrying out their obligations through
an inclusive and genuine Somali-owned political
process.
The international community has already shown
its dedication to helping the Somali people achieve
lasting peace and stability in the country. We express
our hope that those efforts will continue, and reiterate
our call on the international community and Somalia’s
partners to provide urgent assistance to the Transitional
Federal Government.
Other important developments are the recent
activities aimed at increasing the presence of the
United Nations in Mogadishu and other parts of
Somalia. We express our encouragement of further
coordination of the United Nations work in the country.
We are concerned about continuing grave
violations of human rights, especially against women
and children. We therefore urge all parties to the
conflict to fully comply with international
humanitarian law and human rights law in order to
protect the civilian population.
Furthermore, we express our serious concern with
regard to the humanitarian situation in Somalia. While
famine is spreading, due to a deadly combination of
severe drought, ongoing fighting and difficulties in the
delivery of humanitarian assistance, the people of
Somalia are facing a new humanitarian catastrophe.
Our thoughts and prayers are with those who endure
the terrible effects of the famine, which has already
resulted in the deaths of tens of thousands of people.
More than 3 million people in Somalia depend on
humanitarian assistance, including internally displaced

20

persons, who represent one of the most vulnerable
groups in the country. The insecurity, compounded by
the drought, has led to migration in all directions
throughout the Horn of Africa.
We urge the international community to redouble
its efforts in providing assistance to the people of
Somalia. We share the assessment of the SecretaryGeneral that a multisectoral response is essential, and
call upon all Member States to contribute to the
consolidated appeal for Somalia.
Bosnia and Herzegovina commends all
humanitarian organizations and workers for their
tireless efforts in providing humanitarian assistance to
people in need in Somalia despite the extremely
difficult environment in which they operate. We urge
that humanitarian agencies and workers be given
unhindered access to the populations in need.
The African Union Mission in Somalia
(AMISOM) continues to represent an important factor
of stability in the country. We commend AMISOM
troops for their tireless efforts in stabilizing the
situation and hope that its troop levels will soon reach
the mandated strength. We call upon the international
community to continue its support to AMISOM, with
the aim of seeing its mandate fully implemented.
We recognize the importance of the United
Nations Support Office for AMISOM, the United
Nations Political Office for Somalia, and the United
Nations country team for Somalia, as well as the hard
work of the African Union, the Intergovernmental
Authority on Development and all other humanitarian
organizations. We also welcome the efforts of the
United Nations Mine Action Service to reduce the risks
to the civilian population posed by mines and
unexploded ordnance.
Piracy off the coast of Somalia continues to pose
a threat to international peace and security. The
phenomenon of piracy is one of the challenges that still
await a comprehensive, adequate and effective
response from the international community, although
some security, judiciary, prevention, best practices and
awareness-raising measures have been taken. We
should continue to cooperate and concentrate on
eliminating the root causes of piracy.
Mr. Wittig (Germany): At the outset, I would
also like to thank Special Representative of the
Secretary-General Augustine Mahiga for his briefing.

11-49644

S/PV.6614

We highly appreciate his work and continue to support
him. I would also like to thank the Special
Representative of the Chairperson of the Commission
of the African Union Somalia, Mr. Boubacar Gaoussou
Diarra, and the Prime Minister of the Transitional
Federal Government of the Somali Republic (TFG),
Mr. Abdiweli Mohamed Ali, for their presence and
their statements.

respects and tribute in connection with the casualties
that the African Union force has had to suffer. We
remain grateful to the African Union for the decisive
action that it has taken in an extremely challenging and
dangerous environment. AMISOM is living proof of
the willingness and capacity of the African Union to
take responsibility for peace and security on the
African continent.

My delegation aligns itself with the statement to
be delivered by the observer of the European Union
later on.

My country actively contributes to the European
Union training mission for Somali security forces,
which takes place in close cooperation with AMISOM
and Uganda. It aims at providing capable and
professional security forces for the Somali Government
that could form the nucleus of a respected State
authority that effectively controls the whole country.

Germany welcomes the results of the Mogadishu
consultative meeting held on 6 September. We hope
that the agreed road map will guide Somali politics for
the months to the come and will be implemented with
determination and a strong sense of responsibility. As
the road map does not yet provide strict benchmarks,
we wish to stress the imperative necessity for making
progress measurable.
Continued international support will be depended
on such progress. The Somali actors have to deliver
now, since the transitional period cannot be prolonged
indefinitely. We encourage the Transition Federal
Institutions to continue to demonstrate their political
will, which is indispensable to successfully cope with
the manifold tasks that still lie ahead.
We call on the Somali institutions to make the
best possible use of the additional year of transition
and to finalize the transition process at last. We
continue to support every honest and serious effort
aimed at achieving sustainable peace and stability in
Somalia.
The withdrawal of Al-Shabaab forces from the
capital and other parts of the country is a unique
opportunity for the Somali Government to assume its
responsibilities and provide stability and a safe life for
Somalis. This opportunity must be seized. The TFG
must reinforce its efforts to enhance its political base
and to reach out and win over as many political forces
as possible, particularly in Somalia’s regions —
something that does not seem to have happened on a
sufficient scale in previous months.
We would like once more to commend the
African Union Mission in Somalia (AMISOM) and the
Ugandan and Burundian peacekeepers for the role that
the Mission plays in Somalia, and especially for the
success achieved over the past month. We also pay our

11-49644

Joint and effective actions by Somali authorities
are all the more important now that the region is facing
a tremendous humanitarian catastrophe. Not only the
continuous drought but, first and foremost, the
repercussions of many years of civil war, as well as the
absence of effective State institutions, have led to the
current catastrophe in Somalia, of which, once again,
the weakest are suffering the most. With almost half of
the entire Somali population affected and more than
12 million in urgent need of help in the whole region,
fast and effective humanitarian assistance is crucial.
My country provides over $200 million for emergency
relief, food assistance and food security.
Finally, I would like to stress that Germany and
the international community continue to support the
Somali institutions in their efforts to establish a viable
and stable Somali State. The Transitional Federal
Institutions can count on this support that has gone on
for decades. In return, my country and the international
community expect Somali institutions to act swiftly,
responsibly and credibly in order end the Somali crisis.
Mrs. Ogwu (Nigeria): On behalf of the Nigerian
delegation, I would like to express our sincere
gratitude to the Lebanese presidency for convening
today’s debate.
Somalia faces daunting challenges, and we
welcome
the
opportunity
to
discuss
them
comprehensively. Let me take this opportunity to
welcome His Excellency Prime Minister Abdiweli
Mohamed Ali and to thank him for his very insightful
statement. I also want to thank Ambassador Boubacar
Diarra, Special Representative of the Chairperson of

21

S/PV.6614

the Commission of the African Union for Somalia, for
his very perceptive remarks.
I want to thank Special Representative of the
Secretary-General Mahiga for his comprehensive
statement and, indeed, his tireless efforts to achieve
peace and security in Somalia. We greatly appreciate
his persistent and enduring engagement with Somalia’s
stakeholders in an effort to optimize the transitional
period.
Nigeria is encouraged by the priorities that Prime
Minister Abdiweli Mohamed Ali has succinctly
outlined to move Somalia beyond its security, political
and socio-economic challenges. Our support for the
Transitional Federal Government (TFG), its institutions
and African Union Mission in Somalia (AMISOM) in
their efforts to rebuild Somalia remains unflinching.
Although recent territorial gains and the ousting
of Al-Shabaab from Mogadishu have undoubtedly
enhanced security around the capital city and
facilitated the delivery of aid, security remains a
daunting challenge in Somalia. Effective and sustained
measures are required to underpin recent gains and
incrementally extend the TFG’s authority throughout
the country. We believe that those challenges must
compel the Council to revise its Somalia strategy by
fast-tracking support both for the TFG and its
institutions as well as AMISOM.
Nigeria
shares
the
Secretary-General’s
assessment that AMISOM’s continued presence in
Somalia remains invaluable to the TFG as it seeks to
discharge its responsibilities. We believe that the full
deployment of the 3,000 troops authorized by the
Council, increasing AMISOM’s force strength to
12,000, will significantly enhance its capabilities and
effectiveness.
Indeed,
augmenting
AMISOM’s
capabilities with force enablers and expanding its
support package should be central to the new Somalia
strategy. Adequate provisions should be made for the
self-sustenance of the troops as well as the
reimbursement for contingent-owned equipment.
Nigeria welcomes the ongoing support provided
by bilateral partners to the Trust Fund for AMISOM
and encourages partners to provide caveat-free support.
In our view, the 18 August African Union
technical workshop outlined critical next steps for
AMISOM. Establishing a dedicated formed police unit
to buttress law and order in Mogadishu, as well as an

22

additional battalion of 300 to protect United Nations
personnel, is critical to prevent the overextension of its
military resources and capabilities.
Cognizant of the importance of building and
strengthening Somalia’s internal security forces,
Nigeria welcomes the prospect of the adoption of a
national security and stabilization plan by 19 October
under the political road map. We welcome the road
map’s declaration of a comprehensive legislative and
security response to the ongoing threat of piracy.
Nigeria is encouraged that the consultative meeting
held in Mogadishu from 4 to 6 September delineated a
concrete set of objectives to reinforce the political
process, including the Transitional Federal Institutions.
Nigeria has unequivocally stressed that national
ownership over Somalia’s political trajectory remains
critical for ensuring the sustainability of the peace
process.
The efforts to adopt a draft constitution and
create a credible and stable parliament by next July are
significant first steps in developing an enduring and
legitimate structure. It bears reiterating that unity and
coherence within the TFG and its institutions will go a
long way in consolidating recent gains and expediting
the implementation of both the Kampala Accord and
the post-transition road map for Somalia.
Like other delegations, Nigeria is deeply
concerned by the unabated humanitarian crisis in the
Horn of Africa, including Somalia. We are all aware
that more than 12.5 million people are affected by the
worst drought in the region in 60 years. It is troubling
that this natural disaster may be worsened by the
deliberate obstruction of humanitarian efforts by
insurgents. Indeed, as many as 750,000 lives may be at
deadly risk. The denial of the right to food undermines
the right to health, thus ultimately placing at risk the
most fundamental of all human rights, namely, the right
to life. We call on all parties to guarantee unfettered
access to humanitarian agencies as they strive to
deliver vitally needed aid.
The current crisis is vast in scope and requires the
collective resources of the international community to
stem the rapidly rising cost in human life. We call on
all Member States to contribute to the consolidated
Somalia fund. For its part, Nigeria has contributed
$2 million to the fund.
The coming months will provide the TFG with a
renewed opportunity to forge permanent governmental

11-49644

S/PV.6614

structures and build enduring peace and security. The
goals enumerated in the road map are a vital first step.
In the face of the difficulties posed by the transition
period, insecurity and the humanitarian crisis,
delivering on these goals will require not only the
comprehensive efforts of the Somali authorities but
also the full support of the international community. As
the Secretary-General aptly stated, we must capitalize
on recent developments and seize the opportunities
created by the Kampala Accord, the political road map
and the force withdrawal of Al-Shabaab from
Mogadishu.
Mr. Pankin (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We are grateful to Special Representative of
the Secretary-General Augustine Mahiga for his
briefing on the situation in Somalia and for his
presentation of the report of the Secretary-General
(S/2011/549). We are also grateful to the new Prime
Minister of the Transitional Federal Government
(TFG), Mr. Abdiweli Mohamed Ali, for his analysis of
the situation and prospects. We also thank
Mr. Boubacar Diarra, Special Representative of the
Chairperson of the Commission of the African Union
for Somalia, for his statement.
As has been said, in spite of clear success in
driving Al-Shabaab from Mogadishu, the security
situation in Somalia continues to be of great concern.
Fundamental breakthroughs have not yet been
achieved. The efforts of extremists have not yet been
extirpated. They continue to control half of the country
and they seem unwilling to lay down their arms.
We share the concern that the security vacuum
following the withdrawal of extremists from
Mogadishu may not be filled by the TFG and the
African Union Mission in Somalia (AMISOM), but
rather by local militias that are not under the control of
the Government. In those circumstances, it is important
to prevent the campaign against Al-Shabaab from
turning into a clan war of the most unpredictable
nature. We are also worried by what is stated in the
Secretary-General’s report with regard to delays in the
implementation of the provisions of resolution 1964
(2010) and efforts for strengthening African
peacekeepers and increasing their force strength to the
planned level of 12,000.
To consolidate security, there must be active
prevention of internal attempts by the Somali
opposition. The Security Council must therefore give

11-49644

due attention to the need to increase the effectiveness
of the sanctions regime.
In our view, the positive outcomes of the
consultative meeting in Mogadishu and the adoption of
the road map for the conclusion of the transition period
are grounds for optimism. The Transitional Federal
Institutions must immediately proceed to the
implementation of their tasks, with optimal support by
participants at the meeting.
We view it as important to continue working on
the participation of a large number of representatives
from local administrations and civil society
organizations in the current unprecedented efforts to
galvanize stability in Somalia. In the end,
comprehensive success in Somalia will depend on
Somalis themselves.
Of particular concern is the exacerbation of an
already chronic humanitarian situation in Somalia. We
support the call by the General Assembly for a more
effective international response to the situation, where
almost half of the population is affected by famine and
life support systems are in danger of collapse. The
Russian Federation stands ready to provide emergency
food aid to Somalia by way of an additional targeted
contribution of $2 million to the World Food
Programme.
Piracy off the coast of Somalia is an area of
particular concern for us. This criminal enterprise is
itself becoming a threat to peace and security in the
region. The force component of the drive against
piracy has revealed its insufficiency. However, the
situation in those troubled waters continues to be
dangerous. In our view, the situation will not improve
as long as pirates and their facilitators get away with
their actions. In that regard, we are disappointed by the
negative reaction of Somali authorities at all levels, in
particular the TFG’s response to the promising
proposal of international efforts to establish an
extraterritorial Somali court. Nevertheless, we continue
to work with other States on creating an effective
justice mechanism in the region in order to bring
pirates to justice.
We believe it is appropriate to maintain a step-bystep approach in expanding the presence of the United
Nations in the country. In that respect, a key factor
would be to take into account the security situation. We
favour strengthened coordination of the activities of
United Nations bodies working on Somalia. We

23

S/PV.6614

support the proposal of the Secretary-General to
establish a separate sub-unit of AMISOM for the
protection of United Nations personnel and those of
international organizations in Mogadishu.
In close cooperation with its partners, Russia will
continue to support the efforts of the President of
Somalia and of the TFG in establishing lasting peace
and national reconciliation based on the Djibouti
Agreements and in the interest of strengthening
security and stability in the region.
In conclusion, we are grateful to the delegation of
the United Kingdom for preparing the draft resolution
on the continuation of the AMISOM mandate.
Mr. Li Baodong (China) (spoke in Chinese): I
would like to thank Mr. Mahiga, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for Somalia,
for his briefing and his contributions to furthering the
peace process in Somalia. I also welcome Prime
Minister Abdiweli Mohamed Ali of the Transitional
Federal Government and His Excellency Mr. Diarra,
Special Representative of the Chairperson of the
Commission of the African Union for Somalia, to this
meeting.
Progress has been made recently in the peace
process and security situation in Somalia, including the
signing of the Kampala Accord and the successful
consultative meeting convened in Mogadishu, as well
as in the transition process. Good intentions have been
shown by various parties in Somalia to build lasting
peace and identify the actions necessary to strengthen
the peace process in the country.
Military operations by the African Union Mission
in Somalia (AMISOM) and the National Security Force
have resulted in important achievements and improved
the security situation in Somalia. China welcomes this
development and appreciates the contributions of
international and regional organizations, such as the
United Nations and the African Union, as well as the
contributions of the Governments of Uganda, Ethiopia
and Burundi.
It should be noted that the peace process in
Somalia still has a long way to go and faces arduous
tasks. The recent famine in Somalia has led to a severe
humanitarian crisis. Parties in Somalia and in the
international community should now focus on the
following efforts.

24

First, they should take advantage of the window
of opportunity to vigorously promote the peace
process. The concrete implementation of the road map
drafted at the consultative meeting on ending the
transition phase is the top priority for the next phase of
work. It also holds the key to achieving peace and
stability in Somalia. China hopes that the parties in
Somalia can make use of the current favourable
momentum to further strengthen unity, increase mutual
trust and strengthen capacity-building in order to
ensure the smooth implementation of the road map.
The international community should continue to assist
the Transitional Federal Institutions through enhanced
capacity-building and provide greater support to
Somalia’s peace process.
Secondly, in order to support the efforts of the
African Union to resolve the question of Somalia, we
hope that the Security Council will attach great
importance to the requests and recommendations of the
African Union Peace and Security Council on resolving
the issue of Somalia and respond positively. AMISOM
plays a vital role in maintaining security and stability
in Somalia. China supports the extension of
AMISOM’s mandate and calls on the international
community, in particular the United Nations, to
intensify its support to AMISON by providing greater
logistical, technical and financial support. At the same
time, we also support the Security Council in positively
considering the deployment of a peacekeeping
operation in Somalia at an appropriate time.
Thirdly, every effort must be made to help
Somalia address its humanitarian crisis. China is
deeply concerned with the increasing famine in
Somalia and welcomes the emergency aid efforts of
international humanitarian agencies. We urge the
parties in Somalia to fully cooperate with the aid
efforts of the international community. China has
donated $16 million to support the efforts of the World
Food Programme on the famine in Somalia. We call on
the international community to continue to provide
further assistance to Somalia.
Mr. Bonne (France) (spoke in French): Allow
me, at the outset, to thank the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General for Somalia, Mr. Mahiga, for
his briefing and for his presence here so soon after the
successful conference in Mogadishu. I also thank the
representative of the African Union and the Prime
Minister of Somalia for joining us in the Council today.

11-49644

S/PV.6614

I will first of all refer to the humanitarian
situation in Somalia, which remains of particular
concern. Famine was declared in the Bay region last
week, bringing to six the number of regions affected by
this scourge. There are now 4 million people affected,
of whom 450,000 are at risk of imminent death. Worse
yet, the famine has almost certainly not yet peaked,
although it could do so in the coming weeks or months.
It is therefore imperative that we support focused and
joint efforts undertaken to help Somalis get through
this severe humanitarian crisis. That is why France has
allocated €30 million in emergency aid to the Horn of
Africa and dispatched 18 tons of child supplements by
air and 381 tons of food rations by ship.
I welcome the efforts of United Nations agencies
and non-governmental organizations (NGOs) to
provide aid to the Somali people. It is a complex task
within a territory that is controlled in most areas by
Al-Shabaab. In that respect it is necessary for all actors
involved, including NGOs, the United Nations country
team and the African Union Mission in Somalia
(AMISOM), to coordinate among themselves as best
they can.
Secondly, the security situation in Somalia
remains critical. The withdrawal of Al-Shabaab forces
from Mogadishu has shown that things can change in
the country. The capital is now completely under the
control of the Transitional Federal Government (TFG).
AMISOM has played an important key role, without
which Mogadishu would still be in the hands of
Al-Shabaab. It is important that today we capitalize on
that progress. AMISOM must secure all of the liberated
territory and the positions acquired, in close
coordination with the armed forces of the TFG and
allied militias. The vacuum left by the withdrawal of
Al-Shabaab must not, under any condition, be filled by
new warlords. AMISOM must also pursue efforts,
together with the TFG forces, to reduce the number of
areas remaining under Al-Shabaab control.
In order to strengthen AMISOM, Council
members raised the troop ceiling from 9,000 to 12,000
troops last year. We would like the African Union to
now do everything possible to ensure that this
authorized increased troop ceiling be achieved as soon
as possible. The strengthening we have also provided
for in the United Nations logistical support package for
AMISOM should also help to strengthen the force.

11-49644

Thirdly, it must be remembered that AMISOM’s
deployment is not an end in itself, but a way to restore
peace and enable the establishment of a stable State in
Somalia. It is therefore the task of the Transitional
Federal Institutions to lay the foundations for that State
as soon as possible. France therefore welcomes the
adoption of the road map on 6 September in
Mogadishu. We hope that it will facilitate the step-bystep establishment of a constitutional framework, bring
about national reconciliation and provide basic services
to the population.
The TFG must be aware of the short time in
which it must achieve those goals. In less than one
year, it will have to accomplish what it has not
managed to do in six years. Every deadline set out in
the road map will have to be met from the beginning so
as not to fail to attain those goals. It will fall to the
international community to help the Transitional
Federal Government throughout the process and to
ensure follow-up at each step. The support and
expertise of the United Nations in this matter will be
critical. The presence of the country team agencies and
of the United Nations Political Office for Somalia
should be strengthened on the ground as much as
possible. To facilitate the efficiency and effectiveness
of that presence on the ground in Mogadishu, we
support the creation of a specific AMISOM detachment
of 300 soldiers for the protection of international
personnel.
The international community has chosen to lend
its trust and its support for another year to the
transitional institutions in Somalia. Over the coming
months, we expect them to demonstrate equal resolve
and engagement — hitherto unseen — commensurate
with the expectations of the Somali people.
Mrs. Viotti (Brazil): I thank you, Mr. President,
for convening this important debate. I welcome His
Excellency Mr. Ali, Prime Minister of Somalia, and
thank him for his presentation. I also thank Special
Representative of the Secretary-General Augustine
Mahiga for briefing us on the latest developments in
Somalia, and I wish to express our appreciation to him
for his work, in particular for his pivotal role in
facilitating dialogue among Somali stakeholders with
such positive results. I also thank Mr. Boubacar Diarra,
Special Representative of the African Union
Commission for Somalia, for his contribution to our
debate.

25

S/PV.6614

The consultative meeting on ending the transition
held in Mogadishu this month represents a very
encouraging step forward. We are pleased at the high
turnout at the meeting, and we welcome the adoption
of a road map for the implementation of the transitional
tasks. We are encouraged by the fact that the key tasks
of improving security, working towards the new
constitution, achieving reconciliation and improving
governance have been given high priority. Adherence
by the Somali authorities to the timeline set out in
Mogadishu will be of the utmost importance. The
support of the international community will remain
crucial.
The fact that the meeting was held in the capital
is very meaningful. We congratulate the Transitional
Federal Government (TFG) and the African Union
Mission in Somalia (AMISOM) on the improvement of
the security situation in the capital. That important
development signals tangible progress in the security
sector. We are also pleased that the United Nations
presence in Mogadishu has also increased. In order to
build on that positive momentum, it is important that
the TFG and AMISOM advance further into areas in
central and southern Somalia.
As we discuss the renewal of the AMISOM
mandate, we must be mindful of the need to grant the
Mission the necessary conditions to fulfil its tasks.
Expanding AMISOM and enhancing its capability is
critical to enabling the Mission to maintain and build
upon the recent security gains. Once again, we thank
Burundi and Uganda for their continued commitment
to the improvement of the situation in Somalia.
We are all touched by the tragic humanitarian
crisis in Somalia, in particular the widespread famine.
The number of children dying of causes related to
malnourishment has reached alarming levels. Internally
displaced persons and refugees have put an increasing
strain on Somalia’s neighbouring countries. Addressing
the humanitarian crisis in Somalia must continue to be
a priority for the international community. Ending the
current famine should be at the top of our agenda. We
welcome the fact that humanitarian agencies have
stepped up assistance to Somalia. Ways of improving
assistance to the populations in areas under the control
of Al-Shabaab must be devised.
Brazil’s humanitarian assistance to the Horn of
Africa has included food donations and financial
support estimated at $27 million. To Somalia alone, we

26

have donated 38,000 tons of food. We agree with the
Secretary-General
and
Under-Secretary-General
Valerie Amos that there is a need to address not only
the immediate crisis but also its underlying causes.
Sustainable solutions must be found, taking into
account in particular the vulnerable segments of the
population. Brazil will continue to work with the
Council and the broader United Nations in helping
Somalia to overcome its current challenges.
The President (spoke in Arabic): I shall now
make a statement in my capacity as representative of
Lebanon.
Allow me to begin by thanking Mr. Mahiga for
his exhaustive briefing and for his efforts to restore
stability and strengthen the United Nations presence in
Somalia. Once again, I welcome the Prime Minister of
the Transitional Federal Government of Somalia,
Mr. Abdiweli Mohamed Ali, and thank him for his
statement. I also highlight the importance of the
participation of Mr. Boubacar Diarra, Special
Representative of the African Union Commission for
Somalia.
We express our deep concern about the worsening
of the humanitarian situation in the Horn of Africa,
particularly in Somalia, due to the drought and famine
that have beset the country. We insist on humanitarian
action being continued, with the involvement of all
Somali stakeholders, so as to provide humanitarian aid
to all those in need. We welcome the pledges of aid
made by donor countries. Lebanon has made its own
modest contribution and calls on other States to
increase their contributions in order to alleviate the
crisis and meet humanitarian needs.
In a country where, because of the war and
famine, half the population is in urgent need of
humanitarian aid, we must not settle for temporary
approaches to the security and humanitarian situations
that would fail to stabilize the situation in the long
term. Somalia needs a comprehensive strategy to
strengthen its unity and State institutions and to
revitalize its economy. We note the momentum in the
Djibouti peace process, especially with the signing of
the Kampala Accord, and we are pleased that the
consultative meeting held from 4 to 6 September led to
a road map defining the transition tasks to be
accomplished.
We highlight yet again the importance of the
Transitional Federal Institutions (TFIs), including the

11-49644

S/PV.6614

new Government, implementing those tasks in
accordance with the timeline set out and engaging with
local administrations as well as opposition parties to
accomplish those tasks. Along those lines, we
encourage the administration to cooperate with the
TFIs. In particular, we call on donor States to
strengthen the central role of the Institutions so as to
promote
cohesion
in
Somalia
and
prevent
fragmentation of international aid.

The candidate countries Croatia, the former
Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Montenegro and
Iceland; the countries of the Stabilisation and
Association Process and potential candidates Albania,
Bosnia and Herzegovina and Serbia; the European Free
Trade Association country Norway, member of the
European Economic Area; as well as Ukraine, the
Republic of Moldova and Georgia align themselves
with this declaration.

Allow me to turn now to the withdrawal of
Al-Shabaab from Mogadishu. We welcome that
development and call on the Government, with the
support of the African Union Mission in Somalia
(AMISOM), to implement a plan to stabilize the city.
We urge parties to fill the vacuum, prevent the
proliferation of militias, and bolster support for
civilians by providing increased public services.

The European Union follows events in Somalia
with great attention. It seeks to help efforts to stabilize
the country and provide hope for those afflicted by
war, insecurity, poverty and starvation. There has been
encouraging progress, such as the accord signed in
Kampala between several of Somalia’s interested
political parties. It is important that this accord be
implemented, promises be kept, and the one-year
extension of the transition period be put to good use.
The adoption of the road map in Mogadishu on
6 September represents an important positive step. As a
member of the technical committee facilitating
cooperation to implement the road map, the European
Union will spare no effort to support the Transitional
Federal Institutions on their path to reforms. This needs
to happen in compliance with the agreed benchmarks
and timelines.

We condemn piracy and armed robbery and call
on the African Union to respond to this global issue by
addressing the root causes of the problem. In the
absence of an international peace force, Lebanon
echoes the Secretary-General’s call for donor States to
give AMISOM the same support given to United
Nations peacekeeping operations. We call on the
Council to seriously consider the proposals contained
in the communiqué issued yesterday by the African
Union Peace and Security Council.
We call on stakeholders and donors to step up
their contributions to covering the costs incurred by
AMISOM and to remove the reservations related to
contributions to the United Nations Trust Fund in
Support of AMISOM. We particularly welcome the
roles played by Uganda and Burundi in helping to
strengthen stability and security in Somalia by sending
additional troops to reinforce AMISOM.
I now resume my functions President of the
Security Council.
I give the floor to Mr. Serrano.
Mr. Serrano (European Union): Let me thank
you, Sir, for having invited the European Union (EU)
to participate in this debate. I also thank His
Excellency Prime Minister Ali for his important
statement. I further wish to thank the Special
Representative of the African Union Commission,
Mr. Diarra, for his presentation, and Special
Representative of the Secretary-General Augustine
Mahiga for this briefing and all his efforts.

11-49644

Encouraging progress has been made at the
security level. The withdrawal of Al-Shabaab from
Mogadishu gives more reason for hope. Despite such
positive developments, however, the situation remains
fragile. And now we are faced with a new challenge:
famine. Almost 4 million Somalis are in need of
assistance. Thousands are fleeing to neighbouring
countries, and food shortages threaten to expand
further. Together with international partners, the
European Union pursues a comprehensive approach to
Somalia.
In order to respond to the immediate needs posed
by the famine, the European Union and its member
States have allocated over €166 million from funds
reserved for humanitarian assistance to help the people
of Somalia. These funds serve to finance the provision
food as well as health care, water and sanitation
facilities by a number of partners and United Nations
agencies. Stepping up the immediate humanitarian
response will save lives, but it is also necessary to
invest in long-term solutions to build up resilience to
future droughts.

27

S/PV.6614

This is why the European Union looks closely at
the causes of famine. It is committed to supporting
programmes in the areas of drought preparedness,
agriculture, rural development and food security. EU
engagement includes an additional €175 million in
development funds recently allocated to Somalia for
the period 2011-2013.
As part of its comprehensive approach, the
European Union is helping to stabilize the country by
providing support to the security sector. On 28 July, the
European Union extended its military training mission
for Somalia by another year in order to help the
transitional Government to build up its security forces.
Some 150 military staff from 14 European Union
States are serving in a mission that has trained around
2,000 Somali soldiers so far. Over the next year, the
European Union training mission will focus on
developing command and control structures and
forming trainers who can then take over the training
exercise. .
In addition, EU Naval Force Atalanta remains
substantially involved in naval operations against
piracy off the shores of Somalia. On 7 December 2010,
the Council of the European Union extended the
operation’s mandate for another two years, until
12 December 2012. The European Union also provides
support to the countries in the region that have taken
up the task of prosecuting suspected pirates.
Other actions focus on building up the maritime
capacities of Somalia and neighbouring countries.
Within the framework laid out by the International
Maritime Organization — the so-called Djibouti Code
of Conduct — our objective is to enhance informationsharing and training capacities for maritime
administrations. In addition, the European Union is
working on a new possible action to support regional
maritime capacity-building in the Horn of Africa and
the Western Indian Ocean. Measures taken in this
context should enhance Somalia’s capacities for
controlling its coastal areas on land. We are also
intensifying contacts with the United Nations and other
relevant actors concerning Somalia’s judicial system
and the setting up of Somali courts. Through these
actions we aim at strengthening national capacities and
the rule of law — vital building blocks for a stable
development environment.
The African Union Mission in Somalia
(AMISOM) remains a crucial element to support and
protect Somalia’s Transitional Federal Institutions. In
2011, the European Union made another contribution

28

worth €65.9 million to AMISOM. It is preparing a
€50-million additional support programme for the
remaining months of 2011. This will bring overall EU
support to AMISOM to more than €258 million since
2007.
The security context has changed significantly
since the withdrawal of Al-Shabaab from large parts of
Somalia, including the capital, Mogadishu. The
Transitional Federal Government and AMISOM are
facing new challenges, such as consolidating security
in newly accessible areas and filling the security
vacuum. Addressing these challenges will have clear
resource implications. It is important to broaden
resource mobilization and to identify alternative and
additional sources of funding.
All this having been said, the role of the
international community is only to assist. The main
responsibility for Somalia’s security lies with the
Somalis themselves. The European Union will continue
supporting the region’s leadership and efforts in
finding solutions. It also appreciates strong United
Nations leadership in Somalia with a view to providing
direction and support to the political process and to
coordinating international support.
In conclusion, the European Union reiterates its
commitment to helping improve the lives, dignity and
security of the Somali people. Reconciliation, respect
for human rights, the protection of civilians, the
inclusion of women in peacebuilding, the rule of law
and good governance are indispensable stepping stones
on the road to peace and sustainable development.
Somalia can count on the EU’s support in this. At the
same time, the European Union calls on Somalia’s
stakeholders, especially the Transitional Federal
Institutions, to redouble their efforts to address the
enormous political, economic and security challenges
before them. The upcoming meeting of the
International Contact Group on Somalia later this
month in Copenhagen will provide an important
opportunity for the Somali authorities and their
regional and international partners to continue working
together towards peace and stability in Somalia.
The President (spoke in Arabic): There are no
further names inscribed on my list of speakers.
The Security Council has thus concluded the
present stage of its consideration of the item on its
agenda.
The meeting rose at 12.55 p.m.

11-49644
