S/PV.7951

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-second year

7951st meeting

Thursday, 25 May 2017, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Nin Novoa/Mr. Bermúdez/Mrs. Nuñez . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Uruguay)

Members:

Bolivia (Plurinational State of). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Egypt. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ethiopia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Italy. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Japan. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kazakhstan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Senegal . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Sweden . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ukraine. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Llorentty Solíz
Mr. Liu Jieyi
Mr. Aboulatta
Ms. Guadey
Mr. Delattre
Mr. Cardi
Mr. Takei
Mr. Umarov
Mr. Iliichev
Mr. Ciss
Ms. Schoulgin Nyoni
Mr. Kyslytsya
Mr. Rycroft
Ms. Sison

Agenda
Protection of civilians in armed conflict
Protection of civilians and medical care in armed conflict
Letter dated 26 April 2017 from the Permanent Representative of Uruguay to
the United Nations addressed to the Secretary-General (S/2017/365)
Report of the Secretary-General on the protection of civilians in armed conflict
(S/2017/414)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

17-14998 (E)
*1714998*

S/PV.7951

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

The meeting was called to order at 10.05 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Protection of civilians in armed conflict
Protection of civilians and medical care in
armed conflict
Letter dated 26 April 2017 from the
Permanent Representative of Uruguay
to the United Nations addressed to the
Secretary-General (S/2017/365)
Report of the Secretary-General on the
protection of civilians in armed conflict
(S/2017/414)
The President (spoke in Spanish): I wish to
warmly welcome the Secretary-General, the ministers
and other distinguished representatives present at
today’s meeting. Their participation here today is an
affirmation of the importance of the subject matter
under discussion.
I wish to congratulate the Republic of Argentina
because today, 25 May, marks its day of independence.
In accordance with rule 37 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite the representatives
of Argentina, Armenia, Australia, Austria, Azerbaijan,
Bangladesh, Belarus, Belgium, Brazil, Canada,
Chile, Colombia, Costa Rica, Côte D’Ivoire, Cyprus,
Estonia, Germany, Guatemala, Hungary, Indonesia,
the Islamic Republic of Iran, Ireland, Israel, Jordan,
Kuwait, Liechtenstein, Malaysia, Mexico, Morocco, the
Netherlands, New Zealand, Nigeria, Norway, Pakistan,
Paraguay, Peru, Poland, Portugal, Qatar, Romania,
Slovenia, South Africa, Spain, Switzerland, the Syrian
Arab Republic, Turkey, the United Arab Emirates and
the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela to participate in
this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite the following
to participate in this meeting: Ms. Christine Beerli,
Vice-President of the International Committee of the Red
Cross, and Mr. Bruno Stagno Ugarte, Deputy Executive
Director for Advocacy of Human Rights Watch.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite Mr. Eduardo
Fernández Zincke, Counsellor and Head of the
2/78

25/05/2017

Humanitarian Affairs Section of the delegation of the
European Union to the United Nations, to participate
in this meeting.
I propose that the Council invite the observer of the
Observer State of the Holy See to the United Nations
to participate in the meeting, in accordance with the
provisional rules of procedure and the previous practice
in this regard.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I wish to draw the attention of Council members
to document S/2017/365, which contains a letter
dated 26 April from the Permanent Representative
of Uruguay to the United Nations addressed to the
Secretary-General, transmitting a concept note on the
item under consideration.
I wish to also draw the attention of Council
members to document S/2017/414, the report of the
Secretary-General on the protection of civilians in
armed conflict.
I now give the floor to the Secretary-General.
The Secretary-General: I thank you, Mr. President,
for this opportunity to address the critical issue of
protection of civilians in armed conflict.
During my 10 years as High Commissioner for
Refugees, I saw the tragic results of our failure to
protect civilians caught up in conflict in the refugee
camps and the settlements that I visited all over the
world. I heard countless horrific stories and met many
of the women and girls, men and boys who fled for their
lives. Their suffering is incalculable and represents
wasted human potential.
But despite our efforts, civilians continue to bear
the brunt of conflict around the world. In Syria, the
Independent International Commission of Inquiry has
documented relentless attacks and sieges that show no
signs of abating. In South Sudan, horrendous abuses
continue as parties to the conflict target civilians,
including aid workers. In Yemen, civilians are trapped
and targeted by all sides. Attacks against humanitarian
personnel and supplies continue putting national staff
at particular risk. The deliberate denial of access to aid
and the abuse of bureaucratic restrictions are becoming
more prevalent in conflict zones. Suffering is pushed to
unbearable limits when civilians are deprived of food
17-14998

25/05/2017

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

and health care in sieges that can last months or in some
cases years.
Cities like Aleppo, Juba and Mosul have become
death traps, while the destruction of housing, schools,
markets, hospitals and vital infrastructure will affect
generations to come. Attacks on hospitals and medical
staff and the removal of medical supplies from
humanitarian convoys are symptoms of a continued
grave disregard for international law and the protection
of civilians. Endemic sexual violence, including rape,
abduction, human trafficking, sexual slavery and forced
marriages, contributes to the disproportionate suffering
of women and girls in conflict. Women are particularly
at risk in urban warfare, during house searches and
operations in residential areas, and at checkpoints.
This brutality has forced unprecedented numbers
of civilians to flee in search of safety. More than
65 million people are displaced by conflict, violence
and persecution worldwide — two-thirds of them
within their own countries. These unrelenting attacks
on civilians, coupled with a lack of access to aid, are
also playing a major role in creating conflict-driven
famines that threaten 20 million people in Nigeria,
Somalia, South Sudan and Yemen.
One year ago, the Security Council took specific
action to improve the protection of medical care
during conflict by adopting resolution 2286 (2016). In
August, my predecessor submitted recommendations,
which I fully endorse, for the swift implementation
of the resolution by Member States and other parties
to conflict. These developments created hope for an
improvement in the lives of millions of people affected
by war and violence.
But on the ground, little has changed. Attacks
against medical workers and facilities continue and
no one is spared. According to the World Health
Organization, attacks on medical facilities — including
hospitals, doctors and ambulances — and on the
wounded and the sick took place in at least 20 countries
affected by conflict in 2016. In most of these places,
fragile medical systems were already at the breaking
point as staff struggled to treat huge numbers of people.
In most cases, no one was held accountable.
In Syria, Physicians for Human Rights has
documented more than 400 attacks on medical facilities
since the conflict began. More than 800 medical staff
have been killed. In Yemen, just a few months after the
adoption of resolution 2286 (2016), 15 people, including

S/PV.7951

3 medical staff, were reported killed when a hospital
was hit in an airstrike — even though the roof of the
building was clearly marked and the GPS coordinates
had been shared with all parties. In Afghanistan, the
number of reported attacks against health facilities and
personnel almost doubled in 2016 compared with 2015.
These attacks are evidence of a broader trend. Parties
to conflict are treating hospitals and health clinics as
targets rather than respecting them as sanctuaries. This
goes against the spirit of the Geneva Conventions, the
fundamental tenets of international humanitarian law
and our basic humanity. These attacks not only cause
immediate suffering to patients, medical workers and
their families; they also deprive entire communities
of essential health care, making them uninhabitable
and contributing to the global displacement crisis. In
Syria, more than half of all medical facilities are closed
or are only partially functioning, and two-thirds of
specialized medical personnel have fled the country.
In South Sudan, after years of attacks on medical
facilities, fewer than 50 per cent are functional in areas
affected by conflict. This severely restricts the services
they can provide.
Resolution 2286 (2016) and the Secretary-General’s
recommendations provide an important platform
for enhancing respect for the norms of international
humanitarian law. What is needed now is action that
will turn these words into reality.
There has been some progress. Switzerland and
Canada have gathered an informal group of States to
support the implementation of resolution 2286 (2016).
Several Member States are in the process of reviewing
their domestic laws and policies to strengthen
implementation. In some conflict zones, parties
to conflict and national authorities are discussing
deconfliction arrangements and making credible efforts
to investigate incidents.
The United Nations, for its part, is improving data
collection so we can understand patterns and work
to change them. The World Health Organization is
consolidating and sharing information on attacks that
obstruct access to medical care. I welcome these efforts
and thank the civil society organizations that have
played such an important role in driving them. I urge
all to use these as a basis for progress.
More broadly, there are three clear ways to improve
the protection of civilians in armed conflict:

17-149983/78

S/PV.7951

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

First, we must ensure greater respect for
international humanitarian and human rights law. I
urge parties to conflict to take concrete steps to limit
harm to civilians in their military operations, as they
are obliged to do under international law, and I call on
all Member States to use their influence to promote
respect for international law and ensure accountability
for violations. I urge those engaged in arms transfers
to show greater responsibility and consider the
potential consequences of those sales for human lives
and for our common security. And I call on all to
support international accountability mechanisms that
complement national efforts, including the International
Criminal Court.
Secondly, we must step up the protection of
humanitarian and medical missions by implementing
my predecessor’s recommendations on resolution
2286 (2016). Many of these measures can and should
be extended to protect other humanitarian actors and
all civilians. We must also prioritize the protection
of civilians in United Nations peace operations and
ensure that missions have the capacity to deliver their
mandates. The Security Council has a central role to
play here. I call on all Member States to endorse the
Kigali Principles on the Protection of Civilians as an
urgent priority.
Thirdly, we must do more to prevent forced
displacement and find durable solutions for refugees
and internally displaced people. We need a strong and
comprehensive agreement to re-establish the integrity
of the international refugee protection regime, in line
with international refugee law, and we must commit to
action on the plight of the internally displaced. We must
also tackle the causes of displacement. That means
addressing the root causes of conflicts by investing
in inclusive and sustainable development; promoting
all human rights — civil, political, economic, social
and cultural — and the rule of law; strengthening
governance and institutions; and enhancing mediation
capacity, from communities to national Governments.
No one is winning today’s wars; everyone is losing.
I appeal to all leaders, parties to conflict and those
with influence to bring these raging conflicts to an end
and to do all in their power to prevent new ones from
erupting. Preventing and ending conflict is my first
priority as Secretary-General. I call on all to make it
theirs, for the sake of the millions of civilians who are
suffering around the world.
4/78

25/05/2017

The President (spoke in Spanish): I thank the
Secretary-General for his briefing.
I now give the floor to Ms. Beerli.
Ms. Beerli (spoke in Spanish): It is a great pleasure
for me to speak here on behalf of the International
Committee of the Red Cross (ICRC).
(spoke in English)
It is a particular pleasure to speak alongside
the new Secretary-General as he presents his first
report (S/2017/414) on this subject. The ICRC greatly
appreciates the strategic focus and energy that the
Secretary-General brings to the critical questions of
how to prevent and alleviate the suffering of civilians
in armed conflict.
My statement today shall focus on three areas: the
strategy in the Secretary-General’s report; progress
in the implementation of resolution 2286 (2016);
and our particular concern for a group that is often
forgotten — missing persons and their families.
Hayat; Ahmed; Samia — these are the names of
some of the children that ICRC hospitals have treated
recently. Our doctors helped to fit them with prosthetic
aids after their limbs were blown off during attacks.
Hayat was just three-years-old when an air strike
destroyed her house, killing her sister and leaving her
severely injured. As we meet today, I ask everyone to
remember their names and the cruel hand dealt to them
in the early years of their lives.
At the ICRC, we see the daily realities of what
happens when civilian populations are not protected
during conflict and other situations of violence. There
are millions of people living in desperate and terrifying
places, and there is no matter more urgent than their
protection. The Secretary-General stresses that
urgency in his report, which states that today the world
faces a protection crisis of the highest order because of
armed conflicts.
The ICRC endorses the three priorities of protection
in the report and supports the call to focus on the
particular challenges of urban warfare. The return of
armed conflict to towns and cities has been a particular
concern of the ICRC in recent years. Approximately
50 million people in urban areas now bear the brunt of
conflict. The overwhelming percentage of people killed
or injured by explosive weapons in populated areas are
civilians. They are mothers, fathers and children who
17-14998

25/05/2017

S/PV.7951

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

are not part of the fighting and simply wish to lead their
lives, not fear for them.
The ICRC advocates that all parties should avoid
using explosive weapons that have a wide-impact
area in populated places. In addition to the high risk
of indiscriminate civilian death and injury, heavy
explosive weapons can cause extensive damage to
critical infrastructure, such as health care, water and
electricity facilities. Critically, under international
humanitarian law, civilians must not only be protected
from attack and the impact of conflict, but also be
able to go about their daily lives, but too often we see
the fabric of communities being eroded. Children are
unable to attend school. The sick cannot reach hospitals,
and livelihoods are interrupted or cease entirely. When
people live in fear and cannot safely continue their
activities, they risk becoming marginalized, destitute
and reliant on humanitarian aid.
Returning to the report, we warmly welcome
the Secretary-General’s priority of prevention as an
important part of his Office and the mandate of the
Council. We agree that strengthening respect for
international law is a prerequisite for halting the brutal
violations that are driving endless cycles of violence.
We urge the Council to continue to demand and
encourage respect for international humanitarian law
as the most immediate form of prevention. Preventing
violations can instantly protect civilians on the ground
and strengthen peacebuilding in the long-term.
The Secretary-General’s report correctly aligns
respect for international law with good practices
by parties to the conflict, especially in military
partnerships. Today’s armed conflicts are increasingly
fought in alliances and coalitions, which develop
partnered operations. Those partnerships may involve
States’ training, equipping and advising other States or
non-State armed groups in armed conflicts. We urge
the Council to remind all parties to armed conflict that
Common Article 1 to the four Geneva Conventions
requires them “to respect and ensure respect for the
Conventions in all circumstances”.
Good practices are equally important in States’
counter-terrorism activities amounting to armed
conflict. The violations committed by the enemy must
not result in the lowering of standards by States, which
are still obliged to respect international humanitarian
law. The law is vital and can help parties find practical
solutions to humanitarian problems. In this fortieth

anniversary year of the Additional Protocols to the
Geneva Convention of 1977, the ICRC urges all States to
recognize the positive impact that those particular rules
make on the conduct of hostilities and reaffirm their
very practical relevance to today’s armed conflicts.
One year after the adoption of resolution 2286
(2016), the Secretary-General’s report clearly shows
how the obstruction of access to, attacks and threats
against health care remain at an extremely high level. We
are not only seeing health workers killed or threatened,
hospitals destroyed and ambulances denied access, but
entire public health systems collapse. Communities are
exposed to renewed epidemics, thereby compounding
existing humanitarian catastrophes and causing
long-term setbacks in the areas of public health and
development. It happens in many places, but most
recently in Yemen we have seen a deadly cholera
outbreak, which has claimed the lives of hundreds of
people just in the past few weeks. Much more needs
to be done to stop violence against health care, which
is carried out by States as well as non-State armed
groups. Several States have nevertheless made progress
in improving their domestic legislation to protect health
care and enhance their military policy and rules of
engagement. Other States are developing diplomatic
networks to build increasing support for resolution
2286 (2016).
Further action in
practical difference.

two

areas

will

make

a

First, States need to gather data on why attacks
happen. Attacks can be direct, but they can also be
the result of inadequate precautions to identify the
location of facilities or an insufficient appreciation of
the humanitarian consequences of military operations.
They also result from an ignorance about the rules
applying to health care or inadequate training. If there
is a better understanding about why attacks happen,
then authorities can take steps to stop them.
Secondly, States must focus much more on the
behaviour and attitudes of weapons-bearers, on
respecting international humanitarian law and on
increasing accountability for those who carry out attacks
against health care. We need more organized exchanges
on best practices so as to improve the passive protection
of facilities and patients and on changing knowledge,
attitudes and behaviour in weapons bearers. There is
an urgent need to implement the recommendations
made by the Secretary-General and others, including

17-149985/78

S/PV.7951

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

the Health Care in Danger project, an initiative of the
Red Cross and Red Crescent Movement. Debates like
this one can play a part, as well as States’ voluntarily
reporting on their efforts to implement resolution 2286
(2016), but to influence behaviour on the ground, our
work also needs to continue at the national and regional
levels. We urge all parties to armed conflicts to issue
specific military procedures so that health care systems
are protected from attacks, threats and other violence,
and that those supporting other parties to armed
conflicts exert their maximum influence to ensure that
their allies do the same.
Finally, the ICRC was very pleased to see
mentioned in the report the plight of missing persons
and their families. That humanitarian challenge has
been overlooked on the global humanitarian agenda
for too long. Right now, we are seeing a new spike in
the numbers of missing persons in armed conflicts.
Last year, tens of thousands of families experienced
the profound pain of not knowing the fate of their
loved ones. Whether a person is unaccounted for after
an attack because they were abducted, displaced or
because their remains were buried in haste, their family
is left waiting. It remains an open wound, which can
last a lifetime. Under international humanitarian law,
parties to the conflict must both prevent people from
going missing and clarify the fate of those who do.
We urge the Council to encourage all States
and parties to conflict to take early action to uphold
families’ right to know the fate of their missing relatives
as provided under international humanitarian law and
support their emotional, legal, social and economic
needs. I also call on parties to conflict to take all
possible measures to ensure the dignified and adequate
management of the dead without adverse distinction
and endeavour to facilitate the return of their remains
to the families.
Finally, I encourage parties to collaborate with
the International Committee of the Red Cross and its
Central Tracing Agency as a neutral, independent and
impartial intermediary. The ICRC is grateful for this
opportunity to reflect on this important report with the
Council, and stands ready to assist States in their efforts
to increase the protection of civilians in armed conflict.
When we meet again in a year’s time, we hope that
the Secretary-General will be able to report favourably
on three points: first, that there have been fewer armed
conflicts; secondly, that improvements have been
6/78

25/05/2017

made in reducing the humanitarian consequences of
military operations and in improving the protection of
health care, especially in urban areas and in partnered
operations; and thirdly, that measures are in place to
increase early action and support for missing persons
and their families.
I would like to finish with the words of Dr. Marco
Baldan, an ICRC war surgeon who has worked in
conflicts across the world:
“As I stand in the emergency theatre, operating
on patients riddled by bullets or torn apart by
explosions, I wish a handful of the lead politicians
in war-torn countries could join me. Would their
decisions be different if faced, on a day-to-day
basis, with the human cost of war, in its most raw
manifestation? The tragedies I have seen so far in
my career have left deep scars within me. Unlike
many of my patients, my scars are invisible. Twenty
years into my career, I muster up the courage to
say, it does not have to be this way.”
Dr. Baldan is right. It does not have to be that way.
The people here in the Chamber today have the power to
make changes and to ensure that civilians are protected
from the worst impacts of war and violence.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I thank
Ms. Beerli for her briefing.
I now give the floor to Mr. Stagno Ugarte.
Mr. Stagno Ugarte: Resolution 2286 (2016) was
a milestone that reaffirmed the principle that health
facilities and personnel must be protected during armed
conflict. Yet today, one year after its adoption, this is
no time for celebration. According to a recent report by
the Safeguarding Health in Conflict Coalition, attacks
against health facilities have continued at alarming
rates in 23 countries over the course of the past year.
Although former Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon
presented a strong set of recommendations for the
implementation of resolution 2286 (2016), the Security
Council has yet to affirm them.
Resolution 2286 (2016) warned that the prevailing
impunity for attacks on health facilities and personnel
in conflict could lead to a recurrence of such acts. As
the resolution indicates, accountability, in particluar
impartial investigations, prompt disciplinary measures
and fair prosecutions, is an essential element of any
strategy to end the widespread violations of the principle
of protecting health facilities and services in conflict.
17-14998

25/05/2017

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

Yesterday, Human Rights Watch published a
review of 25 attacks on health facilities that occurred
between 2013 and 2016 in 10 countries. We found that
little has been done to investigate such attacks or to
hold those responsible to account, where appropriate.
In such incidents, at least 232 people were reportedly
killed, including 41 health workers and more than
180 injured. We believe that 16 of those incidents
may have constituted war crimes, either because
they were intentional attacks on protected health
facilities, or because there is evidence of criminal
negligence. And yet, no one appears to have faced
criminal proceedings for any of the attacks. In fact,
based on publicly available information, it does not
appear as though 20 of the incidents that we reviewed
were ever investigated. Perpetrators either ignored
credible allegations about the attacks, publicly denied
responsibility or blamed another party, without
providing any supporting evidence.
Let me share an example. In February 2016, the two
largest hospitals of Maret al-Numan in Syria were hit
three hours apart. Those wounded in the first attack
were immediately transferred to a nearby hospital,
only to suffer a second attack. In all, 11 health workers
and 17 patients and other civilians were killed. Russia
and Syria, the likely perpetrators of both attacks,
denied responsibility and claimed that United Statesled coalition forces had carried out the strikes. The
United States denied that allegation, and none of the
parties investigated the incident. In three of the cases
we reviewed, authorities indicated that they would
investigate attacks but either failed to present any
findings or have not concluded any investigation.
Let me share another example. In February 2016,
Afghan security forces, reportedly accompanied by
international military forces, raided a clinic in Tangi
Saidan in Wardak Province. The soldiers handcuffed
staff members while they searched the premises
for Taliban fighters. They then took two patients,
including a 15-year-old boy, and shot them dead outside
the clinic. Both Afghanistan and NATO reportedly
opened investigations into the incident, but neither
has published any findings. NATO has stated that it
found absolutely no evidence to support that allegation,
without specifying which allegation it was referring to,
or whether international military forces were present in
the raid. Five of the cases reviewed were investigated,
yet all five investigations were flawed. Almost all of

S/PV.7951

them left critical questions unanswered, and many
arrived at conclusions that contradicted our findings.
Let me share another example. In August 2016,
an air strike hit the main hospital in western Hajja,
Yemen, killing 19 and wounding 24, including 11
health workers. The task force established by the Saudiled coalition forces to investigate potential violations
of international humanitarian law committed by the
coalition in Yemen investigated the incident and
concluded that the air strike was an error, but failed
to determine whether the attack violated the laws of
war. The task force also claimed that the coalition was
not aware that it was a hospital prior to the attack. Yet,
Médecins Sans Frontières had clearly marked the roof of
the hospital and repeatedly provided the coalition with
the GPS coordinates of the facility, including just five
days earlier. To date, the Saudi-led coalition has neither
released further findings nor offered a public apology,
nor has it, to our knowledge, offered compensation
to victims.
Resolution 2286 (2016) also highlighted the
importance of international justice mechanisms when
domestic systems are unwilling or unable to respond
appropriately. In many conflict countries, however, from
Libya to the Central African Republic to South Sudan,
State justice systems have become largely defunct,
yet none of the incidents that we reviewed have been
referred to international accountability mechanisms.
The Security Council has, however, one important
accountability mechanism for the perpetrators of
attacks on health care, under the children in armed
conflict agenda. As part of the monitoring and
reporting on parties to armed conflict responsible for
recurrent attacks on schools and hospitals or related
personnel, the Secretary-General is mandated to list the
perpetrators in the annexes to his report. In the 2016
report (S/2016/360), the Secretary-General reported
more than 350 United Nations-verified attacks on
medical facilities or personnel in 10 States and listed
nine parties to armed conflict in six States in the
annexes to the report. Under Council resolutions, those
parties must enter into action plans with the United
Nations to end their violations, or be subject to possible
targeted measures. To date, none of the parties have
signed such action plans.
In order to enhance accountability for attacks on
health facilities and personnel, Human Rights Watch
therefore recommends that the Secretary-General

17-149987/78

S/PV.7951

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

25/05/2017

commit to alerting the Council of all future attacks
on health-care facilities on an ongoing, rather than an
annual basis. The United Nations system, consistent
with its Human Rights Up Front initiative, should
also prioritize the collection of information about
such attacks wherever they happen, push States to
hold perpetrators responsible and recommend avenues
for accountability.

Nations, then Secretary-General Pérez de Cuellar had
already concluded that as

In that regard, Human Rights Watch would also
recommend the following. In the light of some yawning
gaps in reporting, the Secretary-General should ensure
that all parties responsible for such attacks are listed
in the annexes to his annual report on children in
armed conflict. This is not the time — I repeat, not the
time — to freeze new additions to the list. The Council
should ensure that the list includes all perpetrators,
with no exceptions. The Secretary-General should
immunize the annexes to his annual report from
political redactions by States by strictly upholding
the technical merits of the monitoring and reporting
process, as well as exercise his powers under Article
99 of the Charter of the United Nations. United Nations
country teams should engage in dialogue with listed
parties and, wherever possible, negotiate concrete,
time-bound action plans to end violations, as stipulated
in previous Council resolutions. And, in the absence
of such action plans by persistent perpetrators, the
Council should impose targeted measures, as stipulated
in its previous resolutions.

Nothing except for political will has prevented the
Council from adopting such procedures. The Council
enjoys unfettered leeway in deciding, adapting or
amending its internal procedures or creating subsidiary
bodies to go about its business. Yet after major failures in
Rwanda, Srebrenica and Sri Lanka, and all of the reports
that followed on those failures, such common-sense
procedures are still struggling to find a firm footing
in the Council. As the 2012 inquiry into the Sri Lanka
debacle highlighted, there was a systemic failure based
on the absence of both an “adequate and shared sense of
responsibility for human rights violations” and a

In addition to medical facilities, schools have
also been bombed, burned and looted or converted to
military bases and barracks. Students and teachers have
been killed, injured, raped, tortured and kidnapped in
at least 21 States since 2013, according to the Global
Coalition to Protect Education from Attack. During
the same period, schools have been used for military
purposes in at least 24 conflict-affected States. By
endorsing the Safe Schools Declaration, 64 Member
States have made commitments to better protecting
schools during armed conflict and to refraining from
using them for military purposes. We welcome these
commitments and, as the Secretary-General does in his
recent report on protection of civilians during armed
conflict (S/2017/414), we encourage all Member States
to endorse the Declaration.
The Security Council has long been failing in
terms of early warning, which is the best strategy for
avoiding civilian harm. As early as 1985, speaking on
the fortieth anniversary of the founding of the United
8/78

“crises have frequently been brought before the
Council too late for preventive action, it would
seem to follow that the Council might well establish
a procedure to keep the world under continuing
survey” (S/PV.2608, para. 15).

“coherent strategy in response to early warnings
and subsequent international human rights — andhumanitarian-law violations against civilians”.
In drawing lessons and identifying improved
early-warning procedures, the inquiry called on the
Secretary-General to make more regular and explicit
use of Article 99 to bring situations of concern to
the attention of the Council. It also referenced the
horizon-scanning briefings to the Council by the
Department of Political Affairs as a welcome recent
initiative undertaken by the United Nations. In that
regard, while the Human Rights Up Front initiative
that emerged in response to the inquiry is full of good
intentions, it has failed — to date at least — to turn
the receding tide on horizon-scanning briefings and to
commit the Executive Office of the Secretary-General
to using Article 99 in order to tell the Council what it
needs to know and not what it wants to hear.
The Council has all the tools it needs, yet it sorely
needs to abide by the promise of the very resolutions
it adopts, resolution 2286 (2016) included. Otherwise,
it is not only failing in its duties to protect medical
facilities and services and to protect civilians trapped in
armed conflict, but surely condemning itself to making
devalued never-again apologies in future.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I thank
Mr. Ugarte for his briefing.
17-14998

25/05/2017

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

I shall now make a statement in my capacity as
Minister for Foreign Affairs of Uruguay.
I should like at the outset to thank Secretary-General
António Guterres for his participation in this open
debate and his introduction of his report (S/2017/414)
on the protection of civilians and the implementation of
resolution 2286 (2016) on the protection of civilians and
medical assistance in armed conflicts.
I also thank the Vice-President of the International
Committee of the Red Cross, Ms. Christine Beerli,
and the Deputy Executive Director for Advocacy of
Human Rights Watch, Mr. Bruno Stagno Ugarte, for
their participation and informative perspectives, which
have allowed us to appreciate, with admiration, the
difficulties and risks that medical personnel face in
areas of armed conflict.
Uruguay aligns itself with the statement to be
delivered by the representative of Spain, as well as that
to be delivered by the representative of Switzerland
on behalf of the Group of Friends on the Protection
of Civilians.
It is an honour for me to preside over this open
debate of the Security Council and to address a topic to
which my country attaches particular important. In our
first presidency in January 2016, we discussed this issue,
which is the main component of Uruguay’s extensive
and active participation in peacekeeping operations.
A year since the adoption of resolution 2286
(2016), parties to conflict continue to increase attacks
and bombings on hospitals and medical personnel in
various settings, such as Syria, Yemen, Afghanistan,
South Sudan and Iraq. It is also those parties who block
humanitarian access and even illegally seize medical
materials and instruments intended to serve the civilian
population. That indicates that there is still a long way
to go for an effective implementation of resolution 2286
(2016).
Uruguay shares and supports the SecretaryGeneral’s vision, expressed in his report, for
strengthening the protection of civilians in armed
conflict through collective action. Making that
protection more effective will require the joint efforts
of the Organization, Member States and civil society,
whose work in conflict zones is fundamental and which
my country recognizes as an invaluable contribution.
States must also adhere to and respect international
treaties relevant to the topic at hand, such as the Geneva

S/PV.7951

conventions and their Additional Protocols. In addition,
national legal frameworks on the protection of hospitals
and medical personnel need to be strengthened.
I want to emphasize the importance of investigating
attacks on medical facilities when they occur and
ensuring that those responsible for those attacks are
held accountable. According to the Rome Statute of the
International Criminal Court, intentionally directing
attacks against hospitals and places where the sick
and wounded are grouped constitutes a war crime.
However, in order to be able to judge those crimes,
it is necessary to collect and analyze reliable and
extensive information, as well as conduct independent
and impartial investigations into specific incidents.
It is an obligation on the part of the international
community to identify and punish the perpetrators.
States should ensure that complaints of serious
breaches of international law relating to the protection
of medical care in armed conflicts are systematically
and effectively investigated.
In the face of the current international situation, all
parties — States and non-State actors — should give
access to the Independent International Commission of
Inquiry established by the Additional Protocol to the
Geneva Conventions, as well as to fact-finding missions
established within the framework of the United Nations
in order to carry out the corresponding investigations.
Given the gravity of the crimes that we are discussing,
the Security Council must assume its responsibility and
decide on the application of sanctions or the referral
of cases to the International Criminal Court. We are
all aware that most attacks on hospitals and sanitary
facilities do not constitute collateral damage. Rather,
the attacks are deliberate and coldly calculated actions.
The most devastating attacks are those carried out
by air forces, particularly those that employ the tactic
of carrying out consecutive attacks. They launch a first
attack that is followed by a second bombing that hits the
relief personnel, in addition to the hospitals where the
wounded are being treated. In none of those scenarios
do the so-called rebel forces have their own air force.
Those with air forces are the States involved in conflicts.
Therefore, the primary responsibility lies with those
States, including those that supply and sell aircraft to
forces on the ground, or authorize their own thriving
and prosperous businesses to engage in the supply and
sale of aircraft and their corresponding weaponry.

17-149989/78

S/PV.7951

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

In 2016, the world arms trade reached its highest
level since the end of the Cold War, and international
transfers of heavy weapons have increased steadily
since 2004. The Congressional Research Center of the
United States estimates that the value of world arms
sales reached $80 billion in 2015. It also indicates that
73 per cent of those sales were made to developing
countries, in other words, poor countries, countries that
should spend their money on other things instead of on
weapons. Furthermore, the Stockholm International
Peace Research Institute indicates that the five
permanent members of the Security Council provided
75 per cent of the volume of the total arms exports for
the 2011-2015 period.
Controlling the international arms trade is an
obvious necessity, the first preventive step that should
be taken. The international community took that first
step with the signing of the Arms Trade Treaty in August
2015, thereby attempting to regulate such trafficking in
a more responsible fashion. Nevertheless, a significant
number of the main producers, exporters and recipients
of armaments have not even signed the Treaty, so its
practical effectiveness is gravely compromised. We call
on all Governments to strengthen the regime of general
and complete disarmament and to ratify the Arms Trade
Treaty, so that we can have an international arms trade
that is responsible with regard to conventional arms,
including small arms and light weapons, their parts,
components and ammunition.
The current level of violence and the unbridled
hatred that is being expressed in several regions of the
world mean that the respect for values and fundamental
humanitarian principles is increasingly being violated.
We see the helplessness of the international community
when it comes to reacting to barbaric acts that we
believed had been relegated to the depths of history.
The universal conscience trembles at the mere fact
that hundreds, thousands, perhaps millions of innocent
people, who quietly live their everyday lives, could,
one day or another, fall victim to the lethal power of
nuclear or conventional weapons. That is unacceptable.
Women and men of good faith cannot resign themselves
to accepting such a situation with their arms crossed,
waiting for new fatalities. We must act with realism,
with pragmatism. The measures we adopt must have
timelines for execution, design and for perfecting
monitoring and control mechanisms.
10/78

25/05/2017

We cannot allow the repetition of such tragedies to
dull our sensibilities and leave us indifferent. Let us
take as an inspiration the example of the thousands of
humanitarian and health workers who tirelessly and
courageously risk their own lives to defend civilians.
On Tuesday in this very Chamber (See S/PV.7947),
we paid tribute to the personnel of peacekeeping
operations who had fallen in the performance of their
duty. We know that the problem will not be solved in a
day, but only by bringing about a greater awareness in
our societies, accountability, respect and strengthening
international humanitarian law will we start taking the
necessary measures.
Uruguay, as a small country both in population
and in territory, but with a great tradition of peace and
democracy, wishes to make its voice heard in defence
of a more fraternal and peaceful world. It is a dream,
but a dream is the beginning of all things. Then come
the plans, the timelines, the actions. But the first thing
is the dream. A dream that motivates, enthuses and
gains the support of the multitudes and arouses hope.
Even when everything seemed impossible, Martin
Luther King was able to turn around a sad tale of
unjust discrimination. But first, he enthused people.
He did not say, “I have a strategic plan”, but he said
“I have a dream”. His words may sound strange in
an environment like this — where, by definition, we
manage international politics in terms of a very stark
realism that verges on disenchantment — but none of
the great achievements of humanity throughout its long
history would have been possible without a dream first,
before venturing into boldness and illusion.
In conclusion, allow me to recall the following
quotation from a speech entitled “The Chance for
Peace”, made by a former President of the United States
of America, Dwight Eisenhower, in April 1953:
“Every gun that is made, every warship
launched, every rocket fired signifies, in the final
sense, a theft from those who hunger and are not
fed, those who are cold and are not clothed. This
world in arms is not spending money alone. It is
spending the sweat of its labourers, the genius of its
scientists, the hopes of its children”.
I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.
I give the floor to the Mr. Sergiy Kyslytsya, Deputy
Minister for Foreign Affairs of Ukraine.
17-14998

25/05/2017

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

Mr. Kyslytsya (Ukraine) (spoke in Spanish): We
thank the delegation of Uruguay for its initiative in
drawing our attention to one of the most important
topics in the area of protection of civilians in armed
conflicts, namely, the protection of civilians and
medical care in armed conflict.
I thank the Secretary-General for his informative
briefing, as well as the other speakers. We are pleased
that the focus of Mr. Guterres’s presentation today in
the open debate coincides with Ukraine’s position,
in particular in terms of strengthening respect for
international law, the protection of civilians, including
medical and humanitarian personnel, and the prevention
of the forced displacement of refugees and internally
displaced persons. We share the deep concern for
the situation in Syria, Afghanistan, Iraq, the Central
African Republic, South Sudan and other places where
civilians, especially women and children, continue to
be victims of armed conflicts.
Attacks on hospitals and medical facilities are
a flagrant violation of international law. Stringent
international legal principles have long provided
absolute security to medical personnel and hospitals
in conflict zones, but in modern conflicts hospitals
and doctors have increasingly become the targets and
victims of military operations. Not very long ago, we
were all witness to the barbaric air strikes on medical
facilities in Aleppo and the methodical destruction of
the city’s medical infrastructure.
When medical facilities come under fire or shelling,
or are bombed, it is a multidimensional tragedy. Not
only do such attacks sow death and destruction now,
but the civilian population is deprived of the possibility
of obtaining medical care and facilities for saving
lives in the future are destroyed. That is why last year
Ukraine co-sponsored resolution 2286 (2016). We are
grateful to the delegations that promoted it, including
the delegation of Uruguay, for such a timely initiative.
Currently, our common goal is to develop effective
mechanisms to monitor its implementation. In that
regard, we would like to stress the following points that
are important to us:
First, improving the procedures for documenting
cases of violence against medical personnel and hospitals
in armed conflicts. Gathering and documenting the
data on attacks against medical facilities and medical
personnel is a key element in developing an effective
preventive system.

S/PV.7951

Secondly, we need to ensure independent
and effective investigations of grave violations of
international humanitarian law against medical
institutions and personnel in situations of
armed conflict. In this vein, we deem it appropriate that
there be briefings or reports by the Security Council on
the situation in countries where medical care is under
threat of attack. Such reports, to our mind, should
include information on investigations of violations
committed by Member States.
An argument similar in content was made by our
delegation as well as by many other speakers during
the April meeting (see S/PV.7926) on the link between
human rights and conflict prevention. We see significant
parallels between our current topic of discussion and
human rights as part of the area of competence of the
Security Council.
Thirdly, it is vital to ensure accountability for acts
of violence against medical personnel and hospitals. It
is crucial that those responsible for such war crimes
be brought to justice. We share the view that when
national accountability mechanisms are insufficient,
Member States must fully cooperate in the fight against
impunity jointly with international institutions in the
area of criminal justice, including the International
Criminal Court.
We believe also that the Secretary-General can
play a key role through his good offices, including
in accordance with Article 99 of the Charter of the
United Nations.
In time of war, people begin to fear even everyday
events and things that they take for granted under other
circumstances. Today, in eastern Ukraine, getting to
work, going to school, resting with one’s family on
Sunday afternoon, or working in one’s own garden very
often means a choice between life and death.
The aggressor country does not abide by the
standards of the Geneva Convention or General
Assembly and Security Council resolutions on
compliance with international humanitarian law.
Medical services continue to come under attack from
the occupied territories of the regions of Donetsk and
Luhansk. Medical emergency brigades in Ukraine are
subject to bombardments and are fired on, even though
they have emergency symbols on their vehicles and
even though the geographic emergency coordinates are
publicly known. In the region of Luhansk, in the area
controlled by the Government, eight health centres were

17-1499811/78

S/PV.7951

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

damaged, out of a total of 11 buildings. In the Donetsk
region, 29 health centres were damaged; five of them
were demolished and have not been rebuilt because of
the ongoing hostilities.
In February, in Avdiyivka, three BM 21 Grad
missiles hit the hospital there, which continues to suffer
from the fighting, with continuing damage being done
to its electrical, water and heating systems. Despite all
of this, the hospital continues to provide medical care,
but the main building is so severely damaged that it
cannot be restored.
The policy espoused by the administration of the
Russian occupation in Crimea, which refuses the use
of substitute maintenance therapy, which is of vital
importance to patients, has led to dozens of deaths.
(spoke in English)
As stated by the Health Minister of Ukraine at the
seventieth World Health Assembly in Geneva just a
few days ago, the Government of Ukraine is unable to
provide any health services whatsoever to the millions
of Ukrainian citizens who remain trapped under
Russian occupation.
In the occupied region of Luhansk Oblast, the
situation has returned to the Dark Ages, with health
policies copied from the Russian Federation. There are
credible reports that anti-retroviral and tuberculosis
treatment is unavailable; the only source is delivery by
smugglers. There is a dangerous lack of detailed, dataderived insights into child health and of immunization,
vaccine and polio status reports in the areas experiencing
the most intensive conflict.
As a party to the 1949 Geneva Convention relative
to the Protection of Civilian Persons in Time of War
and its Additional Protocols, Ukraine committed to
complying with its provisions and is disseminating
knowledge of the norms and principles of international
humanitarian law. Particular attention is paid to
the protection of civilians, including medical and
humanitarian personnel.
In order to fulfil these obligations, the armed
forces of Ukraine organized personnel and staff
training on compliance with the norms and principles
of international humanitarian law during planning and
the use of force in armed conflict.
These activities were carried out in cooperation
with the delegation of the International Committee of
12/78

25/05/2017

the Red Cross in Ukraine, the Danish Refugee Council,
Taras Shevchenko National University, the Red Cross
Society of Ukraine, the Ukrainian Helsinki Human
Rights Union, the international charitable foundation
Caritas Ukraine and other international and national
human rights organizations.
With the support of these organizations, in
2017 training activities for the study of international
humanitarian law covered all categories of personnel
of the armed forces of Ukraine. These measures also
cover personnel units returning from the immediate
area of the anti-terrorist operation, as well as those
moving to that area.
On 26 April, the Government of Ukraine adopted
resolution 329, on the establishment of the Inter-Agency
Commission for the Implementation of International
Humanitarian Law in Ukraine. Since 2014, when the
Russian aggression against my country began, we
have been able to do a great deal to protect civilians.
However, much work remains to be done. We also
count on the support and assistance of the international
community in the implementation of the relevant tasks.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I congratulate
the representative of Ukraine on his excellent Spanish.
Mr. Takei (Japan): At the outset, I should like to
congratulate you, Foreign Minister Nin Novoa, on your
presentation and to thank you for holding this open
debate. It is also my pleasure to see Secretary-General
António Guterres again after the London Somalia
Conference two weeks ago. I would also like to thank
Ms. Christine Beerli, Vice-President of the International
Committee of the Red Cross, and Mr. Bruno Stagno
Ugarte, Deputy Executive Director of Human Rights
Watch, for their insightful briefings.
The protection of civilians in armed conflict,
including health care in armed conflict, is an imperative
that requires the united efforts and courage of the
international community. Japan is honoured to have
assumed an important role, together with the other
co-penholders, in drafting Security Council resolution
2286 (2016). In order to push for the realization of
the principles of the resolution, Japan has urged
all parties to conflict to take seriously the former
Secretary-General’s recommendations under that
resolution. However, despite the unanimous adoption
of that landmark resolution last year and despite our
hopes, attacks on medical personnel and facilities have
17-14998

25/05/2017

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

S/PV.7951

continued in many parts of the world, especially in
Syria and Yemen.

G-7 summit in Taormina, Italy. Japan will continue to
work proactively on this issue.

Japan associates itself with the statements to
be delivered later by the representative of Spain, on
behalf of the co-penholders of resolution 2286 (2016),
and by the representative of Switzerland, on behalf of
the Group of Friends of the Protection of Civilians in
Armed Conflict.

One of the main factors behind the failure to
prevent recurrences of attacks against medical
personnel and facilities is the lack of accountability.
While underlining the Security Council’s active role
in fact-finding and ensuring accountability, Japan
emphasizes the important role of the International
Humanitarian Fact-Finding Commission, with a view to
ensuring respect for and compliance with international
humanitarian law. Japan will continue to contribute to
the Commission both financially and by nominating the
most qualified and independent members it can.

Against this backdrop, I would like to express my
appreciation for Secretary-General Guterres’ dedicated
efforts in producing his informative report (S/2017/414).
Allow me to comment on his vision for the protection of
civilians and health care in armed conflict.
Japan fully supports the Secretary-General’s
vision for enhancing respect for international law and
believes that raising awareness, as provided for under
Recommendation 7 of the former Secretary-General’s
recommendations (S/2016/722, annex), should be the
first step. In this regard, Japan has recently revitalized
its National Committee on International Humanitarian
Law. In addition, Japan has also participated actively
in the multilateral discussions of the intergovernmental
process on strengthening the respect for international
humanitarian law, held in Geneva.
As the Secretary-General’s report indicates,
conflict prevention is the best way to avoid attacks
and threats against civilians and medical personnel.
Japan, which gives great importance to the concept
of human security and which aims to contribute to
sustaining peace, has been making various efforts
in the field of peacebuilding to prevent the outbreak
and recurrence of conflict, including by contributing
$48.5 million to the United Nations Peacebuilding
Fund and leading the discussion on institution-building
at the Peacebuilding Commission.
I would now like to briefly touch upon the issue
of forced displacement, refugees and internal displaced
persons, which is also an important element in the
context of the protection of civilians in armed conflict.
At the Group of Seven (G-7) Foreign Ministers Meeting
held in Hiroshima last year, the Japanese Minister
for Foreign Affairs, Mr. Fumio Kishida, stressed the
importance of the G-7 countries utilizing their respective
strengths and proceeding with initiatives related to
terrorism and the refugee crisis in a manner that is
mutually complementary and generates synergistic
effects. Furthermore, starting tomorrow, the issue of
refugees and displaced persons will be discussed at the

Among the various issues related to the protection
of civilians in armed conflict, the protection of health
care in armed conflict should be a priority for the
international community. As a member of the Security
Council, Japan strongly condemns all attacks against
medical facilities and personnel and is fully committed
to realizing the principles of resolution 2286 (2016).
We will continue to work closely with other Member
States, the United Nations system and civil-society and
international humanitarian organizations to make a
substantial contribution in this area.
Mr. Rycroft (United Kingdom): I thank you,
Sir, for holding today’s debate and ensuring that this
Chamber hears the voices from civil society and your
own statement. It is quite rare to get a round of applause
from this audience. I also thank the Secretary-General
and to the International Committee of the Red Cross and
Human Rights Watch for their excellent contributions. I
pay tribute to them and their teams’ work.
The United Nations Charter is clear. Protecting
civilians is supposed to be at the heart of what we do.
When Governments fail to protect, people look to the
Security Council for safety from the scourge of war.
But for civilians in Syria, South Sudan and so many
other places, this is not about words in the Charter or a
debate held once a year; it is a horrific daily reality. The
sheer scale of the need is unprecedented. The year 2016
saw record numbers of people needing assistance and
protection, so many of them victims of conflict and of
the flagrant violation of international humanitarian law,
so many of them becoming victims of sexual violence,
trafficking or other forms of slavery.
As our briefers make clear, that suffering has been
made worse through cruel, unconscionable attacks on
medical facilities. Look at the fall of Aleppo last year:

17-1499813/78

S/PV.7951

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

time and again the regime and its backers bombed that
city until all the hospitals were out of action, so that the
city could not even care for its injured. Sadly, the trend
is spreading. As the Secretary-General pointed out, the
urbanization of conflict in Aleppo, Mosul and Juba has
increased the risk of destruction of hospitals, schools,
water systems and power supplies. This cannot become
the new reality of warfare.
Fifteen years on from the Council’s first formal
commitment to protecting civilians in armed conflict,
it is clear that we need a new approach. I therefore
welcome the Secretary-General’s call to reinvigorate
a global campaign, which should take practical steps
to minimize civilian harm, protect those that are
displaced, ensure peacekeepers perform their best and
deliver accountability for those who flout compliance
with international law. In support, we should all do
four things.
First, we need to take practical steps to mitigate
impacts on the ground. For instance, work is ongoing
to fortify health-care facilities in Syria and to provide
access to mobile clinics in Yemen. In South Sudan,
United Kingdom peacekeepers are helping strengthen
the security and accessibility of United Nations
protection-of-civilians sites.
Secondly, we should share best practices. That
means the full participation of women in efforts to
protect civilians. It also means full compliance with
international humanitarian law by all. In the United
Kingdom, we train our military on international
humanitarian law throughout their careers, including
with country-specific courses before they deploy. We
are sharing our expertise to help other Governments
and their armed forces comply with international
humanitarian law and we are helping them to make
their military-justice systems more effective.
Thirdly, we need to collect better and more
systematic data on attacks on medical facilities
and personnel. We support the Secretary-General’s
commitment to do this within the United Nations
system, but it is not enough to collect data; we need
to use it. We therefore call for more Council briefings
from the whole United Nations family, including the
Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs,
the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner
for Human Rights and the Special Representative
for Children in Armed Conflict whenever attacks on
medical facilities and personnel occur.
14/78

25/05/2017

Finally, the Council needs to take action when
violations occur. When States fail to act, it is our
responsibility to decide that these abuses will not
be tolerated, that we will hold those responsible
accountable. In this Chamber, we have a duty to shine
a light on those who fail to comply with international
law. We have a duty to collect the evidence that is so
essential for timely legal action against those who
attack medical personnel and facilities in violation of
international humanitarian law.
But we are not fulfilling that duty, not yet. So, today,
let us all recommit to using the Council’s authority,
shouldering our responsibility to prevent conflict,
to protect civilians and to hold to account those who
violate international humanitarian law and those who
violate and abuse human rights. The United Kingdom
will continue to show leadership, including as part of
the Secretary-General’s global campaign.
Mr. Liu Jieyi (China) (spoke in Chinese): China
commends Uruguay for taking the initiative to hold
today’s open debate on the protection of civilians in
armed conflict and specifically on the protection of
civilians and medical care in armed conflict. China
welcomes Foreign Minister Mr. Nin Novoa for coming
to New York to preside over today’s meeting. I wish
to thank Secretary-General Guterres for his briefing.
China has listened carefully to the statements made
respectively by Ms. Beerli, Vice-President of the
International Committee of the Red Cross, and the
representative of non-governmental organizations.
At present, the security situation around the world
remains grim. Hot spot issues in some areas gone
unresolved for far too long, which have resulted in
continuous armed conflict. The situation has put the
growing insecurity of local civilians and their medical
care into sharper focus. As such, this issue has attracted
much attention from the international community.
China supports the international community in taking
robust actions to provide safety and security to civilians,
medical workers and their facilities.
First, focus must be placed on conflict prevention
and resolution so as to eliminate the root causes that
jeopardize the safety of civilians, medical workers
and their facilities in the first place. Countries must
foster a sense of community and shared future and
promote a paradigm of global governance based on
joint consultations and contributions and shared
17-14998

25/05/2017

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

S/PV.7951

benefits in order to build a peaceful and a stable
international environment.

missions so as to ensure that the relevant mandate is
clear, practical and feasible.

Secretary-General Guterres has been actively
campaigning for initiatives on conflict prevention and
sustainable peace, which in our view is a valuable attempt
to achieve the aforementioned goal. The international
community should, working with one mind, implement
the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development and
tackle the deep-rooted causes of conflict. At the same
time, it is necessary to advocate a culture of peace
and the promote national reconciliation. As the core
of the collective security mechanism, the Security
Council should effectively shoulder its responsibility
for maintaining international peace and security by
working to promote dialogue and negotiation and
sustaining efforts to find political solutions to hot spot
issues, so as to keep civilians in armed conflict out of
harm’s way.

Peacekeepers who commit sexual exploitation and
abuse must be firmly punished. Regional organizations,
such as the African Union, and international
humanitarian agencies have comparative advantages
and a unique role, which must be fully utilized. Efforts
must also be made to enhance information exchanges
a policy alignment so as to help affected countries
enhance their ability to protect civilians. In this
connection, it is also important to have an effective
strategy to cope with the refugee situation, help host
countries resettle refugees and resolutely stamp down
on criminal activities against refugees.

Secondly, the Government and the parties to a
conflict are duty-bound to protect the civilians. National
Governments bear the primary responsibility when it
comes to the protection of their civilians. Parties to
conflict must respect international humanitarian law
and implement all relevant resolutions of the Council,
including resolution 2286 (2016); honour their obligation
to protect civilians, medical workers and their facilities;
and ensure that there is humanitarian access.
With regard to the victims of armed conflict, it is
incumbent on the Government and the communities
concerned to protect their legal rights and dignity
and help them to reintegrate into their communities.
With regard to cases of violations of international
humanitarian law in armed conflict, such as human
rights violations, threats to and attacks on health-care
personnel and facilities, national Governments must
take action to investigate and punish the perpetrators
Thirdly, it is necessary to adopt a holistic approach
and a working synergy. The civilian protection mandate
embedded within United Nations peacekeeping
operations, being an important means to protect
civilians as it is, must strictly abide by the Council’s
mandate and should not be seen as a replacement for
the responsibility and obligation to protect civilians
that fall to our national Governments and the parties to
the conflict. When designing a protection of civilians
mandate, the Council should take into account to the
overall condition and requirement of the host country
and the capacity and the conditions of the peacekeeping

Fourthly, we must do a good job of providing
humanitarian assistance in armed conflict. China hereby
pays tribute to all medical workers and humanitarian
relief agencies for their humanitarian spirit in healing
the wounded and rescuing the dying in armed conflict.
We hope that, in carrying out their noble mission, they
will abide by the purposes and principles of the Charter
of the United Nations, observe the guiding principles
of United Nations humanitarian assistance, respect the
sovereignty and territorial integrity of the host country,
make a special effort to win the understanding and trust
of the parties concerned and avoid being themselves
involved in the conflict. Such an approach is conducive
to the safety and security of medical personnel, their
facilities and the humanitarian workers operating in
armed conflict. The United Nations should play its
coordinating role, keep channels open with all parties to
the conflict and strengthen its supervision of h workers
and others involved so as to create conditions for timely
and safe humanitarian access.
Mr. Llorentty Solíz (Plurinational State of
Bolivia) (spoke in Spanish): At the outset, I would like
to welcome the presence of Minister for Foreign Affairs
of the Oriental Republic of Uruguay, Mr. Rodolfo Nin
Novoa, at this meeting today. It is a privilege to have
him in the Council.
I would also like to acknowledge the statements by
the Vice-President of the International Committee of the
Red Cross, Ms. Christine Beerli, and Mr. Bruno Stagno
Ugarte, Deputy Executive Director for Advocacy of
Human Rights Watch. The three briefings were very
important, not only because they touched the hearts of
those of us in this Chamber, but they also touched the
crux of the problems that our Organization in general

17-1499815/78

S/PV.7951

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

and the Security Council in particular are facing in
this area.
Unfortunately, war has taken on a brutal dimension.
Practices and dynamics have developed that, according
to the report of the Secretary-General on the protection
of civilians in armed conflict (S/2017/414), have affected
the lives of 65 million innocent people in various parts
the world. According to the Office for the Coordination
of Humanitarian Affairs in Yemen, over 21 million
people need assistance or protection to satisfy their basic
needs as a result of the conflict. In Syria, 13.5 million
people need humanitarian assistance and 6.3 million
have been displaced. In Libya, 2.4 million people need
humanitarian assistance. In the same vein, the number
of civilian fatalities — both because of terrorist attacks
and confrontations among forces and parties to the
different conflicts around the world — has increased
owing to the indiscriminate bombing by various
coalitions of hospitals, medical facilities, humanitarian
assistance facilities, religious sites and even wedding
celebrations, which are of no military importance but
remain targets nonetheless. In accordance with the
information provided by the Secretary-General in
his report, in 2016 there were 108 attacks on medical
facilities in Syria, 17 attacks in the Central African
Republic and 19 attacks in Yemen. Moreover, the report
indicates that every month around 30,000 people are
injured in Syria alone, which is the equivalent of almost
42 victims per hour.
In that connection, on 3 May 2016, at the initiative
of Uruguay, Egypt, Japan, Spain and New Zealand, the
Security Council adopted resolution 2286 (2016), which
seeks to protect civilians in armed conflict; protect
humanitarian personnel and guarantee their deployment
with complete security; and protect humanitarian
infrastructure, among other things. However, despite
the resolution, we still bear witness to violations of
international humanitarian law through attacks on
civilians and civilian infrastructure and denial of
access to medical assistance in armed conflicts, which
is often not the result of an error, but rather a method
of war. We urge States to ratify the Rome Statute, first
in order to ensure its universality, and secondly to end
impunity for such attacks.
We believe it important to recall here the Declaration
made by the Heads of State and Government of the
Movement of Non-Aligned Countries at their seventeenth
Summit, held in September 2016 on Margarita Island,
Venezuela, which condemned the increasing attacks
16/78

25/05/2017

on humanitarian personnel and related facilities. We
support it, needless to say, and firmly condemn all
attacks and threats against civilians, hospitals, health
facilities, water and power infrastructure, as well
as attacks on the doctors who give their lives to help
civilians trapped in armed conflicts, in what is coldbloodedly referred to as “collateral damage” but which
actually constitutes a war crime whose perpetrators
must be brought to justice.
We urge all parties to any conflict to protect the
civilian population and their property and health
facilities, as well as humanitarian missions deployed
on the ground. International humanitarian law and its
principles of impartiality, neutrality, humanity and
independence were created in response to violence in
armed conflicts and must be complied with in political
and military disputes. Bolivia calls on the international
community to take concrete action and to implement
the commitments made by all members of the Security
Council and of the United Nations generally to ensuring
the safety of civilians in armed conflicts, especially
women and children, who are the most vulnerable in
situations of extreme violence. Bolivia also advocates
for using peaceful means to resolve disputes — the use
of good offices, preventive diplomacy, multilateralism,
non-interference and respect for the sovereignty,
independence and territorial integrity of States — all
of which are universal principles recognized by the
international community and are effective tools for
avoiding the scourge of war.
In that context, we call on Member States to
support the Agenda for Humanity proposed by the
United Nations, which is based on a five-point plan
to guide the international community’s efforts to
alleviate humanitarian suffering and reduce risk and
vulnerability. The five points are, first, preventing and,
of course, ending conflicts; respecting international
humanitarian law; ensuring that no one is left behind;
changing the way we work so as to meet people’s needs;
and investing in humanity. That cannot be achieved as
long as armed conflicts continue to erupt and innocent
civilians continue to be seen as military targets, and
as long as technology is used for war and destruction
rather than peace.
The relevance or uselessness of this Organization,
its success or failure, is measured by our ability to save
lives. Every life lost, every person who is wounded
or displaced, every refugee embodies our failure. We
must share best practices and gather more and better
17-14998

25/05/2017

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

S/PV.7951

information to prevent such events from happening
again. We must bring those responsible to justice,
punish them and put an end to impunity. We must
work on the underlying causes of conflict in the areas
of development and civil, political, economic, social
and cultural rights, and we must strengthen the rule of
law and institutions. But apart from all of that, as you
rightly said, Mr. President, we should stop feeding the
monster of war, the enormous business of war. We must
end interventionism and the logic of regime change,
which have brought humankind so much pain.

comprehensive instrument. We should distribute it
and make use of it as widely as possible. The second
is the Kigali Principles, which provide guidance on
conducting operations, training and cooperating with
local communities on the ground. France supports
them, and we should all do the same. The third is the
recommendations that the Secretary-General made
in his most recent report (S/2017/414), many of which
are particularly useful. I would like to highlight three
major issues that he raises that we should prioritize and
make progress on.

Mr. Delattre (France) (spoke in French): I would
like to begin by thanking the Uruguayan presidency of
the Security Council for organizing today’s important
and very welcome debate. I would also like to thank
Ms. Christine Beerli, Vice-President of the International
Committee of the Red Cross (ICRC), and Mr. Bruno
Stagno Ugarte, Deputy Executive Director for Advocacy
of Human Rights Watch, for their presence here today,
their very informative briefings and their commitment
and that of their teams.

The first is humanitarian access, which must be
safe, immediate, full and unhindered, which, as we
know, is far from being the case everywhere. In Syria,
restrictions on humanitarian access are used as a
method of warfare, which is unacceptable. In Yemen,
effective and unhindered access must be restored for
humanitarian aid and basic necessities. Needless to say,
we are concerned about the famine not only in Yemen
but also in Somalia, Nigeria and South Sudan, where
nearly 20 million people are at risk. France will be
organizing an Arria Formula meeting on this subject
very soon.

I would also especially like to thank the SecretaryGeneral for presenting his ambitious vision for the
protection of civilians, so central to the prevention
agenda. France fully shares that priority and ambition,
to which the Council must fully contribute.
When we in the Council talk about Syria, about
indiscriminate bombing in residential areas in defiance
of respect for humanitarian law, as has been described;
when we talk about Yemen, Iraq, the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, the Central African Republic,
Afghanistan or South Sudan, we are all conscious of
the plight of civilians, women, children, journalists and
medical and humanitarian personnel — those who pay
the high price of conflict. The protection of civilians
is one of our highest priorities, and the challenge is
to translate that priority into action. That is why the
Council has made the protection of civilians central
to the mandates of peacekeeping operations that
have to use robust methods. It is also why violations
of international humanitarian law and human rights
have been integrated into sanctions regimes. Those
responsible for such violations must be punished more
systematically, and we must go further.
We have specific tools that we should use to do
that. The first is the aide memoire on the protection
of civilians (see S/PRST/2015/23), which was updated
in November 2015 and has become a concrete,

The second priority is disappearances. We have
heard the ICRC’s warning, relayed by the SecretaryGeneral, that in some areas disappearances have
more than quadrupled since 2014. They are the result
of fighting that displaces populations and separates
families, as well as of kidnappings and arrests that
include arbitrary detentions, torture and executions,
as has happened in Syria. In that regard, France
calls on all countries to ratify the Convention on
Enforced Disappearance.
The third priority is justice, because there can be no
protection of civilians without sanctions for violations of
people’s rights. We welcome the progress that has been
made in some places. A special criminal court is being
established in the Central African Republic. In Mali,
the Joint Mechanism has already begun prosecutions.
As a complementary measure, when nothing can be
done at the national level, the Rome Statute enables the
Security Council to make referrals to the International
Criminal Court (ICC). In the case of Syria, as we know,
France’s proposal that the ICC be involved was vetoed.
We should not forget the Council’s responsibility in
that regard, since evidence continues to be collected
in cooperation with the International Commission
of Inquiry and, soon, a dedicated mechanism. In the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, we have taken note

17-1499817/78

S/PV.7951

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

of the statement by the Prosecutor of the International
Criminal Court to the effect that the violence between
local militias and Congolese forces, the killing of many
civilians and non-civilians, kidnappings and summary
executions, including of United Nations experts on
mission and their support staff, could constitute crimes
within the Court’s jurisdiction.
I would like to touch on resolution 2286 (2016) more
specifically, because it is emblematic. Indeed, attacks
on hospitals kill caregivers and patients, but they also
condemn to death all those who would require care in
future. The consequences for children, particularly in
Yemen and Syria, are extremely alarming.
You have invited us, Mr. President, to share our
actions to implement resolution 2286 (2016). I will cite
three that concern the French forces.
The first example is notification and communication
to the forces of no-strike lists, elaborated in connection
with the ICRC, whose efforts I again warmly salute.
The latest air campaigns in Libya, Mali and the Levant
have all been carried out by systematically including
personnel, vehicles and health infrastructure on the
lists of protected properties, including their locations.
Moreover, regarding the use of explosive weapons in
urban areas, our very strict rules of engagement make
possible the prevention of humanitarian consequences
of our operations, in accordance with international
humanitarian law.
Secondly, with regard to the training of
troops — ours and those with whom we cooperate — in
Gao, Mali, the legal advisers of the Barkhane force are
raising the awareness of the Malian forces as to the
protection of medical facilities through regular training
in the law of armed conflict, as but one example.
A third example is the protection due to the
injured, whoever they are. Any member of the enemy
belligerent forces who is wounded and collected by the
French forces is cared for by the French army health
service until his wounds have healed. French forces,
when deployed in harsh environments, also provide
medical care to civilians. As an example, I reaffirm
the importance that France attaches to the fight against
sexual abuse through concrete action in prevention,
training and the fight against impunity.
To conclude, I will make a recommendation for
the information of the Council. The Secretary-General
highlighted the importance of early warning and of
18/78

25/05/2017

the collection of structured data in the implementation
of resolution 2286 (2016). The annual report on the
protection of civilians could include a dedicated
appendix identifying the development and type of
attacks on medical personnel and their facilities. I wish
to recall the role of the World Health Organization
(WHO) in that regard and to take the opportunity to
congratulate the new Director-General of WHO, Dr.
Tedros Adhanom Ghebreyesus, with whom the Security
Council must be fully engaged.
Mr. Umarov (Kazakhstan): I thank the Uruguayan
presidency and Minister for Foreign Affairs, His
Excellency Rodolfo Nin Novoa, for putting the
spotlight on the protection of health care in armed
conflict and the Secretary-General for his insightful
recommendations. We also express warm appreciation
to Ms. Beerli, of the International Committee of the
Red Cross, and Mr. Ugarte, of Human Rights Watch,
for their comprehensive briefings.
Statistics prove that about 75 per cent of all war
victims are civilians, due to hostilities and the excessive
use of explosives in urban areas. Those fatalities and
gross violations of human rights are accompanied by
large-scale forced displacements, which have led to a
global protection crisis. The survival of injured victims
is dependent on fully operational medical facilities
and medical and humanitarian personnel. Therefore
the destruction of those facilities might be used by
armed groups as a new weapon of war. At the same
time, we must acknowledge that health facilities are
also frequently demolished as collateral damage in our
attempts to fight terrorism and armed groups.
Last year Kazakhstan co-sponsored resolution
2286 (2016), whose unanimous adoption reflected the
Council’s unity in commitment to humanity in wartime.
However, health-care personnel and facilities remain
under fire in a number of conflicts. The effective
implementation of this resolution becomes even more
necessary. In that light, my delegation would like to
make the following observations for consideration by
the Council.
First, the United Nations and the Council should
send a strong signal to all conflicting parties by
implementing the relevant recommendations of the
Secretary-General’s latest report, of May (S/2017/414),
such as enhancing respect for international law,
providing impartial medical care and unimpeded access
to humanitarian action, prioritizing the protection
17-14998

25/05/2017

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

of civilians in United Nations peace operations and
finding durable solutions for refugees and internally
displaced persons.
Second, accountability is critical. Perpetrators
must be brought to justice in order to end all forms
of impunity. All parties to armed conflict that are
responsible for attacks on schools and hospitals must
be precisely, without exception, listed in the annexes to
Secretary General’s annual report on children in armed
conflict. The United Nations should engage with the
listed parties to secure action plans to hold accountable
those responsible for such attacks.
Third, the protection of civilians is primarily for
the host country. Governments need to strengthen
national mechanisms for independent investigations
of such violations, together with the introduction of
comprehensive security sector reform, rule of law
and good governance. They should be supported by
the United Nations system, regional organizations,
peacekeepers, donors and the international community.
Fourth, the support of the international actors
should focus primarily on tackling the root causes of
conflict through conflict prevention, peacebuilding and
development measures.
Fifth, we must actively use non-military protection
tools, including strong political advocacy, vigilant
reporting and monitoring. The need for the education
and training of all stakeholders in the larger framework
of international law is therefore absolutely essential.
We also need to promote improved data collection
by monitoring and analyzing data regarding attacks
on health care facilities in armed conflict and to
act accordingly.
Sixth, we underscore the importance of
implementing the recommendations of the SecretaryGeneral’s June 2015 report (S/2015/453) and the
relevant
recommendations
of
the
High-level
Independent Panel on Peace Operations, which
proposed that mandates to protect civilians need to be
coherent, with a comprehensive political strategy. We
also need operational clarity on the formulation and
implementation of mandates, which has not always been
possible due to differing perceptions and geopolitical
positions in the Council. Lines become further blurred
by parties to the conflict and players on the ground,
including the role of non-State actors and foreign
fighters, as a new phenomenon.

S/PV.7951

Seventh, attacks on health-care facilities and
personnel have a devastating impact on women,
children and persons with disabilities. All humanitarian
responses must therefore address the rights and needs
of vulnerable groups, including access to essential
medical care. The full participation of women in
decision-making will help ensure that those rights are
respected. Victims of land mines and other munitions
and the indirect effects of armed conflict, such as
disease, malnutrition and famine, also require special
medical care and specialized services. All of those
problems can be effectively addressed only by bringing
together international, regional and local stakeholders
and civil society.
Finally, Kazakhstan pays tribute to the noble work
of the International Committee of the Red Cross and
the humanitarian and human rights organizations.
My delegation attaches the utmost importance to
the security of civilians and is fully committed to
implementing resolution 2286 (2016).
In conclusion, I cannot but agree with the
passionate call of His Excellency the Foreign Minister
of Uruguay that the dream will save the world. The
Secretary-General has a dream and a vision, and all of
us, collectively, need to help him in its realization.
Mr. Ciss (Senegal) (spoke in French): The Senegalese
delegation is pleased to see you, Mr. President, presiding
over this Security Council open debate, which your
country has decided to dedicate to the important theme
of the protection of civilians and medical care in armed
conflict — the first public debate of this kind since the
Council adopted resolution 2286 (2016).
I would also like to take this opportunity to thank
the Secretary-General for his report (S/2017/414) and
the recommendations contained therein, as well as
our briefers, Ms. Christine Beerli, Vice-President
of the International Committee of the Red Cross and
Mr. Bruno Ugarte, Deputy Executive Director for
Advocacy of Human Rights Watch, for their continued
commitment to the humanitarian cause.
In the report before us, the Secretary-General
provides a pertinent description of his vision of
establishing the protection of civilians and the prevention
of conflicts as absolute priorities within the framework
of the maintenance of international peace and security.
Senegal, in accordance with the principle underlying
its foreign policy, fully adheres to such a vision, which,
we are convinced, will also deeply inspire the United

17-1499819/78

S/PV.7951

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

Nations, especially the Security Council, given that
armed conflicts remain by far the number-one cause of
humanitarian emergency in the world.
At the same time, during times of conflict, emphasis
should be placed, on the one hand, on the protection of
civilians and infrastructure — which, unfortunately,
have become preferred targets — and, on the other
hand, on the need for accountability, given the flagrant
and systematic violations of international humanitarian
law by parties to conflict. That is why the triptych
of prevention, protection and accountability should,
more than ever, guide the action of the international
community. Indeed, as conflict prevention makes it
possible to avoid the escalation of violence, which is a
source of indiscriminate attacks and the displacement
of persons, it should be the foundation of any security
strategy. That is why it is necessary to strengthen the
coherence of relevant policies introduced by the United
Nations and by other international organizations.
In addition, everyone is aware that in the various
hotbeds of conflict around the world, civilians and
health facilities have increasingly been deliberately
targeted by either armed groups or regular armies.
Added to that are indiscriminate and recurring attacks
on health facilities, medical personnel and humanitarian
convoys and, therefore, on humanitarian workers — to
whom I wish to pay due credit for their sacrifices, often
made at the cost of their lives.
At the same time, as stressed by the SecretaryGeneral in his report,
“among the international community there is a
growing sense of fatigue, even resignation, in
addressing the suffering of civilians in conflict”
(S/2017/414, para. 2).
Faced with that bitter observation, which has lasted
too long, it seems to us that the time has come for the
Security Council in particular to give priority to the
protection of civilians, especially to medical personnel,
health facilities and transport, in accordance with the
provisions of the Geneva Conventions of 1949 and their
Additional Protocols of 1977 and 2005, as well as all
relevant international instruments.
While it is true that States have the primary
responsibility to ensure the protection of civilians
in times of armed conflict, the fact remains that the
United Nations, through this Council, has an essential
role to play in the matter. To that end, it is important
20/78

25/05/2017

to strengthen, in all ways, the culture of preventing
violations of international humanitarian law and human
rights and to combat the impunity of their perpetrators,
whoever they may be.
For that, it remains essential to strengthen the
prevention role of United Nations peacekeeping
operations. When reviewing or establishing mission
mandates, it is appropriate to consider capacity-building
measures and measures to support security sector
reform and, where appropriate, sanctions procedures. It
is also appropriate to ensure that the resources of peace
operations are adapted to their mandates.
As for the parties to conflicts, they are clearly
obligated to respect international humanitarian law,
while the international community has a duty to
ensure that persons suspected of serious violations
of these rules of law, including International law
relating to the protection of medical care in time of
armed conflict, are brought to justice. That is why
military partnerships play a prominent role, as they
offer a unique opportunity to influence the parties
to the conflict and to ensure respect for international
law. The achievement of these objectives requires a
multidimensional approach that involves a variety of
actors, including the Security Council, Member States
and troop-contributing countries.
It is also essential to ensure the restoration of basic
services, in particular by rebuilding hospitals and other
medical facilities destroyed or damaged during attacks.
Another important aspect to be taken into account
is the implementation of the measures taken by the
Security Council in resolution 2286 (2016) and the
recommendations made by the Secretary-General in
this regard. In addition, all possible barriers to access
to health care and related facilities should be lifted
to allow for adequate deployment on the ground.
Furthermore, local health organizations need to be
supported in order to maintain a minimum level of
service through tailor-made solutions, depending on
circumstances on the ground.
Finally, quality training should be provided to
military personnel in order to minimize disruptions
to health-care services while safeguarding legitimate
security concerns.
Despite the unanimous condemnation by the
international community of indiscriminate attacks on
civilian populations and health facilities in flagrant
17-14998

25/05/2017

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

violation of the relevant provisions of international
humanitarian law, the report of the Secretary-General
states that, unfortunately, the number of such attacks
remained very high in 2016. Even more serious, the
report states:
“Many incidents were never investigated, and where
investigations were conducted they often failed to meet
international standards, preventing effective corrective
action and accountability (ibid., para. 37).”
It is for that reason that my delegation supports
the strengthening of the international community’s
efforts through opening investigations of allegations of
violations and the prosecution of perpetrators of attacks
on health infrastructure — the services of which, of
course, remain essential in times of armed conflict.
It goes without saying that our generation has the
opportunity, if it has the genuine will, to replace the
culture of impunity with that of accountability.
My delegation believes that we can hold to the
view that the best way to protect civilians is to create
a protective and preventive environment that pays
particular attention to the root causes of conflict, the
promotion of human rights and the rule of law, and
inclusive and sustainable development.
Ms. Sison (United States of America): I want to
thank Secretary-General Guterres for laying out his
vision of how to respond to what he has rightly called a
global protection crisis.
I also want to thank Mr. Ugarte and Ms. Beerli.
Their organizations do critical work to promote
accountability and respect for and protection of
medical personnel and facilities in armed conflict. The
United States especially values the participation of civil
society organizations like theirs at these briefings, as
well as the data and reporting provided by so many civil
society groups on this issue.
There is little doubt that trends are getting worse
when it comes to the protection of civilians. Parties to
conflicts are using despicable tactics, starving entire
cities until they surrender, deliberately bombing
hospitals — sometimes the same hospital over and
over — and raping and torturing civilians who are trying
to flee. And yet as the Secretary-General has observed,
“among the international community there is a
growing sense of fatigue, even resignation, in
addressing the suffering of civilians” (S/2017/414,
para. 2).

S/PV.7951

The protection of civilians remains the primary
responsibility of United Nations Member States, so
changing this attitude of resignation means that we on
the Council need to change our approach to responding
to protection crises on the ground. We as a Council
need to be honest with ourselves when Member States
are not living up to their commitments, and we need to
be willing to apply meaningful pressure when parties
to a conflict do not change course. We should be calling
on the United Nations to be more active and more
explicit in naming perpetrators, and then follow up on
the United Nations efforts with specific actions on the
part of the Council, whether that means naming those
responsible in our products or considering sanctions and
other mechanisms for accountability. That is the way to
start addressing the prevailing climate of impunity in
so many of the conflicts on our agenda.
The protection of health-care facilities and medical
workers in armed conflicts remains of particularly grave
concern to the United States. One year ago, the Council
adopted resolution 2286 (2016), which emphasized that
attacks directed against medical personnel and facilities
must cease and that the perpetrators of violations must
be held accountable. However, in far too many places
these attacks have not only continued but have gotten
worse, and many of these attacks are not incidental.
In some cases, warring parties are attacking hospitals
precisely because medical staff are doing their jobs of
treating the sick and the wounded.
In Syria, the Al-Assad regime, with help
from Russia, Iran and Hizbullah, has attacked and
destroyed medical facilities in a relentless campaign of
destruction. Physicians for Human Rights recorded 108
attacks against medical facilities in 2016 alone. Since
the start of Syria’s civil war, the Al-Assad regime and
its allies have reportedly been responsible for 90 per
cent of the 454 attacks on medical facilities. The world
witnessed this cruelty during the offensive last year
against eastern Aleppo. Between July and November
2016, the Al-Assad regime reportedly bombed every
single hospital in eastern Aleppo, leaving as many as
250,000 civilians with virtually no access to medical
care. Some hospitals were attacked by the regime more
than once, and Al-Assad’s forces would not even spare
maternity wards or children’s hospitals. The Council
has heard first-hand from doctors about the horror of
treating patients in makeshift basement emergency
rooms, where doctors had to retreat to avoid the regime’s
indiscriminate attacks. The attacks on medical workers

17-1499821/78

S/PV.7951

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

and facilities in Aleppo last year will not be forgotten.
They are a stain on the Council and on the members
that refused to stop it.
Turning to Yemen, the fighting has led to the
rapid deterioration of the country’s health-care
infrastructure. Just 45 per cent of medical facilities are
still open, even as nearly 70 per cent of the population
needs humanitarian aid. The results are devastating.
Over the past three weeks, Yemen has witnessed a
quickly spreading cholera outbreak. The World Health
Organization has reported a 50-per cent increase in
cases since 27 April, and hundreds have already died
from this treatable illness. With Yemen’s resources so
overstretched, all sides of the conflict in Yemen must
take all feasible precautions with a view to avoiding or,
in any event, minimizing civilian casualties and damage
to civilian infrastructure, especially medical facilities.
Attacks on health facilities and health workers only
exacerbate Yemen’s humanitarian crisis. The parties
must do everything possible to facilitate access to
humanitarian aid — both getting aid into the country
and distributing it throughout the country.
Finally, in South Sudan the challenge is not about
attacks from the air but about the calculated efforts
of the Government forces and armed groups to deny
humanitarian access, intimidate aid workers and prevent
health facilities from functioning. Since December
2013, not only have 100 medical facilities closed, but
29 have reportedly been ransacked or destroyed. South
Sudan remains one of the world’s most dangerous
places to be an aid worker, and the violence is getting
worse. Just two months ago, six staff members from
a UNICEF partner were killed in a vehicle marked
with the logo of their non-governmental organization
(NGO), in the worst attack on humanitarians since the
war began. Humanitarian convoys carrying life-saving
aid have come under attack attack repeatedly. Even with
famine declared and cholera on the rise in South Sudan,
the Government still imposes a never-ending series of
bureaucratic obstacles that keep the United Nations and
its partners from delivering food and medicine to the
people who need it most. We could go on and on.
One recent report issued by a coalition of NGOs
documented attacks against medical personnel and
facilities in no fewer than 23 different countries around
the world. One year after the adoption of resolution
2286 (2016), this track record is simply unacceptable.
The Council must therefore strengthen its resolve to
stop attacks directed against medical personnel and
22/78

25/05/2017

facilities, end impunity for perpetrators of violations,
and focus on preventing harm to the tens of millions
of civilians trapped in armed conflicts. This has to be
a collective and continuous effort in the year to come.
We have a choice here today. We can let another
year go by and then sit here again to lament still more
attacks against hospitals and medical workers, or we
can come together now and take steps to reverse the
rising tide of violence on the ground by using the tools
at the Council’s disposal to push warring parties to live
up to their obligations to protect civilians. That choice
should be obvious, and we need to make the choice that
saves lives.
Ms. Guadey (Ethiopia): I would like to start by
commending Uruguay for convening this open debate
one year after the adoption of resolution 2286 (2016).
Let me also thank the Secretary-General for his
report on the protection of civilians in armed conflict
(S/2017/414) and his briefing this morning. We are
grateful to him and all other briefers for sharing their
thoughts on the theme of our debate today.
In our consideration of various conflict situations
around the world here in the Council, there have been
concerns about the grave violation of international
humanitarian law committed by parties to armed
conflict. This has to do with the means and methods
of combat used by conflicting parties, particularly
widespread and indiscriminate attacks against civilian
populations. We are also alarmed by reports of continued
attacks on civilian objects, such as schools and hospitals,
the denial of access for humanitarian actors operating in
accordance with international humanitarian principles,
as well as attacks, the threat of attacks and obstruction
hindering humanitarian assistance, including healthcare services and personnel.
Violence against health care in armed conflict
has devastating short- and long-term consequences
for affected communities, health-care facilities and
thousands of health-care staff and volunteers who
provide assistance. Such reports in various conflict
situations result in forced displacement, poverty and
lack of access to basic services. Of particular concern
to us is, of course, the impact on civilian populations,
including the untold suffering and loss of life, the
displacement of people internally and across borders,
as well as the weakening of the capacity of health-care
systems to provide the necessary care to the civilian
17-14998

25/05/2017

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

population, as highlighted by the Secretary-General in
his report.
Ethiopia welcomes the three protection priorities
identified by the Secretary-General in his report,
which are aimed at strengthening compliance with
international human rights law and international
humanitarian law, the protection of humanitarian and
medical missions, and the prioritization of civilian
protection in United Nations peace operations, as well
as at preventing forced displacement and at finding
durable solutions for refugees and internally displaced
persons. We also note his vision for strengthening the
protection of civilians in armed conflict. In that regard,
we would like to make the following five points.
First, Ethiopia recognizes the importance of strict
compliance with international humanitarian law by all
parties to an armed conflict, especially where that law
relates to the means and methods of combat, which
includes the protection of civilians against the effects
of hostilities involving a deliberate or accidental attack.
We would encourage the further exploration of the
impact of the risks associated with the proliferation of
weapons of mass destruction in violation of international
humanitarian law, which again relates to the means of
warfare used by parties to an armed conflict and their
possible devastating impact on civilians.
Secondly, while concurring with the importance
of accountability in strengthening compliance with
international humanitarian law, strengthening or
establishing national and regional accountability
mechanisms should be encouraged.
Thirdly, as one of the largest refugee-hosting
countries, Ethiopia is encouraged by the inclusion of
forced displacement as one of the key priority areas
for action by the Secretary-General in his report. We
also appreciate his recognition of the indispensable
role of United Nations peace operations in protecting
civilians. We want, however, to emphasize that United
Nations peace operations should be provided, from
the beginning, with the necessary resources and
capabilities, including the equipment and training
needed to fully implement their mandates. As much as
possible, that should be coupled with the capacity to
address the needs of the victims of serious violations
and the capacity to respond to the humanitarian needs
of the civilian population, particularly internally
displaced persons. The capacity to find durable
solutions to assist internally displaced persons should

S/PV.7951

be further strengthened. Such capacity would enable us
to respond to the protection needs of civilians, while
preventing any further displacement and reducing their
vulnerability to the impact of armed conflict.
Fourthly, the Council should look closely at the
conclusions reached by the Working Group on Children
and Armed Conflict with regard to the various country
situations involving children and armed conflict. It
would also be important for the Security Council to
make greater use of the informal expert groups relating
to the protection of civilians so as to track serious
violations of international humanitarian law.
Finally, as one of the major troop-contributing
countries and a signatory to the Kigali Principles on
the Protection of Civilians, I would like to conclude
by reiterating the firm commitment of Ethiopia to the
protection of civilians. We will continue to work with
all of the relevant actors in that regard.
Ms. Schoulgin Nyoni (Sweden): I thank you, Sir,
for organizing today’s debate.
(spoke in Spanish)
I also thank you for the enthusiasm with which you
presented your views.
(spoke in English)
I should also like to thank the Secretary-General,
Ms. Christine Beerli, Vice-President of the International
Committee of the Red Cross, and Mr. Bruno Stagno
Ugarte, Deputy Executive Director for Advocacy
of Human Rights Watch, for their important and
inspiring contributions.
Sweden fully endorses the statements that will
be made later today on behalf of the European Union
and on behalf of the Group of Nordic Countries by the
representative of Norway.
The Fourth Geneva Convention puts the protection
of civilians at the heart of international humanitarian
law. The Charter of the United Nations puts it at the
heart of the mandate and responsibility of the Security
Council. Sadly, despite those protections, one might say
that it has never been as perilous as it is today to be a
civilian in the middle of armed conflict. It has been forty
years since the adoption of the Additional Protocols of
1977 to the Geneva Conventions, which specifically
strengthen the protection of civilians Yet, almost every
day, the Council is faced with testimonies to the most

17-1499823/78

S/PV.7951

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

brutal, barbarous and premeditated instances of the
targeting of civilians as a tactic of war.
From the atrocities in Syria and in the inaccessible
villages of Borno State in northern Nigeria and the
man-made famine ravaging South Sudan to the crisis
in Yemen and the attacks on medical facilities in
Kunduz in Afghanistan, the Secretary-General and the
Vice-President of the International Committee of the
Red Cross rightly speak of a global protection crisis.
The current level of preventable suffering is horrifying,
and, as we have stated repeatedly, utterly unacceptable.
It is incontrovertible that States have the primary
responsibility for the protection of civilians. At the
same time, the international community, including the
Council, must do more. We welcome the SecretaryGeneral’s proposed path to protection and his
recommendations for a more ambitious approach for the
United Nations across the board. The path to protection
is strongly linked to the Secretary-General’s prevention
agenda. Such an approach saves lives and prevents
suffering. It also has the potential to save billions of
dollars in humanitarian aid, which can, in turn, be
invested in building stable and prosperous societies.
Once a year, we meet here to speak about the
protection of civilians in an open debate. Every day,
however, we address those issues in our work. It is our
responsibility to ensure the protection of civilians in
each and every conflict, but often we fail. How can we
do better? The protection of civilians’ agenda is broad.
Today, I will limit myself to focusing on three issues.
First, we can ensure respect for international
humanitarian law, as well as international human
rights law. Where once civilian deaths were seen as
the unavoidable accidental casualties of war, we now
see civilians being actively targeted. Deliberate attacks
on civilians and civilian infrastructure are seen as
just another tool in the toolbox of warfare. We fully
agree with the Secretary-General that the narrative that
civilian deaths in war are inevitable must be reversed.
In fact, such deaths can be prevented.
International humanitarian law provides a
foundation for prevention, as well as for reconciliation,
peacebuilding and accountability. The protection
and promotion of human rights contributes to
addressing the root causes of instability. We can
include a gender perspective in the implementation
of international humanitarian law. It would ensure
that all civilians — both men and women — get the
24/78

25/05/2017

effective protection to which they are entitled, as well
as impartial humanitarian assistance. Women and girls
face heightened and specific risks in situations of armed
conflict. It is, therefore, important that the situation
and needs of women and girls in armed conflict be
addressed. Furthermore, the particular vulnerabilities
and protection needs of migrants, refugees and internally
displaced persons — especially children — need to be
recognized, considered and addressed
Secondly, we can take concrete steps forward by
building upon landmark resolution 2286 (2016) and
the recommendations contained in the report of the
Secretary-General of August 2016 (S/2016/360). The
legal and policy framework for protecting the sick and
wounded and those endeavouring to assist them is in
place. Sweden is ready to engage. My Government’s
ministerial delegation on international law and
disarmament is in the process of developing new and
concrete proposals to strengthen the protection of
medical care in armed conflict
Thirdly, with regard to peacekeeping, we can
ensure that cross-pillar political strategies guide all
peace operations. The protection of civilians cannot
be seen as optional. It must be politically prioritized
within those strategies, properly resourced and
integrated across the work of missions. That requires
the availability to the Council of relevant and accurate
information with respect to the protection of civilians,
which, we believe, should be included in reporting by
the Secretary-General and other mechanisms, while
drawing on the whole of the United Nations system.
Missions have a critical role in ensuring that
protection needs are identified, reported and addressed.
Women’s participation must be ensured at all stages
of protection strategies in order to ensure that those
strategies address the needs of the entire population.
Building the capacity of United Nations troops and
police, including in the protection of citizens, is part
of a larger peacekeeping reform that must be sustained.
Finally, as the Chair of the Security Council
Working Group on Children and Armed Conflict, we
would also like to highlight the fact that the Security
Council’s children and armed conflict agenda has an
important accountability mechanism for dealing with
the perpetrators of attacks on schools and hospitals.
That includes its monitoring and reporting mechanism,
namely, the Secretary-General’s annual report on
children and armed conflict with its annexes, which
17-14998

25/05/2017

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

list the perpetrators of such attacks and United Nations
action plans concluded to end such violations. In order
to address the widespread impunity for attacks on
health care, we can fully utilize that mechanism.
We have made much progress on the protection of
civilians within the Council and within the work of the
United Nations more broadly. The legal framework is
there; the resolutions have been adopted and agreed.
We must now start down the path of protection that
reinforces respect for international humanitarian law,
while working to prevent and end conflict. Doing so
will require the full commitment and strong leadership
of both the Secretary-General and the Security Council.
Mr. Iliichev (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We are grateful to the Secretary-General and
the briefers for participating in today’s meeting.
The issue of the protection of civilians has longbeen
inscribed in the Security Council’s agenda. We believe
that it is justified for that issue to remain the focus
of the Council’s attention. As the nature of conflict
changes, the issue of the provision of health care for
and protection of the sick and wounded is of particular
importance. In many hotspots today, hostilities occur in
densely populated areas whose inhabitants are heavily
dependent on the smooth functioning of the medical
infrastructure. The parties to the conflict, wherever it
is taking place, should take all necessary measures to
ensure the safety of civilians. That includes providing
humanitarian and medical assistance.
The work of the international community in should
seek to carry out humanitarian tasks, such as alleviating
the suffering of civilians. However, we do not believe
that it is right to disconnect the matter of medical
assistance from the general context of the protection
of civilians and efforts to settle conflicts. We highly
value the efforts of the International Committee of the
Red Cross (ICRC) in lending assistance to civilians,
including through the provision of medication, the
training of staff, the provision of medical assistance and
the sharing of knowledge on the norms of international
humanitarian law. We believe that the proposals made
by the ICRC to review the best practices in that area
warrant additional study.
The need civilians have for medical assistance is
often used, contrary to the provisions of international
law, to achieve military and other advantages. Once
again, we must draw attention to the disastrous
situation regarding access to medical assistance in

S/PV.7951

eastern Ukraine. Indiscriminate attacks by the armed
forces of Ukraine have destroyed much civilian
infrastructure, including hospitals. For example, in
January, artillery fire hit hospitals and middle schools
in Makiivka. Over the past three years, as a result of
the blockade from Kyiv, civilians have been unable to
receive the necessary care and medication. The report
of the Secretary-General on the protection of civilians
in armed conflict (S/2017/414) highlights Kyiv’s ban on
trade with the south-east of Ukraine, affecting, inter
alia, the provision of medical supplies to the area.
Our country, unlike the Ukrainian authorities, has
provided and continues to provide full-scale assistance,
including health care, to the citizens of the south-east,
whose lives and health are threatened daily by the
targeted action of the Ukrainian Government. Appeals
from international humanitarian workers and human
rights advocates, who often note that it is the most
vulnerable who suffer from the blockade, including
children, the elderly and persons with disabilities, have
not led to any results. We would like to address our
appeal to the delegation of Ukraine and call for Ukraine
to lift the inhumane restrictive measures that it has
imposed on its own people.
Elsewhere, humanitarian workers, including
medical personnel, have increasingly been the victims
of terrorist armed groups. We do not have to look very
far for examples, such as the attack by Islamic State in
Iraq and the Levant fighters on the military hospital in
Afghanistan in February and on ICRC staff in March.
We should also recall tactics such as disguising fighters’
sheltmedical centres, the use of the wounded and the
sick as human shields, and the creation of obstacles
to the provision of humanitarian assistance, as well
as the forcible seizure of medications from civilians.
In eastern Aleppo, the issue of medical evacuation
was brazenly used as a bargaining chip by terrorists.
There has been grim information regarding attacks
by terrorists on medical workers, which underscores
the need for additional efforts by States, the United
Nations and humanitarian organizations to strengthen
mechanisms to ensure the safety of humanitarian staff.
At this stage, we believe that the legal frameworks
we have for dealing with the issues at hand are quite
sufficient. The focus should be on practical measures to
uphold the relevant principles and standards. Resolution
2286 (2016) provides States and parties to a conflict
with the necessary guidelines on the issue. Regarding
the set of health-care recommendations proposed by

17-1499825/78

S/PV.7951

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

the Secretary-General in 2016, we have already shared
our assessment on that matter. We believe that those
recommendations could provide a basis for future work,
but we should not, in our opinion, forget that they also
contain a number of contentious issues that go beyond
resolution 2286 (2016) and the norms of international
humanitarian law.
We have studied the recent report of the SecretaryGeneral on the protection of civilians in armed conflict.
We support the intention to ensure the pooling of efforts
to prevent conflict and protect civilians. In our view,
such an approach should be based on international law
and should not impose any artificial hierarchies; it could
then lead to positive results. However, we would like to
warn against any arbitrary interpretation of the norms
of international humanitarian law and other documents.
We do not challenge the need for measures to ensure
that those responsible for the killing of civilians,
including medical staff, should be held to account. But
we do not share the rosy assessment of the activities
of the International Criminal Court with regard to the
so-called mechanism for conducting investigations in
Syria. As we have noted, the establishment of that
mechanism was a blatant violation of the Charter of the
United Nations.
The current skyrocketing level of confrontation
and politicization in international affairs has also had
an adverse impact on the matter of the protection of
humanitarian and medical personnel. Against the
backdrop of uncorroborated allegations against Russia,
the lack of response in 2016 to the strike on a Russian
mobile hospital that was lending assistance to Syrians
was a blatant example of double standards. As a result
of the strike, two nurses were killed and one doctor
seriously wounded. Those who only want to raise
anti-Russian hype were not interested in the information
on the overfilled stockpiles of medicines in eastern
Aleppo, which militants kept from the population
suffering from a lack of medications. Double standards
are visible in the information available on the military
campaigns in Iraq, Yemen, Afghanistan and other
countries and on the actions of the so-called coalition
in Syria. There is a so-called coalition in Syria. Civilian
infrastructure, including health facilities, have been
subject to strikes with frightening regularity, including
international armed forces. The umber of casualties
caused by such attacks amounts to hundreds, if not
thousands of killed.
26/78

25/05/2017

For exampn February, as a result of a rocket strike on
Idlib, the ICRC mission, including medical equipment,
was damaged and personnel were injured. As a result
of strikes carried out by the international coalition on
17 and 30 April on a field hospital in Al-Tabka,Syria
in April, 14 civilians were killed. However, for many
years, those incidents have been ignored or have been
presented as unavoidable collateral damage. Given the
unprecedented abuse in the information sphere, the
reliability and credibility of data on the protection of
civilians, including attacks on medical staff, and the
weighing of all the factors and circumstances, are of
particular importance. All factors and circumstances
should be taken into account. We believe that the
relevant bodies of the United Nations should be guided
by the imperatives of thorough verification and unbiased
analysis of the information that comes to them. That
also pertains to the report of the Secretary-General on
the protection of civilians in armed conflict.
In conclusion, we would like once again to express
our gratitude to all those who, even in harsh conditions,
provide medical care to civilian populations in zones
of armed conflicts, often at the cost of their own lives.
Mr. Aboulatta (Egypt) (spoke in Arabic): At
the outset, I would like to thank the Uruguayan
presidency for convening this important open debate
on the protection of civilians and medical personnel in
armed conflicts.
The plight of civilians as a result of the ongoing
conflicts in various corners of the globe, particularly
in the Middle East and Africa, has unequivocally
demonstrated the inaction of the international
community and its failure to provide protection to
civilians and preserve their dignity and humanity.
That is especially the case for the most vulnerable
demographic groups, namely, women and children.
Despite the development of the concept of the protection
of civilians following the adoption of resolution
1265 (1999) and the subsequent priority given to the
protection of civilians by the Security Council, we
have not seen words being translated into tangible
actions on the ground that would lead to the systematic
protection of civilians. Therefore, the entire system of
the United Nations, particularly the Security Council,
must adopt more effective measures in order to ensure
such protection.
We share the priorities defined by the SecretaryGeneral in his report on the protection of civilians in
17-14998

25/05/2017

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

armed conflicts (S/2017/414) aimed at promoting a
system of civilian protection. In that vein, we would like
to focus on the second priority defined by the SecretaryGeneral: the need to work on providing protection for
medical missions. Attacks on health-care facilities and
personnel, as well as on injured patients, constitute a
heinous violation of international humanitarian law. In
that framework and in the light of the increasing attacks
against the health-care sector, including perceived
moves by some parties to put obstacles in the way of
access to medical facilities and equipment, the Security
Council, at the beginning of Egypt’s presidency in May
2016, adopted resolution 2286 (2016), which focused
on health care in armed conflicts. That historic and
important initiative, launched by five elected members
of the Security Council, including Egypt, reaffirmed the
commitment provided for in international humanitarian
law to the protection of the health-care sector. It also
condemned any attacks on medical facilities and
personnel. Furthermore, the resolution urged States to
adopt practical and effective measures to prevent such
violations and address them. It also stressed the need
to hold perpetrators of such attacks accountable and
eliminate the immunity with which those perpetrators
appeared to be acting. It also called upon the parties
to provide safe and unhindered access to medical care.
The adoption of the resolution was a milestone in
the conceptual development of the protection of the
health-care sector. However, it has not substantively
changed the situation. The targeting of health-care
workers in zones of armed conflict continues unabated.
Ironically, 2016 saw a huge rise in the frequency of
attacks targeting the health-care sector. The primary
responsibility for providing protection for civilians
lies with the States that are parties to the conflict,
pursuant to the Geneva Convention of 1949. However,
recent incidents around the world have shown the need
for concerted international efforts to prevent such
violations and bring to account the perpetrators, all
while fully respecting national sovereignty.
In conclusion, I would like to reaffirm that today’s
open debate presents an opportunity to assess the
progress made in implementing resolution 2286 (2016).
We call upon States to shoulder their responsibilities
and implement their commitments pursuant to that
resolution. For our part, we will spare no effort to
achieve the targets contained in the resolution, as we
are eager to uphold the noble values and principles of
international humanitarian law.

S/PV.7951

Mr. Cardi (Italy): I thank the Uruguayan
presidency for this open debate, which marks the first
anniversary since the adoption of resolution 2286
(2016) on the protection of medical and humanitarian
personnel and facilities.
I would also like to thank the briefers — first of all,
the Secretary-General for his participation in this open
debate and the introduction of his report (S/2017/414),
as well as the Vice-President of the International
Committee of the Red Cross, Ms. Christine Beerli, and
the Deputy Executive Director for Advocacy of Human
Rights Watch, Mr. Bruno Stagno Ugarte, for their
interesting and insightful thoughts and presentations.
Italy aligns itself with the statements to be delivered
by the observer of the European Union and by the
representative of Switzerland on behalf of the Group of
Friends on the Protection of Civilians.
Last year’s adoption of resolution 2286 (2016) by
consensus and with a very large number of sponsors
was a landmark achievement by the Security Council. It
sent a powerful message to the international community
by calling on all parties to conflicts to give special
protection to medical and humanitarian personnel and
facilities, and to ensure accountability for violations and
ensure the concrete implementation of the resolution’s
provisions, including the need to share best practices.
Italy supports the provisions of resolution 2286
(2016) as a tool to implement and increase respect for
the cardinal principles of international humanitarian
law and the 1949 Geneva Convention. We must recall
the obligation enshrined in Common Article 1 of the
four Geneva Conventions and the first 1977 Protocol,
not only to respect the Conventions, but also to ensure
respect for the Conventions in all circumstances. In that
regard, we are committed to the full implementation
of resolution 2286 (2016) and its provisions on the
protection of civilians and health-care facilities and
personnel. We will also contribute to the important role
of advocacy to that end. Today’s open debate forms a
part of that effort, as well.
Since the adoption of the resolution on 3 May 2016,
we have, unfortunately, witnessed further deterioration
of the situation, with increasing attacks in which
civilians have been sacrificed in the name of the warring
parties, whose destructive strategies and objectives
demonstrate that the well-being and safety of their own
populations are clearly not the top priority. It happens
everyday — in Syria, in Yemen, in South Sudan, as

17-1499827/78

S/PV.7951

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

25/05/2017

well as in many other places. It is time to translate
words into actions. We urge that not only must healthcare facilities and personnel not be targeted in the
context of conflicts, but also that safe and unimpeded
humanitarian passage be guaranteed to them in order to
ensure the quickest, most effective delivery of relief to
the populations in need.

law and human rights principles must be investigated,
and the perpetrators must be brought to justice,
including, where appropriate, by making fuller use of
referrals by the International Criminal Court. Let us not
forget, in that respect, that the primary responsibility
for protecting their own population lies with the States
themselves and their national judicial systems.

Those that suffer the most devastating effects
from conflicts are often children. For that reason, Italy
condemns, in the strongest terms, attacks directed
against schools, as well as any military use of schools,
recalling in that regard the Safe Schools Declaration,
which we hope that more Member States will sign.

Finally, Italy was among the first signatories and
promoters of the Kigali Principles on the Protection
of Civilians and the Responsibility to Protect, rightly
recalled in the Secretary-General’s report. In that
connection. Italy contributes to capacity-building
through specific courses for peacekeepers on the
protection of civilians, which are carried out by the
Italian Carabinieri’s Centre of Excellence for Stability
Police Units in Vicenza. We hope that more Member
States will subscribe to the Kigali Principles, which are
crucial, in our view, for the protection of civilians by
our peacekeeping missions.

Conflicts bring about a vicious cycle of forced
migrations, refugee flows and human trafficking,
which all involve many children. We reiterate our deep
concern over the smuggling of migrants and human
trafficking, which endanger the lives of thousands of
people in the Mediterranean Sea. Italy will continue
to spare no efforts to combine security, solidarity and
development in order to dismantle the business model
of the traffickers and save lives at sea. That effort also
involves protecting the lives of civilians, most of whom
are fleeing conflict.
Italy supports the three protection priorities outlined
by the Secretary-General in his report (S/2017/414),
namely, to enhance respect for international law,
with particular attention to urban warfare; to protect
humanitarian and medical missions and prioritize
the protection of civilians in United Nations peace
operations; and to prevent forced displacement and
pursue durable solutions for displaced persons and
refugees. We also support the recommendations of the
Secretary-General in that regard, addressed both to
Member States and to the Council, including the need
for systematic data collection, analysis and reporting.
We would like to point out two other important
priorities regarding the effective protection of civilians.
The first is upstream, namely, prevention, and the other
is downstream, namely, accountability. Preventing
conflicts through a holistic, comprehensive approach
that addresses root causes is the best way to protect
civilians. That is why we particularly appreciate the
reference in the report to the necessity of strengthening
early warning and early-action mechanisms.
At the same time, prevention would be largely
ineffective if not coupled with downstream
accountability. Violations of international humanitarian
28/78

The President (spoke in Spanish): I wish to remind
all speakers to restrict their statements to no more than
four minutes in order to allow the Council to carry
out its work expeditiously. Delegations with lengthy
statements are kindly requested to circulate the texts
in writing and to deliver a condensed version when
speaking in the Chamber.
I now give the floor to the representative of the
Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela.
Mr. Molina (Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela)
(spoke in Spanish): It is an honour for the Bolivarian
Republic of Venezuela to take the floor on behalf of
the Movement of Non-Aligned Countries (NAM) in
this open debate where we are commemorating the
first anniversary of the adoption of Security Council
resolution 2286 (2016) on the protection of the wounded
and sick, medical personnel and humanitarian personnel
in armed conflict.
First, on behalf of the States members of NAM, we
wish to convey our respects to Mr. Rodolfo Nin Novoa,
Minister for Foreign Affairs of Uruguay. We also
convey our best wishes to his delegation for a successful
month in leading the work of the Council. We also
recognize the efforts made in preparing the concept
note (S/2017/365, annex) for this open debate, which
will serve as a basis to guide our discussions today. We
also thank the Secretary-General for his statement and
Ms. Christine Beerli and Mr. Bruno Stagno Ugarte for
their briefings.
17-14998

25/05/2017

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

The world in which we live today faces many
complex, new and emerging threats and challenges to
international peace and security. They include those
brought on by terrorism and violent extremism and
war and protracted conflicts. In the context of armed
conflicts, we have seen how the human suffering of
innocent civilians, trapped in the midst of the conflict,
can be exacerbated by deliberate, indiscriminate and,
in some cases, systematic attacks on the wounded and
the sick, on health-care personnel and humanitarian
personnel dedicated exclusively to medical missions,
and on their means of transport and equipment, as
well as on hospitals and other health institutions. That
includes attacks perpetrated by non-State actors, all of
which jeopardize the inviolability of those institutions
under international law.
The Non-Aligned Movement therefore emphatically
condemns such acts of violence, attacks and threats. The
Non-Aligned Movement deplores the consequences over
the long term of such attacks on the civilian population
and the health systems of the affected countries. Those
attacks, which could constitute war crimes, must come
to an end. Those responsible must face justice in order
to break the cycle of impunity and send a clear and
united message of zero tolerance.
In that regard, during the 17th Summit of the
Non-Aligned Movement, which took place in September
2016 on Margarita Island, Venezuela, the Heads of
State and Governments condemned the increasing
attacks on the safety of humanitarian personnel, and
they called on the Governments of States Members
of the United Nations to guarantee the protection
of the personnel of humanitarian organizations, in
accordance with the relevant international law and its
humanitarian provisions.

S/PV.7951

therefore necessary for all parties to comply fully with
their obligations under international law, as appropriate,
and under international humanitarian law, in particular
their obligations under the Geneva Conventions of 1949
and their obligations under the Additional Protocols
of 1999 and 2005, as indicated in the concept note
(S/2017/365, annex) for this open debate. That is needed
in order to enable and facilitate the safe and unimpeded
passage of impartial humanitarian relief, including
medical missions, personnel and supplies.
The member States of the Non-Aligned Movement
also call on all parties to international armed conflicts
to redouble their efforts to comply with their obligations
under international humanitarian law. That includes the
principles of precaution against attacks, proportionality
and differentiation aimed, inter alia, at banning attacks
against civilian populations, civilian property and some
special properties during an armed conflict. This also
includes the obligation of the parties to any conflict
to ensure general protection from dangers posed by
military operations to civilian facilities, hospitals,
means of transport and relief materials, as well as to
the distribution of such materials.
The Non-Aligned Movement also stresses that
humanitarian agencies and their personnel must
respect international humanitarian law and the laws of
the country in which they are operating, as well as the
guiding principles of humanitarian assistance set out
in the annex to General Assembly resolution 46/182,
including the principles of humanity, neutrality and
impartiality, as well as non-interference in the internal
affairs of host countries, and the sovereignty, territorial
integrity, national unity and independence of States.

In reaffirming that the protection of civilians
throughout their territory is the primary responsibility
of host countries, the Heads of State and Government
of the Movement of Non-Aligned Countries recognized
that that task is sometimes also entrusted to United
Nations peacekeeping operations, to which they
reaffirmed their commitment.

The Non-Aligned Movement recognizes the
importance of early and effective recording and census
systems as a means of quantifying and assessing the
need for the provision and delivery of humanitarian
assistance. It recognizes also the need to respect
international refugee law and to preserve the civilian
and humanitarian character of refugee camps, and
in this regard calls on receiver States to ensure the
demilitarization of refugee camps.

In that regard, the members States of the
Non-Aligned Movement recognized that many
humanitarian agencies and health personnel operate in
countries where United Nations peacekeeping missions
are deployed, where they play an important role in
assisting civilians in the context of armed conflicts. It is

Another matter of deep concern to the States
members of the Movement is their ability to respond
to humanitarian emergencies, including in the context
of armed conflict, owing to the impact of various
phenomena ranging from climate change to the
consequences of the economic and financial crisis, and

17-1499829/78

S/PV.7951

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

25/05/2017

from insecurity in the area of food, energy and water to
the negative impacts of unilateral coercive measures,
among many others. In this regard, we must work
together to address these challenges and strengthen
our capacity for resilience, particularly in terms of
prevention, preparedness and response.

attacked on the battlefield and ensuring the exercise of
their activities. They also provide that the parties to the
conflict may notify each other of the location of their
fixed medical facilities and that the absence of such
notification does not imply authorization to carry out
attacks on these premises.

In conclusion, the 120 States members of the
Non-Aligned Movement wish to pay tribute and
acknowledge the commendable work done by the many
humanitarian workers, including physicians and other
health personnel, who are carrying out their work in
the context of armed conflicts and who, in many cases,
work under adverse conditions on the ground, risking
their lives daily, in their quest to alleviate the human
suffering of those trapped in armed conflict. Our
sincere appreciation goes to the men and women who
work for life and for humankind.

Under no circumstances should medical facilities
be used for military purposes. In addition to the
prohibition of targeted attacks on such facilities and
their personnel, it is forbidden to use them as a shield to
protect military equipment and personnel.

The President (spoke in Spanish): I give the floor
to the representative of Brazil.
Mr. Sobral Duarte (Brazil) (spoke in Spanish): At
the outset, I wish to congratulate Uruguay for having
convened this important open debate.
(spoke in English)
Allow me to thank the Secretary-General for his
report (S/2017/414), as well as the Vice-President of
the International Committee of the Red Cross and the
Deputy Executive Director for Advocacy of Human
Rights Watch for their enlightening presentations.
It is unacceptable that in many countries hospitals
are still being routinely bombed, raided, looted or
burned to the ground. Brazil strongly condemns attacks
and threats against the wounded and the sick, medical
personnel and humanitarian personnel engaged in
medical duties, their means of transportation and
equipment, as well as hospitals and other medical
facilities. The nature of warfare might have changed,
but the rules of war have not.
For Brazil, the cause of such violations of
international humanitarian law is not associated with
shortcomings in the normative framework, but, rather,
with a lack of respect for international humanitarian
law by the main actors involved.
Geneva Conventions I and II of 1949, aimed at
improving the situation of the wounded, sick and
shipwrecked, stipulate the protection of medical
and hospital personnel, preventing them from being
30/78

Protocol II to the Geneva Conventions, which
addresses non-international armed conflicts, contains
similar provisions in protection of medical services and
their personnel against attacks.
Brazil strongly supports seminal resolution 2286
(2016), which demands respect for international law
and an end to impunity. Violations of humanitarian law
must be considered war crimes, not just errors. They
must be investigated impartially and the perpetrators
held accountable.
In order to ensure the resolution’s due implementation,
it is important, among other initiatives, to align domestic
legislation with obligations under international law, to
train military personnel to minimize disruptions to
health-care services, and to ensure that every transfer
of weapons is accompanied by an assurance of respect
for international humanitarian law.
Brazil is committed to the intergovernmental
process aimed at strengthening respect for international
humanitarian law and the possible creation of a forum
of States on the subject. We regret that the discussions
so far have been marked by excessive polarization.
In peacekeeping operations, the protection of
humanitarian and health workers should be seen as
a multidimensional task to be pursued by all mission
components in the field and by both the Department
of Peacekeeping Operations and the Department of
Field Support at Headquarters. It is also essential to
ensure that peacekeeping missions have the capabilities
and resources they need to discharge their protection
responsibilities as effectively as possible.
The World Health Organization has played an
increasingly important role in humanitarian crises.
Health workers are present in nearly 50 countries at
high risk and are becoming the preferred targets in
conflict situations. However, we are concerned with the
17-14998

25/05/2017

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

growing securitization of health issues. It is imperative
that national health emergencies be treated as such,
even when they arise from armed conflicts, and that
the activities of international organizations occur only
with the consent of the affected countries.
It is crucial that all parties to armed conflict
facilitate safe and unimpeded passage for medical and
humanitarian personnel. In this regard, we commend
the brave work of all entities involved in providing
much-needed care and protection for conflict-affected
people around the globe.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Spain.
Mr. Castro López (Spain) (spoke in Spanish): I
should like to begin with a few words of congratulations
for and gratitude to the Uruguyan presidency of the
Security Council.
Spain associates itself with the statement on the
protection of civilians to be made by the observer of
the European Union on behalf of its 28 member States.
I wish to devote this statement to attacks against
doctors and hospitals, with a message to the Security
Council on behalf of the five countries that promoted
resolution 2286 (2016).
On behalf of Egypt, Japan, New Zealand, Uruguay
and my own country, Spain. Five countries, from five
different regions of the world, came together a year ago
united by a common goal: to stop attacks against health
care in armed conflict.
Resolution 2286 (2016) is a unique resolution for
different reasons: the scope of the resolution, the role
of civil society, and the teamwork behind the scenes.
For the first time ever, the Security Council focused
on the increased difficulty of providing basic health
care in conflict situations all around the world. As
the Secretary-General has pointed out in his report
(S/2017/414), hospitals are treated today as part of the
battlefield rather than as sanctuaries.
Resolution 2286 (2016) did not merely seek to
condemn attacks against hospitals or recall international
humanitarian law provisions for protecting the
wounded and those who care for them; it also lays
out a series of practical steps to be taken by Member
States in order to prevent those attacks. The resolution
addresses such issues as humanitarian access, adequate
training in international humanitarian law, adequate

S/PV.7951

reporting, the fight against impunity and the need to
hold investigations when violations occur. Resolution
2286 (2016) is unique because of the role played by
civil society, from the early stages of its drafting to the
present day. It is a resolution inspired by those who risk
their lives to save others on the field on a daily basis.
We have all felt extremely concerned, frustrated
and disappointed whenever the parties to an armed
conflict fail to comply by international humanitarian
law. However, for thousands of doctors, nurses and
first-responders all around the world, frustration is not
the issue. It is their ability to work — and ultimately
their own lives — that are at stake here. That is why we
need to speak up and react whenever attacks take place,
demanding full, prompt and impartial investigations. In
the words of an Uruguayan poet, Mario Benedetti, few
things are more deafening than silence.
Finally, resolution 2286 (2016) was the product of
a joint effort by five elected members of the Security
Council from a purely humanitarian perspective. We
did not seek to take sides or point fingers. Our goal
was — and still is — to unite the Council and eventually
get it to act whereever and whenever an attack takes
place.
In that spirit, Egypt, Japan, New Zealand, Uruguay
and Spain stand together today to affirm that resolution
2286 (2016) can be only a first step in the right
direction. If we are to see positive results over time, we
need a strong engagement from all States Members of
the United Nations, particularly from the members of
the Security Council. We all need to lead by example,
implementing resolution 2286 (2016) and holding others
accountable when they fail to do so.
(spoke in Spanish)
I conclude by indicating that Spain will circulate
in the Chamber a note with its national contribution in
compliance with resolution 2286 (2016).
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Mexico.
Mr. Sandoval Mendiolea (Mexico) (spoke in
Spanish): We thank Uruguay for convening today’s
debate and express our appreciation for the statements
made by the Secretary-General and representatives
of civil society who have briefed us on the particular
problems faced by humanitarian personnel dedicated to
medical missions and health personnel.

17-1499831/78

S/PV.7951

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

It is necessary and appropriate for the Security
Council to address this issue on a regular basis and that
it reiterate its appeal to the United Nations membership
and all parties to conflicts to respect the standards
and principles related to the protection of civilians
enshrined in international humanitarian law, human
rights and international criminal law. Nevertheless,
on many occasions, these appeals are ignored. They
have therefore been insufficient to prevent or eliminate
armed conflicts or to ensure the protection of civilians
during conflicts, including in post-conflict stages.
This is particularly worrying given the persistence
of and increase in attacks against those involved in
humanitarian operations and attacks on humanitarian
convoys and medical facilities. All such attacks
constitute war crimes.
Mexico strongly condemns this violence and
calls on all parties to a conflict to respect and
protect civilians, wounded and sick combatants and
humanitarian workers alike. It is unacceptable that
these personnel and facilities should be considered as
parts of the battlefield rather than as sanctuaries for the
wounded and the sick. The granting of humanitarian
assistance can in no way be held hostage to political or
military interests in an armed conflict, whether it be
international or domestic conflict.
Similarly, given the devastating consequences of the
use of explosives in densely populated areas, because of
the difficulty of fully predicting and controlling their
effects in the area around a detonation point — and
therefore on people living there — we support efforts to
adopt a political declaration on the issue. It is necessary
and urgent to agree on a comprehensive response, since
the consequences of the use of explosives in densely
populated areas are experienced over the long term. We
must prevent explosive weapons from destroying entire
infrastructures, including hospitals and health centres.
In the light of this reality, the historic adoption
of resolution 2286 (2016) represents an opportunity
to step up and focus the efforts of Member States and
the Organization to protect civilians. Accordingly,
the Secretary-General’s recommendations provide
a basis for strengthening our response. It is also
vital to seek to address the structural failings of the
Organization in these cases. That is why we reiterate
our appeal to the permanent members of the Security
Council to follow the example of one of their own,
France, and commit themselves not to veto Council
decisions in cases that involve mass atrocities. Nearly a
32/78

25/05/2017

hundred countries have aligned themselves in support
of the Franco-Mexican initiative in this regard. We
therefore call on the members of the Security Council
to implement the Security Council code of conduct
proposed and strengthened by the Accountability,
Coherence and Transparency Group, so as to enhance
the capacity and effectiveness of the Organization in
the face of violations of international humanitarian law,
human rights and international criminal law.
We welcome the increasing interest and attention
being given to including better policies for the
protection of civilians in the mandates of peacekeeping
operations. The Security Council’s condemnation
is very important, but it should be accompanied by
decisive actions to combat impunity in those cases. We
also have to focus on addressing the underlying causes
of conflict and on sustainable peace as a goal but also
as a process and tool for ensuring international security
and human security.
Civilians, and in particular women, boys and
girls, continue to be the majority of the victims in
armed conflicts. It is therefore essential to translate
the political commitment of the Security Council into
up-to-date and strengthened protection mechanisms,
which in turn generate a tangible change in the situation
on the ground. We therefore echo the recommendations
of the Secretary-General and call on the Security
Council to ensure that this issue remain at the heart of
our definition of political strategies and solutions on
its agenda.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Colombia.
Mr. Morales López (Colombia) (spoke in Spanish):
First, let me congratulate you, Madam President,
on the excellent conduct of the work of the Security
Council during Uruguay’s presidency. We welcome the
convening of today’s open debate and the presidency’s
concept note (S/2017/365, annex) on the first
anniversary of the adoption of resolution 2286 (2016) on
the protection of civilians. The note deals in particular
with issues related to medical personnel and health care
in the context of armed conflicts at a critical moment in
international affairs in relation to humanitarian issues.
We thank the Secretary-General, the Vice-President of
the International Committee of the Red Cross and the
Deputy Executive Director of Human Rights Watch for
their statements.
17-14998

25/05/2017

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

Over the course of the last few years, we have
witnessed the increasing degradation that the
prolongation of conflicts has caused for the most
vulnerable, such as boys, girls, women and the elderly.
However, as stated in the report of the International
Committee of the Red Cross, the health system,
and medical missions in particular, are increasingly
among the first victims of the war. In 2017 alone, more
than 80 attacks on medical missions worldwide have
been reported.
In that regard, my country shares the concern over
the situation being faced by the civilian population
in situations of armed conflict in some parts of the
world and the recurring failure on behalf of the parties
to recognize their obligation to respect and protect
civilians. That demands more accountability when these
parameters are violated, for that is not only a violation
of the guiding principles of international humanitarian
law, but also of humanity itself.
The policies of the Government in Colombia are
aimed at ensuring that all State and non-State parties in
armed conflicts respect their obligations to respect and
protect health and humanitarian workers and related
facilities, as well as the injured and sick. In that regard,
we rely on what we have learned from experiences
in the armed conflict that afflicted my country for
more than five decades. Our accomplishments include
the following.
We have achieved the continuous promotion of
the norms of international humanitarian law for health
personnel, the community in general and the armed
actors. With the ongoing support of the International
Committee of the Red Cross and the Colombian Red
Cross, we have made strides in this effort in many
regions of the country. We maintain an updated
record of violations against the Medical Mission and
are making progress in establishing an observatory
mechanism to follow up on those cases. That enabled
us to establish corrective measures in terms of security
and protection. We are also establishing an appropriate
legal framework for dealing with this problem, which
has included, for example, an ongoing programme for
showing and posting the Medical Mission emblem
by the Colombian Ministry of Health among health
workers and the community in general.
There is crosscutting work at the national level
to promote prevention of and responses to aggression
against the Medical Mission, with the participation

S/PV.7951

of universities, the national police, the Office of the
General Prosecutor, military forces, the International
Committee of the Red Cross and the Colombian Red
Cross, the National Protection Unit and the Ministry of
Labour, among others.
The fulfilment of mandates, including the protection
of civilians by the United Nations and other international
organizations, should be accompanied by the political
will of States. Such mandates include resolution 2286
(2016), which has brought us together today, and the
guidelines established by resolution WHA55.13 at the
fifty-fifth World Health Assembly of the World Health
Organization. That resolution urges member States to
vigorously promote and adopt relevant standards of
international humanitarian law, to condemn attacks
on health-care workers in humanitarian or health areas
and to promote actions that ensure the security of
health-care workers. Colombia has been implementing
those mandates for many years. States’ capacity for
compliance must be encouraged by the international
community, and any violation should be explained and
the object of an impartial investigation.
In conclusion, I would like to reiterate the
importance that Colombia attaches to the fact that
the United Nations fully recognizes the work that
national Governments are carrying out in the area
of the protection of civilians. To that end, it needs
objective, balanced and impartial information, which
should include the identification of shortcomings and
challenges, but also recognize the progress made in
each country.
We believe without a doubt that the United Nations
should continue to promote respect for international
humanitarian law. In our view, this effort will lead to
the effective protection of medical personnel and, to the
extent possible, to a humanization of conflicts.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Liechtenstein.
Mr. Wenaweser (Liechtenstein): We welcome the
focus of today’s debate on health care in armed conflict.
It also illustrates a deeper problem we are facing: the
erosion of the respect for international humanitarian
law. Article 24 of the First Geneva Convention states:
“Medical personnel exclusively engaged in the
search for, or the collection, transport or treatment
of the wounded or sick... shall be respected and
protected in all circumstances.”

17-1499833/78

S/PV.7951

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

In practice, however, this norm is increasingly
violated in a systematic manner, as medical facilities
and personnel are targeted in various conflicts around
the world, often with the apparent intention to intensify
the suffering of the civilian population. Killing one
health-care worker can result in the lack of care for
hundreds of people.
As in other areas, the case of Syria is particularly
dramatic. Physicians for Human Rights has
documented — as the Secretary-General has indicated
in his opening remarks — over 400 attacks on medical
facilities since 2011, as well as the deaths of hundreds
of medical personnel. It is estimated that more than
three quarters of Syrian doctors have fled since 2011. In
Yemen, there have been 160 documented deadly attacks
on hospitals and health professionals over the past two
years alone.
One year ago, the Security Council strongly
condemned attacks against medical facilities and
personnel in conflict situations in its resolution 2286
(2016). However, this important text has had limited
impact on the ground, and the Council has been unable
to enforce its implementation in various conflict
situations.
In his recent report on the protection of civilians
(S/2017/414), the Secretary-General has called on States
to intensify efforts to tackle the root causes of forced
displacement. One such effort is the code of conduct
regarding Security Council action against genocide,
crimes against humanity or war crimes put forward
by the Accountability, Coherence and Transparency
group and currently supported by 112 States. The code
of conduct is a political commitment from these States
to take timely and decisive action aimed at preventing
or ending atrocity crimes and not to vote against
credible draft resolutions put forward to that end. The
code of conduct gives a very important role to the
Secretary-General in submitting relevant information
to the Council and is therefore complementary to his
prevention agenda.
Given the failure of other initiatives to enhance
compliance with international humanitarian law, a key
responsibility to do so falls on the Security Council. It
has several tools at its disposal, ranging from support
for national efforts to ensure accountability to referrals
to the International Criminal Court. Its overall record,
however, is unfortunately mixed, at best.
34/78

25/05/2017

The people of Syria again have been at the
receiving end of the failure of the Council to act. This
has prompted the General Assembly to play a more
active role in the area of accountability by creating the
International, Impartial and Independent Mechanism
for Syria. This decision was a very important step
forward to ensure that the crimes committed in Syria
will not go unpunished and a landmark decision in
the accountability work of this Organization. We
look forward to the early appointment of the head of
the Mechanism by the Secretary-General and to its
financing from the regular budget of the United Nations.
Civilians will always suffer disproportionately
in armed conflict. The most effective way to protect
them is therefore avoiding armed conflict altogether.
We view the effort to criminalize illegal war-making
as an essential part of the conflict-prevention agenda
and are therefore working, with many other States,
towards ensuring the activation of the jurisdiction of
the International Criminal Court over the crime of
aggression at the end of this year. We encourage all
States to ratify the Kampala Amendments on the crime
of aggression and look forward to jointly writing a
chapter of history that is long overdue: criminalizing
and thereby deterring illegal war-making.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor the representative of Pakistan.
Ms. Lodhi (Pakistan): Pakistan welcomes this
open debate on the protection of civilians and health
care in armed conflict. We thank the Secretary-General
and the Vice-President of the International Committee
of the Red Cross for their insightful briefings.
The protection of civilians in armed conflict is
a basic tenet of international humanitarian law. The
1949 Geneva Convention and its Additional Protocols
contain specific rules to protect civilians. Yet, despite
an established normative framework, compliance is
unfortunately sporadic and accountability mechanisms
are weak or, in many cases, nonexistent. Non-combatants
continue to be treated as fair game by warring parties
seeking to further their strategic interests. Collateral
damage is still considered a regrettable but inevitable
byproduct of conflict. As a result, the tapestry of armed
conflict is increasingly being coloured by the suffering
of civilian populations.
As the seething fires of armed conflict rage across
the world, the international community has confronted
the grim reality of growing civilian casualties as well
17-14998

25/05/2017

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

as an ever-greater need for humanitarian assistance
and the protection of people displaced by conflict.
The plight of the vulnerable, including women and
children, remains particularly acute. As the SecretaryGeneral notes in his latest report (S/2017/414), more
than 20 million people in conflict situations, including
1.4 million children, are on the brink of famine. This
tragedy is compounded by a less-than-adequate global
response to the need to address the suffering of civilians
in armed conflict.
Amid the dark shadows of war and conflict,
essential health services, including hospitals and
medical personnel, play a critical role both as providers
of vital life support and sustainers of hope and optimism.
Any attack on medical facilities and staff puts lives at
risk and exacerbates suffering. It is therefore not only
an egregious breach of international law but a betrayal
of humankind itself. It is unfortunate that we have
witnessed a spate of recent attacks on medical facilities
in conflict situations by both State and non-State actors.
The culture of impunity for such crimes must end.
The Security Council’s landmark resolution 2286
(2016) speaks to that imperative by unequivocally
condemning attacks or threats against medical and
humanitarian personnel who are exclusively engaged
in medical duties. The task we have now is to translate
that political resolve into tangible action. As a first step,
all parties to an armed conflict should unequivocally
affirm that health care must be protected in compliance
with their obligations under international law, in
particular humanitarian law. Criminal prosecutions
and other forms of accountability for the perpetrators
of attacks on health-service providers are equally
essential. The parties to an armed conflict should
also ensure safe, unimpeded passage and sustained
access for humanitarian personnel. Human misery
cannot be mortgaged or sacrificed at the altar of
political objectives.
The protection of civilians must also be prioritized in
United Nations peacekeeping operations. As one of the
world’s leading contributors of troops to United Nations
operations, my country has proudly and conscientiously
performed the task of protecting civilians in various
parts of the world, including in missions in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, Darfur, the Central
African Republic and Liberia. Based on our diverse and
rich experience, we underscore the critical importance
of troop-contributing countries to the process, not just
in designing mandates but also in their implementation,

S/PV.7951

review, renewal or change, especially in cases where
the situation on the ground has deteriorated rapidly.
While the fundamental principles of peacekeeping are
not an impediment to mandates for the protection of
civilians, the primary responsibility for protecting all
civilians nonetheless rests with the host countries. The
clear distinction between the established norm of the
protection of civilians and the evolving concept of the
responsibility to protect must therefore be maintained.
Above all, the goal of protecting civilians is best
served by preventing the outbreak of armed conflicts in
the first place. That entails addressing the root causes
of conflicts, finding inclusive political solutions to
disputes and seeking peaceful settlements. We believe
that the Secretary-General’s call for a surge in diplomacy
for peace represents a reinforcement and strengthening
of that approach. A culture of prevention is, after all,
the best assurance we can have for sustainable and
enduring peace and security.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Hungary.
Ms. Bogyay (Hungary): I would like to thank the
Uruguayan presidency for organizing today’s open
debate, as well as for the briefings by the representatives
of the International Committee of the Red Cross and
Human Rights Watch.
Hungary aligns itself with the statement to be
delivered on behalf of the European Union, and I would
like to add a few words in my national capacity.
We share the view that the issue of health care in
armed conflict should be addressed in the wider context
of the protection of civilians, peacekeeping operations
and humanitarian access, and the strengthening of
compliance with international humanitarian law. We
also firmly believe that the protection of civilians should
be integral to every United Nations peace operation
that has such a mandate. It is important to maintain
continuing consultations and enhance communication
between the Security Council, the Secretariat and
troop- and police-contributing countries about possible
gaps in mission mandates.
Hungary considers respect for international
humanitarian law and the protection of victims of
armed conflicts to be extremely important. Since today
thousands of civilians are not only suffering from
the effects of armed conflict but are also becoming
targets for the military strategies of the parties to those

17-1499835/78

S/PV.7951

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

conflicts, the international community must intensify
all its efforts to enhance respect for international
humanitarian law. Resolution 2286 (2016) sent the
strong message that any attack on medical personnel
and facilities in conflict situations is absolutely
unacceptable. But sadly, while we regularly call the
international community’s attention to the protection of
civilians and to atrocities committed against innocent
people and medical personnel, we are all aware that the
daily facts reveal hardly any changes for the better.
The protection of medical care in conflict and
humanitarian aid to the most vulnerable populations
must continue to be a priority. In cases where
international efforts fail and atrocity crimes, including
attacks on health-care institutions and medical
personnel, are committed, accountability is crucial.
Hungary is committed to supporting institutions
dedicated to ensuring accountability and establishing an
environment of respect for international humanitarian
law, such as international courts and tribunals and other
mechanisms. In that spirit, Hungary made a voluntary
contribution of €50,000 towards the establishment of the
International, Impartial and Independent Mechanism
to Assist in the Investigation and Prosecution of
Those Responsible for the Most Serious Crimes under
International Law Committed in the Syrian Arab
Republic since March 2011. As a member of the Human
Rights Council, Hungary will prioritize working to
prevent atrocity crimes and to promote tools already at
the international community’s disposal that can help to
achieve an effective and timely response.

25/05/2017

for peace and for placing prevention at the centre of
our joint efforts. Hungary fully shares that vision,
and my Government has therefore made voluntary
contributions in 2016 and 2017 in support of the work
of the Department of Political Affairs in preventive
diplomacy and mediation.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the Counsel and Head of the Humanitarian
Affairs Section of the Delegation of the European
Union to the United Nations.
Mr. Fernandez-Zincke (spoke in Spanish): I
would like to thank the Council for organizing today’s
timely debate.
(spoke in English)
I have the honour to speak on behalf of the European
Union (EU) and its member States. The candidate
countries the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia,
Montenegro, Serbia and Albania; the countries of the
Stabilization and Association Process and potential
candidates Bosnia and Herzegovina; as well as Ukraine
and the Republic of Moldova, align themselves with
this statement.
I would like to thank Secretary-General António
Guterres, the Vice-President of the International
Committee of the Red Cross (ICRC), Christine Beerli,
and the Deputy Executive Director for Advocacy of
Human Rights Watch, Bruno Stagno Ugarte, for their
contributions to this debate.

We would also like to affirm the relevance to
today’s discussion of the concept of the responsibility
to protect. With a view to ensuring more timely and
decisive responses on the part of the Security Council,
Hungary participated actively in creating the code of
conduct regarding Security Council action against
genocide, crimes against humanity and war crimes
formulated by the Accountability, Coherence and
Transparency group, which has already been signed by
112 Member States.

The protection of civilians and health care in armed
conflict continues to be of profound concern. We
welcome the focus of today’s debate on the topic and
the opportunity to take stock of the implementation of
resolution 2286 (2016) one year after its adoption. The
European Union has been from the outset and continues
to be a strong supporter of that landmark resolution. We
welcome the strong message it sends that any violation
of international humanitarian law committed against
medical personnel and facilities in conflict situations is
completely unacceptable.

Hungary believes that the best way to protect
civilians is by preventing armed conflicts. The United
Nations should use every tool at its disposal for
achieving the early warnings and political mediation
that are needed to prevent outbreaks of hostilities and
to de-escalate them when they occur. In that regard,
we wholeheartedly support the Secretary-General’s
recommendation for a surge in the use of diplomacy

We are, however, concerned by the troubling
developments on the ground. Attacks on medical
facilities and personnel in conflicts, such as in Syria,
Yemen, Afghanistan and South Sudan, continue. In
some instances, those are carried out in full knowledge
of the exclusively medical or humanitarian nature of
the facilities being attacked and in most cases without
any action being taken to investigate and counter

36/78

17-14998

25/05/2017

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

those attacks. We continue to be equally concerned
by the lack of safe and unimpeded passage of medical
personnel, assets and supplies in numerous instances,
whose compounded consequences on the health of
civilians, including children, are devastating.
We must strengthen our resolve to implement
the commitments we have made and to stop medical
facilities and personnel from being targeted, in clear
breach of international humanitarian law. It is a war
crime to intentionally attack hospitals and places where
the sick and wounded are collected.
The EU is committed to ensuring the full
implementation of resolution 2286 (2016). At the
World Humanitarian Summit last year, the EU made
the commitment to promoting and enhancing efforts
to respect and protect medical personnel, transports
and facilities, as well as humanitarian relief personnel
and assets against attacks, threats or other violent acts.
The EU also acknowledges the Secretary-General’s
recommendations made in 2016, pursuant to resolution
2286 (2016), and concurs with the recent report of
the Secretary-General (S/2017/414) in that respect,
including on the need to share best practices and
lessons learned and ensure rapid, complete, safe and
unimpeded humanitarian access.
The blatant disregard and refusal in many cases
of the parties to armed conflict to comply with their
obligations under international humanitarian law and
international human rights law continue to be one of the
most critical challenges for the protection of medical
care in conflicts, as well as globally for the protection
of civilians. That problem is further exacerbated by
the escalation of urban warfare in recent years, and the
use of weapons with wide-area impacts is destroying
critical infrastructure and killing civilians, including
medical and humanitarian personnel, in virtually all
conflicts. The EU strongly condemns such violations
and is committed to consistently speaking out for
global respect and compliance with international
humanitarian law and ensuring safe, rapid, full and
unimpeded humanitarian access to those who are most
in need of assistance.
The EU is a major advocate for international
humanitarian law, humanitarian principles and human
rights, and continues to implement the EU guidelines
on international humanitarian law. The EU fosters
global respect for and compliance with international
humanitarian law through a variety of means, including

S/PV.7951

political dialogue, demarches or public statements
about specific conflicts, restrictive measures, sanctions
and cooperation with the United Nations and relevant
regional organizations.
However,
compliance
with
international
humanitarian law and human rights law needs to
be further strengthened and enhanced. The EU and
its member States remain committed to the Swiss/
ICRC initiative on strengthening compliance with
international humanitarian law and calls on all Member
States to participate constructively in that process. The
EU’s long-standing involvement in ending impunity and
strengthening accountability includes the EU’s support
to the International Criminal Court. The new EU
global strategy explicitly commits the EU to promoting
international criminal law and the universality of the
Rome Statute.
The EU and its member States are also committed
to continuing their efforts to promote the dissemination
of and training in international humanitarian law and
human rights, both inside and outside the European
Union, as well as supporting relevant States and
non-State actors in implementing or reinforcing
context-specific measures to enhance physical safety
of medical personnel and infrastructure.
The EU will also continue to place protection of
civilians at the core of its humanitarian response and
to support the international humanitarian system in
ensuring the centrality of protection in humanitarian
action. Having recognized that a disproportionate
number of internally displaced persons and those
in conflict zones are women, we will apply a gender
perspective to ensure that both women’s and men’s
needs are taken into consideration to enable a targeted
humanitarian response.
States bear the primary responsibility for providing
protection for their citizens. However, the protection
of civilians is also a main task of United Nations
peacekeeping and is often decisive for its success and
legitimacy. Today, 10 of 16 peacekeeping missions have
mandates encompassing the protection of civilians.
To conclude, the European Union and its member
States remain committed to the full implementation
of resolution 2286 (2016). All States may count on our
support for reinforcing the protection of the wounded
and sick, as well as medical personnel, facilities and
equipment. We will also continue our global support for
promoting compliance with international humanitarian

17-1499837/78

S/PV.7951

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

law and the protection of civilians. And we call on all
States to join us in that effort.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Austria.
Mr. Kickert (Austria): Allow me at the outset to
thank the Uruguayan presidency for convening this
open debate on the protection of civilians.
Austria fully aligns itself with the statement just
delivered by the observer of the European Union and
those still to be delivered on behalf of the Group of
Friends of the Protection of Civilians and the Human
Security Network. In our national capacity, we would
like to highlight some additional points we deem
especially important.
Enhanced respect for international law, especially
international humanitarian law, is of paramount
importance, as highlighted by the Secretary-General
and the representative of the International Committee
of the Red Cross at the outset of the debate. Austria
therefore welcomes the attention the Secretary-General
gives in his report (S/2017/414) to the massive harm,
destruction and negative long-term consequences
of explosive weapons with wide-area impact when
used in populated areas. The available data shows
that 2016 was the worst year recorded within the past
six years for civilian deaths resulting from explosive
weapons. We therefore strongly support the clear and
unequivocal call of the Secretary-General on all State
and non-State parties to conflict to avoid the use of
explosive weapons with wide-area effects in populated
areas and appreciate his encouragement regarding the
efforts led by Austria on the development of a political
declaration on that issue.
We also share the Secretary-General’s concern
regarding the detrimental impact of conflict on
education and medical care. In too many conflict
situations, attacks on schools, teachers and students
or the use of schools and universities for military
purposes are not uncommon. Similarly, we note the
numerous incidences of direct and indiscriminate
attacks against humanitarian and medical personnel
and objects. Hence we wholeheartedly support the call
for the endorsement of the Safe Schools Declaration
and the recommendations presented by the SecretaryGeneral on implementing resolution 2286 (2016) to
protect medical care in armed conflict.
38/78

25/05/2017

On a different note, we need to further
operationalize the protection of civilians in United
Nations peacekeeping operations. Against that
background, we continue to advocate for Member
States’ endorsement of the Kigali Principles on the
Protection of Civilians. Austria, from this year on,
organizes two operational-level courses per year,
certified by the United Nations, on the protection of
civilians. Again this year, we will host and support
one training-of-trainers course on training materials
concerning protection of civilians and related areas,
developed by the Integrated Training Service together
with interested States, among them Austria. Only
adequately trained peacekeepers are able to effectively
implement their mandates and protect civilians.
Let me finish by thanking Secretary-General
Guterres for not only linking the protection of civilians
to the issue of forced displacement, but also for not
forgetting the plight of internally displaced persons
(IDPs). We fully share the view that IDPs have received
inadequate attention from their Governments and
global leaders, as stated in the report (see S/2017/414,
para 61), and we certainly do agree that we need to use
the twentieth anniversary of the Guiding Principles on
Internal Displacement, in 2018, in order to advance this
important issue.
In conclusion, let me repeat that Austria shares
the Secretary-General’s assessment that protection
is a whole-of-UN responsibility. We also call on all
States to continue in good faith the ongoing discussions
in Geneva about ways and means to enhance the
implementation of international humanitarian law.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Peru.
Mr. Prieto (Peru) (spoke in Spanish): First of all,
I would like to thank the Uruguayan presidency of the
Security Council for convening this open debate on
the protection of civilians and medical care in armed
conflicts. I would also like to thank the SecretaryGeneral, Mr. António Guterres; the Vice-President
of the International Committee of the Red Cross,
Ms. Christine Beerli; and the Deputy Executive
Director of Human Rights Watch, Mr. Bruno Stagno
Ugarte, for being present here today.
The Security Council, through resolution 2286
(2016) — which specifically addresses the subject
of this open debate — “strongly condemns acts of
violence, attacks and threats against the wounded and
17-14998

25/05/2017

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

sick, medical personnel and humanitarian personnel
exclusively engaged in medial duties”, and “deplores
the long-term consequences of such attacks for the
civilian population and the health-care systems of the
countries concerned”. That document also reiterates the
relevant legal framework and calls upon all parties to
armed conflict to fully comply with their obligations
under international law, including respect for the rules
of international humanitarian law.
In that regard, Peru is party to the Geneva
Conventions, which declare illegal any attacks against
hospitals or workers providing medical assistance, which
includes convoys providing humanitarian assistance
as well as to all those who bear distinguishing marks.
We call on the international community to effectively
enforce that ban. Peru considers that the sacrificial and
risky work of protection developed by humanitarian
agencies and workers should be the object of the highest
recognition by the international community.
Resolution 2286 (2016) also requires Member
States to take measures with regard to the protection of
civilians and medical care in armed conflicts, such as
facilitating the safe passage of personnel and supplies
to those in need; preventing attacks against medical
services in armed conflicts; and implementing practical
protection measures when planning and executing
their operations. In that vein, and in line with the
recommendations made by the Secretary-General in his
report in document S/2016/447, for more than 20 years
Peru has been training its armed forces personnel in
accordance with the applicable norms of international
humanitarian law. Incorporating recognized norms
into personnel doctrines has allowed the peacekeepers
that Peru contributes to peacekeeping operations to be
soundly prepared in areas of international humanitarian
law, which translates into impeccable performance on
the ground.
Peru encourages the active involvement of
the Security Council in the protection of civilians
affected by armed conflict. Only strong action by
the Security Council is appropriate in that regard.
Attacks on medical facilities and humanitarian workers
are considered war crimes. The perpetrators must
be brought to justice, because impunity encourages
conflict. In the light of that, Peru recognizes the
jurisdiction of the International Criminal Court and
hopes for its universalization. Likewise, we are in the
process of ratifying the Kampala Amendments. We call
on States to comply with the relevant obligations under

S/PV.7951

international law to put an end to impunity and to hold
those responsible for serious violations of international
humanitarian law accountable for their acts.
Peru commits to work with other States to address
outstanding issues in this area, in order to ensure
accountability, punish those responsible and improve
the protection of the wounded and sick and of health and
humanitarian personnel, their equipment and means of
transport, hospitals and other health facilities.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of the Islamic Republic
of Iran.
Mr. Khoshroo (Islamic Republic of Iran): Allow
me to begin by thanking the Uruguayan presidency for
convening this open debate. I would also like to express
my gratitude to the briefers for their valuable input in
this debate.
I align myself with the statement made earlier
by the representative of Venezuela on behalf of the
Movement of Non-Aligned Countries.
Attacks against medical workers and facilities and
the humanitarian convoys delivering medical supplies
have increased since the adoption of resolution 2286
(2016). In 2016 alone, attacks on health-care facilities,
health workers, ambulances and patients increased in
23 countries under these conditions. Those attacks are
taking place in various places around the world; but in
terms of frequency and ferocity, they are more prevalent
in the Middle East.
We condemn all the attacks that have taken place
against medical and humanitarian staff, facilities and
means of transport throughout the world, especially in
Palestine, Afghanistan, Yemen and Syria.
It is difficult to understand how it is possible
that, at a time of high-tech and high-precision modern
bombs, so-called mistakes could happen so frequently,
with medical facilities and personnel in areas of armed
conflict being targeted. Hospitals are public facilities.
Their locations are well known by all parties to the
conflict, and necessary protocols are in place to avoid
bombing them. Unfortunately, such incidents keep
occurring, and the perpetrators continue to claim
that they are simply mistakes. Tragedies such as the
bombing of the hospital in Kunduz, Afghanistan in
October 2015 are declared mistakes and end without
any military personnel involved being convicted.

17-1499839/78

S/PV.7951

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

25/05/2017

In 2016 alone, the Palestine Red Crescent Society
reported 416 instances of violence or interference with
its ambulances by Israeli forces or settlers, which
resulted in the injury of 162 emergency workers,
damage to 108 ambulances and the denial of access to
health care in 146 cases. That is on top of the illegal
blockade against the Palestinians that has continued for
more than a decade, denying them their basic human
rights, including access to health care, by the Israeli
regime, all unabated.

combatants, and the obligation to do everything
feasible to avoid attacks on civilians, civilian property
and medical personnel and their facilities in situations
of armed conflict. Resolution 2286 (2016) and others
before it have called for effective measures to safeguard
medical and humanitarian personnel and their
equipment. Yet it is deeply disturbing that not only have
attacks against them increased, but State authorities in
a number of cases are unable to prevent, counter and
investigate them properly, owing to a lack of capacity.

Since March 2015, the Saudi-led aggression
in Yemen has led to many well-documented war
crimes. They involve the destruction of much civilian
infrastructure, including medical facilities, and that
aggression continues under the watch of the Security
Council. Worse still, that unfortunate misadventure is
enjoying the ever-increasing military, logistical and
training support of the United States and its Air Force.

At this important juncture, I would like to share
some important points pertaining to our topic today.

Greater efforts are needed to document and analyse
every incident that affects the security and the wellbeing of health-care workers and facilities and ensure
that impartial, independent and prompt investigations
are carried out, and those found responsible for such
acts be brought to justice. The Council must abandon its
double standards with respect to bombing humanitarian
and health facilities and workers. By highlighting some
attacks and remaining silent on others, the Council
discredits its own resolutions, especially resolution
2286 (2016).
Finally, I would like to conclude by paying tribute
to the valuable work carried out by the many health-care
workers who perform in the context of armed conflicts.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Indonesia.

First is the primary responsibility of States to
protect the population. Indonesia believes that the
protection of civilians is the primary responsibility
of the host country. In that regard, all parties to
armed conflict must uphold that principle and fully
comply with the obligations applicable to them under
international humanitarian law related to the protection
of civilians and medical personnel in armed conflict.
The second point is the nexus between the
protection of civilians and counter-terrorism activities.
In the context of peacekeeping, the operating
environments for United Nations peacekeeping
missions have become more dangerous with the threats
posed by armed groups and violent extremists. There
has to be a better focus on increasing the situational
awareness and response capabilities of peacekeepers
through better predeployment training and adequate
protection equipment, including in combat first aid,
medical evacuation and casualty evacuation. All of this
is covered in our peacekeeping training in Indonesia.

We associate ourselves with the statement made
by the representative of Venezuela on behalf on the
Non-Aligned Movement.

The Security Council also needs to engage better
with the relevant State and non-State entities to deter
violent extremists and terrorists. However, that situation
should not be a justification for peacekeepers to engage
in counter-terrorism, which can have a very different
dimension. Being perceived as neutral and credible
actors is essential for Blue Helmets to discharge their
tasks. We fully agree with the Secretary-General’s
assessment in his report on the work of the Organization
(A/71/1) that peacekeeping operations should not
engage in counter-terrorism activities, which was also
stressed in the report of the High-level Independent
Panel on Peace Operations (S/2015/446).

I should first like to begin by reminding us all
of our obligation under international humanitarian
law to distinguish between civilian populations and

Third is the close relationship between the
protection of civilians and health care. Provision of
sufficient and quality medical and health facilities is

Mr. Djani (Indonesia): Indonesia thanks the
Uruguay presidency for convening this open debate on
a highly important topic. We also thank the SecretaryGeneral; Ms. Christine Beerli, Vice-President of
the International Committee of the Red Cross; and
Mr. Bruno Stagno Ugarte, Deputy Executive Director for
Advocacy of Human Rights Watch, for their comments.

40/78

17-14998

25/05/2017

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

required for United Nations peacekeeping operations,
as well as for combatants. That is in the interests of all,
not just for personnel and parties to conflict, but also
for people besieged in an armed conflict. That is then
all the more reason for the United Nations to establish
standards and facilitate improved medical capabilities
and facilities in armed conflict.
The fourth point is the improvement of medical care
to respond to emergency situations. Some situations
of armed conflicts and peacekeeping missions have
experienced challenges in consistently responding
to medical emergencies and in evacuating casualties.
Indonesia stresses the need to ensure the swift and safe
passage for injured, wounded and sick peacekeepers,
medical personnel and humanitarian personnel
exclusively engaged in medical duties.
Our fifth point is the increasingly important and
positive role of women peacekeepers in communitybuilding and preventive and primary health care, as well
as secondary health care such as post-traumatic care and
pandemic cases in conflict areas. Our experience and
training of peacekeepers in Indonesia has shown that
Indonesian women peacekeepers are far more effective
in gaining the trust and confidence of the community,
particularly women and children. That is also especially
evident in addressing health issues involving serious
cases of sexual violence and exploitation. We recognize
that both the United Nations and its Member States
must do more to further strengthen the role of women
in peacekeeping, as clearly outlined in the London
Communiqué of 2016.
The United Nations system should continue its
efforts to improve measures to help protect civilians,
health and humanitarian personnel and their facilities.
The improvement of health care in conflict situations is
an important element to build trust and hope for a better
future. The life of civilians is at stake.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Slovenia.
Mr. Logar (Slovenia): I have the honour to speak on
behalf of the members of the Human Security Network,
a cross-regional network composed of Austria, Chile,
Costa Rica, Greece, Ireland, Jordan, Mali, Norway,
Panama, Switzerland, Thailand, South Africa as an
observer State, and my own country, Slovenia.
I should like to start by thanking Uruguay for
convening this important debate today. I would also

S/PV.7951

like to express our appreciation to Secretary-General
António Guterres, Ms. Beerli and Mr. Ugarte for their
comprehensive briefings.
The protection of civilians in armed conflict is of
the utmost importance to the members of the Human
Security Network. Resolution 2286 (2016), which was
adopted one year ago, specifically recognized the
particular challenges faced by humanitarian personnel
engaged in medical duties and by medical personnel.
It was encouraging to see the wide support for the
resolution, which reaffirms, inter alia, the need for all
parties to armed conflict to respect and ensure respect
for international humanitarian law and international
human rights law, as applicable, and to facilitate the
activities of humanitarian organizations, which adhere
to the principles of humanity, neutrality, impartiality
and independence in the provision of humanitarian
assistance, including medical assistance.
We continue to note with great concern that,
according to the latest report of the Secretary General
(S/2017/414), attacks on medical personnel and on
humanitarian personnel engaged in performing medical
duties, as well as on medical facilities and patients,
continue at an alarming rate. The Human Security
Network strongly condemns all violence, attacks and
threats against wounded and sick humanitarian workers
engaged in medical duties, as well as against medical and
health personnel and facilities, and deplores the longterm consequences of such attacks for the population
and health-care systems of the countries concerned.
We therefore encourage the parties and mediators to
consider including provisions on the protection of
medical personnel and facilities in the drafting of peace
agreements, including in the definition or principles of
ceasefire and in security and monitoring provisions,
where relevant.
The Secretary General’s report provides yet another
sobering testimony of grave situations civilians face in
a number of conflict-affected countries. All of those
situations need to be urgently and effectively addressed,
according to the Human Security Network. Focus must
be placed on enhancing protection on the ground. We
see that armed conflicts are increasingly waged in
urban areas. Therefore we must ensure that the civilian
population is adequately protected. However, many
parties have not only shown a blatant disregard for the
principles of distinction, proportionality and necessity
in the conduct of hostility, but have deliberately
targeted civilian infrastructure. We therefore share the

17-1499841/78

S/PV.7951

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

Secretary-General’s concern regarding the harm caused
by the use of explosive weapons with wide-area effects
in populated areas and support his call for further
measures to address that issue.
The Human Security Network advocates a
people-centred, holistic approach to security. That
includes a focus not only on the protection of civilians
once a conflict situation occurs, but also on conflict
prevention in a broader sense. We therefore share the
Secretary-General’s view that, in the long term, the
best way to protect civilians is to address the root
causes of conflicts, build sustainable peace, promote
human rights and rule of law, strengthen governance
and democratic institutions and invest in inclusive and
sustainable development.
Ensuring respect by all parties to a conflict for
international humanitarian and human rights law is
the first necessary step to enhance the protection of
civilians. States must comply with their obligation to
allow and facilitate rapid and unimpeded access to
humanitarian relief for civilians in need and the freedom
of movement of humanitarian personnel. All parties to
every armed conflict bear the responsibility to allow
and facilitate access for the delivery of such assistance.
In addition to enhancing compliance with
international law and strengthening national protection
capacities, we recognize the major role of the United
Nations peacekeeping operations, the majority of
which are mandated with protection-related tasks,
in the protection of civilians, including in the area of
prevention. In that regard, the Human Security Network
underlines the importance of clear and achievable
mandates with sufficient resources and capabilities to
fulfil the protection mandate.
Accountability is a key element in the protection
of civilians. States must comply with their obligations
under international law to hold accountable
perpetrators of crime committed against civilians.
The Human Security Network stresses the usefulness
of commissions of inquiry and fact-finding missions
in investigating and substantiating alleged violations
of international law, in particular international
humanitarian law and human rights law. We also
underscore the crucial role of international courts and
tribunals in ensuring accountability. When States are
unwilling or unable to bring perpetrators to justice,
a referral to the International Criminal Court is a
complementary means to avoid impunity and restore
42/78

25/05/2017

dignity to survivors of atrocities, their families and
communities. We reiterate the importance of States’
cooperation in that regard.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I give the floor
to the representative of Belgium.
Mr. Buffin (Belgium) (spoke in French): Belgium
supports the statement made by the observer of the
European Union, as well as the statement made by the
representative of Switzerland on behalf of the Group
of Friends on the Protection of Civilians in Armed
Conflict.
I would like to address more specifically the
implementation of resolution 2286 (2016), on the
protection of health services in armed conflict.
First, on behalf of my country, I would like to
express my indignation at the number and intensity of
attacks on health services around the world. We are all
familiar with the situation in Syria, where, according
to various United Nations and non-governmental
organization (NGO) reports, there is a sustained and
targeted campaign against medical facilities and
personnel. But that intolerable practice of targeting
those who put themselves at risk to come to the aid of
victims is not limited to that country; on the contrary,
the phenomenon is much more widespread.
We welcome the project undertaken by
the International Red Cross and Red Crescent
Movement — Health Care in Danger — to combat the
problem of violence against patients, health workers,
medical facilities and vehicles, and to make access to
health care and the provision of health care in armed
conflict and other emergency situations safer. The
Safeguarding Health in Conflict Coalition — a group
comprising of more than 30 NGOs — has published
a report on the subject, which was recently presented
to the Permanent Mission of Belgium to the United
Nations at a seminar on Syria and Yemen. The Coalition
has compiled a list of attacks perpetrated on health care
personnel and facilities in no fewer than 23 countries.
We must all support this vital effort to list and document
such incidents.
Attacks on health services are not just an ethical or
moral issue; their scope is much broader. We must not
forget the doubly devastating effect of such attacks on
already fragile health-care systems and, by extension,
their effect on vulnerable people such as the elderly, the
sick, the pregnant women and the children who depend
17-14998

25/05/2017

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

S/PV.7951

on those systems. There is also an adverse effect on
international law, which we have all pledged to uphold.
International humanitarian law is slowly being eroded
because of serious repeated and often unpunished
violations of the obligations it imposes on all parties to
armed conflict. It is our shared responsibility to reverse
that trend, by making tangible commitments and by
taking concrete action.

and the tireless efforts of their staff, and all local
health-care workers who undertake remarkable work,
despite the risks and challenges they face. It is essential
for all parties to a conflict to respect at all times the
impartiality and neutrality of such actors.

I would like to make the following three points on
resolution 2286 (2016).

Mr. Schulz (Germany): I would like to thank the
Uruguayan presidency for convening this important
open debate and the briefers for sharing their
valuable insights.

First, although the adoption of resolution 2286 (2016)
is a good starting point, it is by no means the end result.
More must be done, starting with the implementation of
the resolution itself. We call on the States Members of
the United Nations to work individually and collectively
to implement the Secretary-General’s recommendations
in a consensual manner.
Secondly, we must make better use of existing
instruments to monitor, document and investigate
serious violations of international humanitarian law. In
that regard, Belgium fully supports the initiative of the
International, Impartial, and Independent Mechanism
for Syria, both politically and financially. We
encourage Member States to do the same. Investigating,
prosecuting and punishing serious violations of
international humanitarian law — in short, combating
impunity — is crucial to deterrence and to preventing
the commission of new crimes, which is essential to
sustaining peace. States have a central role to play in
that regard.
Thirdly, I would like to recall the plight of children
and young people and on the devastating impact
of conflict on their education. It is estimated that
246 million children live in conflict zones. Like attacks
on health services and personnel, attacks on schools are
on the rise in many conflict situations. But attacks on
schools not only claim the lives of innocent children and
young people, they also jeopardize the education and
the future of those who survive. Therefore, Belgium has
endorsed the Safe Schools Declaration and invites other
Member States to do the same. In that regard, we would
like to call on the members of the Security Council to
consider the possibility of drafting and adopting, along
the lines of resolution 2286 (2016), a resolution with a
specific focus on attacks on the education sector.
In conclusion, I would like to commend Human
Rights Watch, as well as the International Committee
of the Red Cross, on their professionalism, courage

The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Germany.

Germany fully aligns itself with the statement
delivered on behalf of the European Union and with
the statement to be delivered by Switzerland on behalf
of the Group of Friends. Germany also supports the
vision outlined by the Secretary-General in his report
on strengthening the protection of civilians in armed
conflicts (S/2017/414).
I will make a few short remarks in my national
capacity.
First, I would like to point out a deeply worrying
trend. Many non-State armed groups flagrantly violate
international humanitarian law by failing to protect
civilians and blocking humanitarian access. What is
equally troubling is that certain States do the same. All
States are bound to protect civilians under international
humanitarian law. We therefore urge all States and all
parties to armed conflict to make the protection of
civilians a priority. We call on this Council to find ways
to enhance compliance with international humanitarian
law and ensure that perpetrators are held accountable
for their violations.
Secondly, the protection of civilians must never
be a secondary concern in peacekeeping operations.
Their protection must always be a prime consideration
and a central element in the operation’s mandate. Of
course, the most effective way to protect civilians is
to end the conflict by finding a sustainable political
solution. That is why we have scaled up our mediation
and mediation support activities in recent years. In
order to protect civilians, the mission must be equipped
with the necessary capabilities and resources to keep
civilians safe, including resources to provide medical
assistance. Ultimately, that is not just the responsibility
of the Council and the United Nations, but of every
troop- and police-contributing country.

17-1499843/78

S/PV.7951

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

25/05/2017

Thirdly, we must protect humanitarian and medical
missions. To help survivors of violent conflicts, it is
essential that we have full, rapid, unimpeded and
sustained humanitarian access. However, despite the
adoption of resolution 2286 (2016), we witnessed an
increase in attacks against medical and humanitarian
personnel in 2016. That trend is unacceptable. The
international community must do everything in its
power to ensure the safety and security of those
personnel. Conflict parties must abide by rules of
engagement to protect medical personnel and facilities.

is with a heavy heart that we look at the increasing
numbers of incidents placing civilians, including
medical and humanitarian personnel, under direct
attack in armed conflicts. We are witnessing obstacles
placed to obstruct the delivery of medical equipment
and people in need who are not receiving necessary
medical treatment.

Germany champions the protection of civilians
through all stages of crisis.

Estonia also aligns itself with the statement
delivered by the observer of the European Union.

First, we have substantially increased our crisis
prevention efforts and capacities, including early
warning systems and mediation.

Resolution 2286 (2016), adopted unanimously by the
Security Council, was a landmark decision addressing
the grave situation that medical and humanitarian
personnel face today. It is important to underline
that they are under the protection of international
humanitarian law and that States have obligations to
respect that. In that regard, Estonia will continue to
support the implementation of resolution 2286 (2016).

Secondly, by upholding international humanitarian
and human rights law, we promote respect for
international humanitarian and human rights law.
Furthermore, we vigorously fight impunity and support
accountability. In the case of Syria, for example,
we support the recently established International,
Impartial and Independent Mechanism to Assist in the
Investigation and Prosecution of Those Responsible
for the Most Serious Crimes under International Law,
as well as the work of the Human Rights Council’s
Commission of Inquiry.
Thirdly, our projects on the ground in conflict
areas are geared towards the protection of civilians.
For instance, we invest in disarmament, demobilization
and reintegration projects in many conflict areas and
support humanitarian mine action and other initiatives
to decrease the impact of small arms, light weapons and
improvised explosive devices.
Fourthly, in our military contribution to the United
Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization
Mission in Mali, we have made the protection of civilians
an important element in our pre-deployment training.
The protection of civilians in conflict must be our
highest priority. If the international community fails to
deliver here, we fail to achieve the purpose for which
this institution was created.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Estonia.
Ms. Lind (Estonia): Deliberate attacks on civilians
are war crimes, and they are simply unacceptable. It
44/78

Over the past years, we have seen a growing number
of violations of international humanitarian law. In this
vein I thank the Uruguayan presidency for convening
the today’s open debate to address this issue.

It is without doubt States that have the primary
responsibility to ensure the protection of their own
people. For that, we have to start with conflict
prevention. Respect for civilian populations and health
care in armed conflicts must be present at all times. In
order to bring that into practice, Estonia has ratified
the main instruments of international humanitarian
law with respect to the protection of civilians and has
introduced the necessary domestic regulations for
their enforcement. We have taken it to heart to ensure
that our personnel do not violate international law
when carrying out their obligations in Estonia or on
a mission. The Estonian Defence Forces are provided
with training on the obligations for the protection of
civilians under international humanitarian law. That
includes basic overviews of the field, briefings on rules
of engagement before every deployment and advanced
training in international humanitarian law.
Perpetrators must be brought to justice. States
must ensure that those responsible do not operate
with impunity. In that respect, let me underline the
importance of accountability and the role of the
International Criminal Court (ICC) in cases where
investigations or prosecutions at the national level are
not possible. We encourage States to cooperate with
the ICC and the Security Council to refer matters to
the ICC.
17-14998

25/05/2017

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Israel.
Mr. Roet (Israel): For too long, the world has
witnessed the unfolding of bloody conflicts, which
have led to some of the worst humanitarian crises in
history. From Yemen to Libya, from Somalia to South
Sudan, infrastructure is destroyed and civilians are
trapped — pawns to illegitimate regimes and targets of
terrorists eager to kill. Most recently, innocent civilians
in Manchester have fallen victim to such inhumane
attacks. Israel stands in solidarity with the people
of Great Britain. In the face of human rights abuses,
the United Nations cannot remain silent. Protecting
civilians and health-care access in conflict zones must
be our top priority.
Nowhere have attacks on civilians and critical
infrastructure caused more damage than in
Syria — devastation that has shaken the whole world
to its core. Over the past six years, the Syrian regime
has led a brutal campaign against its own population.
Al-Assad has deployed chemical weapons, including
the recent sarin attack in Khan Shaykhun. He has
authorized siege warfare and hanged thousands of
prisoners, with shocking reports of his plans to dispose
of their bodies in a large crematorium, seeking to hide
the atrocities committed.
The Syrian regime has even resorted to destroying
hospitals and removing essential medical aid from
humanitarian convoys, leaving almost 13 million
people with no access to treatment. As we heard from
the Secretary-General this morning, over 400 hospitals
and medical facilities were hit last year, which forced
half of Syria’s hospitals to close treatment wings or shut
down completely. Eight hundred medical staff were
tragically killed in 2016, and most of those remaining
have been forced to flee. In Madaya, following months
of siege, al-Assad and his allies not only starved the
town’s 42,000 residents, but also proceeded to demolish
all but one hospital.
Al-Assad’s main ally and beneficiary, Iran, is an
accomplice to those crimes. Terror militias backed and
financed by Iran, most notably Hezbollah, operate in
Syria, bolster its brutal regime and commit unspeakable
atrocities, trapping innocents in the crossfire.
The Syrian people have called desperately for the
world’s help. Despite lacking diplomatic ties with Syria,
Israel has responded to that call. Our medical team and
first responders have treated countless Syrians — no

S/PV.7951

questions asked. We do so because we firmly believe
that it is the right thing to do. Earlier this year, a sniper
hit 23-year-old Raji in the face. With his upper jaw,
cheekbones and right eye gone, this Syrian person
knew that he had to seek treatment in Israel. Using 3-D
printing technology, the Israeli doctors reconstructed
Raji’s face, completing one of the first-ever treatments
of this kind. Under Israel’s care, Raji is now close to
full recovery.
Israel’s Western Galilee Hospital in Nahariya has
treated 1,600 Syrians over four years. Doctors and
nurses are committed to improving physical and mental
health, ensuring that patients feel at home and restoring
their sense of humanity. When it comes to saving lives,
Israel knows no borders.
Israel’s northern hospitals must often perform
life-saving procedures under threat from Hizbullah.
In 2006, that terrorist organization fired almost 900
rockets into the city of Nahariya alone. Hizbullah is an
internationally designated terrorist group, notorious for
destroying critical infrastructure and conceiving of new
ways to harm civilians. It has amassed over 100,000
missiles and point them straight towards Israel, in clear
violation of resolutions 1710 (2006) and 1559 (2004).
As we have cautioned time and again in this Chamber,
Hizbullah has transformed southern Lebanon’s Shiite
villages into terror outposts, intending to harm Israel.
Rocket launchers sit by schools and hospitals, and
living rooms store missiles. Today, Hizbullah has
recruited a third of the civilians within these villages,
strengthening its terror framework. By launching
attacks on Israel out of Lebanese population centres,
Hizbullah is committing a double war crime.
Lebanon continues to ignore the Council’s demand
to take responsibility, restore order and “exercise full
sovereignty and authority over its territory”. Lebanese
President Aoun recently described Hizbullah as
essential to Lebanese defence. Just this week, Lebanon’s
Foreign Secretary distanced himself from the Riyadh
Declaration at the Arab-Islamic-American Summit
criticizing the terror group.
Hamas is another internationally recognized
terrorist organization guilty of a double war crime.
At the expense of the people of Gaza, Hamas exploits
international humanitarian aid to build rockets and
terror tunnels, and even base its headquarters among
civilians. During the 2014 conflict, Hamas stored its
lethal arsenal, launched deadly attacks and created a

17-1499845/78

S/PV.7951

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

makeshift military command centre in Gaza’s Wafa
Hospital. These terrorists even built an entrance inside
Wafa to Hamas’s vast terror tunnel network.
The senseless attacks on civilians, the use of
human shields and destruction of health-care facilities
must end. The Security Council must stand against
these abuses. While Israel supports and co-sponsored
resolution 2286 (2016), the issue of human shields
should not have been omitted from that text.
Millions in Syria, throughout the Middle East and
around the globe look to the United Nations to end the
carnage. Our goal, our duty, is to end all war. But until
then, the international community must answer the call
and guarantee the protection of civilians around the
world.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I give the floor
to the representative of Switzerland.
Mr. Lauber (Switzerland): I am pleased to take
the floor on behalf of members of the Group of Friends
on the Protection of Civilians in Armed Conflict:
Australia, Austria, Belgium, Brazil, Canada, France,
Germany, Italy, Japan, Liechtenstein, Luxembourg,
the Netherlands, Norway, Portugal, Switzerland, the
United Kingdom, Uruguay and my own country,
Switzerland. The Group of Friends thanks Uruguay
for organizing today’s open debate and the briefers for
their statements.
Deliberate and indiscriminate attacks on civilians
are widespread in many armed conflicts. A growing
number of parties to armed conflicts openly disregard
long-established rules of international humanitarian
law, especially with regard to the conduct of hostilities
and the protection of civilians. The despicable trend
whereby medical facilities, personnel and their means
of transport and the wounded and sick are deliberately
targeted, so as to violently deprive civilian populations
of vital services, has to be reversed. Access restrictions
and assaults on humanitarian and medical workers
impede the delivery of urgently needed assistance. The
number of deaths of humanitarian and medical workers
to date this year, one of the deadliest on record, should
horrify us all. Therefore, it is with a sense of urgency that
we must promote respect for international humanitarian
law. As highlighted in the Secretary General’s report
(S/2017/414), all States have an obligation to respect and
ensure respect for international humanitarian law in all
circumstances.
46/78

25/05/2017

The unanimous adoption of resolution 2286 (2016),
condemning attacks against medical units and personnel
in armed conflict by the Council in May 2016, with a
large number of sponsors, was an important signal that,
despite the numerous violations observed in recent
years, international law is clear. The wounded and
sick, medical personnel and humanitarian personnel
exclusively engaged in medical duties, their means of
transport and equipment, as well as hospitals and other
medical facilities, must be respected and protected.
This is an issue of great concern to the international
community.
The Group of Friends acknowledges the Secretary
General’s recommendations on implementing resolution
2286 (2016) and urges States to implement them, in
accordance with their national legal framework. Member
States have the primary responsibility to ensure that
proper legal, policy and operational frameworks are
in place to ensure full implementation of international
law. We call on all Member States to take action on
the Secretary-General’s recommendations which will
allow for the full implementation of resolution 2286
(2016).
The Group of Friends condemns attacks against
schools, which, as civilian objects, enjoy protection
against direct attacks and the effects of such attacks
under the Geneva Conventions and international
humanitarian law. When schools and children are
targeted, the future is attacked. In this regard, the Group
of Friends takes note of the Safe Schools Declaration,
currently endorsed by 64 countries, aiming at the
protection and continuation of education in armed
conflict.
The Group of Friends underlines the importance
of deterring violations of international humanitarian
law and promoting accountability. States must make
greater efforts for systematic data collection, analysis
and reporting on incidents, including on civilian
casualties; for full, prompt, impartial, independent and
effective investigations into alleged serious violations
under international law; for the prosecution of alleged
serious violations; and for the provision of assistance
to victims.
In this sense, we welcome the adoption by the
General Assembly of resolution 71/248, establishing the
International, Impartial and Independent Mechanism
to assist in the Investigation and Prosecution of
those Responsible for the Most Serious Crimes
17-14998

25/05/2017

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

under International Law committed in the Syrian
Arab Republic since March 2011. The Mechanism is
mandated to collect, consolidate, preserve and analyse
evidence of violations of international humanitarian
law and human rights violations and abuses and to
prepare files in order to facilitate and expedite fair and
independent criminal proceedings in national, regional
or international courts or tribunals. It is anticipated
that the Mechanism will not share information in
circumstances in which a trial may be held in absentia
on the basis of universal jurisdiction.
In line with the principle of complementarity,
we call on all States to ratify the Rome Statute of the
International Criminal Court (ICC), to penalize the
most serious crimes of concern to the international
community as a whole and to enable the ICC to
investigate such crimes should national justice systems
not be able or willing genuinely to do so. Through such
measures, we can deter future crimes by closing the
impunity gap.
The report of the Secretary-General in the protection
of civilians (S/2017/414) rightly puts an emphasis on
prevention. Preventing armed conflict in the first place
is the best way to protect civilians. However, prevention
also applies within the context of armed conflict. Good
practice that spares civilians from harm should be
developed, implemented and shared, as identified in
the Secretary-General’s report. The report underlines
the importance of finding comprehensive strategies to
address forced displacement. We recall that two thirds
of forcibly displaced persons are displaced within their
own countries. Ensuring assistance and protection but
also the development of opportunities for displaced
persons is crucial, especially when looking at the many
protracted situations.
A gender perspective is also a key component of
effective protection. At the same time, preventing
forced displacement in the first place becomes even
more important, including by addressing the need
to avoid civilian harm during hostilities in an urban
environment and to prevent the indiscriminate use of
weapons, in particular in areas with concentrations
of civilians.
Access remains a central challenge in conflicts
around the world. For example, millions of civilians
are on the brink of famine in Nigeria, Somalia, South
Sudan and Yemen, and humanitarian access restrictions

S/PV.7951

imposed by parties to conflict played a key role in
this crisis.
Greater respect for international humanitarian
law and negotiations for the purposes of gaining
humanitarian access may imply contacts with all
parties to armed conflicts, including armed groups.
The Group of Friends takes note of the Kigali
Principles on the Protection of Civilians currently
endorsed by 40 countries, aimed at reinforcing the
protection of civilians by troop-contributing countries
and police-contributing countries in the framework of
peacekeeping operations. The Group of Friends calls on
all current and future Security Council members to take
timely and decisive action to prevent or end genocide,
crimes against humanity and war crimes.
The Group of Friends would like to encourage
States having not yet done so to consider acceding to
the Additional Protocols to the Geneva conventions
of 1949, in particular this year, the year of the fortieth
anniversary of Additional Protocols I and II, and to
engage constructively in the ongoing discussions in
Geneva about ways and means to strengthen respect for
international humanitarian law.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now call on the
representative of Romania.
Mr. Jinga (Romania) (spoke in French): I thank
the Uruguyan presidency of the Security Council for
the initiative of having convened this open debate one
year after the adoption of resolution 2286 (2017), which
focuses on the protection of civilians during armed
conflict and the protection of medical and humanitarian
staff in areas of conflict. I should like also to thank
the Secretary-General, Mr. António Guterres, for his
detailed briefing on the current situation.
Romania fully aligns itself with the statement
delivered by the observer of the European Union. I
would now add some remarks in our national capacity.
Improvement of the condition of wounded and
injured armed forces personnel was codified by the very
first Geneva Convention, in 1864. In the wake of the
Second World War, the Geneva Conventions and their
Additional Protocols provided the modern framework
for international humanitarian law and must remain at
the heart of our action in addressing all conflicts.
However, despite this commitment, the situation on
the ground reflects a cruel reality: there is a growing
lack of security for the injured and ill and for medical

17-1499847/78

S/PV.7951

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

and humanitarian staff, whose work is exclusively
medical in nature. No conflict more starkly reflects the
horrors of war and its impact on the lives of innocent
civilians than the protracted violence in Syria, where
more than 13 million people are in need of protection
or assistance.
Despite the protected status of medical
establishments under international law, such structures
continue to be destroyed or damaged in the wake of
conflict or combat, even following the 30 December
2016 ceasefire. According to the Office for the
Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs (OCHA), seven
attacks against medical facilities were reported in Syria
in February and 19 others in March. In addition, the
lack of specialized professional medical personnel
has a significant impact on the most common medical
services, such as vaccination. The repercussions of this
war on civilians will continue to reverberate for many
years after peace in Syria has been restored.
The conflict in Yemen is equally alarming.
Currently fewer than half of medical facilities are
functioning. There is a grave scarcity of staff, equipment
and medicine. Some 15 million people lack access to
basic medical services. Thirteen health-care providers
have been killed and 31 wounded since the outbreak of
hostilities, according to OCHA.
Reducing or cutting off people’s access to basic
medical services is a grave violation of international
humanitarian law. All parties to conflict are bound by
a strict obligation to respect and protect medical staff,
facilities and vehicles, as well as the wounded and the
sick. Security Council resolution 2286 (2016), which
Romania co-sponsored, is an important benchmark
in the international community’s efforts to draw
attention to the protection of medical and humanitarian
staff in areas of conflict. However, after outrage, it is
time to act. The resolution must mark not the end of
a political process but rather the commencement of a
practical effort.
Medical infrastructure is also referred to as critical
infrastructure. Security Council resolution 2341 (2017),
on the protection of critical infrastructure against
terrorist threats, buttresses this approach, especially in
the realm of civilian protection. Intentional and direct
attacks against hospitals are war crimes, hence the need
to ensure that perpetrators are held accountable and
brought to justice.
48/78

25/05/2017

Protection of civilians during armed conflict,
including the need to protect health care, which is the
topic of today’s debate, remains a key aim. Although
it is incumbent primarily upon States to protect their
people, the protection of civilians is an integral facet
of peacekeeping operations, with a significant impact
on both the reputation and the credibility of the United
Nations. In this regard, Romania aligned itself with
the Kigali Principles, which reflects my country’s
commitment to global efforts to deliver peace and
security to conflict-affected countries. Respect for the
Kigali Principles is critical and must be reflected in all
peacekeeping operation mandates.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the Permanent Observer of the Observer State
of the Holy See to the United Nations.
Archbishop Auza (Holy See): My delegation believes
that the worst development in the evolution of armed
conflict is that civilians not only are less protected and
not spared from armed conflicts but have increasingly
become targets. The use of civilians as weapons of war
represents the most execrable kind of human behaviour.
The international community should show itself at its
best by holding those who commit such heinous crimes
accountable and by rising above narrow national and
geopolitical interests to spare innocent civilians from
the scourge of war. Unspeakable violence wilfully
inflicted upon civilian populations and the flagrant
violation of international humanitarian law in many
current conflicts are becoming commonplace.
Today’s discussion provides a much-needed
opportunity to focus on the impact that modern
weapons and technology are having on civilians caught
up in armed conflict. The technological modernization
of weapons blurs the distinction between weapons
of mass destruction and conventional weapons. Socalled modernized conventional weapons increasingly
resemble weapons of mass destruction in terms of their
indiscriminately targeting civilians and destroying
extensive areas, together with their inhabitants. Any
weapon with such devastating impacts on civilians is
against all international humanitarian law and all ideas
of civilization.
The intentional destruction of the infrastructure
critical to the survival of the civilian population,
such as hospitals and water supplies, has become a
strategy of choice in recent and ongoing conflicts in
many areas of the Middle East. It is the obligation of
17-14998

25/05/2017

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

the international community, in accordance with the
United Nations Charter, to protect civilians and their
critical infrastructure from this brutality and barbarity.
A little over a week ago, Pope Francis observed:
“We say ‘[War]: Never again,’ yet we continue to
produce weapons and sell them to those who are at
war with one another.”
Copious international discussions on ending
violence and conflicts are almost pointless if at the
same time untold quantities of arms are continuously
produced, sold or gifted to dictatorial regimes,
terrorist groups or organized-crime syndicates. Arms
producers, traders and traffickers must be made aware
that they are directly and indirectly abetting massatrocity crimes, enabling violators of fundamental
human rights, and turning back the development of
entire peoples and populations. Strengthening relevant
laws and conventions at the multilateral, bilateral and
national levels is a necessary step in the right direction
in the protection of civilians caught in armed conflicts.
My delegation believes that the Security Council’s
mission to protect innocent civilians caught in armed
conflicts should be considered within the framework
of the responsibility to protect. There exists a graver
responsibility, first for the States where the crimes
were committed, and then for the international
community, to defend those who are exposed to war
crimes, crimes against humanity, genocide and ethnic
cleansing. Moreover, the 2005 World Summit Outcome
provides that if a State is manifestly failing to protect
its populations, the international community must
be prepared to take appropriate collective action in a
timely and decisive manner and in accordance with the
United Nations Charter.
In his 2016 report entitled “Mobilizing collective
action: the next decade of the responsibility to protect”,
the Secretary-General affirms,
“It is time for Member States to show greater
resolve in defending and upholding the norms that
safeguard humanity, on which the responsibility to
protect rests. If we do not, the achievements made
in the first decade of the responsibility to protect
will be eroded.” (S/2016/620, para. 62)
Due to the unacceptable human costs of continued
inaction, the Holy See appeals once more for the
United Nations to define clear and effective criteria for
applying the principle of the responsibility to protect

S/PV.7951

and integrating it with Chapter VII of the Charter of the
United Nations.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Jordan.
Ms. Sughayar (Jordan) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, I would like to thank the Uruguayan delegation
for presiding over the Security Council this month and
wish it every success as it fulfils that charge. We also
thank Uruguay for convening today’s open debate,
having chosen to make this vital subject a part of the
Council’s agenda for the month.
My delegation would like to express its appreciation
to Secretary-General António Guterres for his
invaluable briefing. We also thank the Vice-President
of the International Committee of the Red Cross and
the Deputy Executive Director of Human Rights Watch
for their statements. I would like to express Jordan’s
condolences to the United Kingdom on the terrorist
attack that took place in Manchester and led to the death
of a number of children and other innocent civilians
The Security Council adopted resolution 2286
(2016) unanimously in response to the violence, attacks
and threats against medical personnel in armed conflict.
These threats and attacks are not limited to those who
were working in the medical and humanitarian fields
alone, but they also target the means of transportation
being used and medical equipment and facilities. Our
meeting today to discuss the steps taken by States
to implement resolution 2286 (2016) one year after
its adoption is important. I would therefore like to
underscore the following.
First, Jordan welcomes the report of the SecretaryGeneral of 10 May 2017 on the protection of civilians
in armed conflict (S/2017/414), the former SecretaryGeneral’s recommendations attached to his letter
addressed to the President of the Security Council on
18 August 2016 (S/2016/722, annex), and the latter’s
briefing to the Council on 28 September 2016 (see
S/PV.7779).
Secondly, Jordan attaches great importance to
the international humanitarian law and international
human rights law and is in full compliance with all their
provisions, which is evidenced by the full compliance
of our security agencies and the Jordanian personnel in
peacekeeping operations with those bodies of law.
Thirdly, we would like to stress that it is important
to implement the measures aimed at improving the

17-1499849/78

S/PV.7951

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

protection of medical facilities and personnel as well as
measures for prevention, protection and accountability.
In the light of the ongoing crisis in Syria and
its political, security and social repercussions that
are a still having impact on Syria’s neighbours and
other countries hosting Syrian refugees, Jordan has
demonstrated its respect for international laws in the
way it deals with these refugees. Jordan has coordinated
with different specialized United Nations agencies to
facilitate the entry of humanitarian relief convoys into
southern Syria in implementation of resolution 2165
(2014), and this assistance includes non-food items.
Today, the strike by Palestinian prisoners of war is
in its thirty-ninth day. These prisoners are continuing
their hunger strike as a call on Israeli prison authorities
to abandon their policies of isolation and administrative
detention. Accordingly, we call on Israel to comply
with its obligations under international humanitarian
law and international human rights law. We also note
the statement contained in the letter of the SecretaryGeneral of the League of Arab States addressed to the
Secretary-General of the United Nations concerning the
violation of rights of a Palestinian prisoners of war and
the deteriorating humanitarian conditions, namely, that
he called for an end to practices that violate prisoners’
basic rights.
In conclusion, the responsibility to protect civilians
and provide health care in armed conflict reflects a
genuine commitment by Member States, especially
in the light of diverse threats that we are facing today
in terms of the growing terrorism and extremism that
are threatening all parts of the world and are violating
principles of human rights law and international
humanitarian law and all other bodies of international
law.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Poland.
Mr. Winid (Poland): I would like to thank Uruguay
for convening today’s important debate. I also offer my
special thanks to the briefers for their comprehensive
presentations and for their dedication and work in
the field.
Poland aligns itself with the statement delivered by
the observer of the European Union, but I would like to
add some comments in my national capacity.
Violations of international humanitarian and human
rights law continue to have an enormous negative
50/78

25/05/2017

impact on civilians in conflict zones in various parts of
the world. The response of the international community
is crucial to ending this situation. We must all work
together to deliver on our pledge to leave no one behind,
and while doing so, we should have three separate
conflict phases in mind, namely, before, during and
after a conflict.
Most civilian deaths and suffering could be avoided
if the fundamental norms of international humanitarian
and human rights law were respected. So we propose
that the following measures be undertaken.
First, in terms of preventive measures, Member
States should adhere to international treaties binding
parties to upholding international law and protecting
civilians in armed conflict, in particular the Geneva
Conventions of 1949 and the Additional Protocols
thereto of 1977 and 2005. They should also reinforce
their national legislation related to the protection of
medical care in armed conflict and introduce guarantees
for medical personnel to allow them to act freely.
Secondly, during the conflict cycle, it is of
utmost importance to introduce safety measures like
mapping the location of medical personnel, medical
facilities and the equipment and to secure humanitarian
access for civilians to receive life-saving assistance
and protection.
Poland was among the sponsors of resolution 2286
(2016), on the protection of medical personnel in armed
conflict. We wish to reiterate what was stated in the
seventeenth preliminary paragraph of the resolution:
“attacks intentionally directed against buildings,
material, medical units and transport and personnel...
are war crimes”. Perpetrators of these crimes must be
held accountable.
We would also like to use today’s debate to endorse
the recommendation of the Secretary-General and the
International Committee of the Red Cross that States
and parties to conflict should avoid the use of explosive
weapons with wide-area effects in populated areas. For
instance, as independent non-governmental research
showed, shelling in eastern Ukraine has directly
damaged hospitals, destroyed ambulances and killed
or injured health workers and their patients. It also
damaged infrastructure and created travel risks. As a
result, the availability and accessibility of health care
have drastically declined.
17-14998

25/05/2017

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

Thirdly, after a conflict, States should introduce
accountability measures and sanctions as mechanisms
for leveraging compliance from conflict parties
to conform with international human rights and
humanitarian law. Poland has experience with regard
to providing medical assistance to those in need in
conflict zones. For instance, in the years 2007-2015 we
maintained a field hospital in the Afghan province of
Ghazni. Apart from emergency medical care, patients
were provided with basic medications. A Polish medical
team also delivered medical care among children
and youth. In the framework of a Polish assistance
programme, we also provided a city hospital in Ghazni
with some medical equipment and supplies. In the last
two years, Poland assigned funds to rebuild and support
hospitals that deliver humanitarian assistance to war
victims in Syria.
In conclusion, let me join other delegations and
reiterate our strong support for all issues pertaining to
the protection of civilians agenda. We very much thank
Uruguay for taking up this topic during its presidency
in the Security Council.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of New Zealand.
Mrs. Schwalger (New Zealand): I thank all the
briefers and I commend Uruguay for organizing
today’s debate.
New Zealand aligns itself with the statement
delivered by the Secretary of State for Foreign Affairs
of Spain.
As we have already heard today, millions of
civilians living in areas of armed conflict around the
world face grave dangers. All too often parties to
armed conflict are placing military advantage ahead
of international humanitarian law. This fact, combined
with the increasing trend for hostilities to take place
in urban settings, has devastated civilian populations.
In some cases their suffering has been exacerbated
through the deliberate obstruction of humanitarian aid
and violent attacks on medical facilities.
The use of indiscriminate explosive weapons
in populated areas is a distressing illustration of
the disrespect for international humanitarian law
demonstrated by some parties to armed conflict.
Explosive weapons in populated areas have destroyed
hospitals, schools, places of worship and vital
infrastructure. Millions of civilians have been displaced

S/PV.7951

and those who remain struggle to access essential
services, including medical care. The consequences
can be catastrophic and will be felt long into the future.
Given these negative trends, we welcome the
Secretary-General’s leadership on protecting civilians
in armed conflict and his path to protection. We are
pleased that he is focused on this critical issue. We are
convinced that there is more that the United Nations can
and should be doing to prevent conflict. We commend
the Secretary-General’s determination to mobilize the
United Nations system towards this goal in a holistic
manner. We also welcome his focus on protecting the
medical and humanitarian mission and tackling the
challenges associated with the mass displacement of
civilian populations affected by conflict.
We sit in this Chamber, a year since resolution
2286 (2016) was unanimously adopted by the Security
Council, with a historic number of sponsors. As one
of the drafters of resolution 2286 (2016), New Zealand
was pleased to work with four other Security Council
members to develop this response to attacks on
health-care workers and facilities. However, since that
resolution was adopted, we have continued to witness
outrages that shock our collective conscience. Rather
than providing care to those wounded in conflict,
doctors and nurses continue to be counted among the
casualties in significant numbers. Hospitals have been
levelled. Central tenets of international humanitarian
law are routinely violated with impunity in some parts
of the world.
All Member States, not only those who are parties
to armed conflict, have a responsibility to take action.
Violations of international humanitarian law must
continue to be condemned and violators brought to
justice. We encourage all Member States to implement
the recommendations made by the Secretary-General
pursuant to resolution 2286 (2016) in order to better
protect the wounded, medical personnel and medical
facilities in armed conflict.
For New Zealand’s part, we continue to build a
strong understanding of international humanitarian
law at all levels within our Defence Force. We are
using practical and innovative tools to ensure that all
members of the New Zealand Defence Force have ready
access to a concise code of conduct, whether they are
in an office or in the field on active duty. This includes
fundamental provisions of international law pertaining
to the protection of civilians and the medical mission.

17-1499851/78

S/PV.7951

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

But we have to take this one step further. Our troops,
in New Zealand, are also required to prevent violations,
and where they do occur, to report them.
Resolution 2286 (2016) established a reporting
architecture which will ensure that the question of
attacks on the medical mission will continue to receive
regular attention by the Council. The Council should
continue to demand compliance with international law
and take decisions to do everything possible to protect
civilians caught up in armed conflict.
Together with the Secretary-General’s path to
protection and action on this issue by all Member
States, we hope that some relief will be brought to
the millions of innocent civilians suffering in armed
conflicts around the world. New Zealand pays tribute
to the International Committee of the Red Cross,
Human Rights Watch, Médecins Sans Frontières and all
international humanitarian [NOTE: speaker did not say
“humanitarian”] organizations for the work they do in
supporting civilians and the medical community they
serve. We know it is an uphill battle to sustain active
engagement by Member States on this issue, including
by those sitting at this table, but it is a job that they must
do and we will always support them.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of the Netherlands.
Mrs. Gregoire-Van-Haaren (Netherlands): I thank
Uruguay for convening this debate on the protection of
civilians and health care in armed conflict. We welcome
the discussion on this issue, which requires our urgent
attention at the highest level.
The Kingdom of the Netherlands aligns itself
with the statement delivered by the observer of the
European Union and with the statement delivered by
the representative of Switzerland on behalf of the Group
of Friends of the Protection of Civilians. In addition, I
would like to make the following remarks.
In his latest report on the protection of civilians
in armed conflict (S/2017/414), the Secretary-General
emphasizes three priority areas for improvement,
which the Netherlands fully supports. I would like to
focus on two of the three protection priorities. The first
is protecting the mission of humanitarian and medical
personnel and prioritizing the protection of civilians.
Despite the Security Council’s unanimous adoption
last year of its landmark resolution 2286 (2016), we see
little change on the ground. We cannot condone attacks
52/78

25/05/2017

on medical personnel and health infrastructure, not just
because the safety of medical missions is at the heart
of humanitarian action, but also because it will more
generally erode respect for international humanitarian
law. We cannot allow attacks on health-care services
to become an accepted part of warfare. We, as Member
States, must put the recommendations of the SecretaryGeneral for the implementation of resolution 2286
(2016) into practice. And we should do more. Improved
and harmonized data collection will provide a factual
base for mechanisms such as the Security Councilmandated Monitoring and Reporting Mechanism on
grave violations against children in armed conflict.
We are very worried about the direct and indirect
effects of the attacks on medical facilities in Yemen and
what they mean for the access to health care of Yemeni
children, who are currently facing a cholera epidemic
on top of severe malnutrition. An environment that
ensures the safe and unimpeded delivery of medical
care in armed conflict is vitally important. The
20 million people currently at risk of famine desperately
need rapid, unimpeded and sustained access to
humanitarian aid, which should be accorded in full
respect for humanitarian principles and international
humanitarian law.
That brings me to my second point, which is the
importance of ensuring that the parties to conflicts
strengthen their respect for international law. In
Syria, Yemen and other conflict situations, civilians
are more than ever becoming the victims of appalling
violence. In order to protect them, we urgently need
to improve respect for international humanitarian law,
and States should use their influence on the parties
involved in armed conflicts to protect civilians. States
should also engage constructively in the process
aimed at strengthening compliance with international
humanitarian law led by the International Committee of
the Red Cross and Switzerland. Ensuring accountability
for serious violations of international humanitarian
law is vital, and impunity is unacceptable, because it
ultimately helps to undermine the rule of law. Where
parties to a conflict persist with serious violations,
the Council should take decisive action to ensure
accountability, including through referral to the
International Criminal Court.
There is also a role for other actors. The Kingdom
of the Netherlands welcomes the General Assembly’s
establishment of the International, Impartial and
Independent Mechanism to Assist in the Investigation
17-14998

25/05/2017

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

and Prosecution of Those Responsible for the Most
Serious Crimes under International Law Committed
in Syria. We urge all Member States to support the
Mechanism financially and politically, since it can
play an important role in preventing impunity for
international crimes committed in Syria. We also
call on troop-contributing countries to endorse the
Kigali Principles on the Protection of Civilians in
peacekeeping operations.
In conclusion, the Kingdom of the Netherlands
would like to emphasize that it has deep respect and
appreciation for the work done by humanitarian workers
and medical staff in exceedingly difficult and dangerous
circumstances. We call on the international community,
the Security Council and individual countries to
implement the Secretary-General’s recommendations
in his report on the protection of civilians in conflict.
As a partner for peace, justice and development, the
Kingdom of the Netherlands will continue to contribute
to that agenda, in close collaboration with Italy, other
Member States and relevant actors.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of the Syrian Arab Republic.
Mr. Mounzer (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke
in Arabic): We would like to thank the Uruguayan
presidency for convening today’s important meeting.
We have taken due note of the concept note
on the protection of civilians and medical care in
armed conflict (S/2017/365, annex), including on
the implementation of resolution 2286 (2016). In that
context, we recall the Preamble to the Charter of the
United Nations, which states that the peoples of the
United Nations are determined to save succeeding
generations from the scourge of war and to reaffirm
faith in fundamental human rights and human dignity.
Today, however, our world remains incapable of
translating those noble purposes and principles into a
reality where peace, security and prosperity prevail.
This has happened because these principles are used
by some Governments to legitimize hegemonic policies
and interfere in other States’ internal affairs.
I would like to make some remarks on behalf of
my country, which for seven years has suffered the
scourge international terrorism, which is supported
by some of the members of the Security Council and
other States. It is States that have the primary and
exclusive responsibility to protect their civilians.
We cannot deal with the issue of the protection of

S/PV.7951

civilians as a whole without ensuring full respect for
international law and the principles of the Charter of
the United Nations, particularly those affirming the
sovereignty and equality of States and the importance
of non-interference in a State’s internal affairs. We
must avoid selectivity and double standards, and we
should not exploit the issue of the protection of civilians
in order to breach international law and the selfish
agendas of certain States. Indeed, some of the ways
in which some States have interfered in the affairs of
others have had disastrous results for civilians that are
very apparent to us all. The protection of civilians in
conflict first requires addressing the underlying and
genuine causes of those conflicts, and the growing
threat posed by terrorism.
Some international parties, however, have shown no
willingness to attain that goal but have rather used their
economic, political and military might to create new
areas of tension around the world, instead of upholding
their commitments regarding international peace and
security and the eradication of terrorism. It is strange
to see them continue to take liberties as they accuse
others of violating the rules of international law and
international humanitarian law, forgetting their own
crimes in many parts of the world . How can the United
States, the United Kingdom and France claim to respect
international law when, as members of illegitimate
coalitions, they are attacking other countries and killing
their citizens? They infringe on the sovereignty of other
States and destroy their health infrastructure with no
respect whatsoever for the Charter of the United Nations
and the resolutions of the Security Council. They have
thus lost all legitimacy and credibility when it comes to
making statements on human rights — statements by
their representatives that are nothing but lies.
How can Saudi Arabia be a member of the
Human Rights Council when it is sending billions of
dollars to help murder Syrians and destroy our health
facilities, which is then being turned into warehouses
for terrorists? It is spreading cholera in Yemen and
attacking funeral processions, hospitals and other
infrastructure mercilessly. How can Qatar preside
over the Dialogue Among Civilizations initiative when
it publicly supports the Al-Nusra Front, a terrorist
organization that continues to commit crime after
barbaric crime in Syria, including the destruction of
clinics and health centres?
The Government of the Syrian Arab Republic has
a constitutional duty to protect its civilians. We are

17-1499853/78

S/PV.7951

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

committed to total respect for our citizens’ lives and to
providing them with basic services, including health,
education and social protection, despite the tremendous
challenges that we are dealing with. We will spare no
effort in upholding and meeting our commitments under
international humanitarian law. We have re-established
the Syrian Commission for International Law and
organized numerous international activities, including
training sessions.
Armed terrorist groups have invaded and occupied
all of the hospitals and clinics in all of the areas of Syria
where those groups are present. The hospitals have
been turned into military bases and weapons depots or
have been demolished. Modern infrastructure has also
been destroyed. The Al-Kindi Hospital and the Surgical
Ophthalmology Hospital in Aleppo were both renowned
institutions of the Middle East. We have heard the lies
that have been spread and the manipulations of the truth,
such as that some armed terrorists have represented
themselves as members of humanitarian and health care
organizations. The so-called White Helmets are nothing
but a cover for individuals committing terrorist acts
with impunity, supported by members of the Security
Council. Numerous instances have underscored those
lies. For example, I can refer to the medical material
found in the warehouses of terrorist groups in east
Aleppo. Those are the same terrorists that have come to
possess medical materials by depriving civilians who
are in great need of such resources.
I wish to emphasize the fact that we need to protect
civilians, including those civilians who are suffering
under the Israeli occupation in the occupied Syrian
Golan and the other occupied Arab territories. We
must build medical infrastructure for those citizens,
owing to the refusal on the part of the occupying Israeli
authorities to build a hospital for our citizens living
in the occupied Syrian Golan, where they are being
cruelly deprived of medical care.
What can we call an occupying Power whose Prime
Minister visits injured belonging to Jabhat al-Nusra at
Israeli hospitals? Of course, we call it occupying and
terrorist Power.
Today, the United Nations is in moral crisis and
representatives of States are forced to listen to the lies
of the representative of the worst occupying Power
known to humankind — the Israeli occupation Power.
As I have mentioned, the Israeli authorities refuse the
requests of the civilians of the Syrian Golan to build
54/78

25/05/2017

a hospital or allow the sick to receive treatment in the
hospitals of their home country, Syria.
Those whom the Israeli representative referred to
as receiving treatment in Israeli hospitals are terrorists
from Jabhat al-Nusra and other armed terrorist groups.
We have informed the Council repeatedly about
their treatment in the occupying Power’s hospitals.
Israel’s role in the Syrian crisis is crystal clear; it
provides logistic support to the terrorists in the area of
separation, as confirmed in the reports of the United
Nations Disengagement Observer Force. When the
terrorists, are under increased military pressure, help
comes from Israel through air and artillery bombing of
the Syrian forces fighting terrorists.
In the case of Liechtenstein, we heard the
representative of that country insist on promoting the
so-called International, Impartial and Independent
Mechanism to Assist in the Investigation and Prosecution
of Those Responsible for the Most Serious Crimes
under International Law Committed in the Syrian Arab
Republic since March 2011. I call on all Member States
to read the delivered by the Syrian Arab Republic to the
Secretary-General (A/71/799), which reveals the grave
legal violations in its establishment. Here, I cannot
but congratulate Liechtenstein’s representative on his
country’s disgraceful participation in its establishment
process, alongsidethe state of Qatar, which supports the
terror unleashed in Syria by Jabhat al-Nusra, a group
that is on the Security Council’s list.
Lastly, we emphasize the fact that the protection
of civilians, particularly with regard to the issue of
health care, requires solutions to the real problems
underlying the conflict and addressing the causes of the
suffering of the civilians. The problems facing civilians
include foreign occupation, terrorism and unilateral
coercive measures imposed by the United States, the
European Union and other States against many peoples,
particularly the people of Syria.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Paraguay.
Mr. Arriola Ramírez (Paraguay) (spoke in
Spanish): On behalf of the Republic of Paraguay, my
delegation pays tribute to the medical and humanitarian
personnel, those that have fallen in the conflict zones
and their families. May our words serve as an offering
for their sacrifice and a support for their selfless work.
17-14998

25/05/2017

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

We thank the Secretary-General and the
representatives of the International Committee of the
Red Cross and Human Rights Watch for their briefings
on the protection of civilians and medical care in armed
conflict. And we welcome the initiative on the part
of the Uruguayan presidency of the Security Council
to convene this open debate on the occasion of the
first anniversary of resolution 2286 (2016), which is
exclusively dedicated to the protection of medical care
in armed conflict.
As to the protection of civilians in general, Paraguay
reaffirms that an effective system for the protection of
civilians in armed conflict is the responsibility of the
Security Council, as has been noted by all Member
States, whether they are parties or non-parties to
conflict. It is therefore up to the Council to continue to
include clearly and explicitly the protection of civilians
in the mandates of peacekeeping operations, and as a
matter of priority in missions where civilians are at
high risk of violence.
My delegation believes that education and training
in international humanitarian and human rights
law are essential in order to stop and prevent acts of
violence, attacks and threats against civilians in armed
conflicts. In that regard, I wish to emphasize that the
Republic of Paraguay is currently contributing military
personnel to six peacekeeping missions. Prior to their
deployment, the Paraguayan Peacekeeping-Operations
Training Centre, known as Cecopaz-Paraguay, provides
specific training in the protection of civilians in armed
conflict, in accordance with the Kigali Principles on
the Protection of Civilians.
With regard to the protection of medical-care
services in armed conflict, Paraguay emphasizes the
importance of resolution 2286 (2016), which draws
attention to the need for information and analysis on
the risks to which health-care services are exposed in
armed conflict. We also express our commitment to the
Secretary-General’s initiative on the development and
dissemination of good practices and lessons learned in
the protection of health-care services in armed conflict
and for their subsequent cross-cutting inclusion in the
national military policies and practices of Member
States and the mandates of peacekeeping missions
provided by the Security Council.
Finally and once again, the Republic of Paraguay
deplores the contempt shown for the fundamental
norms of international humanitarian law and human

S/PV.7951

rights by parties to conflict, in particular the practice
of using starvation to wage war against the population,
restrictions imposed on humanitarian access and
the protection of civilians, and the undermining
of the institution of asylum and the principle of
non-refoulement.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Belarus.
Mr. Dapkiunas (Belarus) (spoke in Russian): The
issue of the protection of civilians in armed conflict
and the protection of the medical staff who work to
save the lives of others while risking their own lives is
of great and particular significance. Belarus attaches
great importance to the strengthening of guarantees for
the protection of all categories of civilians not directly
engaged in hostilities.
Nevertheless, today I wish to draw the attention
of the members of the Council to another vulnerable
professional group that is present in hot spots, namely,
translators and interpreters. Yesterday the General
Assembly adopted resolution 71/288, on the role of
professional translation in connecting nations and
fostering peace, understanding and development. The
resolution acknowledges the practical contribution
of language professionals to the maintenance of
international peace and security and to peacekeeping.
In high-risk settings of armed conflict and in postconflict peacebuilding, translators and interpreters face
grave danger in carrying out their professional duties as
they seek to help establish dialogue among the parties
to conflict and with civilians. They are subjected to
threats. They are abducted and murdered. They are
subjected to torture and degrading treatment.
A single database that reflects the genuine
scale of losses amongst translators and interpreters
working in armed conflict has never been established.
Some statistics have been compiled by international
translators and interpreters associations from open
sources, and they are appalling.
From 2003 to 2008, no fewer than 360 translators
and interpreters were killed; 1,200 were wounded
while working alongside American troops for its
subcontracting organizations in Iraq. According to
some reports, the likelihood of the death of translators
and interpreters in Iraq is 10 times greater than for
regular troops. In 21 days in late 2006, British armed
forces in Iraq lost 21 interpreters, 17 of whom were

17-1499855/78

S/PV.7951

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

deliberately killed due to their professional activity.
The list of such examples goes on and on.
Indeed, at present there is a fundamental principle
in international humanitarian law of a distinction
between civilians and individuals directly taking
part in armed conflict. Non-compliance with this
principle is considered to be a war crime. We would
like to clarify that we do not mean to apply the term
“civilian” to interpreters that are part of regular
troops. Rather, we are referring to those categories of
interpreters who do not take up arms and serve solely
to establish dialogue among the parties to conflict.
Those include interpreters who do not act on behalf of
a party to a conflict and interpreters assisting agencies
or individuals who do not engage in conflict, including
international organizations, media professionals and
non-governmental organizations.
However, interpreters and translators are neither
regular civilians when they represent a party to
conflict, nor are they, in those instances, regular
fighters — at least, not so long as they do not directly
engage in hostilities. So this is a special category of
individual in need of special protection.
We believe that the time is ripe to craft an
international instrument — be it an international
treaty or a Security Council resolution — a document
that would affirm the special status of translators and
interpreters under dangerous conditions so as to raise
the level of their protection de lege ferenda — with
a view to a future law. Why not have special signage
to distinguish interpreters from civilians or parties to
conflict, as was done for medical staff?
There are issues that need to be addressed in these
documents, and there are a great number of such issues.
We must acknowledge the fact that due attention is not
being paid to the issue of the protection of translators
and interpreters under dangerous conditions. We must
consider how best and most expeditiously to bridge
this gap.
If the issue raised today is duly taken into account
by delegations both within the Council and beyond, then
we will stand ready to work jointly to seek solutions
to the issue of the legal protection of translators and
interpreters in high-risk settings.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of South Africa.
56/78

25/05/2017

Mr. Mminele (South Africa): We congratulate you,
Mr. President, and your delegation on the able manner
in which you are presiding over the Security Council.
We thank you for organizing this open debate on such
an important issue.
We also thank the Secretary-General for his
statement, and the representative of the International
Committee of the Red Cross, Ms. Christine Beerli, and
Mr. Bruno Stagno Ugarte for their briefings.
We align ourselves with the statement delivered
by the representative of the Bolivarian Republic
of Venezuela on behalf of the Movement of
Non-Aligned Countries.
Debates of this nature are necessary, as protecting
civilians from the scourge of war is at the core of the
Security Council’s mandate to maintain international
peace and security. If the Council cannot play its role in
this regard, it then fails in its responsibilities toward the
international community that it seeks to serve. We wish
to begin by commending the humanitarian workers and
medical staff who carry out their duties so valiantly,
often under the most difficult of circumstances. South
Africa has been involved in a number of initiatives that
highlight the circumstances in which health-care and
humanitarian workers operate, including the Health
Care in Danger project of the International Red Cross
and Red Crescent Movement.
We wish to underline that, while it remains the
primary responsibility of States to protect civilians,
including humanitarian personnel and health workers
within their borders, all parties, including armed
opposition groups, must also bear responsibility
for ensuring that civilians and health workers are
protected. All parties to a conflict should fully comply
with their obligations under international law, as stated
in resolution 2286 (2016). Furthermore, we believe that
Member States have an obligation under international
humanitarian law to allow and facilitate the safe and
unhindered passage of humanitarian relief, including
medical missions and their personnel and supplies.
My delegation wishes to emphasize the following
four points.
First, we support the Secretary-General’s call for
increased efforts in mediation and preventive diplomacy
in our quest to protect civilians. The Security Council
should therefore ensure that the protection of civilians
remains a core aspect of all political strategies to
17-14998

25/05/2017

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

S/PV.7951

prevent and resolve conflicts. In pursuing that goal,
we call on the United Nations to strengthen and
streamline regional partnerships, including the African
Union-United Nations partnership, in fulfilling its
mandate to protect civilians and health workers.

wounded and the sick in situations of armed conflict.
Health workers and other civilian personnel carry out
their duties at great risk to their lives. They have been
kidnapped, tortured and killed while performing their
life-saving duties.

Secondly, South Africa supports the adoption and
implementation of measures pursuant to resolution 2286
(2016), which emphasizes the protection of the wounded
and sick, medical personnel, medical facilities and
equipment, and the sharing of best practices and lessons
learned. We reiterate that the selective application of
the protection of civilians mandate undermines the
credibility of the international community in pursuing
this goal.

Today’s debate is taking place at a time of great
crisis in some parts of the world, a time when attacks
on humanitarian workers have hindered the delivery
of much-needed medical assistance and supplies
to millions of people in many theatres of conflict.
Undoubtedly, the United Nations has a pivotal role to
play in the protection of civilians in armed conflict and
in preventing the emergence of situations of genocide,
war crimes, ethnic cleansing and crimes against
humanity. Nigeria believes that the critical element in
preventing violations of international humanitarian law
in armed conflict is the respect for international human
rights and humanitarian law.

Thirdly, the Security Council should at all times
condemn all instances of arbitrary withholding of
consent to impartial humanitarian relief operations or
any actions to deprive civilians of means indispensable
to their survival, including wilfully impeding access to
relief. Such acts constitute violations of international
humanitarian law and are therefore unacceptable.
Lastly, we call on all parties to conflicts to
comply with their obligations to respect and protect
humanitarian and medical personnel and objects, as
well as to condemn direct and indiscriminate attacks in
this regard. The Council should ensure that activities of
this nature are investigated and do not go unpunished.
Ensuring accountability for these crimes is crucial in
ensuring that the credibility of the United Nations is
maintained, which is key to delivering global justice.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Nigeria.
Mr. Bande (Nigeria): The Nigerian delegation
commends the presidency of Uruguay for organizing
this important debate on the protection of civilians and
medical care in armed, and for the detailed concept
note (S/2017/365, annex) to guide our discussion.
We support the Secretary-General’s call upon
Member States and parties to conflict to develop,
implement and share operational policies and practical
measures to enhance respect for international
humanitarian and human rights law and to avoid
harm to civilians. We also commend the briefers for
their perspectives.
It is widely acknowledged that the existence
of health facilities and activities of health workers
are vital to save lives and provide assistance to the

The fact that attacks are being carried out
against medical personnel and humanitarian workers
exclusively engaged in medical duties and their means
of transport and equipment demonstrates the level of
vulnerability to which they are exposed. The existence
of such threats is due not to a lack of international
mechanisms, but rather to the lack of political will to
implement existing norms.
We recall in particular the Fourth Geneva
Convention of 1949, which established the standards
of international law for humanitarian treatment
in conflict situations. It provides not only for the
protection of the wounded and sick and of medical and
humanitarian personnel exclusively engaged in medical
duties, but also places obligations on parties to armed
conflict to respect and ensure respect for international
humanitarian law in all circumstances.
My delegation therefore sees today’s debate as a
significant step towards realizing that commitment.
That is an urgent and priority task that the Council must
deal with in the face of several conflict situations across
the globe. We acknowledge the work already done in
that regard and recall the adoption of resolution 2286
(2016) — the first of its kind, dedicated to the protection
of medical care in armed conflict. We must continue to
work in concert to build upon that laudable initiative.
As a first step, there must be unanimity in strongly
condemning acts of violence, attacks and threats
against the wounded and the sick and medical and
humanitarian personnel, as well as hospitals and other

17-1499857/78

S/PV.7951

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

medical facilities, wherever such acts occur. Failure
to do so will result in long-term consequences for
the civilian population in conflict situations and for
the health-care systems of the countries concerned.
Concrete steps must be taken to ensure that health-care
workers and facilities are protected. All parties to armed
conflicts must fully comply with their obligations under
international law, including international human rights
law and international humanitarian law, particularly
their obligations under the Fourth Geneva Convention
of 1949.
In the fulfilment of its obligations, the Nigerian
Government has set up the Presidential Committee
on the North East Initiative to serve as the primary
national body to, inter alia, see to the enhancement
of the security conditions in the north-eastern part of
the country, facilitate the work of health personnel and
ease the movement of medical equipment and supplies.
We recognize and commend the assistance received
from international partners and humanitarian agencies
in the setting up of permanent and mobile clinics, as
well as support for infrastructure rehabilitation in
affected communities.
Nigeria stands ready, as called for in resolution 2286
(2016), to join efforts with all those concerned to protect
civilians in armed conflict, especially the prevention of
acts of violence, attacks and threats against medical and
humanitarian personnel exclusively engaged in medical
duties and their means of transport and equipment.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Turkey.
Mr. Sinirlioğlu (Turkey): We thank Uruguay for
organizing the first open debate on the protection of
civilians and medical care in armed conflict since the
adoption of resolution 2286 (2016), the first on this
subject, nearly a year ago. We also thank the SecretaryGeneral and the briefers for their insightful remarks.
Turkey joins the concerns expressed by many
delegations with regard to the ongoing pattern of
destruction of medical care in too many conflicts
today. Those trends pose an immediate danger to the
millions of people affected by man-made crises, as well
as the health systems supporting their well-being and
lives. With that understanding, Turkey co-sponsored
resolution 2286 (2016), which demonstrated the
determination of Member States to strengthen the
protection of medical care in armed conflict.
58/78

25/05/2017

In view of the continuing disrespect of international
humanitarian law, including through the actions of
criminal and terrorist networks in our neighbourhood,
Turkey appreciates the Security Council’s sustained
attention to this issue, with a view to reinforcing the
normative framework. Furthermore, we take note of the
recommendations presented by the Secretary-General.
Beyond the Security Council, the World
Humanitarian Summit, the first anniversary of which
we just marked, generated over 3,000 commitments by
Member States and other stakeholders. Some of those
commitments highlighted actions to strengthen the
protection of civilians, including women and children,
and the promotion of the centrality of protection. Other
commitments demonstrated a collective desire to
address the root causes of conflict, increase conflict
prevention and resolution capacities and learn from
successful prevention practices. Those commitments
can make a meaningful change in the lives of 130 million
affected people only if they are implemented. As
President Erdogan underscored in his message to mark
the anniversary of the Istanbul Summit, it is important
to maintain the momentum generated by the World
Humanitarian Summit, and we call on all stakeholders
to uphold their commitments.
Turkey has been carrying out activities to reinforce
the respect for the protection of the wounded and sick,
to ensure access to assistance, to raise awareness
with regard to the protection of health care and to
support efforts to increase accountability. In Palestine,
Afghanistan, Iraq and Somalia, Turkish assistance
has strived to strengthen the national health systems.
In Yemen, we have been providing medical assistance
in Turkish hospitals for those affected by the ongoing
conflict. In Libya, just yesterday Turkish aid agencies
delivered to the Libyan Government of National Accord,
more than 22 tons of medication and health kits so as
to support the various hospitals and medical facilities.
However, more than anywhere else, Turkey’s
humanitarian and medical efforts have been focused
on Syria. Since the beginning of the crisis, Turkey
has maintained an open-door policy, including for
urgent medical evacuations. Today, Turkey provides
free health care to the more than 3 million Syrians in
Turkey. We have been facilitating the work of the United
Nations agencies in their vaccination campaigns for
Syrian children and that of medical non-governmental
organizations across the border who treat civilians
targeted by barrel bombs, shelling and chemical
17-14998

25/05/2017

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

weapons. Inside Syria, Turkey has been supporting the
Security Council-mandated cross-border shipments
that have delivered more than 11,500 truckloads of
humanitarian assistance since July 2014. Those efforts
helped the United Nations and its partners to reach
more than 13.5 million Syrians with health assistance.
In blatant disregard of international humanitarian
law, the attacks on medical staff and their equipment and
facilities have been more brutal in Syria than anywhere
else. Most of those attacks were perpetrated by the
Syrian regime. Furthermore, the regime continues
to pursue its shameful policy of removing medical
equipment and medication from humanitarian convoys.
If we are to transform the recent advances achieved
in the normative framework under today’s agenda into
concrete action on the ground, the implementation of
our existing obligations and commitments must take
place in Syria and in other ongoing conflicts. Turkey
stands ready to support the relevant United Nations-led
efforts in achieving that objective.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Guatemala.
Mr. Skinner-Klée (Guatemala) (spoke in
Spanish): We congratulate you, Madam President,
and your delegation on organizing this debate on the
protection of civilians, and we commend the fact that
your Minister for Foreign Affairs has been presiding
it. We also express our appreciation to the briefers for
their contributions.
My delegation associates itself with the statement
delivered earlier on behalf of the Movement of
Non-Aligned Countries.
We note with concern that in armed conflicts,
combatants and civilians are dying from wounds that
would not have been fatal had they had access to medical
assistance, which they have the right to receive. To
address that, the Security Council adopted resolution
2286 (2016), which reaffirmed the responsibility of
parties involved in armed conflicts to comply fully with
the obligations under international humanitarian law
so as to ensure the unqualified respect and protection
of all humanitarian personnel exclusively involved
in medical missions, their means of transport and
equipment, hospitals and other health-care facilities.
However, we find it disturbing that violent acts
against such personnel and facilities continue to be
practiced by parties in conflict, especially terrorist

S/PV.7951

groups who carry out indiscriminate attacks against
hospitals, humanitarian convoys and infrastructure
used for medical care. Attacks against water supplies
as a tool of war are equally reprehensible, flying in the
face of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development.
It is unacceptable that armed conflicts are on the
rise in urban areas, in which populations are at their
densest, thereby causing increased fatalities by the
indiscriminate use of artillery and aerial bombardment,
as well as by the use of improvised explosive devices
that considerably increase the lethal radius.
We also condemn the proliferation of small arms and
light weapons, which continue to kill and injure many
people and often block humanitarian aid operations.
We therefore echo the call of the Secretary-General
to redouble our efforts to comply with international
humanitarian law and international human rights
law. We urge States to ratify the main international
instruments pertaining to weapons and ammunition,
such as the Arms Trade Treaty.
We underscore the importance of preventing the
displacement of people and of protecting humanitarian
and medical missions, as well as the civilian population.
We believe that it is important to ensure that all
international instruments and tools at the disposal
of the Security Council are put to use in combating
crimes in the fields we are discussing, and that they
contain tangible elements in the areas of deterrence,
accountability and justice. My delegation maintains
that the protection of civilians is a legal obligation.
We must, therefore, demand that members of security
forces, local militias or other armed groups who have
committed violations of international humanitarian law
and international human rights law be held to account.
We reaffirm that it is the primary responsibility of
troop- and police-contributing countries to investigate,
without delay, allegations of acts of violence against
civilians. In that regard, we underscore the importance
of the International Criminal Court. We advocate that
States ensure that their armed and security forces, in
accordance with their mandates, work to adopt practical
measures to protect the wounded and the sick, as well
as medical services, when planning and implementing
their operations. In that regard, we welcome the
recommendations of the Secretary-General to ensure
that the States Members of the United Nations and
the parties to conflict develop, implement and share
operational policies and measured practices so as to

17-1499859/78

S/PV.7951

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

25/05/2017

improve respect for international law, with a view to
preventing harm to civilian populations.

guidance to the missions and promoting a mission-wide
coherent approach to protecting civilians.

Guatemala commends the fact that the report of
the Secretary-General advocates early warning and
action and stresses the close link between sustainable
peace and prevention. That concept is a game-changer
in meeting the challenges of peace and security,
development and human rights.

Secondly, in order to be effective, the protection-ofcivilians mandates require the continued political
support of the Security Council, the main parties to the
conflict and the commitment of the host Governments
in particular. Protection-of-civilians mandates need to
be backed by viable strategies and adequate resources,
so that they do not fall through when faced with
belligerence from the parties to the conflict or the
lack of will or capacity of the host Governments to
cooperate. There is need for appropriate investment in
building missions’ capacities for, inter alia, situational
awareness, strategic planning, threat assessment and
mitigation. There may be scope for peacekeeping
missions to contribute to the capacity-building of
national authorities and other local actors in protecting
civilians. Such scenarios need to be carefully mapped
out and walked through in the course of mandate design
and implementation.

The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Bangladesh.
Mr. Bin Momen: (Bangladesh) We thank the
Uruguayan presidency for organizing today’s open
debate to coincide with the first anniversary of the
adoption of resolution 2286 (2016). We also thank
the Secretary-General for his informative report
(S/2017/414) and for his succinct recommendations
under his three priority areas relating to the protection
of civilians.
We agree with his views regarding the inevitability
of civilian casualties in wars and armed conflicts. As one
of the leading troop-contributing countries, Bangladesh
takes a pragmatic approach to the protection-ofcivilians mandate in both practice and preparedness,
while adhering to the principles of peacekeeping
operations. Being part of most of the highly challenging
United Nations peacekeeping missions, we have seen
the relevance of the protection-of-civilians mandate at
first hand on the ground, and we have usually tackled
it with professionalism and some degree of creativity,
even when the mandate was not laid out in clear, specific
terms. Our endorsement of the Kigali Principles on
the Protection of Civilians was largely guided by such
considerations. As announced by our Prime Minister,
Sheikh Hasina, at the peacekeeping summit in New
York, we remain committed to further mainstreaming
the protection of civilians in peacekeeping training
programmes, designed for our troops and police.
In line with our previous statements in the
Security Council, we take this opportunity to further
elaborate on five points. First, there needs to be greater
emphasis on the strategic assessment of threats to
civilians, so that the Security Council can clearly set
out its expectations regarding the implementation of
peacekeeping mandates to protect civilians. To that
effect, it is imperative to have meaningful coordination
and consultation among the Security Council, troopand police-contributing countries, the Secretariat, and
United Nations country teams, with a view to improving
60/78

Thirdly, measures to ensure the safe passage of
the relevant humanitarian personnel and supplies to
civilians in need and the addressing of acts of violence,
attacks and threats against medical care in armed
conflict are critical for the protection of civilians. We
subscribe to the notion that respect for medical care in
armed conflict needs to be promoted during times of
both peace and conflict. There is a need for sustained
engagement with the parties to armed conflict so
as to ensure that preventive measures can minimize
harm to civilians and that medical care is included in
the planning and conduct of hostilities. In the case of
specific incidents reported and backed by evidence,
investigation and accountability must be pursued as the
most effective deterrence measure.
Fourthly, the ongoing efforts to end violence
against women and children in armed conflict must
enlist the support of all State and non-State actors.
The underlying causes of forced displacements during
armed conflict need to be addressed through inclusive
multidimensional and comprehensive approaches.
Medical facilities, educational institutions, specialist
schools and places of worship should be kept out of
harm’s way in the planning and conduct of hostilities.
The use of explosive weapons with wide-area effects
needs to be avoided in populated areas, considering their
humanitarian impact. In certain contexts, peacekeepers
and humanitarian workers can operate in tandem to
17-14998

25/05/2017

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

gather information, raise awareness and respond to the
needs of those affected.
Lastly, ensuring accountability for serious
violations of international humanitarian law and human
rights law is a crucial element for enhancing compliance
with that law, spreading the message of zero-tolerance
and generally strengthening the protection of civilians
and medical care in armed conflict. The Security
Council should continue to use the tools at its disposal
to that effect, including by providing consistent support
to the International Criminal Court so as to enable it to
deliver on its mandate.
The security and protection of civilians in today’s
asymmetric conflict environment are increasingly seen
as linked to the legitimacy and credibility of United
Nations peacekeeping operations and humanitarian
assistance. The protection of civilians through military
means alone will always fall short unless vigorously
supported by meaningful political processes to prevent
conflicts and sustain peace.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Qatar.
Ms. Al-Thani (Qatar) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, I should like to congratulate you, Madam, on
your country’s assumption of the presidency of the
Security Council this month. I would also like to thank
you for convening today’s debate. We commend the
Foreign Minister of Uruguay, who also presided over
the meeting. We would also like to thank the SecretaryGeneral.
Resolution 2286 (2016) is of particular importance,
given the outbreak of wars and conflict in many parts of
the world, including in our region. Unfortunately, those
conflicts have often disregarded the inviolability of
medical professionals and their work, the wounded and
the sick. We commend the efforts undertaken to assist
medical personnel, the wounded and humanitarian
workers. They carry out their duties as medical
professionals in hospitals and medical centres and
provide equipment. The perpetrators of violations must
be held accountable. That is the best way to strengthen
protection under international humanitarian law.
We can tolerate no delay in the effective
implementation of resolution 2286 (2016), because
targeting health-care staff and facilities represents a
violation of international humanitarian law that has
grave repercussions on the ground. The cost is always

S/PV.7951

paid by innocent civilians. In that regard, I would like
to note what we have seen every day, which has been
documented in reports of the United Nations, namely,
the demolition and destruction of hospitals and healthcare facilities in Syria by the Syrian Armed Forces, as
well other acts of violence, attacks and threats against
medical and humanitarian actors. The Syrian Armed
Forces have also targeted convoys carrying medical
equipment, which has led to the destruction of hospitals
and the deaths of many doctors and humanitarian actors,
as well as the sick and wounded. Such actions certainly
constitute a grave breach of international humanitarian
law. Many Syrian health-care facilities are unable
to function now, which constitutes a grave threat to
thousands of civilians. It is therefore necessary for the
international community to act and adopt preventive,
practical measures in order to end such violations.
They constitute flagrant violations of international
humanitarian law.
We also need to adopt measures to ensure
accountability for the perpetrators of such crimes,
who must be brought to justice. They must not enjoy
impunity. We believe in the importance of the rule of
law, both internationally and domestically, as well as
of ensuring accountability in cases of mass atrocities
and violations of human rights. That is all necessary
in order to reinforce peace and ensure stability on the
ground in countries riddled with conflict.
We worked with our partners to ensure that
the General Assembly adopted resolution 71/248,
establishing the International, Impartial and
Independent Mechanism to Assist in the Investigation
and Prosecution of Persons Responsible for the Most
Serious Crimes under International Law Committed
in the Syrian Arab Republic since March 2011. That
resolution is of great importance for setting up and
implementing resolution 2286 (2016) in Syria.
The State of Qatar is committed to providing
humanitarian assistance. Much of that assistance
is geared towards the alleviation of the suffering
of civilians, who are those most affected by armed
conflicts. In that regard, we support the provision of
medical and health-care support. For example, we
provided $1.6 billion for the alleviation of suffering
both in Syria and outside of Syria through international
humanitarian organizations and donor conferences.
Furthermore, a significant portion of that assistance to
the region, which has been ravaged by conflict, includes
assistance for the health-care sphere. I would also like

17-1499861/78

S/PV.7951

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

to mention international humanitarian organizations
operating in Qatar, which are working hard to remedy the
situation on the ground. If the international community
hopes to succeed in protecting civilians during armed
conflicts, it is necessary to work hand-in-hand to find
just solutions to the conflicts. My country stands ready
to work tirelessly to support any Security Council
initiatives to establish international peace and security
in the region and in the world.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Australia.
Ms. Bird (Australia): Australia welcomes
the Secretary-General’s focus on prevention. It is
undoubtedly the best long-term strategy for protecting
civilians. However, where such efforts fail, the
protection of civilians must remain our highest priority.
The reason is obvious. Already in 2017, we have
witnessed frequent, direct, as well as indiscriminate,
attacks against civilians. We have witnessed the
arbitrary denial of consent to humanitarian access. We
have witnessed utter contempt for human rights. We
have witnessed such behaviour in conflicts around the
world, including in South Sudan and Yemen, but most
especially in Syria.
In line with what others have said today, Australia
is particularly alarmed by the frequency, severity and
deliberate nature of attacks against health care. Today’s
briefers, like those who have presented before them,
have painted a heartbreaking picture of realities on the
ground and have provided dire warnings about the risks
of failing to implement resolution 2286 (2016) in full.
For that reason, we commit to doing our part to translate
resolution 2286 (2016) from rhetoric into action.
We applaud the Secretary-General’s statement that
he will facilitate a global effort to mobilize Member
States, civil society and other stakeholders in order to
enhance respect for international humanitarian law.
We are in full agreement that that must, as a priority,
include responding to serious violations, including by
holding perpetrators to account.
For good reason, the scorecard of the United
Nations on the protection of civilians is one of the
litmus tests of the Organization’s effectiveness and,
frankly, its credibility. Australia therefore expects the
members of this Council to support timely and decisive
action aimed at preventing or ending the commission
of mass atrocities, consistent with the Accountability,
Coherence and Transparency Group’s Code of Conduct,
62/78

25/05/2017

as well as with the French and Mexican initiative on
veto restraint.
United Nations peacekeeping operations that
have been given a protection mandate must prioritize
implementation. Despite the significant growth of
the protection-of-civilians doctrine and guidance,
performance across peacekeeping operations remains
mixed. The High-Level Panel on Peace Operations
emphasised that protection mandates must be a
mission-wide task that utilizes every tool at a given
mission’s disposal, including non-traditional strategies,
such as unarmed civilian protection. The Independent
Special Investigation into South Sudan stressed the
importance of a forward-leaning, highly mobile
posture, including conducting robust, dismounted,
day-and-night patrolling. All peacekeepers must be
empowered and supported by both the United Nations
and the troop- and police-contributing countries to act
in accordance with their protection responsibilities.
To assist in such efforts, Australia has provided
support to the Department of Peacekeeping Operations
to disseminate guidelines and policies on the protection
of civilians. We have also endorsed the Kigali Principles
on the Protection of Civilians, which we consider
provide useful guidance to peacekeepers.
In closing, let me pay tribute to those in the field
trying to provide protection to civilians, often at great
risk to themselves. Together with those whom they are
trying to protect, those brave men and women deserve,
at the very least, our respect and protection.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Armenia.
Mr. Mnatsakanyan (Armenia) I thank the
Uruguayan presidency for its choice of the theme
of this open debate, as well as for the concept paper
(S/2017/365, annex). We also thank the SecretaryGeneral and the briefers for their analyses.
The latest report of the Secretary General
(S/2017/414) of 10 May is alarming. The overall number
of people globally displaced reached 65 million in
2016. Civilians are routinely killed. The number of
children directly affected by conflicts has been rising.
Attacks on humanitarian and medical personnel remain
widespread. Recently, more medical personnel have been
killed or injured. More journalists have been attacked
and killed. Equally disturbing are the observations
about the growing fatigue in addressing the suffering
17-14998

25/05/2017

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

S/PV.7951

of civilians in conflicts, as well as perceptions of the
inevitability of civilian losses in armed conflicts. Such
disturbing realities should serve, first of all, as a call
for renewed determination to take decisive action.

do not occur overnight, they are detectable and
predictable. Early warning, early action, prevention
and conflict resolution should take precedence over
crisis management.

We support the in-depth analyses and
recommendations of the Secretary-General, as
contained in his report, for specific measures along
the three priority pillars of protection. Furthermore,
full compliance with obligations under international
human rights law and international humanitarian
law, in particular the Geneva Conventions and the
Additional Protocols of 1977 and 2005, is critical for
the protection of civilians and of humanitarian and
medical personnel. However, universal ratification
of the Additional Protocols has not been achieved.
Unimpeded humanitarian and medical access must be
fully secured, while the arbitrary withholding of consent
to impartial humanitarian and medical assistance
must be confronted vigorously. The principles of
humanity, impartiality, neutrality and independence in
humanitarian action must be fully respected.

The Safe Schools Declaration, initiated by
Argentina and Norway, aims at the protection of
educational facilities from attacks and military use.
Armenia has recently endorsed the Declaration, thus
becoming the sixtieth country to assume the political
commitment to advance those principles.

The Security Council plays a key role in addressing
crisis situations and the protection of civilians. We
attach equal importance to a comprehensive and
consolidated approach of the entire United Nations
system in addressing the challenges of protection.
Our global agenda for development and the promotion
and protection of human rights bear direct relevance
to effective measures aimed at averting conflicts
in the first place. We recognize the value of such a
comprehensive approach as outlined, for example, in
One Humanity: Shared Responsibility, the Report of
the Secretary-General for the World Humanitarian
Summit (A/70/709).

The civilian population of Nagorno Karabakh
and the bordering regions of Armenia have been
consistently exposed to serious humanitarian risks. The
aggression against Nagorno Karabakh in April 2016
was accompanied by grave violations of international
humanitarian law and human rights law, including
barbaric acts commensurate with war crimes and
crimes against humanity. That aggression inflicted
losses on the civilian population, including children
and the elderly. Ceasefire violations continue to date.
The latest statement of 18 May of the Organization for
Security and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE) Minsk
Group co-Chairs was explicit in identifying the party
that initiated the violations. The risks of the escalation
of the conflict must urgently be averted. Armenia
urges an immediate implementation of the agreements
reached at the Vienna meeting on Nagorno Karabakh
and the trilateral summit on Nagorno Karabakh, held
in St. Petersburg in May and June 2016 respectively, in
order to create conditions conducive to the advancement
of the peace process.

We attach considerable importance to actions at the
regional level. The division of labour, coordination and
non-duplication of efforts and activities are the building
blocks of an effective utilization of the capacities
of regional organizations in conflict prevention and
conflict resolution.

In conclusion, Armenia, once again, expresses
its deep appreciation to the international community,
to the Council and to Secretary-General Guterres
for their continued and unwavering support for the
efforts of the OSCE Minsk Group co-Chairs, the only
internationally agreed format for negotiations for the
peaceful settlement of the Nagorno Karabakh conflict,
in the hope that a lasting settlement can be reached as
soon as possible.

Armenia has been a consistent advocate of and
a contributor to the current strong and credible
prevention architecture. We are convinced that in order
to be effective and serious about our determination to
protect, the primary role should be assigned to early
action on warning signs of deteriorating situations
that could potentially result in conflicts, atrocities
and human suffering. Crises, atrocities and genocides

Mr. Alotaibi (Kuwait) (spoke in Arabic): At
the outset I would like to commend Uruguay for its
assumption of the presidency of the Council for the
month of May and to wish you, Mr. President, every
success in conducting the Council’s work. I also thank
you for preparing the concept note (S/2017/365, annex)

The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Kuwait.

17-1499863/78

S/PV.7951

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

on today’s open debate on resolution 2286 (2016) on
the protection of civilians and medical care in armed
conflict, one year after the adoption of that resolution.
I would like to seize this opportunity to thank
Secretary-General Guterres and the representatives
of the International Committee of the Red Cross and
Human Rights Watch for their briefings this morning.
The appalling figures on the civilians victims of
wars and conflicts clearly demonstrate the plight of our
world today. The report of the Secretary-General on the
protection of civilians in armed conflicts (S/2017/414)
refers to huge numbers of people in need of humanitarian
assistance and protection. More than 65 million persons
have been displaced because of conflicts, violence or
persecution. This meeting provides a good opportunity
to review the appalling incidents that occurred in the
world last year and to assess the implementation of the
relevant Security Council resolutions on the ground.
We have seen the various conflicts in the world
at large, especially in the Middle East and Africa,
including militias and terrorist groups, which have
targeted residential areas, key infrastructure facilities
and places that provide basic services. Those actions
have become tactics of war so that one party can
achieve victory over the other. It has indeed been proven
that there have been wide-ranging violations of and
disregard for international law in the various conflicts.
In Iraq, we have seen such violations by Islamic State in
Iraq and the Sham, which have included attacks against
civilians and the basic civilian infrastructure, the use of
human shields, sexual violence and others. In Palestine,
the Israeli occupying forces continue their violations
against the Palestinian people and their violence and
provocations against them, especially in the form of the
settlements. We call upon all parties to address those
continuous violations. We remind members that the
Council adopted resolution 2334 (2016), which stresses
that all Israeli settlement activities are illegal and must
immediately be removed.
In Syria, despite the many humanitarian efforts
made to alleviate the suffering of the Syrian people
and the efforts of the State of Kuwait in hosting three
international donor conferences and presiding over
two conferences on Syria, those efforts were not
enough. We welcome further efforts to maintain the
ceasefire, establish de-escalation lines and continue
negotiations in Geneva. We support the implementation
of the relevant Security Council resolutions, especially
64/78

25/05/2017

resolution 2254 (2015), to maintain the independence,
sovereignty and territorial integrity of Syria.
In Yemen, we would like to commend the coalition
for restoring legitimacy in Yemen and the efforts aimed
at reconstruction in various parts of the country. We
support all efforts that would preserve the territorial
integrity of Yemen. That can only be achieved through
a political solution in accordance with the three major
instruments agreed in Kuwait. We have made many
efforts to reach a peaceful settlement to the crisis in
Yemen. We have hosted three months of consultations
among the various Yemeni parties. However, it has been
to no avail. Still, we are willing to host our brotherly
people in Yemen, once again, at a meeting to sign a
final accord.
As I have stated, there have still been gross
violations of Security Council resolution 2286 (2016),
even after its adoption. We have to respect international
humanitarian law and international human rights law.
We have to provide the necessary protection to all
humanitarian and medical missions and give priority
to the protection of civilians in all peacekeeping
operations. We have to work on preventing forced
displacements and find a durable solution to the
problem of refugees and internally displaced persons
everywhere in the world.
In conclusion, we would like to stress our support
for the vision and recommendations of the SecretaryGeneral contained in his report on the protection of
civilians in armed conflict. He referred to the need to
make a leap forward in diplomatic efforts to address
this issue and prevent conflict, enhance early-warning
systems and encourage the collective efforts to reform
the United Nations.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Costa Rica.
Mr. Mendoza-García (Costa Rica) (spoke in
Spanish): At the outset, allow me to express our
condolences to the delegation of the United Kingdom
for the terrible events that took place this week.
We are grateful for the organization of this
open debate and for the two documents presented
this morning.
One year ago, the Security Council adopted
resolution 2286 (2016), which reminds the parties to
armed conflict of their obligations to protect the civilian
population and all health and humanitarian personnel
17-14998

25/05/2017

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

dedicated exclusively to medical missions, their
means of transport and equipment, hospitals and other
health facilities. Those obligations emanate directly
from international law, international humanitarian
law, international human rights law and the various
resolutions of the Council.
However, the report of the Secretary-General
(S/2017/414) and the briefing we received this morning
from Mr. Stagno Ugarte clearly reflect a bleak reality,
namely, the horrors suffered by millions of people as
a result of armed conflicts, as well as their trials and
tribulations as they attempt to escape war and confront
the indifference and cruelty with which human life and
dignity are treated.
All parties to armed conflict have the international
obligation to respect the norms of international
humanitarian law, namely to ensure that the wounded
and sick receive, in accordance with basic ethical
principles, the medical care that they need to safeguard
their lives, and also that the personnel carrying out
medical missions receive protection. Barriers posed to
the provision of humanitarian and medical assistance to
the civilian population represent a flagrant violation of
international humanitarian law, and deliberate attacks
on health personnel, medical facilities and places where
the injured and the sick are held are war crimes under
international law. They also have an immediate impact
on the civilian population and the availability of basic
health-care services in areas of conflict, exacerbating
their also appalling living conditions. It is unacceptable
that the parties to an armed conflict should interrupt
the supply of drinking water, electricity, gas, food,
medication or humanitarian assistance to the civilian
population. They must stop using civilian populations
as cannon fodder to achieve their political and military
aims. The parties must stop locating military targets in
medical facilities, move away from major urban centres
and refrain from using explosive weapons in cities and
other populated areas.
Costa Rica supports the recommendations of
the Secretary- General and the appeals made by
International Committee of the Red Cross to avoid the
use of explosives within or close to densely populated
areas and or explosive weapons with wide-ranging
effects. We reiterate our support for international
efforts aimed at putting an end to explosive weapons in
densely populated areas. This is an essential obligation
for us.

S/PV.7951

The international community must assist displaced
persons and civilian victims. However, we also have to
put an end to the prevailing generalized impunity. In
this spirit, it is vital, in Syria in particular, to support the
efforts of the General Assembly in the establishment of
an independent and impartial international mechanism
to assist in the investigation and bring to justice those
responsible for the most serious crimes committed in
the Syrian Arab Republic since March 2011. It is vital
also that the Council refer to the International Criminal
Court the most urgent cases in order for the relevant
investigations to be completed and the perpetrators
of the most serious crimes to be brought to justice.
The Organization must also provide the Court with
the economic resources necessary to fully discharge
its mandate.
We agree with the Secretary-General that the
best way to protect the civilian population and health
workers in the long run is prevention and institutional
strengthening. It is key to strengthen the rule of law
and institutions. We all need to help States ensure that
the rule of law prevails in the framework of respect for
human rights and the norms of international law.
Finally, we agree with the presidency that as long as
the international arms trade continues to fuel conflicts
and the air forces of the States involved continue to be
supplied with weapons and planes through this trade we
will continue not to be able to properly protect civilian
populations. The terrible consequences of war will
continue to ravage the civilian population until their
root causes are dealt with.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Cyprus.
Mr. Korneliou (Cyprus): At the outset, allow me
to commend you, Mr. President, for having organized
this open debate.
Cyprus subscribes to the statement delivered by the
European Union and would like to add the following in
its national capacity.
The Charter of the United Nations puts the people at
the vanguard of the Organization’s purpose and vision.
A peaceful and safe world is the principal yardstick
of our collective failure or success. Civilians are the
primary victims in most of today’s armed conflicts.
They are being indiscriminately killed or injured and
often deliberately targeted. The data indicate that more

17-1499865/78

S/PV.7951

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

25/05/2017

than 90 per cent of those killed or injured in populated
areas are civilians.

religion, as well as medical care by their own doctors
and freedom of movement in the north.

Beyond human loss, the consequences extend to the
separation of families, the destruction of communities
and of cultural heritage, deprivation of education and
health care, displacement and alienation of peoples
from their ancestral lands and the continuous migratory
outpouring in search of shelter and a safe future. It is
extremely alarming that more than 2,500 targeted
attacks have been carried out in the last four years
against patients and health-care workers.

In practice, the Cypriot enclaved were subjected
to constant harassment. Their living conditions since
1974 and despite the aforementioned agreement can be
demonstrated by a simple recount of their numbers. In
July 1974, after more than 100,000 Cypriots were forced
to flee their homes, a significant number amounting to
20,000 have remained enclaved in the occupied part. In
43 years, this number has diminished to only 403.

Echoing the need for urgent action, Cyprus
co-sponsored resolution 2286 (2016), by which the
Security Council strongly condemned attacks on
medical personnel in conflict situations today. It
deplored the long-term consequences of such attacks for
the civilian populations and health-care systems of the
countries concerned and demanded an end to impunity
for those responsible and respect for international law
on the part of all warring parties.
The protection of civilians must be at the core of the
Security Council’s agenda, not only in connection with
peacekeeping missions explicitly mandated to protect
civilians, but as an integral part of a comprehensive
approach encompassing all aspects related to
prevention, peacekeeping and peacebuilding and the
promotion of international peace and security. Cyprus
endorses the concept of encompassing the whole
spectrum of peacebuilding activities, from contributing
to a return to normal conditions and thus providing
secure environments, to monitoring human rights and
facilitating the implementation of peace agreements.
The protection of civilians in conflict should
not be seen merely as a duty deriving from explicit
peacekeeping mandates but as a mission-wide task
extending to the whole spectrum of peacekeeping
operations in a specific context.
Let me give one example from a peacekeeping
mission. The United Nations Peacekeeping Force in
Cyprus (UNFICYP) — hosted in my country for the
past 53 years — is not explicitly mandated to protect
civilians but is performing important tasks in this field.
According to an agreement reached between Greeks and
Turkish Cypriots in 1975, the Turkish side undertook to
give the enclaved Greek Cypriot population every form
of help to enable them to live a normal life, including
facilities for education and for the practice of their
66/78

Even though due to the help of UNFICYP the
Turkish side allowed certain minor improvements in
the lives of the enclaved, their living conditions remain
deplorable and unchanged. This conclusion is fully in
accord with the findings of the European Commission
of Human Rights and of the European Court of Human
Rights, which examined the plight of enclaved as
part of the fourth inter-State application of Cyprus
against Turkey.
The report of the High-level Independent Panel
on Peace Operations (see S/2015/446), released
in 2015, observed a growing gap between what is
expected of peace operations and what they deliver,
particularly recognizing this gap in the area of the
protection of civilians. This shortcoming is to a large
extent a result of the gap in many missions between
resources and mandates, yet another pertinent issue
in the light of ongoing discussions on the financing of
peacekeeping operations.
In concluding, let me underline that strengthening
the ability of the United Nations to respond to people
undergoing hardship remains our fundamental challenge.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now call on the
representative of Malaysia.
Mr. Yaakob (Malaysia): At the outset, I would like
to express our delegation’s profound indignation at the
senseless attack in Manchester which killed at least
22 innocent people, including an 8-year-old child. We
also condemn strongly the recent attacks that caused
casualties in Jakarta and Marawi. Our thoughts and
prayers are with the victims, the families and the people
of the United Kingdom, Indonesia and the Philippines
during these trying times.
We join other speakers in expressing our appreciation
to the Secretary-General, the Vice-President of the
International Committee of the Red Cross and the
Deputy Executive Director for Advocacy of Human
17-14998

25/05/2017

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

Rights Watch for their respective briefings. Their
invaluable insights on the unpredictable risks faced
by medical personnel and the protection of civilians in
armed conflict are indeed helpful.
We continue to read frequent media reports of
callous and egregious attacks on health-care personnel
and facilities. However, we remain hopeful that
resolution 2286 (2016), adopted last May, will act as
a deterrent against such violent acts. These attacks,
deliberate or otherwise, against the wounded and sick,
medical personnel and health-care facilities across
many conflicts, reflect the current grim realities and
a total disrespect for international humanitarian law. It
would not be far-fetched to say that these attacks are
being used as a tactic of war.
This trend, which we are seeing in various
conflicts seemingly without end or without limit, is
worthy of a greater and more appropriate response,
including concrete actions that must goes further
than mere condemnation of such egregious acts. We
therefore reiterate our call on the Council to carry out
its obligation to enhance its efforts to prevent these acts
of violence, including by implementing the SecretaryGeneral’s recommendation for a full, prompt, impartial,
independent and effective investigation into any attack
against a health-care system. My delegation is also of
the view that those with influence over conflicting
parties should use all available tools at their disposal,
through either diplomatic, political or economic
means, to leverage enhancement of the protection of
medical personnel.
We are not oblivious to the fact that most warring
parties continue to blatantly disregard international
humanitarian law, nor do they have respect for medical
neutrality. Given the bleak outlook for civilians, and
particularly children, as a result of systematic targeting
of medical facilities in conflict situations, accountability
is a key question that requires the urgent attention of
all stakeholders, particularly from the Council and the
international community. In addition, the establishment
of international fact-finding missions, inter alia, should
be carried out in line with the Geneva Conventions to
investigate allegations of serious violations, bring the
perpetrators to justice, enhance accountability and
address impunity.
We would like to pay our tribute to fallen medical
personnel who have lost their lives in the protection
of others. Our utmost gratitude also goes to all parties

S/PV.7951

on the ground, particularly peacekeepers and healthcare personnel stationed in conflict zones. As we seek
to shield the very persons protecting civilians at large,
protection of medical personnel and health facilities
should always remain high on the Council’s agenda.
The Security Council must take timely actions in
defending and protecting all human lives in situations
of armed conflict, an undertaking that Malaysia is fully
committed to pursuing.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of the United Arab Emirates.
Mrs. Nusseibeh (United Arab Emirates): On
behalf of the United Arab Emirates, I congratulate
Uruguay on its presidency of the Security Council this
month and reiterate the importance of the topic under
discussion today.
The United Arab Emirates is deeply committed
to the protection of civilians and medical care in
conflict situations, which is why health-care provision
around the world, particularly for women and children,
is a critical element of our foreign aid and why we
co-sponsored resolution 2286 (2016). We are naturally
very concerned about the challenges we face in our
region, which have severe implications for health care
in communities in need.
In Syria, the United Arab Emirates condemns the
targeting of medical care in the conflict. We call for the
unobstructed delivery of humanitarian aid, including
health care, to all Syrians, as well as accountability for
crimes committed by the Syrian regime with the help
of Iran.
In Yemen, the United Arab Emirates continues to
condemn the use of hospitals by Iran-backed Houthi
rebels and militias to hide military supplies. Ensuring
humanitarian access to civilian populations in Yemen
must be the priority for all parties, and the Houthis
must stop this practice immediately.
Medical care is also at risk in other conflicts in
our region, including Afghanistan and Somalia. The
targeting of medical personnel and facilities by terrorist
groups not only threatens the welfare of civilians but
also the long-term stability of these countries. My
country’s ambassador to Afghanistan recently paid
the ultimate sacrifice, losing his life while he was on a
humanitarian mission in Kandahar, and we honour his
service to his country.

17-1499867/78

S/PV.7951

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

The situation in the occupied Palestinian territories
also demonstrates the devastating impact of obstructing
access to health care. We call on Israel to end its
blockade of Gaza, which has exacerbated the damage to
health-care infrastructure caused by successive attacks,
thereby imperilling the well-being of Palestinians.
The crucial component of resolution 2286 (2016)
was its confirmation of the pillars of international
humanitarian law. The United Arab Emirates reaffirms
its respect for, commitment to and compliance with
its obligations under the rules and principles of
international law and international humanitarian law.
The United Arab Emirates also recalls paragraph
nine of resolution 2286 (2016), which strongly urges
Member States to investigate and ensure accountability
for violations of international humanitarian law.
However, it is not just the legal frameworks that
must underpin health-care delivery. The United Arab
Emirates emphasizes the importance of genderresponsive medical care in armed conflict to ensure
that women and men have equal access to health
services. To that end, the United Arab Emirates
urges Member States, United Nations agencies and
non-governmental organizations to commit to including
women in the design and delivery of health care and
humanitarian relief.
Because we believe special consideration must be
given to refugee women and children, the United Arab
Emirates established the Mrajeeb Al Fhood refugee
camp in Jordan, which is exclusively for Syrian families
and women arriving alone, offering them the full range
of medical and psychosocial services.
The United Arab Emirates recognizes that States
must safeguard medical services in armed conflict.
That is why, as a member of the Coalition to Restore
Legitimacy in Yemen, my country is committed to
working with health-care and aid agencies operating
in the country to safely address the needs of the
civilian population.
The
United
Arab
Emirates
welcomed
recommendation 13 of the report of the SecretaryGeneral (S/2016/722, annex) submitted pursuant
resolution 2286 (2016). My country’s relief efforts
in Yemen have focused on restoring and improving
medical facilities and infrastructure, and, to date, the
United Arab Emirates has built or reconstructed 40
hospitals and clinics in that country, equipping them
with new operating rooms, supplies, medicines and
68/78

25/05/2017

emergency vehicles. We have also received 1,500
Yemenis in the United Arab Emirates for medical
treatment, as have other coalition members — this in
addition to my country’s delivery of basic supplies and
facilities necessary to ensure the health and well-being
of civilians.
There is much more to be done to implement
resolution 2286 (2016), and to that end the United Arab
Emirates is committed to protecting health care in
armed conflict in three ways.
First, we are committed to building the United Arab
Emirates capacity to uphold international humanitarian
law, and, as part of these efforts, a national committee for
international humanitarian law was recently established
to disseminate the fundamentals of international
humanitarian law and ensure implementation.
Secondly, the United Arab Emirates is committed
to advancing my country’s partnerships with the United
Nations and support for humanitarian organizations on
the ground in Yemen and elsewhere. Collaboration is
especially crucial during outbreaks of disease, as was
seen in the recent outbreak of cholera in Yemen.
Thirdly, we are committed to continuing our
work in elevating women in the design and delivery of
health care and humanitarian relief. The United Arab
Emirates commends the work of the Inter-Agency
Standing Committee’s Reference Group on Gender
and Humanitarian Action and in its advancement of a
gender-sensitive approach to medical care. However, the
United Arab Emirates recommends that the Standing
Committee consider including UN-Women among its
members. Member States must work to address the
disproportionate impact of conflict on women and
children, and not enough is being done to coordinate
this objective.
Mr. President, I thank Uruguay for its leadership
and wish you continued success for the remainder of
your presidency.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Chile.
Mr. Barros Melet (Chile) (spoke in Spanish): Chile
thanks the Minister for Foreign Affairs of Uruguay and
his country for convening and presiding over today’s
debate on medical care in situations of armed conflict.
17-14998

25/05/2017

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

S/PV.7951

Our country aligns itself with the statement made
by the representative of Slovenia on behalf of the
Human Security Network, of which we are a member.

facilities and statistics is crucial in order to implement
these measures. The World Health Organization can
play an important role in guiding this work.

Schools and hospitals are zones of peace that
must be respected by all parties to a conflict. Attacks
against hospitals are all the more cruel as they harm
the population while leaving it without medical
care, which is a vital resource for any society. The
World Humanitarian Summit and the Agenda for
Humanity reaffirmed that the protection of the civilian
population in armed conflict should be a priority and,
in accordance with resolution 2286 (2016), we reiterate
the responsibility that is incumbent upon the parties as
well as the importance of taking action in this regard.

We must continue to make efforts in the fight against
impunity, urging all parties, as well as humanitarian
actors, to work together to shed light on these crimes.
In accordance with resolution 1998 (2011), which was
co-sponsored by my country, we ask the SecretaryGeneral to include, in the annexes to his reports on
children and armed conflict, all parties to armed
conflicts without any distinction who, in contravention
of international law, carry out attacks against schools
or hospitals. We hope that the Special Representative
for Children and Armed Conflict, Ms. Virginia Gamba,
will enjoy the necessary support to carry out this task.

We condemn the attacks and threats of attacks
against schools and hospitals and against protected
persons associated with them, the closing of schools
and hospitals in situations of armed conflict as a result
thereof, and the storage of weapons in these facilities
and their use for military purposes, endangering the
civilian population and the personnel who work in them.
We call on all parties to a conflict, without distinction,
to cease such attacks and refrain from actions that
would obstruct access to health and education services,
pursuant to resolution 2143 (2014). That is why we
support the prevention, protection and accountability
measures proposed in the reports of the SecretaryGeneral.
In terms of immediate measures, we insist on
including the protection of health and medical facilities
in ceasefire agreements and post-conflict agendas,
and we must train the various actors in this regard.
It is also essential to move forward in prevention, by
harmonizing national legislation with international
humanitarian law, including the Geneva Conventions
and their optional Protocols, and we must train all those
to whom the laws and standards apply.
We must also ensure that decisions on foreign
policy, including those related to the sale and transfer
of weapons, respect the provision of medical care in
conflicts. Member States and parties to a conflict
must take precautions to safeguard medical facilities
and personnel in planning and carrying out military
operations, including through advance warnings and
evacuations, among other things. To this end, the action
of security and development bodies on the ground should
be coordinated with national authorities, including
health authorities. Drawing up registries of health

We reiterate the need to strengthen cooperation
with civil society in this context, as was underscored
by the Council in its 2015 presiidential statement on
inclusive development (S/PRST/2015/3), and we await
with interest those proposals. Both the Council and its
subsidiary bodies should pay particular attention to the
implementation of resolution 2286 (2016) and take it
into account in their deliberations and outcomes.
In conclusion, we extend our solidarity to the
victims and to the civilians affected by these attacks
and we express our gratitude to all the actors dedicated
to their protection, including civil society, and their
efforts in this area.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Argentina.
Mr. García Moritán (Argentina) (spoke in
Spanish): At the outset, I wish to thank Uruguay and
congratulate Foreign Minister Nin Novoa on organizing
this debate. I would like to thank the Secretary-General,
the Vice-President of the International Committee of
the Red Cross and the Deputy Executive Director of
Human Rights Watch for their briefings.
We thank the Secretary-General for his first
report on this subject (S/2017/414) and we value
his recommendations and description of the three
protection priorities. Again, we must regret the fact
that, according to this report, civilians continue to
constitute the majority of victims of conflicts. The lack
of distinction between combatants and civilians results
in civilians being killed, wounded and displaced, and
in situations in which there are serious impediments to
and even attacks on access to humanitarian assistance.

17-1499869/78

S/PV.7951

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

It is therefore necessary for the Security Council
to remain committed to the protection of civilians in
armed conflict through the promotion of full respect for
international law, in particular respect for international
humanitarian law, international human rights and
refugee law, as well as the fight against impunity. In
this context, it is imperative to recall the obligations
arising from the four Geneva Conventions of 1949 and
their 1977 Additional Protocols, the Hague Conventions
of 1899 and 1907, human rights and refugee law and
customary international law.
It is also necessary to continue to include and
strengthen civil protection activities in the mandates
of United Nations field missions. In that regard and
in line with the recommendation of the report of the
High-level Independent Panel on Peace Operations
(S/2015/446), which was also recognized in the reports
of the Special Committee on Peacekeeping Operations,
we understand that the protection of civilians in
peacekeeping operations is an integrated effort across
the mission which requires, as a first essential measure,
close cooperation between military, police and civilian
components, in coordination with local Governments
and communities and humanitarian organizations in
the field.
With regard to humanitarian assistance, parties to
a conflict must make every effort to ensure effective
and timely access to humanitarian action, including
cargo and materials. Such assistance enjoys special
protection under international humanitarian law, and it
is therefore a matter of concern that, in many situations,
there are obstacles to access to humanitarian assistance
or in some cases access is even denied.
Under international humanitarian law and the
Security Council’s resolutions, attacks of any kind
on civilians, schools, cultural property and places of
worship, as well as obstructing access to humanitarian
assistance, constitute a violation of international law.
We regret that, one year after the adoption of resolution
2286 (2016), we must reiterate that medical and
hospital personnel cannot be targeted, and we condemn
the numerous cases in which this has occurred.
We also express our gratitude and support for the
recommendation of the Secretary-General to accede
to the Safe Schools Declaration, in support of which
my country had the honour of organizing the second
international conference in March in Buenos Aires.
70/78

25/05/2017

The Security Council must remain committed to
the protection of civilians in armed conflict, including
by considering particular situations, as it has done for
children, women or journalists; continue to promote
respect for international law; and put an end to impunity
for perpetrators of grave violations against civilians. In
this regard, Argentina believes that there is a preventive
role for accountability mechanisms. Impartial
mechanisms are essential to investigating violations
of international humanitarian law and human rights.
In this connection, I would highlight the work of the
International Humanitarian Fact-Finding Commission
provided for in Protocol I of the Geneva Conventions
of 1949.
Also, with regard to the need to strengthen
accountability for perpetrators of heinous crimes,
Argentina wishes to emphasize the role of the
International Criminal Court. In particular, we recall
that, according to its Statute, the Court has jurisdiction
over attacks on medical personnel, hospitals and
places where the sick and injured are assembled, and
on medical buildings, equipment, units and means
of transport. States parties to the Rome Statute need
to adopt appropriate standards to that end, and the
cooperation of all States with the Court is essential.
The existing legal framework for the protection of
civilians should be translated into concrete results on
the ground. The Council should strengthen its efforts to
explore how best to do so.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Côte d’Ivoire.
Mr. Gone (Côte d’Ivoire) (spoke in French): I would
like to congratulate the Uruguayan presidency of the
Security Council on organizing this high-level public
debate on the issue of the protection of civilians and
medical care in conflict. I also congratulate SecretaryGeneral Mr. António Guterres, the Vice-President of
the International Committee of the Red Cross and the
Deputy Executive Director of Human Rights Watch for
their briefings. Their various reports, which are very
exhaustive and based on observations from the field,
shed light for us without reservation and challenge our
collective conscience on the need to join our efforts to
strengthen the protection of vulnerable people and of
those who are entitled to special protection.
My delegation would also like to take the
opportunity that today’s debate affords to pay tribute
to the commitment of humanitarian actors, especially
17-14998

25/05/2017

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

those who have paid with their lives in performing
their duties.
In spite of the fact that international humanitarian
law obliges us to distinguish between civilians and
combatants and to respect and protect medical and
humanitarian personnel and their equipment and
facilities, it is clear that, far from diminishing, efforts
to hinder humanitarian action, attack medical personnel
physically and destroy hospitals are still continuing
and are often accompanied by unspeakable atrocities.
As many speakers before me have pointed out, these
represent serious violations of humanitarian law that
remind us that it is more urgent than ever to mobilize
the international community and to act, including
through coercion.
With its adoption a year ago of resolution 2286
(2016), the Security Council marked an important
stage in the readiness of the United Nations and the
international community to meet the challenge of
protecting medical personnel and infrastructure in
areas affected by conflict. My delegation welcomes that
progress and has also noted with interest the SecretaryGeneral’s recommendations for measures that should
be taken in that regard. From now on, the Geneva
Conventions and their Additional Protocols, resolutions
1894 (2009) and 2286 (2016), along with previous
resolutions and the many multilateral instruments that
have been adopted to date, will provide us with solid
benchmarks for effectively preventing and ending any
violations of humanitarian, human rights or refugee law.
In my delegation’s view, the major challenge
continues to be ensuring that States take on board and
implement these various documents effectively. In
that context, my delegation would like to make some
recommendations. The first is that we should strengthen
the promotion of international humanitarian law. More
often than not, many of the violations committed in
conflict situations occur out of the total ignorance of
the parties involved of their obligations. We believe
that strengthening the promotion of humanitarian law
could considerably reduce the frequency and extent
of such violations. That involves training defence and
security forces in the basic principles of international
humanitarian law, with particular emphasis on
protecting civilians and medical personnel in conflictaffected areas. That has been a goal of the securitysector reform that Côte d’Ivoire has been conducting
since the end of the 2011 post-election crisis, with the
valuable support of the United Nations system and

S/PV.7951

bilateral partners. The challenge has been to transform
the army into a body imbued with the basic principles of
humanitarian law and focused on serving development
and the protection of civilians. The same objective
guides the Ivorian authorities in training contingents
for United Nations peacekeeping operations.
Our second challenge is aligning national legislation
with international legal norms related to preventing and
ending violations of humanitarian law. It is impossible
to effectively protect civilians and medical personnel
and infrastructure without aligning national legislation
with international norms. States must therefore acquire
the necessary capacity to enable them to deal with all
cases of violations of international humanitarian law
in accordance with internationally recognized and
accepted legal standards.
Recognizing the major instruments governing the
area, de facto and de jure, continues to be one of the
basic steps in achieving that. To that end, my country,
which considers international law extremely important,
is party to the principal international instruments in
the areas of international humanitarian law and human
rights, including the Geneva Convention relative to the
Protection of Civilian Persons in Time of War and its
Additional Protocols I and II, the Convention Relating
to the Status of Refugees, the African Union Convention
for the Protection and Assistance of Internally Displaced
Persons in Africa, and the Rome Statute.
The third and last challenge is combating impunity.
Many speakers in today’s debate have emphasized that
the abuses and crimes committed against humanitarian
workers have for the most part gone unpunished. That
makes it all the more crucial to ensure that all States, and
conflicting parties in particular, fulfil their obligations
under international humanitarian law, especially where
bringing the perpetrators of such unacceptable crimes
before the competent jurisdiction is concerned.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Canada.
Mr. Grant (Canada) (spoke in French): Since today
we are considering the suffering of civilians who have
been harmed or displaced by conflict, we take this
opportunity to emphasize the urgency need to help the
more than 20 million people who are currently facing
famine, in large part thanks to conflicts that have been
permitted to continue without consequences and to
restrictions imposed on humanitarian access. Canada
commends the Council for its adoption last year of

17-1499871/78

S/PV.7951

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

resolution 2286 (2016), which requires all parties to
armed conflicts to comply fully with their obligation
to ensure that all medical personnel are respected
and protected, and to facilitate safe and unimpeded
passage for them and their supplies. That sense of
initiative is vital, and the Council has received broad
support from the international community. More than
80 States, including Canada, sponsored the resolution,
demonstrating that this is an issue that resonates deeply.
Today, we are dealing with the grim fact that
attacks on medical facilities in some conflict areas
have become so commonplace that hospitals have to
be fortified to protect them from bombs and artillery
shells, while some have actually had to be moved
underground, even into caves, in order to protect them
from constant bombardments. Moreover, when civilians
are violently and even purposely deprived of the health
care that is crucial to their survival and that of their
communities, it undermines all of our efforts to protect
those under threat.
(spoke in English)
We also acknowledge that this constant violence
poses an additional global threat — that of complacency.
We run the risk that people will lose hope; indeed, we
have already seen the consequences of that in the global
refugee crisis. Reinforcing our well-established norms
requires determined leadership, and Canada is taking
the following steps in that regard.
First, together with Switzerland, we are proud
to be the co-Chair of an informal group of States,
based in Geneva, to promote the implementation of
resolution 2286 (2016), thereby providing States with
an opportunity to collaborate on advocacy and promote
best practices.
Secondly, we have continued to condemn attacks
targeting civilians, medical personnel and health-care
facilities. Canada worked in the General Assembly last
year to focus attention on the critical situation in Syria,
including by taking the lead on General Assembly
resolution 71/130, adopted on 9 December, which
condemned attacks on civilians and humanitarian and
medical personnel. We urge the Council to clearly
condemn direct and indiscriminate attacks and to
continue to demand that parties to conflicts comply
with their obligations.
Thirdly, Canada is fully committed to ensuring
that the perpetrators of such crimes, and those who
72/78

25/05/2017

do not respect international law, are held accountable.
For instance, in the context of Syria, Canada is
supporting and funding evidence collection and
documentation efforts.
Fourthly, Canada’s obligations under international
humanitarian law are embedded in Canadian Armed
Forces doctrine and predeployment training, which
we believe is a crucial step that States must undertake.
We urge countries to examine their national legislative
frameworks and consider signing the relevant
international treaties and guidelines for enhancing the
protection of civilians. Those include the Arms Trade
Treaty, to which Canada is currently in the process
of acceding. Canada has also recently endorsed the
Safe Schools Declaration, reaffirming our commitment
to protect children affected by armed conflict.
Member States and the Council must address
persistent violations of international humanitarian law
and end the pervasive climate of impunity. The Council
has important tools for ensuring accountability and
must use them more consistently. We encourage all
Member States to consider the Secretary-General’s
positive recommendations. Canada will continue to
lead efforts to enhance the protection of civilians.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Ireland.
Mr. Mawe (Ireland): I thank you, Sir, for convening
today’s debate. Ireland aligns itself with the statements
delivered by the observer of the European Union and by
the representative of Slovenia on behalf of the Human
Security Network.
In my national capacity, I wish to situate my brief
remarks in the broader context of sustaining peace. The
Security Council and, indeed, the entire United Nations
system was established not to mitigate the effects of
conflict, but to deal with threats and risks to peace in
order to prevent them from breaking out into full-scale
conflict. We commend Secretary- General Guterres
for emphasizing the primacy of peace and for placing
conflict prevention at the core of his mandate. We were
also glad to see all United Nations Member States come
together, with the backing of the Council, to adopt an
innovative resolution on sustaining peace in April of last
year (General Assembly resolution 70/262). Preventing
and ending conflicts must be at the top of our agenda as
the most effective means to protect civilians.
17-14998

25/05/2017

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

S/PV.7951

Unfortunately, we are compelled to focus on the
many conflicts currently being fought. Today, there are
more people in conflict-related humanitarian need than
we have seen since the end of the Second World War.
Much of that is caused not by the mere existence of
conflict, but by violations by conflict parties of their
duties and obligations — most of which arise from
international customary law. Those are not accidents,
but deliberate decisions by parties to conflict.

were used in populated areas, 92 per cent of those killed
and injured were civilians. The immediate effects are
clear; we have heard accounts in this Chamber of the
destructive aftermath in cities in Yemen, Syria and
many other places. What we often do not hear about is
the longer-term effect — the stagnation of economic,
social and environmental development, or the harm
and injury caused by explosive remnants long after the
initial conflict has ceased.

We absolutely condemn attacks on medical and
health care facilities. We do so without qualification or
reserve. Not only are parties to conflicts reneging on
their obligations to ensure, in their military planning
and operations, the protection of hospitals and other
civilian facilities, they are engaging in deliberate
and repeated attacks. We commend the Security
Council for responding to that egregious trend by
adopting resolution 2286 (2016) in May of last year,
which underlines the obligations of parties to armed
conflict to comply with international humanitarian and
international human rights law to protect health care
infrastructure and personnel.

We therefore support the recommendation of the
Secretary-General for States to engage constructively in
efforts to develop a political declaration to address the
humanitarian impact of the use of explosive weapons
in populated areas. We also urge all States to accede to
the Convention on Cluster Munitions, the Convention
on the Prohibition of the Use, Stockpiling, Production
and Transfer of Anti-Personnel Mines and on Their
Destruction and the Arms Trade Treaty. Illegal and
irresponsible arms transfers to conflict regions must
be stopped.

The growing trend of attacks on humanitarian
workers is also a cause of grave concern. We heard
yesterday in this Chamber (see S/PV.7950) that 17 aid
workers have been killed in South Sudan this year alone
and we are not yet in the month of June. Moreover, the
politicization and militarization of humanitarian aid
is unacceptable. Access to food, water and medical
care cannot be denied in an attempt by a conflict
party to gain military advantage. Similarly, we reject
the use of humanitarian access as a bargaining chip
in peace negotiations, as well as the attempted titfor-tat agreements we have seen regarding medical
evacuations in Syria.
We support the critical role of the International
Committee of the Red Cross (ICRC), which works to
coordinate and protect those on the ground who are often
putting their lives at risk to access and assist victims
of conflict. We thank the ICRC for using its voice to
remind States and other parties to armed conflicts of
their legal obligations under international humanitarian
law, as has been done today by the Vice-President of the
ICRC, Ms. Beerli.
Ireland wishes to direct the Council’s attention
also to the issue of civilian harm from the conduct of
hostilities in urban areas, particularly through the use
of cluster munitions. Last year, when explosive weapons

Finally, when discussing the issue of the protection
of civilians we must also highlight the particular
challenges faced by women and children. Ireland is
supporting a civil society-led study to explore the
specific risks faced by women and girls following
forced displacement caused by explosive weapons in
populated areas.
Let us be clear. We are making lowest common
denominator calls today. We are asking that States and
non-State actors alike adhere to the rules and norms
that bind them to protecting civilians who have nothing
to do with the conflict happening around them. As we
have seen today in the Secretary-General’s report, this
is simply not happening. What is more, perpetrators are
not being held accountable. If the Organization and the
Council are to remain effective and relevant they must
take the measures necessary to ensure that everyone
adheres to the most basic threshold of humanity.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Norway.
Mr. Pedersen (Norway): I am delivering this
statement on behalf of the Nordic countries: Denmark,
Finland, Iceland, Sweden and my own country, Norway.
I will not read out the full statement.
As highlighted in the Secretary-General’s report
(S/2017/414), recent armed conflicts have seen State
and non-State armed groups defying international law

17-1499873/78

S/PV.7951

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

by directly targeting civilians and civilian objects.
That has led to indescribable acts of violence and
brutality and caused human suffering and carnage on
an unprecedented scale.
The backdrop for our current debate is the one-year
anniversary of the Security Council’s adoption of
resolution 2286 (2016) on health care in armed conflict.
The resolution sent a resounding message. The wounded
and sick, medical and humanitarian personnel, as well as
hospitals and other medical facilities, must be respected
and protected. States are responsible for implementing
resolution 2286 (2016). That requires putting in place
the requisite legal and operational measures. The Nordic
countries are committed to the Secretary-General’s
recommendations on implementing resolution 2286
(2016). We call on all Member States to do the same.
Attacks against medical personal must be
understood as part of a broader trend where civilians
increasingly are subjected to attacks in armed conflict
and that becomes a tactic of war. Our common resolve
to confront such acts must be unequivocal. There are
no simple solutions. Our response must be carefully
calibrated and effective. Let me emphasize seven points
of particular importance.
First, we must ensure full respect for international
law, especially humanitarian law, human rights law and
refugee law. International law protects the delivery of
humanitarian aid; providing medical care, it mandates
the protection of refugees, displaced persons and
migrants and protects civilians from harm. Compliance
with international law is therefore paramount. We
remain committed to the joint initiative on the part of
Switzerland and the International Committee of the Red
Cross on strengthening compliance with international
humanitarian law.
We must enhance respect for international law by
the parties to armed conflict. This requires that we
understand the changing nature of conflict. Armed
conflicts are increasingly being fought in urban areas
with devastating consequences for civilians. We share
the concern of the Secretary-General and call on State
and non-State parties to armed conflicts to prevent
civilian harm resulting from the use of wide-area
explosive weapons in populated areas.
Second, we must ensure that those who violate
international law are held accountable. If States are
unwilling or unable to prosecute such crimes, they must
be referred to the International Criminal Court.
74/78

25/05/2017

Third, parties to a conflict must allow and facilitate
the rapid and unimpeded passage of humanitarian relief.
The international community must unequivocally
condemn and take effective measures against attacks on
health care personnel and facilities. The International
Red Cross and Red Crescent Movement Health Care in
Danger initiative should be universally supported.
Fourth, we must meet the humanitarian challenges
posed by the historically high number of irregular
migrants, refugees and internally displaced persons.
Our humanitarian response must be effective, efficient
and fully able to meet urgent humanitarian needs and
promote sustainable solutions.
Fifth, States must fulfil their responsibility to
protect children from armed conflict and take action to
address violations and abuses. That includes protecting
the right to education and schools from attacks. Our
children deserve the right to pursue a better future
through education, even when their grown-ups cannot
make peace. We urge all States to join the Safe Schools
Declaration, now endorsed by 65 Member States.
Sixth, we must recognize that gender equality and
women’s participation are critical to peaceful societies.
We must actively involve women in political and
economic decision-making. Women and men must be
heard and respected equally.
Seventh and finally, we must address the root
causes of conflict, violent extremism and terrorism.
That entails ensuring respect for human rights,
upholding the rule of law and striving for sustainable
development and socioeconomic opportunities without
discrimination of any groups.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Morocco.
Mr. Laassel (Morocco) (spoke in French): I would
first like to thank you, Mr. President, for organizing
this debate, marking the first anniversary of the
adoption of resolution 2286 (2016), which Morocco
co-sponsored. We also commend the other nations
behind that initiative that submitted the draft to the
Security Council alongside Uruguay, namely, Spain,
Egypt, New Zealand and Japan. Our thanks also go
to the representatives of the International Committee
of the Red Cross and Human Rights Watch for their
presentations this morning.
The subject chosen for today’s debate is a call
on us all. In recent years, there has been a worrying
17-14998

25/05/2017

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

increase in attacks on humanitarian personnel and
medical facilities during periods of armed conflict. It
is important that the Security Council, as well as all
United Nations members, be able to reiterate the strong
signal sent last year on the vital importance of respecting
international humanitarian law and protecting civilians.
In that regard, I should like to point to resolution 2286
(2016), which strongly condemns intentional attacks
on medical facilities or any equipment bearing the
distinctive emblems of the Geneva Conventions, and
which qualifies such attacks as war crimes.
Several reports have described attacks or incidents
involving medical infrastructure or personnel in 23
countries in 2016. Beyond the failure to respect the basic
principles of international law, including international
human rights law, and international humanitarian law
in particular, the Geneva Conventions of 1949 and the
additional protocols thereto of 1977, attacks on medical
infrastructure and personnel have serious direct
consequences. The following are some examples.
The first is the suspension of health programmes.
In many cases, attacks have resulted in the withdrawal
of humanitarian organizations that could no longer
ensure the security of their property and personnel.
This situation primarily affects civilian populations
already in situations of vulnerability due to conflict
and that greatly need health services. For example,
in the Central African Republic — where more than
half of the population is dependent on humanitarian
assistance — many non-governmental organizations
have had to cease their activities because of the violence
they have suffered, depriving people of assistance
when they most need it. This example can be seen
increasingly in many conflict-affected areas.
The second example is the degradation of existing
infrastructure. Some countries currently in crisis once
had functional health infrastructure, but because they
are subject to attacks or because fighting is taking
place in the vicinity, those facilities are no longer able
to operate at full capacity, even as needs increase. That
leads to a worrying phenomenon — the flight of skilled
medical personnel. Figures show that two-thirds of
specialized personnel have fled Syria. That gives an
idea of the magnitude of the problem.
In other countries where basic infrastructure is
lacking, clashes delay or nullify efforts to build or
rehabilitate health facilities. Morocco, which had
pledged to rehabilitate the university hospital of Bangui

S/PV.7951

in the Central African Republic, had to wait several
years before it could complete the rehabilitation work.
Indeed, it was impossible to finalize the work at the
height of the crisis, between 2012 and 2014, mainly
because of recurring looting in the country.
It is clear that despite the considerable legal arsenal
set up for the protection of civilians in the event of
conflict, the international community has failed to
eradicate this phenomenon and to address the serious
difficulties related to attacks on medical infrastructure
and personnel, whether those are ensuring the access
of humanitarian personnel to civilian populations,
bringing to justice those responsible for attacks or
simply collecting reliable data. Today, these difficulties
are growing due to the increase in attacks by terrorist
groups. In Syria, Iraq, Nigeria, Mali and many other
countries, the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant, Boko
Haram and other terrorist groups are now deliberately
targeting medical infrastructure and personnel.
Firm measures should be taken in this regard. As
a first step, the relevant recommendations made by the
Secretary-General in his report (S/2016/722) following
the adoption of resolution 2286 (2016) should be
implemented. Our first preventive measure should be
to ensure respect for international law. It is by investing
in prevention and strengthening democracy, the rule
of law, as well as development, that we can limit the
impact of conflicts, especially on medical personnel
and, from there, on civilian populations.
For quite some time, the Kingdom of Morocco has
integrated the teaching of international humanitarian
law into the training curriculum of the Royal Armed
Forces. Its provisions are an integral part of the rules of
engagement of our armed forces. Moroccan contingents
also benefit from this training before being deployed.
With a long tradition of deploying rural hospitals in
crisis theatres, Morocco takes very seriously the threats
to infrastructure and health personnel in times of armed
conflict. My country has deployed its most recent field
hospitals to Juba, South Sudan. In addition, Morocco
has set up a hospital in the Zaatari refugee camp, where
hundreds of thousands of people have been treated
since 2012. In the past, the Royal Armed Forces have
deployed hospitals in Kosovo and Somalia. Generally,
the equipment used is offered as a gift at the end of
the mission. Currently, Morocco is deploying a levelII hospital under the United Nations banner within the

17-1499875/78

S/PV.7951

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

United Nations Organization Stabilization Mission in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo.
In conclusion, the Kingdom of Morocco shares the
Secretary-General’s firm conviction that the protection
of civilian populations requires the implementation of
the provisions of international law and international
humanitarian law. The Kingdom of Morocco takes this
opportunity provided by this debate to pay homage to
those who are active in protecting civilians in conflict
zones and expresses its sympathy to all the humanitarian
actors and Blue Helmets who have paid with their lives
for their commitment to the serve in United Nations
operational deployment areas.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Portugal.
Ms. Pucarinho (Portugal): I would like to thank
you, Mr. President, and Uruguay for organizing this
very important debate on the protection of civilians in
armed conflict, with a special focus on medical care.
Portugal aligns itself with the statements delivered
earlier by the observer of the European Union and by the
representative of Switzerland on behalf of the Group of
Friends on Protection of Civilians. I would like to add
some additional remarks in my national capacity.
Portugal welcomes the report of the SecretaryGeneral (S/2017/414), which contains relevant
information on the implementation of the resolutions
adopted by this Council on protection of civilians, in
particular resolution 2286 (2016). Since the adoption of
that resolution one year ago, the situation of civilians
in a number of conflict-affected countries, some
of those on the Council’s agenda, has deteriorated.
Civilians continue to account for the vast majority
of casualties in situations of armed conflict, and are
continuously exposed to violence, being the primary
victims of violations of human rights and international
humanitarian law.
International law requires schools and hospitals to
be treated as sanctuaries, yet these facilities are often
among the most dangerous places to be in conflictaffected countries. Facilities continue to be used
systematically for military purposes before our eyes
that. They are deliberately targeted, overexposing
civilians, especially children and young people, to
violence. It is obvious to us all how schools and hospitals
play a crucial role in conflict zones, as they are part of
the most critical infrastructure to mitigate the effects of
76/78

25/05/2017

any armed conflict, particularly those involving mass
casualties. We cannot stress enough the need to protect
and promote the human right to health care in conflict,
and we will continue to draw the Council’s attention
to that critical issue. I would also like to specifically
mention the importance of ensuring adequate health
care to those who are more vulnerable, including in the
area of mental health.
With regard to health-care providers — those
crucial humanitarian agents in conflict situations — we
have seen them attacked. We have seen ambulances
held up at checkpoints, hospitals bombed, medical
supplies looted and entire communities cut off from
critical services. Violence against health-care workers,
facilities and vehicles is a humanitarian issue with a
broad and multiplier, long-term effect.
The environment for humanitarian action faces
a number of challenges that are contributing to the
shrinking of the humanitarian space and jeopardizing
the protection of civilians, which is required
under international humanitarian law and human
rights obligations. Regrettably, in some instances
humanitarian access has been deliberately blocked,
often due to political considerations or alleged securityrelated concerns. The duty to prevent and address acts
of violence, attacks and threats against medical care
in armed conflict must be honoured and respected.
We must collectively act to ensure that those in need
can enjoy medical care. In that regard, civil society
organizations also should be mentioned, as they play
an essential role in providing medical care to people
affected by conflicts throughout the world. Working in
close collaboration with them therefore often becomes
indispensable to enhance assistance to those in need.
The failure to stop violations of international
humanitarian law and human rights abuses, which may
amount to crimes against humanity and war crimes, also
highlights the importance of prioritizing prevention
and fighting impunity. It can be done only by ensuring
accountability and the systematic and impartial
investigations of reported violations of human rights
law and international humanitarian law, including
attacks against medical convoys and personnel. The
responsibility of ensuring the protection of human
rights and respect for international humanitarian
law lies primarily with Member States. However, if
national authorities fail to take the necessary measures
in that regard, the Security Council can accordingly
play a more active role. In that regard, the International
17-14998

25/05/2017

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

Criminal Court remains, in our opinion, a key venue
in the fight against impunity for the most serious
violations of international humanitarian law and plays a
complementary role to those of tribunals at the national
and international levels.
In recent decades, there has been undeniable
progress in integrating a component of the protection
of civilians into the mandates of United Nations
peacekeeping missions. However, United Nations
missions increasingly struggle to fulfil their mandates
and protect their own personnel and innocent civilians
on the ground. That trend must be reversed, and to
that end it is necessary that, among other tools, United
Nations missions be provided with modern and flexible
capabilities, including a human rights component,
which contributes to enhancing the performance of
peacekeeping operations.
In that regard, I wish to mention very briefly
the recent experience of members of the Portuguese
national force in their role as a quick reaction force
in the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated
Stabilization Mission in the Central African Republic.
Acting without caveats, that force has recently been
involved in the protection of civilians in the area around
Bangassou, where it strengthened the Mission’s decisive
efforts to secure and protect civilians seeking refuge
from the threat of armed groups at a local hospital and
mosque and the Saint Peter Clavel Cathedral. Portugal
reiterates its pledge to continue conducting training
programmes for national personnel and members of
the armed security forces assigned to international
peacekeeping missions.
In conclusion, we believe that only a coherent
and long-term approach based on addressing root
causes, increasing political diplomacy for prevention
and conflict resolution and bringing humanitarian
development and peacebuilding efforts together can
effectively strengthen compliance with international
humanitarian law, promote accountability for
perpetrators, improve humanitarian access to those in
need, strengthen the international response to global
massive displacements and build sustainable peace.
The dignity and value of a human being must be at the
core of a shift from perpetual reaction to early action.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Azerbaijan.
Mr. Musayev (Azerbaijan): First of all, I would
like to commend your delegation, Sir, for taking

S/PV.7951

the initiative of convening this open debate on the
protection of civilians and medical care in armed
conflict, and for submitting a concept note (S/2017/365,
annex) on the topic.
We also take note of the report of the SecretaryGeneral (S/2017/414) on the protection of civilians in
armed conflict and its recommendations.
Despite the important preventive and protection
efforts that have been undertaken at the national and
international levels, numerous challenges remain and
civilians continue to suffer in situations of armed
conflict. Azerbaijan strongly condemns all attacks
against civilians, including attacks against the wounded
and sick, medical and humanitarian personnel, hospitals,
other medical facilities and humanitarian convoys.
Efforts to prevent and resolve conflict and strengthen
respect for international law have acquired importance
today. As a matter of priority, special attention should
be given to the implementation of resolutions adopted
by the principal organs of the United Nations, in
particular those relating to the peaceful settlement of
disputes and conflict prevention and resolution.
Furthermore, the increasing brutality of armed
conflicts and the changing nature of warfare have
given rise to the need for greater measures for
protection, including with regard to the humanitarian
and medical mission. A critical element in that context
is accountability for enhancing compliance with
international humanitarian law and human rights law.
Resolute and targeted measures are required to that
end. Such measures must be free of selectivity and
politically motivated approaches, however difficult
or even unrealistic that may seem. Impunity for the
most serious crimes of concern to the international
community contributes to instability and prevents the
development of lasting solutions and the achievement
of sustainable peace.
When national authorities fail to take the necessary
steps to ensure accountability, the international
community, particularly the Security Council, should
play a more proactive role so as to ensure an appropriate
response, including through support for national
prosecutions, the establishment of ad hoc tribunals,
hybrid mechanisms, international commissions of
inquiry and fact-finding missions. It is important
that peace efforts never encourage, accept or tolerate
situations achieved through the unlawful use of force
and other egregious violations of international law,

17-1499877/78

S/PV.7951

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

such as war crimes, crimes against humanity, genocide
and ethnic cleansing.
Special attention must be given to the protection
of civilians forced to leave their homes as a result
of armed conflict. Azerbaijan supports continuing
efforts to raise awareness of the problem of internal
displacement and the right of return at the national
and international levels. In that regard, we welcome
the call of the Secretary-General on Member States
to intensify efforts to tackle the root causes of forced
displacement by preventing and resolving conflicts and
strengthening respect for international law, including
in protracted conflict.
My country’s familiarity with the suffering of
civilians in armed conflict is not based on hearsay. The
continuing aggression of Armenia against my country
has led to the temporary occupation of a significant
part of Azerbaijan’s territory, including the Nagorno
Karabakh region, the seven adjacent districts and
some exclaves. The war has claimed the lives of tens of
thousands of people and ruined cities and livelihoods
in my country. Serious violations of international
humanitarian law amounting to war crimes, crimes
against humanity and acts of genocide were committed
by the Armenian side in the course of the aggression.
Such violations include, inter alia, deliberate attacks

78/78

25/05/2017

against hospitals, schools, places of worship and
other civilian objects, the killing of civilians, the
taking and holding of hostages, the mistreatment and
summary execution of prisoners of war and hostages,
sexual violence, the extensive destruction of inhabited
areas and public and private property, pillaging and
forced displacement.
The impunity still enjoyed by the perpetrators of
the crimes committed in the course of the Armenian
aggression not only impedes progress in achieving
long-awaited peace and reconciliation between the
two countries, but also aggravates the already difficult
situation in the peace process. Moreover, despite the
formal ceasefire, deliberate attacks against Azerbaijani
civilians and civilian objects have become more frequent
and more violent in recent times. Azerbaijan will spare
no effort towards ending the unlawful occupation of
its territories, achieving the political settlement of the
conflict and ensuring peace and justice in the region.
In conclusion, we believe that it is essential that the
Security Council consistently maintain its focus on the
protection of civilians and systematically reiterate its
demand that all parties to armed conflict comply fully
with their obligations under international law.
The meeting rose at 5.25 p.m.

17-14998
