UNITED NATIONS

SECURITY
OFFICIAL
THIR

RECORDS

T Y-F 0 UR TH

2152

nd

NEW

COUN~CIL
YEAR

MEETING:

21 JUNE 1979

YORK

CONTENTS
Page

Provisional

.....................................

1

of the agenda . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

1

Letters dated 13 June 1979 and 15 June 1979 from the Permanent Representative
of Morocco to the United Nations addressed to the President of the Security
Council (S/13394 and S/13397)
........................................

1

Adoption

agenda (WAgendaI2152)

snV.2152

NOTE
Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined
with figures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United Nations
document.
Documents of the Security Council (symbol S/. . .) are normally published in quarterly Supplements of the OflczizI Record of the Security Council. The date of the document
indicates the supplement in which it appears or in which information about it is given.
The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a system
adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of Resolutions and Decisions of the
Security Council. The new system, which has been applied retroactively to resolutions
adopted before 1 January 1965, became fully operative on that date.

2152nd MEETING
Held in New York on Thursday, 21 June 1979, at 10.30 a.m.
At the invitation of the President, Mr. Taya (Mauritania)
and Mr. Buketi Bukayi (Zaire) took the places reservedfat’
them at the side of the Council chamber.

President: Mr. Oleg A. TROYANOVSKY
(Union of Soviet Socialist Republics).
Presenr: The representatives of the following States:
Bangladesh, Bolivia, China, Czechoslovakia, France,
Gabon, Jamaica, Kuwait, Nigeria, Norway, Portugal,
Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, United Kingdom of
Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United States of
America, Zambia.

3. The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Russian): The
fust speaker is the representative of Algeria. I invite him to
take a place at the Council table and to make a statement.
4. Mr. BEDJAOUI (Algeria) (interpretationfrom French):
Mr. President, allow me on behalf of the delegation of
Algeria to congratulate you most warmlyon your accession
to the presidency of the Security Council. It is foi us a
matter of satisfaction to note that with your guidance the
Council has already successfully concluded debates on such
important problems as the situation in Cyprus and the
deterioration of the situation in Southern Lebanon as a
result of the repeated acts of aggression of Israel. Despite
the number of problems that remain in the agenda for June,
and in particular the question of Namibia, whose resolution
more than ever remains linked to the long-awaited decision
on sanctions to be instituted by the Council against the
illegal occupation regime of South Africa, we are confident
that you will guide the Council debates with the same
prudence and wisdom, the same experience. that of an
eminent and respected diplomat, and the same authority in
the promotion of the ideals of justice, peace and progress
with which our Organization has been concerned since it
came into being.

Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/2152)
I.

Adoption of the agenda

2.

Letters dated 13 June 1979 and 15 June 1979 from
the Permanent Representative of Morocco to the
United Nations addressed to the President of the
Security Council (S/13394 and S/13397)
The meeting was calIed to order at II.35 a.m
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted

Letters dated 13 June 1979 and 15 June 1979 from the
Permanent Representative of Morocco to the United
Nations addressed to the President of the Security Council
(S/13394 and S/13397)

5. The Algerian delegation also wishes to congratulate
your predecessor as President of the Council, Mr. Futscher
Pereira, the Permanent Representative of Portugal.
Mr. Futscher Pereira had to preside over the meetings of the
month of May, and he did so with all the more competence
and skill inasmuch as the informal consultations, which
were as numerous as they were difficult, on the question of
Namibia required of him endurance, ability and skill in
conducting a dialogue that earned him the respect and
esteem of all the Members of the Organization. Moreover,
we cannot .forget that he represents a country that had the
courage and the merit of breaking with a very ancient
colonial tradition and which has presented to the intemational community an attractive picture of realism and of
new relations among nations, on the basis, in particular, of
strict respect for the right of peoples to self-determination
and independence.

1. The PRESIDENT
(interpretation from Russian): In
accordance with the decision taken at the 215lst meeting, I
invite the representative of Morocco to take a place at the
Council table and the representative of Algeria, Benin and
Madagascar to take the places reserved for them at the side
of the Council chamber.
At the invitation of the President, Mr. Filaii(Morocco) took
a place at the Council table and Mr. Bet$aoui (Algerib)),
Mr. Houngavou (Benin) and Mr. Rabetafika (Madagascar)
took the places reservedfor them at the side of the Council
chamber.
2. The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Russian): I wish
to inform members of the Council that I have received
letters from the representatives of Mauiitania and Zaire in
which they request to be invited to participate in the discussion of the question on the agenda. In accordance with the
usual practice, I propose, with the consent of the Council, tp
invite those representatives to participate in the discussion
without the right to vote, in conformity with the relevant
provisions of the Charter and rule 37 of the provisional rules
of procedure.

6. I should like at the very outset to express the Algerian
delegation’s satisfaction that I have been given this opportunity to address the Council and to express Algeria’s feelings about a question which, at least since 1966, has been of
concern not only to my country but also to the United
1

Nations, the Organization of African Unity and the nonaligned movement. I must say that, thanks to the efforts of
the countries of the north-western region of Africa-efforts
which at that time were united and convergent-this
question, that is, the question of the decolonization of Western
Sahara, seemed to be a natural part of the application of a
peaceful process. That was so because it is a fact that all the
countries concerned, linked by relations of brotherhood
and cooperation, had ensured that higher interests, in conformity with the nature of peoples and the ideals of the
Charters of the United Nations and OAU, would prevail. That lofty view of matters was based on the constant
recognition by everyone of this principle: the right to selfdetermination of a neighbouring country in regard to which
there had been a spontaneous manifestation of brotherly
solidarity, forged in a common culture and a common
experience of sacrifice and struggle. Unfortunately, through
an about-face rarely equalled in history, covetousness took
the upper hand over obligations that had been undertaken,
to the point that, regrettably, our region has been drawn
into an adventure that has created tensions and fratricidal
confrontations of which the Saharan people have been the
primary victims.

against the Saharan people being turned into the alleged
victim of aggression today.
11. The situation is clear. The Security Council adopted
three resolutions in 1975 on this very matter of Western
Sahara. In one of them, resolution 380 (1975) it deplored
Morocco’s invasion of Western Sahara and, it will be
remembered, called upon Morocco to withdraw immediately from that Territory. Having heeded neither the
requests nor the orders of the Council, Morocco comes
back here four years later, as though justice demanded this.
But it is not here to admit the tragic errors of a policy of
annexation which the Council had already, in 1975, known
was doomed to failure;,it is here to ask the Council to follow
it in its vain search for a scapegoat. An aggressor claiming to
be the victim of aggression, it wishes to add one more error
to that of 1975-and it is hard to say which is the more tragic
of the two-an error which in any case can bring chaos to
the entire region. The international community is profoundly concerned at this repetition of political and military
errors and this persistence in a disaster-seeking policy for
which the Moroccan people and all the peoples of the region
are made to pay.
12. I have too much respect for the exalted mission of the
Council to be led into a debate which has nothing to do with
the substance of the problem which the delegation of
Morocco has sought to cast aside. It is nothing more than a
problem of decolonization concerning a specific and geographically well-defined territory, the Western Sahara, and
a clearly identified people, the Saharan people.

7. That is the focal point of the problem, but the desire
today is to make us consider only the fall-out from that
problem -a fall-out which is certainly explosive but which,
examined outside the context, could divert the Council’s
attention from its responsibility of guaranteeing intemational peace and security. And in this specific case, that
responsibility includes the effective exercise of the right of
the people of Western Sahara to self-determination, a right
it has been mcognized as having by the Organization and
which only Morocco continues to ignore, thereby provoking constant tension in the region.

13. All that was said yesterday to take the problem out of
this context seems to me to have been a regrettable waste of
time. There was a wild rush to mask the failure of an
adventurisic policy of expansionism and a vain quest for a
scapegoat to make others responsible for the political and
military deadlock in which Morocco unhappily finds itself
as a result of its occupation of a territory which is totally
alien to it. All that was heard yesterday can in no way alter
the obstinate fact that Morocco remains an illegitimate
military occupier which is stifling the voice of a martyr
people fighting for its national independence.

8. All the delegations have been conjecturing about the
real meaning of Morocco’s initiative in the Council. No one
finds it justified by the recent fighting within Moroccan
territory because, on the one hand, this is not the first time
that such operations have taken place and, on the other and
above all, everyone knows that they are the inevitable result
of a Moroccan policy of military occupation of the territory
of the people of Western Sahara.

14. The most elementary analysis, furthermore, requires
that we should place the occupation of Western Sahara
within the framework of a broader, planned scheme of
regional expansionism that as such is all the more disquieting and intolerable. Moroccan expansionism since 1956 has
never taken the trouble to disguise itself. It is now revealed
with all the political actions of the expansionists. Who does
not recall the diplomatic battles and military skirmishes of
the 1960s over the Moroccan claim to incorporate Mauritania itself? Who can forget the notorious maps of “Greater
Morocco” annexing part of Algeria, all of Western Sahara,
which was then under Spanish occupation, the entire
territory of Mauritania, part of Mali and a part of Senegal
itself?

9. This Moroccan initiative has seemed even more surprising to a number of delegations because in two days there
will be a meeting of the OAU AdHocCommitteeand
in two
weeks the summit conference of OAU will take place at
Monrovia-and,
decidedly, Morocco seems to pay only lip
service to the recognition that those bodies wig demonstrate
the wisdom necessary to solve the explosive problem
Morocco has created in the region through the occupation
and partition of Western Sahara.
10. All the delegations, and principally those of the Arab
and African Groups, tried to dissuade Morocco from bringing this matter before the Council. In that respect, it is a
secret to no one that the African Group, in particular, made
more than praiseworthy efforts to obtain Morocco’s agreement not to take this action, which entailed the risk of
offering the astonishing paradox of the Moroccan aggressor

15. Our concern is therefore legitimately increased by reason of the annexation& greed and the expansionist ambitions already achieved in some places and on the way to
achievement elsewhere, thus creating a grave situation of
2

reported by the Moroccan delegation, whose mere listing
curiously suffices in their eyes to implicate Algeria, are but
tangible manifestations of the struggle for liberation of the
people of Western Sahara.-

conflict on the borders of Algena which is dangerous for the
peace and stability of the entire region.
16. Any State Member of the UnitedNations certainly has
the right to request a meeting of the Security Council and it
is not in any way the intention of the Algerian delegation to
deny that right to anyone. But the Moroccan delegation,
which bases its action on what it claims is aggression by
Algeria, while no material proof has been produced in
support of that accusation, does not have the right either to
waste the valuable time of the Council with an unfounded
request or to attempt to divert the attention of the intemational community from the true facts of the question of
Western Sahara.

21. If there have been acts of aggression in the Western
Sahara affair, they occurred when Morocco invaded the
territory of the Saharan people, occupied it militarily and
partitioned it. Now, the Declaration contained in resolution
2625 (XXV), to which the Moroccan delegation referred
yesterday, specifies that
“The territory of a colony oi other Non-Self-Governing Territory has, under the Charter, a status separate
and distinct . . . [which] shall exist until the people of the
colony or Non-Self-Governing Territory have exercised
their right of self-determination in accordance with the
Charter, and particularly its purposes and principles.”

17. For in point of fact, as is well known, a diversionary
scheme has been devised here at great expense to distract us
from the problem of the decolonization of Western Sahara.
Thus, Algeria has been accused of militarily intervening in
this affair in which occupiers and occupied are pitted
against each other. Algeria cannot allow itself to be accused
so lightly and inconsistently and the United Nations-and
the Security Council in particular-cannot
allow itself to be
diverted by such a tactic which strives to bring it into a
pernicious debate and to cause it to lose sight of the substance of the problem, which is and remains that of the
decolonization of a Territory and the self-determination of
its people.

Thus violating this statute, which can be invoked against all
comers so long as the people of Sahara have not freely
acceded to self-determination, the Moroccan Government
invaded the Territory. In so doing, it clearly contravened
resolution 2625 (XXV), which the representative of Morocco
very rashly quoted yesterday and which further specifies
that
“Every State has the duty to refrain from any forcible
action which deprives peoples . . . of their right to selfdetermination and freedom and independence.”

18. Mr. President, the Government of Morocco felt it
necessary to address two letters to you which claim to report
acts of war within the territory of Morocco and it is trying to
place the blame on my country. The representative of Algeria, in his letter of 16 June [s/13399], clearly and energetically refuted those gratuitous accusations. In its statement
yesterday [2ZSZsr meeting], as was to be expected, the delegation of Morocco was not able to support any of those
claims. How then can one refrain from being indignant at
such a shocking attempt to divert the attention of the international community from the true facts of the problem and
thus blame my country for the tragic consequences of acts
of a policy of annexation and expansion?

22. Unfortunately for the Moroccan delegation, it could
cite in support of its thesis only the texts of resolutions
which incriminate rather than absolve the Moroccan
Government. Resolution 2635 (XXV) was followed by resolution 3314 (XXIX), on the definition of aggression, which
Morocco cited but which, again, condemns it. Not only
does Morocco practise a policy of expansionism which it
has vainly sought to have endorsed; what is more, it poses as
the victim of aggression, whereas it obstinately persists in
refusing to allow, the people of Western Sahara to exercise
its right to an independent existence. Indeed, ever since the
very first day it assumed a grave responsibility by invading
the territory of the Saharan people, Morocco could not be
considered as anything but an aggressor State, with all the
legal consequences of such a qualification, in accordance
with the relevant provisions of the Charter and the pertinent
resolutions of the United Nations. In particular, resolution
3314 (XXIX) considers as a case of flagrant aggression the
use of armed force to deprive peoples, such as the people of
Western Sahara, of their right to self-determination and
independence. That same resolution 3314 (XXIX), echoing
resolution 2625 (XXV), emphasizes the legitimacy of the
support given to peoples which, like the people of Western
Sahara, are lighting in such circumstances to win their right
to selfdet&mination against armies of invasion. “. . . Such
peoples [affirms resolution 2625 (XXV)] are entitled to seek
and to receive support in accordance with the purposes and
principles of the Charter”.

19. The delegation of Morocco, which knows full well
;hat the Algerian army has never crossed the AlgerianMoroccan border, has mistaken its opponents, which it
sometimes describes as “mercenaries” and sometimes as
“armed bands” so as not to have to name the fighters of the
POLISARIO
Front, whose mastery in the field, military
initiative and methods of combat enable them to extend the
area of fighting into the very territory of the aggressor.
Perhaps we should recall that it was from that same town of
Tantan that Morocco’s aggressive expedition against the
Saharan people set out in 1975. So who can, in good faith,
reproach or blame men who are denied an internationally
recognized right and who are the victims of a permanent
aggression for seeking to destroy the rearguard bases of
their adversaries and to weaken their logistical support?
20. Rather, we should see in these deeds proof that POLISARI0 broadly controls the Territory of Western Sahara,
an important part of which it has effectively liberated and in
which it has installed its own fighting bases. The acts of war

23. Hence the Saharan people have the right to turn to the
Security Council and to call on it for support in order to
repulse its aggressors and to achieve its independence. Now,
3

what does Morocco do? In a demonstration ofastounding
blindness, it describes that people and its legitimate and
exclusive representative, the POLISARIO,
as “mercenaries” armed by Algeria. And at the same time, by
absurdly and ineffectively lumping everything together,
Morocco believes, on the one hand, that it can rid itself of
the question of the decolonization of Western Sahara,
whose territory it has annexed and whose people it is muzzling, denying the existence of its legitimate representatives,
and, on the other hand, that it can blame Algeria for the
desperately grave situation into which it has plunged the
region as a result of the mistakes of a sinister policy doomed
by history to failure.

of Algeria, Morocco is trying to justify in advance an act of
aggression it is preparing against my country. Taking refuge
behind Article 51 of the Charter, which manifestly does not
apply in this case, Morocco is preparing to commit armed
aggression against Algeria, thus violating the sovereignty
and territorial integrity of my country, adding to the aggression committed against the Saharan people since 1975 a
further aggression against a neighbouring State and assuming the historical responsibility for unleashing a conflict
with incalculable consequences for the security and stability
of a large part of the African continent.
28. Invoking Article 51 of the Charter, which permits the
exercise of the right of kgitimate self-defence, is here as
inappropriate and unjustified as the so-called “right of pursuit” with which Morocco is threatening Algeria. The right
of pursuit, which cannot be dissociated from colonialism, is
directly linked in its manifestations to the pouncings of
occupying forces in reaction to national liberation struggles.
It is one of the ‘intolerable semblances of legality which
colonialism tries to.impose, conferring legal validity on all
forms of violence in opposition to the emancipation movement of peoples. Having been rejected along with other
errors of the past, the right to pursuit is now being resurrected and therefore given another lease of life, thanks,
unfortunately, to Morocco. A favourite weapon of the
colonial forces of the past, and now a preferred instrument
of violence for Israel and the racist Pretoria and Salisbury
r&gimes against the peoples of Lebanon, Zambia, Botswana, Mozambique and Angola, the right of pursuit is a
prime example of an act of “unqualified and premeditated
armed aggression”, in the words of Mr. Mongi Slim to the
Council on 2 June 1958 [819th meeting]. The right of pursuit, a dusty argument of the colonial Powers which
Morocco has pulled out of the imperialist legal scrap-heap
to invoke against Algeria, recalls to us the horrors of the
massacre of thousands of innocent civilians in southern
Africa, victims of haughty white racist power.

24. And yet Morocco seeks to buttress its position by
citing resolutions 2625 (XXV) and 3314 (XXIX), which
clearly point out to it the limits beyond which it cannot go
without becoming an aggressor State. The Security Council, in November 1975, called on Morocco to withdraw from
the Western Sahara. Seven months later, in June 1976, the
Organization of African Unity, in turn, taking up where the
Council had left off, by the resolution adopted by the
Council of African Ministers at its session at Port-Louis,
demanded
“‘the immediate withdrawal of all foreign forces of occupation- and respect for the territorial integrity of the
Western Sahara and for the national sovereignty of the
Saharan people” [S/12141 of 14 Jady 1976, annex l’j.
25. In its statement yesterday, the Moroccan delegation,
with consummate scorn, reduced the Saharan people and its
legitimate and exclusive representative, the PGLISARIO,
to “mercenaries”. Have the international community, the
United Nations, the Organization of African Unity and the
non-aligned countries thus made a gross mistake in recognizing the right to self-determination of Western Sahara, its
territory and its people and representatives? By thus insulting that people and its representatives, has not the Moroccan delegation impugned the honour of the international
community, which only yesterday at the thirty-third session
of the General Assembly, vigorously reaffhmed the right of
the people of Western Sahara to independence and welcomed the cease-fire unilaterally decreed by POLISARIO
so as to start a peace process in the region? Did not a
Moroccan magazine closely associated with the USFP
[Union sociahte desforces populaires], Lamalif: in its issue
No. 103 of last January, just after the thirty-third. session of
the General Assembly, characterize these results as a total
failure of Moroccan policy?

29. Morocco is seeking no more and no less than to have
the Council legitimize and legal& this deadly right of
pursuit. In so doing, it is striving to liquidate Saharan
resistance and at the same time trying to provide South
Africa and Rhodesia with a legal precedent to allow them to
attack front-line countries such as Zambia, Angola, Mozambique and Botswana and to permit Israel to attack the PLO
with impunity in Lebanon.
30. What Morocco threatens to unleash against my country is nothing but an attempt to justify the extermination of
any national liberation movement wherever it is, while at
the same time seeking to destabilize the countries which
offer asylum and assistance to these national liberation
movements. In behaving in this manner, Morocco, whether
voluntarily or not, is joining the camp of the aggressor
regimes in southern Africa, which regularly undertake the
same kind of reprisals against the front-line countries of
Africa, particularly, I repeat, Zambia, Botswana, Mommbique and Angola, which are also accused of coming to the
assistance of national liberation movements.

26. The Council has taken the decision to hear Mr. Madjid
Abdallah, the representative of POLISARIO in New York.
He is one of those described by the delegation of Morocco
as “mercenaries”. I leave it to members to judge the esteem
the delegation of Morocco has for the Council.
27. From what I have set forth before the Council since
the beginning of my statement, it is clear that Morocco,
which does not stop at demonstrating the existence of facts
for which it falsely blames Algeria, is deliberately mixing up
different things. The goal it seeks is clear. By invoking what
it claims is a legitimate right of self-defence without previously demonstrating the existence of an attack on the part

31. By coming to justify in advance its aggression against
my country, Morocco is at the same time giving an addi4

-

tional argument to these regimes of southern Africa, just as
it is providing additional’ satisfaction to Israel, in their
respective actions of reprisals against the Patriotic Front,
SWAP0 and PLO. My delegation wishes to declare this
here before the Security Council+ which has already had on
several occasions to consider complaints of countries such
as Zambia, Angola, Mozambique and Lebanon, the victims
of aggression.
32. The step taken by Morocco is part and parcel of the
logic of rushing to escape one’s responsibilities, and this is
serious. In his message of 4 October 1978 addressed to the
Moroccan head of State, a copy of which was addressed to
the Secretary-General, the head of the -Algerian State
declared:
“. . . I can assure Your Majesty, in the name of the
indissoluble bonds which will always exist between our
two peoples, that no Algerian soldier has ever crossed the
national frontiers, particularly those which we agreed
upon together in 1972. Moreover, only a few months
ago, I solemnly declared before the People’s National
Assembly that the Algerian armed .forces would not in
any case intervene beyond our frontiers and that, vigilant
guardians of our national sovereignty and territorial
integrity, they would stand by to repel any attack against
our country. This policy remains unchanged.‘*r
33. In the circumstances, Algeria places on the authorities
of Morocco total responsibility for the inevitable .consequences which would flow from the violation of our frontiers, just as the President of the Republic of Algeria recalled
once more in his message of 9 June last to the President of
the Sudan, current President of OAU. It is in these circumstances also that on the same day, 9 June, the Minister for
Foreign Affairs of Algeria addressed, in the same spirit, a
message to the Secretary-General. In addition to the order
given by the King of Morocco to his armed forces to exercise
their so-called right of pursuit, there are now the letters of 13
and 15 June 1979 [S/13394 and S/13397) in which Morocco
brings before the Council its complaint of an alleged aggression, thus clearly revealing the Moroccan plan which casts
threats of exceptional gravity over Algeria and the region,
34. It is really quite easy to unmask what we must call the
Moroccan manceuvre of which they have tried to make the
Security Council itself a witness. The proof which the representative of Morocco has attempted to set before us is really
a rather thin veil through which we can clearly perceive the
true problem of Western Sahara, a problem of decolonization frustrated, the struggle for freedom of the Saharan
people, which the Moroccan authorities find it increasingly
difficult to conceal from their own people and in which the
royal army suffers with increasing hardship.
35. So blatantly to attack Algeria and accuse it of aggression is a means as deplorable as it is vain of falsifying the
facts and making another country bear the responsibility
for the original crime of which Morocco is guilty in invading
Western Sahara in 1975-thus defying the Security Council-occupying
and partitioning its territory and then
’ See A/33/289.

annex.

annexing it in defiance of,all the relevant decisions of the
international community and of all the principles on whicfi
our action, our work and the existence’of our Organization
are based.
36. Morocco is now claiming to be the defender of principles of international law. As I recalled earlier, we have also
heard them refer to certain important texts, which the
Organ&&m
has drafted for the benefit of peoples and of
which it can be justly proud. But the delegation of Morocco
was a little too selective in its reading of those texts. Allow
me, in the context of what concerns us, to put before the
Moroccan delegation for further consideration a paragraph
of one of the declarations which it quoted. Following is
paragraph 18 of the Declaration on the Strengthening of
International Security [re.r&?io~ 2734 (m],
which
! “Calls upon all states to desist from any forcible or
other action which deprives peoples, in particular those
still under colonial or any other form of external domination, of their inalienable right to self-determination, freedom and independence and to refrain from military and
repressive measures aimed at preventing the attainment
of independence by all dependent peoples in accordance
with the Charter and in furtherance of the objectives of
General Assembly resolution 1514 (XV) of 14 December
1960, and render assistance to the United Nations and, in
accordance with the Charter, to the oppressed peoples in
their legitimate struggle in order to bring about the
speedy elimination of colonialism or any other form of
external domination,”
37. Likewise, resolution 3314 (XXIX), which the delegation of Morocco recalled and to which I too have referred,
and which contains the defmition of aggression, deserves
more thorough consideration by the delegation of Morocco,
particularly the provision on the duty of.States not to resort
to the use of armed force to deprive peoples of their right to
self-determination,’ freedom .and independence, to say
nothing of the resolutions which recognize the right of
peoples subject to colonial. and racist regimes and other
forms of foreign domination to seek support in their
”
struggle.
38. The Minister of the Cheritian Kingdom also referred
to the resolution by which the United,Nations marked and
celebrated the twenty-fifth anniversary of the Organization,
that is, resolution 2625 (XXV), mentioned earlier, which
contains the Declaration on Principles of International Law
concerning Friendly Relations and Co-operation among
States in accordance with the Charter of the United
Nations. I would remind the Council of the most relevant
provisions which have bearing on the problem of the decolonization of Western Sahara, which is at the core of the
crisis from which the region has been suffering for four
years. The Declaration provides that “‘the subjection of
peoples to alien subjugation, domination and exploitation
constitutes a major obstacle to the promotion of intemational peace and security”. Thus the relationship between
foreign domination and threats to international peace and
security is clearly perceived. Thus one can also remind
Morocco that the primary cause of the tension in the region
is the military occupation of Western Sahara by’Morocco.

39. That same resolution recalls that the right of peoples
to self-determination is a fundamental principle which is
not to be breached and that *‘its effective application is of
paramount importance for the promotion of friendly relations among States”. Various resolutions of the United
Nations, the Organization of African Unity and the nonaligned countries have called on Morocco to implement
that provision and finally allow the Saharan people to
exercise their right to selfdetermination. It is the act that for
four years Morocco has not budged and has refused to
recognize that the Saharan people has that right in accordance with the terms of the resolution that I have quoted
and which Morocco too has quoted, which hinders the
promotion of friendly relations among States in the region
and constitutes the “major obstacle” to the attainment of
peace and security in north-west Africa. It is also the same
resolution that specifies, for the benefit of Morocco which
unfortunately has forgotten it, that “every State has the
duty to refrain from any forcible action which deprives
peoples.. . of their right to self-determination and freedom
and independence”, as has happened today in the case of
the people of Western Sahara.
40. We could go on with this exercise for a long time and
in greater detail regarding all the texts quoted by Morocco.
It would prove its rather bizarre reading and selective understanding of such important documents. Yet 1 have no doubt
that the members of this body, having been to the highest
degree involved- in their drafting, are fully aware of the
significance and meaning of the texts and therefore cannot
be imposed upon.
41. Algeria has never committed any of the acts of which
it has been so lightly accused by Morocco and them is no
proof of the deeds of which we have been accused because
they did not take place. Indeed, Algeria has no reason to
embark on so irresponsible an adventure against a neighbouring State. Since 1975 and the military occupation of
Western Sahara by Morocco and Mauritania, Algeria has
maintained its composure and kept calm even when the
threats and provocations which replaced the invective
brought forth by political frustration, became clearer. But
Algeria wishes to reaflirm once again that it has never
departed from its duty to provide support, assistance to and
solidarity with the peoples that are struggling for their
national rights, and we deeply regret seeing that our erstwhile brothers in arms are turning their backs on the heritage of a common struggle to take up where the aggressors
left off and to deny the existence of another brother people
whom we were all hastening to welcome into the Maghreb
family.
42. Algeria worked tirelessly in order that Morocco.
should recognize the official existence of Mauritania that
for many long years it denied, and we might be right in not
despairing of that same Morocco’s one day recognizing,
elsewhere than on the battlefield, the existence of the Saharan people.

fraternal feeling among the peoples of the Maghrkbds
there wasyesterday-it should be of a brotherhood that had
its roots in history and that must always be based on respect
for the independence of each people whatever may be the
size of its territory or of its population. In no way can
recalling history serve to justify annexation and occupation.
44. Morocco has consistently opposed and considered
null and void all United Nations initiatives and decisions
aimed at guaranteeing to the people of Western Sahara
satisfaction of their national fundamental rights. Thus, for
example, the .mission entrusted by the United Nations to
Ambassador Rydbeck could not be successfully concluded
because of Rabat’s refusal to receive the representative of
the Secretary-General.
45. It would thus seem to us that the Security Council
could usefully examine the ,consequences for peace and
security in the region flowing from the persistent refusal of
Morocco-in
contrast to Mauritania, it would seem-to
implement the decisions of the United Nations and of OAU
regarding the self-determination of the Saharan people.
46. Morocco pretends that it wants to refer the matter of
Western Sahara to the AdHoc Committee of OAU, according to what its representative said. According to the terms of
the resolution adopted at Khartoum last July by the African
heads of state, the Committee must consider “all the data
on the question of Western Sahara” including “the exercise
of the right of the people of this Territory to selfdetermination**, in order to allow the convening of “an
extraordinary summit meeting devoted to the question of
Western Sahara”. It seems that Morocco has suddenly
discovered the virtues of the wisdom of OAU and its organs.
And yet it is Morocco which has always systematically
obstructed any action on the part of OAU. It is Morocco
which left the room at the African summit held at PortLouis in 1976 when the heads of State decided to convenean
extraordinary summit meeting devoted to the question of
Western Sahara. It was Morocco again which sought in
vain to prevent the General Assembly in the course of its
last two sessions from debating the question of Western
Sahara. And it was Morocco which, last year at Belgrade
and recently at Colombo, in the non-aligned movement,
tried to delete that item from the agenda of our debates,
claiming that the Ad iYoc Committee was seized of the
matter, but without doing anything to facilitate the task of
OAU’for almost four years or that of the AdHoc Committee for a year. From conference to conference, it is Morocco
which has been practising a policy of obstruction, so as not
to have to give an accounting of its illegal occupation of the
Saharan territory and the extermination of its people. It is
Morocco, finally, which despite pressing appeals made by
the African Group for several days here, has refused-as I
have mentioned earlier-to drop its submission of the matter to the Security Council.
47. Thus,. despite the statements dictated by political
opportunism in favour of the efforts of OAU the “closedfile” argument that is always invoked by Morocco is tantamount to a refusal to seek any solution apart from
annexation and partition.

.43. In this respect, the attitude of the new leaders of
Mauritania provides for us-at least, we hope-a reason to
believe in the future of our region, provided that their
example is clearly understood. And when there is talk of the
6

48. Yesterday it affGmed that it had submitted a request
concerning “a specific time and place”. By limiting its
request to that specific time and place, Morocco was trying
artificially to isolate from their context the most recent
manifestations of the struggle waged by the POLISARIO
Front since the Moroccan troops invaded the Territory of
Western Sahara. According to that approach, the Council
was supposed to concentrate on the events that have taken
place within the internationally recognized borders of
Morocco. Indeed, the representative of Morocco specified
that he was referring to localities “completelyoutside Westem Sahara”. Even though Morocco persists in considering
a part of the Territory it occupies by force a “Saharan
province*‘, it is worth pointing out that it itself makes a
distinction between what I would call the “metropolis” and
the “colony”, thus following a logic familiar to us all: the
logic of colonial Powers.
49. Nevertheless, one State that was a party to that partition now recognizes that the tension in the region has as its
real cause the violation of the principle of selfdetermination and the policy of military fait accompli. This healthy
awareness and the willingness proclaimed by Mauritania to
begin by dialogue and negotiation to make up’ for the
damage caused to the people of Western Sahara thus provide a response to the initiative for a cease-fire taken by
the POLISARIO Front in July 1978.
50. We must also point out at the same time the clearer
and more consistent attitude adopted by the former administering Power which, by recognixing the POLISARIO
Front as the legitimate representative of the Saharan peapie, has recalled the urgent need to ensure for that people
the exercise of its right to self-determination.
51. In this context, which is favourable to the search for a
peaceful solution, OAU has also been able to regain the
initiative to undertake its mission, through the Ad Hoc
Committee set up at the Khartoum summit, to guarantee

the application of the principle of selfdetermination‘for
benefit of the people of Western Sahara.

the

52. Algeria wishes to emphasise’ that the problem of
Western Sahara is a political problem that calls for a political solution. That solution has been the subject of thorough
debates both regionally and internationally, debates in
which it was clearly estab1ishe.d that the only basis for a
solution are serious guarantees of the effective implementation of the fundamental right to self-determination by
means of a free and authentic referendum.
53. Algeria makes a solemn and urgent appeal to the
Security Council to exercise all its authority, power and
prestige so as to make a decisive contribution to the multiple
efforts to bring back peace to north-west Africa, a peace
based on the right of the Western Saharan people to selfdetermination and independence.
54. To safeguard peace and security in our region, the
Council must also seriously warn Morocco against any new
attempt to have the international community as a whole set
the Saharan question aside. Morocco must be warned of the
dangerous and dramatic consequences of its declarations
and threats against Algeria.
55. Algeria has always adamantly defended its sovereignty, its security and the integrity of its territory. Accordingly, we shall take all measures that may be required by any
situation, and we shall meet any aggression.
56. While this is a particularly grave time, Algeria will
maintain that calm that arises from its sense of responsibility and its faith in the common destiny of the peoples of the
region. We wish members of the Council to witness our
message.

The meeting rose at 12.50 p.m.

.

2,

HOW

TO OBTAIN

UNITED

NATIONS

Unite
1 Nations
publications
throughout
the world.
Consult
Section,
New York or Geneva.
COMMENT

SE PROCURER

may
your

LES

PUBLICATIONS
be obtained
bookstore

or

PUBLICATIONS

from
bookstores
write
to: United

and
distributors
Nations,
Sales

DES

UNIES

NATIONS

Les publications
des Nations
Unies
sent
en vente
dans
les librairies
depositaires
du monde
entier.
Informez-vous
aup&s
de votre libraire
A : Nations
Unies.
Section
des ventes.
New York ou Geneve.
KAK

COMO

IIOJIY’IRTb

CONSEGUIR

HBAAHHR

PUBLICACIONES

Las publicaciones
de las
buidoras
en todas
partes
Unidas,
Sac&n
de Ventas.

Litho

in United

Nations,

New York

OPl-AHHBAUWW

DE

OEbEflWHEHHblX

LAS

Naciones
Unidas
estin
de1 mundo.
Cons&e
Nueve
York o Ginebra.

Price:

W.S.

NACIONES

HAUNR

UNIDAS

en vents
en librerfas
a su librero
o dirfjase

1.50

et IS agences
ou adressez-vous

y casas distria: Naciones

79-70002-February

1982-2.250
