S/2001/357

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
12 April 2001
Original: English

Letter dated 12 April 2001 from the Secretary-General
to the President of the Security Council
I wish to refer to the presidential statement dated 2 June 2000
(S/PRST/2000/20) in which the Security Council requested me to establish a Panel
of Experts on the Illegal Exploitation of Natural Resources and Other Forms of
Wealth in the Democratic Republic of the Congo for a period of six months. The
Council also requested that the expert panel, once established, submit to the
Council, through me, its final report at the end of the mandate.
Further to my letter dated 2 April 2001, I have the honour to transmit to you
the report of the Panel, submitted to me by the Chairperson of the Panel. I should be
grateful if you would bring the report to the attention of the members of the Security
Council.
(Signed) Kofi A. Annan

01-32354 (E) 130401

*0132354*

S/2001/357

Report of the Panel of Experts on the Illegal Exploitation of
Natural Resources and Other Forms of Wealth of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo
Contents
Paragraphs

Page

Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

1–24

3

A.

Summary . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

4–8

3

B.

Methodological framework . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

9–16

4

C.

Overview . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

17–20

5

D.

Background . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

21–24

6

Illegal exploitation of natural resources and other forms of wealth . . . . . . . . . . . . .

25–108

6

A.

Pre-existing structures that facilitated illegal exploitation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

26–31

6

B.

Mass-scale looting . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

32–45

8

C.

Systematic and systemic exploitation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

46–70

9

D.

Current structures of illegal exploitation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

71–86

14

E.

Individual actors . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

87–93

17

F.

Economic data: confirmation of the illegal exploitation of the natural
resources of the Democratic Republic of the Congo . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

94–108

19

Links between the exploitation of natural resources and the continuation of the
conflict . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

109–212

27

A.

Budgets compared to military expenditures . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

110–124

27

B.

Financing the war . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

125–172

29

C.

Special features of the links between the exploitation of natural resources
and the continuation of the conflict . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

173–180

36

Facilitators or passive accomplices? . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

181–212

37

IV.

Conclusion and findings . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

213–218

41

V.

Recommendations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

219–242

42

Sample of companies importing minerals from the Democratic Republic of the Congo
via Rwanda . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

46

II.

Countries visited and representatives of Governments and organizations interviewed . . . . . . . .

48

III.

Abbreviations. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

55

I.

II.

III.

D.

Annexes
I.

2

S/2001/357

I. Introduction
1.
By the statement of its President of 2 June 2000
(S/PRST/2000/20), the Security Council requested the
Secretary-General to establish an expert panel on the
illegal exploitation of natural resources and other forms
of wealth of the Democratic Republic of the Congo, for
a period of six months, with the following mandate:
– To follow up on reports and collect information
on all activities of illegal exploitation of natural
resources and other forms of wealth of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, including in
violation of the sovereignty of that country;
– To research and analyse the links between the
exploitation of the natural resources and other
forms of wealth in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo and the continuation of the conflict;
– To revert to the Council with recommendations.
2.
The Secretary-General, in his letter to the
President of the Security Council dated 31 July 2000
(S/2000/796), notified the President of the Security
Council that the composition of the Panel was as
follows:
Mme Safiatou Ba-N’Daw (Côte d’Ivoire)
(Chairperson);
Mr. François Ekoko (Cameroon);
Mr. Mel Holt (United States of America);
Mr. Henri Maire (Switzerland);
Mr. Moustapha Tall (Senegal).
3.
The Panel was assisted by a technical advisor, an
associate political officer, an administrator and a
secretary.

A. Summary
4.
Illegal exploitation of the mineral and forest
resources of the Democratic Republic of the Congo is
taking place at an alarming rate. Two phases can be
distinguished: mass-scale looting and the systematic
and systemic exploitation of natural resources.
5.
Mass-scale looting. During this first phase,
stockpiles of minerals, coffee, wood, livestock and
money that were available in territories conquered by
the armies of Burundi, Rwanda and Uganda were

taken, and either transferred to those countries or
exported to international markets by their forces and
nationals.
6.
Systematic and systemic exploitation. Planning
and organization were required for this phase. The
systematic exploitation flourished because of the preexisting structures developed during the conquest of
power of the Alliance of Democratic Forces for the
Liberation of Congo-Zaire. These pre-existing
structures were improved over time and new networks
for channelling extracted resources were put in place.
However, the systemic exploitation used the existing
systems of control established by Rwanda and Uganda.
In both cases, exploitation was often carried out in
violation of the sovereignty of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, the national legislation and
sometimes international law, and it led to illicit
activities. Key individual actors including top army
commanders and businessmen on the one hand, and
government structures on the other, have been the
engines of this systematic and systemic exploitation.
7.
The consequence of illegal exploitation has been
twofold: (a) massive availability of financial resources
for the Rwandan Patriotic Army, and the individual
enrichment of top Ugandan military commanders and
civilians; (b) the emergence of illegal networks headed
either by top military officers or businessmen. These
two elements form the basis of the link between the
exploitation of natural resources and the continuation
of the conflict. Other contributing factors however
exist — the roles played by some entities and
institutions, and the opportunistic behaviour of some
private companies and influential individuals,
including some decision makers in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and Zimbabwe. Some leaders in
the region bear a direct responsibility. The Panel
concludes that tough measures must be taken to bring
to an end the cycle of exploitation of the natural
resources and the continuation of the conflict in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo.
8.
The Panel’s recommendations revolve around six
broad themes: (1) sanctions against countries and
individuals involved in the illegal activities;
(2) preventive measures to avoid a recurrence of the
current situation; (3) reparations to the victims of the
illegal exploitation of natural resources; (4) design of a
framework for reconstruction; (5) improvement of
international mechanisms and regulations governing
some natural resources; and (6) security issues.

3

S/2001/357

B. Methodological framework
9.
Methodology. Owing to the nature of the work
and the complexities of the issues, a methodology that
allows flexible data collection was essential in order to
complete this project. The Panel has therefore utilized:
(a) Primary
data
collection.
Official
documentation from ministries and other institutions as
well as recorded minutes of meetings involving various
relevant actors;
(b) Secondary sources. Reports, workshop
proceedings, published and unpublished literature;
(c) Interviews. Structured, semi-structured and
open interviews as well as interviews resulting from
various network referrals.
10. A vast amount of data was obtained from three
essential sources:
(a) Countries and other entities involved in the
conflict in the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
namely: Angola, Burundi, the Democratic Republic of
the Congo, Namibia, Rwanda, Uganda, Zimbabwe,
RCD-Goma and RCD-ML;
(b) “Third-party” sources such as Belgium,
Cameroon, China, Denmark, France, Germany, Kenya,
the Netherlands, the United Kingdom of Great Britain
and Northern Ireland, the United Republic of Tanzania,
the United States of America, Switzerland, various
United Nations agencies, the International Monetary
Fund, the World Bank, the World Trade Organization,
OECD, the International Coffee Organization, De
Beers, the Diamond High Council, the International
Diamond Manufacturers Association, the University of
Maryland, the World Resource Institute and CIFOR;
(c) Various individual actors and stakeholders
who expressed an interest for various reasons in
sharing their knowledge and understanding with the
Panel.
11. The production and export data series available
for the analysis cover the period 1995-2000. Data were
systematically analysed separately and then compared
with one another. Comparative analysis thus
contributed to the Panel’s ability to develop a good
understanding of the issues. In addition, the Panel
sought to cross-check every item of information
received. In relation to this and to the extent possible,
Panel members attempted to speak to individuals

4

against whom serious allegations were made. When
access to those key witnesses or primary actors was
denied, Panel members often relied on their closest
collaborators for insight. The Panel however faced a
problem of imbalance in the acquisition of data. Indeed
data was abundant for Rwanda, Uganda, RCD-Goma,
RCD-ML and MLC. This is partly due to the high
number of insiders living in the Democratic Republic
of the Congo and in Europe who were directly involved
with those entities and who offered to share almost
everything they knew or had experienced or gathered
as documentation while they were involved with them.
The same quantity and quality of data were not
available for Angola, Namibia or Zimbabwe, although
the Panel visited those countries. This constraint can be
felt in the report. Overall the report was written using
the empirical method combined with the economic
analysis of data collected, supported by elements of
evidence.
12. Establishing boundaries. Geographically, data
were gathered for occupied and non-occupied
territories within the Democratic Republic of the
Congo as well as for any country involved in the
conflict or of other strategic importance, geographic,
financial or other. With respect to natural resources, the
Panel focused on minerals, forest and agricultural
products and other forms of wealth, primarily taxes.
Given the high number of natural resources found in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo, the high level
of exploitation by numerous parties, and the limited
time and resources available to the Panel, the following
criteria for the selection of resources to be examined
were developed:
• The commercial value of the resources in
absolute terms;
• The interest of parties in the resources;
• The scale of exploitation.
13. Based on these criteria, three categories of
products were of primary consideration: (a) mineral
resources, primarily coltan, diamonds, gold and
cassiterite; (b) agriculture, forests and wildlife,
including timber, coffee and ivory; and (c) financial
products, mainly in regard to taxes. Copper, cobalt,
livestock, gorillas, okapis, tobacco, tea, palm oil and
land allocation deserved to be among the resources and
products to be studied. Some did not meet established
criteria, however, and for others, such as copper and
cobalt, time constraint was the main reason for a lack

S/2001/357

of study. These resources are touched upon in the
report for illustrative purposes, but were not
systematically studied.
14. Defining the key concepts. In determining the
parameters of the project the definition or
interpretation of illegality and exploitation was
vigorously debated.
15. Illegality. The most contentious concept in the
mandate has been the term “illegality” with regard to
exploitation. Almost all actors in the conflict and
observers requested a clear definition of illegality. In
the Panel’s view, the understanding of illegality is
underpinned by four elements all related to the rule of
law, namely:
(a) Violation of sovereignty. The first element
is based on the Security Council’s understanding of
illegality as described in the Panel’s mandate (see the
statement of the President of the Security Council of 2
June 2000 (S/PRST/2000/20)). This posits that all
activities — extraction, production, commercialization
and exports — taking place in the Democratic Republic
of the Congo without the consent of the legitimate
government are illegal. This interpretation suggested
that only non-invited forces and their nationals are
carrying out illegal activities in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo.
(b) Respect by actors of the existing regulatory
framework in the country or territory where they
operate or carry out their activities. The Panel
considers that if authorities exerting effective power
and control over their sovereign area recognize or set
up a regulatory framework to govern the use or
exploitation of resources, this framework shall be
respected. Failure to do so may lead to the
infringement of the law and, therefore, activities
considered illegal or unlawful. In this case, the Panel
deems illegality to be the carrying out of an activity in
violation of an existing body of regulations.
(c) The discrepancy between widely accepted
practices in trade and business and the way business is
conducted in the Democratic Republic of the Congo. In
this category, the Panel has considered that the use and
abuse of power by some actors fall into the category of
illegality. This includes forced monopoly in trading,
the unilateral fixing of prices of products by the buyer,
the confiscation or looting of products from farmers,
and the use of military forces in various zones to

protect some interests or to create a situation of
monopoly.
(d) The violation of international law including
“soft” law. The Panel considers that business activities
carried out in violation of international law are illegal.
The Panel utilized the aforementioned elements in a
complementary manner, refusing to be exclusive or to
focus on one single element. On the basis of
discussions with different members of the Security
Council, the Panel has interpreted the wish of the
Security Council to be a broad interpretation of the
concept of illegality.
16. Exploitation. The Panel opted for a broad
understanding and interpretation of exploitation.
Exploitation was used beyond the mere consideration
of production and extraction. It was viewed as all
activities that enable actors and stakeholders to engage
in business in first, secondary and tertiary sectors in
relation to the natural resources and other forms of
wealth of the Democratic Republic of the Congo. The
broad interpretation enabled the Panel to look into
extraction, production, commercialization and exports
of natural resources and other services such as
transport and financial transactions.

C. Overview
17. This section offers a general overview of the
report. Initially, the Panel examined the pre-existing
structures that have facilitated the illegal exploitation
of natural resources in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo.
These
elements
encompass
the
financial/commercial links and the transportation
networks that essentially laid the foundation for the
current situation of illegal exploitation.
18. The Panel then reviewed the primary processes
by which the natural resources are physically exploited
by the occupying forces, primarily Rwanda and
Uganda, in conjunction with their respective rebel
counterparts in the Democratic Republic of the Congo.
Subsequently, the current structures of exploitation
were discussed in order to demonstrate the evolution of
the process to its present state. Selected individuals
were then profiled to illustrate the extent to which this
is an organized and embedded venture. Economic data
were then analysed to confirm the findings described
above.

5

S/2001/357

19. The focus then moved to exploring the
complexities of the links between the continuation of
the conflict and the exploitation of resources through
the use of specific country examples. The aim is to
demonstrate the varying means by which power
structures can manipulate situations for the most
favourable outcome. This section is directly linked to
the previous one and, in some cases, information
overlapped. This was unavoidable because of the
intricate nature of the problem at hand.
20. The report goes on to discuss more incidental
elements in this exploitation, which are nonetheless
important and relevant: official and non-official fronts
utilized as well as the facilitators or passive
accomplices within the processes. The report concludes
with a summary of the findings and recommendations
for action.

D. Background
21. The Democratic Republic of the Congo is located
in the heart of equatorial central Africa and has an area
of 2,267,600 square kilometres and a current
population estimated at 50 million. The Democratic
Republic of the Congo is endowed with a unique
biodiversity, vast mineral and forest resources, and rich
soils conducive to agriculture (see map). These
favourable conditions, concentrated in the eastern
regions, are the setting for the current ongoing
occupation and struggle to exploit these natural
resources.
22. The initial disruption, predominantly affecting the
eastern Democratic Republic of the Congo, began with
the 1994-1995 refugee crisis in the region, spawned by
the war in neighbouring Rwanda. The sudden influx of
hundreds of thousands of refugees, including members
of the Interahamwe, created a new demographic
dynamic in the subregional population, abruptly
disturbed the delicate balance of the ecosystems and
generated a new security situation along the border
between the Democratic Republic of the Congo and
Rwanda.
23. The situation further deteriorated in 1996 with the
war between the Zairian forces and the Alliance of
Democratic Forces for the Liberation of Congo-Zaire
(AFDL), the rebel movement led by the late LaurentDésiré Kabila and supported by the Angolan, Rwandan
and Ugandan forces. This AFDL-led conquest of then

6

eastern Zaire fundamentally altered the composition of
the regional stakeholders and the distribution of natural
resources. Previously, the distribution norm was (via
legal and illegal channels) through locally based
Congolese,
mostly
civilian-managed,
business
operations. However, these traditional modes were
quickly overtaken by new power structures. Along with
new players came new rules for exploiting natural
resources. Foreign troops and their “friends” openly
embraced
business
in
“liberated
territories”,
encouraged indirectly by the AFDL leader, the late
President Kabila.
24. In August 1998, fighting erupted again in the
northern, western and eastern parts of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, this time between Rwandan and
Ugandan troops and the Congolese army, with the
assistance of Angolan, Namibian and Zimbabwean
armies, as well as Sudanese and Chadian forces. The
last two countries have since withdrawn their soldiers
from the Democratic Republic of the Congo.

II. Illegal exploitation of natural
resources and other forms of
wealth
25. The illegal exploitation of resources by Burundi,
Rwanda and Uganda took different forms, including
confiscation, extraction, forced monopoly and pricefixing. Of these, the first two reached proportions that
made the war in the Democratic Republic of the Congo
a very lucrative business. Prior to defining the type and
manner of illegal exploitation, however, it is important
to examine the pre-existing structures which facilitated
this process.

A. Pre-existing structures that facilitated
illegal exploitation
26. Illegal exploitation1 by foreigners aided by the
Congolese began with the first “war of liberation” in
1996. The AFDL rebels, backed by Angolan, Rwandan
and Ugandan soldiers conquered eastern and southeastern Zaire. As they were advancing, the then AFDL
leader, the late Laurent-Désiré Kabila, signed contracts
with a number of foreign companies. Numerous
accounts and documents suggest that by 1997 a first
__________________
1 In the context of the Panel’s mandate.

S/2001/357

wave of “new businessmen” speaking only English,
Kinyarwanda and Kiswahili had commenced operations
in the eastern Democratic Republic of the Congo.2
Theft of livestock, coffee beans and other resources
began to be reported with frequency. By the time the
August 1998 war broke out, Rwandans and Ugandans
(top officers and their associates) had a strong sense of
the potential of the natural resources and their locations
in the eastern the Democratic Republic of the Congo.
Some historians have argued that Ugandan forces were
instrumental in the conquest of areas such as Wasta,
Bunia, Beni and Butembo during the first war.

29. Financial and commercial links. During the
early months of the rebellion, the financial setting and
networks were already in place. At the heart of the
financial setting is the Banque de commerce, du
développement et d’industrie (BCDI) located in Kigali.
According to some sources, there was an understanding
between the President of Rwanda, Paul Kagame,
President Museveni and the late Laurent-Désiré Kabila
on the collection and use of financial resources during
the time of the AFDL rebellion. This collaboration led
many sources to believe that the three leaders were
shareholders in BCDI. But this was not the case.

27. Numerous accounts in Kampala suggest that the
decision to enter the conflict in August 1998 was
defended by some top military officials who had served
in eastern Zaire during the first war and who had had a
taste of the business potential of the region. Some key
witnesses, who served with the Rally for Congolese
Democracy rebel faction in early months, spoke about
the eagerness of Ugandan forces to move in and
occupy areas where gold and diamond mines were
located. Other sources informed the Panel that, late in
September 1998, they were already engaged in
discussions with General Salim Saleh on the creation
of a company that would supply the eastern Democratic
Republic of the Congo with merchandise, and on the
import of natural resources. The project never
materialized in this form, but the sources reportedly
also discussed this and other business venture
possibilities with the President of Uganda, Yoweri
Museveni.

30. The following example illustrates the nature of
the financial transactions and links involving BCDI,
Citibank New York as a corresponding bank, and some
companies and individuals. In a letter signed by
J. P. Moritz, General Manager of Société minière de
Bakwanga (MIBA), a diamond company, and Ngandu
Kamenda, the General Manager of MIBA ordered a
payment of US$ 3.5 million to la Générale de
commerce d’import/export du Congo (COMIEX),3 a
company owned by late President Kabila and some of
his close allies, such as Minister Victor Mpoyo, from
an account in BCDI through a Citibank account. This
amount of money was paid as a contribution from
MIBA to the AFDL war effort.

28. There are strong indications that, if security and
political reasons were the professed roots of the
political leaders’ motivation to move into the eastern
Democratic Republic of the Congo, some top army
officials clearly had a hidden agenda: economic and
financial objectives. A few months before the 1998 war
broke out, General Salim Saleh and the elder son of
President Museveni reportedly visited the eastern
Democratic Republic of the Congo. One month after
the beginning of the conflict, General James Kazini
was already involved in commercial activities.
According to very reliable sources, he knew the most
profitable sectors and immediately organized the local
commanders to serve their economic and financial
objectives.
__________________
2 Cross-border commercial exchanges between people of

the region have traditionally existed.

31. Transportation networks. Illegal activities also
benefited from the old transportation network that
existed prior to the 1998 war. This network consists of
key airlines and trucking companies, a number of
which aided AFDL troops in their war against the
Mobutu regime. The pattern of transport remains
similar today: merchandise or arms are flown in and
natural resources or their products are flown out. For
example, Aziza Kulsum Gulamali, a businesswoman
operating within the region for some time, utilized this
network even in the 1980s. She contracted Air Cargo
Zaire to transport arms to the FDD Hutu rebels in
Burundi and smuggled cigarettes on the return flight.
Since 1998, aircraft also fly from the military airports
at Entebbe and Kigali, transporting arms, military
equipment, soldiers and, for some companies,
merchandise. On the return flights, they will carry
coffee, gold, diamond traders and business
representatives and, in some cases, soldiers. The Panel
__________________
3 COMIEX is registered as follows: immatriculé No.

43797, identification nationale No. 31837T, Siège
sociale Kinshasa/Gombé No. 4 Avenue de la Justice.
Administrateur Directeur générale: Frédéric Kabarele.

7

S/2001/357

concludes that these pre-existing networks and
structures constitute the basis for the current
exploitation of the natural resources of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo.

B. Mass-scale looting
32. Between September 1998 and August 1999,
occupied zones of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo were drained of existing stockpiles, including
minerals, agricultural and forest products and livestock.
Regardless of the looter, the pattern was the same:
Burundian, Rwandan, Ugandan and/or RCD soldiers,
commanded by an officer, visited farms, storage
facilities, factories and banks, and demanded that the
managers open the coffers and doors. The soldiers were
then ordered to remove the relevant products and load
them into vehicles. The Panel received numerous
accounts and claims of unlawful removal of products
by Rwandan or Ugandan armies and their local RCD
allies. The Panel has chosen to illustrate this point with
some examples.
33. In the mining sector, SOMINKI (Société minière
et industrielle du Kivu) had seven years’ worth of
columbo-tantalite (coltan) in stock in various areas.
From late November 1998, Rwandan forces and their
RCD allies organized its removal and transport to
Kigali. Depending on the sources, between 2,000 and
3,000 tons of cassiterite and between 1,000 and 1,500
tons of coltan were removed from the region between
November 1998 and April 1999. A very reliable source
informed the Panel that it took the Rwandans about a
month to fly this coltan to Kigali. The Panel, however,
received official documents including one in which
RCD acknowledged removing 6 tons of coltan and 200
tons of cassiterite from SOMINKI for a total of
US$ 722,482.
34. Late in late August 1998, General Kazini’s
soldiers absconded with the stockpiles of timber
belonging to the logging company Amex-bois, located
in Bagboka. In December that year, the same General
ordered the confiscation of all the stocked timber
belonging to the logging company La Forestière.
General Kazini was reportedly seen in the area at least
twice during the period when the looting occurred and
temporarily established his headquarters in the area.
35. Then, in January 1999, in Equateur Province,
Jean-Pierre Bemba and General Kazini organized a

8

large operation for the confiscation of coffee beans.
Mr. Bemba initiated, encouraged and perpetuated such
practices in the Province. In a written letter to one of
his commanders, he urged him to release a bigger
vehicle he was using because it was needed urgently.
The source indicated that this was later used to carry
away tons of coffee beans. A participant in this
operation, who has since left the movement, explained
that two months were required to remove the enormous
quantities of coffee. In the past, this province produced
60 per cent of the country’s robusta coffee. The
localities of Bumba, Lisala, Bosonzo, Binga and
Mindembo for a year did not have coffee stocks to
export because of these seizures. The Société
congolaise du café, the largest owner of coffee stocks
in the area, went bankrupt. The mass-scale looting
reached such levels that, in one instance, Mr. Bemba
seized 200 tons of coffee beans from the SCIBE
company, which was owned by his father, Saolona
Bemba. The matter remains unresolved in court.
36. In some cases, factories were dismantled or
machinery spare parts were taken away, as in the case
of the sugar factory of Kaliba in South Kivu. When the
Panel asked about the dismantling of some factories,
the RCD cabinet replied that investors were free to
dismantle their factories and relocate wherever they
wanted. In essence, RCD recognized the phenomenon,
but explained it in terms of the investors’ decision to
relocate the factories while taking the raw materials
from the Democratic Republic of the Congo. Cars and
other items were apparently also taken from the
country, as statistics on Ugandan registered cars
reflected an increase of about one quarter in 1999.
37. The financial sector was not left untouched either.
A defector from RCD who participated in some looting
informed the Panel that Rwandan soldiers
systematically targeted local banks as soon as they
conquered a town. In many cases, they would use the
RCD soldiers to collect the money while those who
were armed would surround the bank. For example, the
Kisangani Bank, a branch of the central bank, received
a visit of RCD staff accompanied by Rwandan soldiers.
Depending on the source (central bank in Kinshasa or
eyewitness), anywhere between $1 million and
$8 million worth of Congolese francs was taken. The
Panel was told that the operation took place a couple of
days after the central bank and Ministry of Finance
officials deposited money to pay civil servants and old
Congolese franc notes were replaced by new ones.

S/2001/357

38. Under the escort of soldiers, the money was taken
to the Palm Beach Hotel. The hotel management
recalled that bags full of money were stored in one of
the rooms and that during those few days armed
soldiers who could not speak Lingala (the most
commonly spoken Congolese language) guarded the
hotel premises. Could such an operation involving a
number of armed soldiers be carried out without the
knowledge and consent of the highest Rwandan
commander in the Democratic Republic of the Congo?
39. Aides of Jean-Pierre Ondekane (an RCD leader)
reportedly collected the money from the Palm Beach
Hotel, flew with it to Goma and handed it over to
Emmanuel Kamanzi (former chief of the Finance
Department of RCD), who then flew on to Kigali. The
Panel could not identify the final recipient of the
money or how much disappeared between Kisangani,
Goma and Kigali. However, some sources told the
Panel that Mr. Kamanzi was imprisoned briefly at some
point after this transaction. According to the same
sources, he had apparently helped himself to the money
he was ordered only to transport. Mr. Kamanzi told
friends that he simply took a break of two months in
Kigali.
40. During the period when this operation was under
way, in Equateur Province, Mr. Bemba’s men visited
several banks. According to a reliable source
Mr. Bemba’s instructions to his soldiers were to
systematically empty the bank once a town was
captured. His troops took an equivalent of $400,000
from the Banque commerciale du Congo branch in
Bumba, $500,000 in Lisala, and approximately
$600,000 in Gemena.
41. The pilfering was also occurring in Kinshasa. The
Panel has evidence of a widespread practice by which
the late President Kabila would by proxy have
companies give a certain percentage of their profits.
For example, certain oil companies in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, under the umbrella of taxe
parafiscale, were delivering sums of money, in hard
cash, daily or weekly to the late President via his
Minister, friend and right-hand man, Mr. Mpoyo. Other
companies, such as MIBA, were asked to hand over
part of their profits to the late President’s regime, and
all parastatals and important private companies were
invited to open bank accounts in the Banque de
commerce et du développement (BCD) (see para. 78).

42. However, over time the mass-scale looting
described above diminished and theft by individual
soldiers became more visible. For example, in Bunia,
during Panel discussions, local non-governmental
organizations, eyewitnesses and victims mentioned
cases in which Congolese civilians were injured or
murdered for resisting the attempted seizure of
property by the RCD rebels and foreign soldiers. In
Bukavu, individuals have told Panel members how
Rwandan soldiers confiscated their life savings in
dollar notes and some of the gold they were buying and
keeping as monnaie refuge in the face of the repeatedly
devalued Congolese franc. Partially, this has
contributed to the increasing resentment felt by the
Congolese population towards foreign soldiers and
some rebels.
43. The lootings of manufacturing plants, stocks and
private property were not only acts of isolated
individual soldiers but were encouraged, sometimes
organized and coordinated, by the highest army
commanders of both Rwanda and Uganda.
44. General Kazini used the same method to facilitate
looting activities. He would appoint loyal commanders
and reliable civilian Congolese in the civil
administration in areas potentially rich in natural
resources in order to secure his networks. This was
exactly the case in Ituri, where he appointed Adele
Lotsove in 1999 (see para. 71). In turn, these top layers
of collaborators, colonels and majors utilized their
right-hand men to carry out the actual looting.
45. The Panel has strong indications after talking to
numerous witnesses (key and others) that key officials
in the Governments of Rwanda and Uganda were aware
of the situation on the ground, including the looting of
stocks from a number of factories. In some cases, the
level of production of mineral resources would have
alerted any government, such as those of gold for
Uganda and coltan for Rwanda (from 99 tons in 1996
to 250 tons in 1997).

C. Systematic and systemic exploitation
46. Extraction phase. The mass-scale looting carried
out on many levels within the Democratic Republic of
the Congo by rebels and foreign soldiers overshadowed
extraction activities during the first 12 months of the
second war. When resource stockpiles were looted and
exhausted by occupying forces and their allies, the

9

S/2001/357

exploitation evolved to an active extraction phase. Both
Congolese (civilians and soldiers) and foreigners
(civilians and soldiers) became involved in the
extraction of natural resources. This section highlights
one particular case study rather than offering a number
of shorter illustrative examples. The study will in effect
demonstrate how a company used illicit business
practices and complicity with occupying forces and the
Government as well as its international connections to
exploit the natural resources of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo.
47. DARA-Forest case study. A Ugandan-Thai
forest company called DARA-Forest moved to the Ituri
area late in 1998. In March 1998, DARA-Forest
applied for a licence to carry out logging activities in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo, but was denied
a forest concession by the Kinshasa authorities. In
1999, the company began to buy production by hiring
individuals to harvest timber and then sell it to the
company. Initially, these individuals were Congolese
operating in partnership with Ugandans. The same
year, DARA engaged in industrial production with the
construction of a sawmill in Mangina. By 2000, it had
obtained its own concession from RCD-ML. Analysis
of satellite images over a period of time reveals the
extent to which deforestation occurred in Orientale
Province between 1998 and 2000. The most harvested
forests in the areas were around Djugu, Mambassa,
Beni, Komanda, Luna, Mont Moyo and Aboro. This
logging activity was carried out without consideration
of any of the minimum acceptable rules of timber
harvesting for sustainable forest management or even
sustainable logging.
48. Timber harvested in this region, which is
occupied by the Ugandan army and RCD-ML, has
exclusively transited or remained in Uganda. Our own
investigation in Kampala has shown that mahogany
originating in the Democratic Republic of the Congo is
largely available in Kampala, at a lower price than
Ugandan mahogany. This difference in price is simply
due to the lower cost of acquisition of timber. Timber
harvested in the Democratic Republic of the Congo by
Uganda pays very little tax or none at all. In addition,
customs fees are generally not paid when soldiers
escort those trucks or when orders are received from
some local commanders or General Kazini. Timber
from the Democratic Republic of the Congo is then
exported to Kenya and Uganda, and to other continents.
The Panel gathered from the Kenyan port authorities

10

that vast quantities of timber are exported to Asia,
Europe and North America.
49. The Panel also discovered during its investigation
that individual Ugandan loggers violated forestry
legislation, recognized by their ally RCD-ML, by
logging (extracting) the timber directly. According to
the Congolese legislation on the permis de coupe, only
individual Congolese nationals are allowed to harvest
timber and only in small quantities. Foreigners must
apply for the larger concessions. Initially, Ugandans
operated in partnership with a Congolese permit holder.
Soon, the Ugandans began to pay the Congolese to
sub-lease the permit and, subsequently, to obtain the
licence in direct violation of the law.
50. Timber extraction in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo and its export have been characterized by
unlawfulness and illegality. Besides extracting timber
without authorization in a sovereign country and in
violation of the local legislation, DARA-Forest
consistently exported its timber without any
certification procedure. It tried to approach some
certification bodies licensed by the Forest Stewardship
Council. These bodies requested documentation and
elements that the company failed to provide. Yet
DARA-Forest exported timber in violation of a normal
procedure generally required and accepted by the
international forest community and gradually
considered to be international “soft law”. Companies
importing this uncertified timber from DARA-Forest
were essentially in major industrialized countries,
including Belgium, China, Denmark, Japan, Kenya,
Switzerland and the United States of America.
51. The Panel also realized that DARA Great Lakes
Industries (DGLI), of which DARA-Forest is a
subsidiary, along with a sister company in Uganda,
Nyota Wood Industries, is in collusion with the
Ministry of Water, Land and Forests of Uganda in
establishing a scheme to facilitate the certification of
timber coming from the Democratic Republic of the
Congo. In May 2000, DGLI signed a contract for forest
stewardship certification with SmartWood and the
Rogue Institute for Ecology and Economy in Oregon,
United States of America. On 21 March 2000, the
Director of the DARA group, Prossy Balaba, sent a
letter to the Commissioner asking him to allow an
official of SmartWood to visit certain forests, such as
Budongo and Bugoma; he was due to visit the region in
mid-April. The visit was meant to deceive the official
by presenting those forests as the ones for which

S/2001/357

certification was sought and to convince SmartWood to
work for the certification of their timber. Indeed, when
the visit took place, from 14 to 16 April, the DARA
group had not even applied for the concession of the
Budongo forest (Uganda). It was only on 5 July 2000
that John Kotiram of the DARA group wrote to the
Commissioner to request the concession on the
Budongo forest.
52. The idea behind this is to use Budongo forest as a
model of forests from which timber is harvested and
which comply with the international requirements for
certification, in order to certify timber coming from the
Democratic Republic of the Congo for which basic
elements of certification do not exist. Future plans for
beating the international system are already in place.
According to internal documents of DGLI, DARAForest will import timber from the Democratic
Republic of the Congo into Uganda, which will be
processed for different types of products in the new
plant in Namanve for the sawmilling of hardwood, both
imported from the Democratic Republic of the Congo
and harvested in Uganda. DGLI partners in this new
scheme include DARA Europe GmbH Germany,
Shanton President Wood Supply Co. Ltd China,
President Wood Supply Co. Ltd Thailand, DARA
Tropical Hardwood, Portland, Oregon, United States of
America. The distribution of sales of the company is
thought to remain the same, about 30 per cent to the
Far East, China, Japan and Singapore, 40 per cent to
Europe and 25 per cent to North America. DARA Great
Lakes Industries shareholding and management is
between Thai and Ugandan nationals, among them
John Supit Kotiran and Pranee Chanyuttasart of
Thailand and Prossy Balaba of Uganda. Some
unconfirmed information indicates that members of
President Museveni’s family are shareholders of DGLI,
although more investigation is needed.
53. The DARA group also established another
scheme to carry out fraudulent activities in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo. The objects of
DGLI range from logging to financial and industrial
activities. Because of the confusion created between
DARA-Forest, which received a concession from RCD,
and DGLI, DARA-Forest has also been dealing in
diamonds, gold and coltan. The Panel has received
reports from the custom posts of Mpondwe, Kasindi
and Bundbujyo of the export from the Democratic
Republic of the Congo of minerals such as cassiterite
and coltan in trucks. During the Panel’s visit to Bunia it

was reported that other products were loaded in trucks
which are supposed to carry timber only; it is likely
that coltan and cassiterite were these products.
Moreover, the fraud extends to the forging of
documents and declarations “originating” in Kinshasa.
54. The logging rate was alarming around Butembo,
Beni, Boga and Mambassa. The RCD-ML
administration acknowledged its lack of control over
the rate of extraction, the collection of taxes on logging
activities and the customs fees at the exit points. On the
basis of eyewitness accounts, satellite images, key
actors’ acknowledgements and the Panel’s own
investigation, there is sufficient evidence to prove that
timber extraction is directly related to the Ugandan
presence in Orientale Province. This has reached
alarming proportions and Ugandans (civilians, soldiers
and companies) are extensively involved in these
activities. In May 2000, RCD-ML attributed a
concession of 100,000 hectares to DARA-Forest. Since
September 1998, overall DARA-Forest has been
exporting approximately 48,000 m3 of timber per year.
55. Other extraction schemes. Burundians and
Rwandans have also extracted timber or have been
associated with Congolese loggers. Roads to evacuate
timber from places deeper in the forest are in a very
bad state. Yet Congo timber, as it is referred to in
Bujumbura, is readily available in Burundi and
Rwanda. Some Burundians, however, are also involved
in the harvesting of bark from prunus Africana. This
tree is known and used in medicine for prostate
treatment. Statistics gathered from the Tanzanian Port
Authority clearly indicate that Burundi exported those
barks in 1998 and 1999. Prunus Africana is not found
in Burundi, however, but rather in the forests of South
Kivu.
56. Mining sector. In the mining sector, direct
extraction was carried out in three ways, namely (a) by
individual soldiers for their own benefit; (b) by locals
organized by Rwandan and Ugandan commanders; and
(c) by foreign nationals for the army or commanders’
benefit.
57. The Panel came across a number of cases in
which soldiers were directly involved in mining in
Watsa. In September 1999, the UPDF local commander
demanded the extraction of gold on the pillars of the
Gorumbwa mine galleries in which dynamite was used.
On 9 September, the galleries collapsed, leading to the
death of a number of Congolese miners. Some months

11

S/2001/357

later, Ugandan soldiers who came to mine in the same
area contracted respiratory disease. Other returning
UPDF soldiers have themselves told friends how they
operated in order to acquire the gold. From these
accounts, it appears that, even when the local
commanders were informed about these activities,
there was an acceptable level of tolerance. Although
the Panel qualifies this behaviour as passive complicity
on the part of some commanders, it is not clear whether
soldiers shared the acquired minerals with their allies.
58. Local Congolese have been mining for years for
their own benefit. The novelty of their involvement lies
in the fact that some of them were used as “convincible
labour” to mine gold, diamonds or coltan. In the Bondo
locality within Equateur Province, young men from 12
to 18 years were recruited by Jean-Pierre Bemba. The
Ugandan allies trained the recruits and shared with
them the idea that the Ugandan army was an “army of
development” that aimed at improving ordinary
people’s living conditions. After the one-hour morning
physical training session, they were sent to gold mines
to dig on behalf of the Ugandans and Mr. Bemba.
According to eyewitnesses, in Kalima, RPA
commander Ruto enrolled two teams of local
Congolese to dig coltan; these Congolese worked under
the heavy guard of Rwandan soldiers.
59. In the Kilo-Moto mineral district, Ugandan local
commanders and some of the soldiers who guarded the
different entry points of the mining areas allowed and
encouraged the local population to mine. The
arrangement between the soldiers and the miners was
that each miner would leave at the entry/exit point one
gram of gold every day. A key informant of the Panel
indicated that on average 2,000 individuals mined this
large concession six days a week. This source,
confirmed by other sources, informed the Panel that it
was so well organized that the business ran smoothly.
On average 2 kg of gold are delivered daily to the
person heading the network.
60. The last pattern of organized extraction by the
occupying forces involves the import of manpower for
mining. Occupying forces brought manpower from
their own countries and provided the necessary security
and logistics. In particular, Rwanda utilized prisoners
to dig coltan in exchange for a sentence reduction and
limited cash to buy food. The Panel was recently
informed that there is a presence of 1,500 Rwandan
prisoners in the Numbi area of Kalehe. According to
the same report, these prisoners were seen mining

12

coltan while guarded by RPA soldiers. Human Rights
Watch also reported the same information in March
2001. This recent report confirms numerous other
reports and eyewitness accounts of the involvement of
prisoners, some of whom are former refugees.
61. Impact on wildlife. Wildlife has also suffered a
great deal from the conflict. Numerous accounts and
statistics from regional conservation organizations
show that, in the area controlled by the Ugandan troops
and Sudanese rebels, nearly 4,000 out of 12,000
elephants were killed in the Garamba Park in northeastern Democratic Republic of the Congo between
1995 and 1999. The situation in other parks and
reserves is equally grave, including Kahuzi-Biega Park,
the Okapi Reserve and Virunga Park. The number of
okapis, gorillas and elephants has dwindled to small
populations. In the Kahuzi-Biega Park, a zone
controlled by the Rwandans and RCD-Goma and rich
in coltan, only 2 out of 350 elephant families remained
in 2000. There is serious concern among
conservationists that the rest fled of their own accord
or were killed, as two tons of elephant tusks were
traced in the Bukavu area late in 2000. Already by
April 2000, about three tons of tusks were temporarily
seized by RCD-ML in Isiro. After strong pressure from
Uganda, the cargo was released and transferred to
Kampala.
62. The Panel has indications that, in most cases,
poaching of elephants in violation of international law
(Convention on International Trade in Endangered
Species of Wild Fauna and Flora (CITES)) was well
organized. Either soldiers hunted directly with the
consent of the commander or they provided equipment
and protection to local villagers to execute the task
with the objective of collecting elephant tusks. For
example, in August 2000, UPDF Colonel Mugeni and a
crew of his soldiers were discovered with 800 kg of
elephant tusks in their car near Garamba Park. The
Government of Uganda received detailed notification
of this incident. Eyewitnesses reported to the Panel
several incidents that involved Rwandan soldiers in the
trading of elephant and buffalo meat. In the Bukavu
and Goma areas, there appears to be a pattern: high
commanders take the tusks, soldiers negotiate the
wholesale price with some locals, and the locals sell
the meat in the market place as retailers.
63. Harvesting of coffee by non-owners has been
another feature of the exploitation of natural resources.
Jean-Pierre Bemba, the leader of MLC and now the

S/2001/357

President of the Front de libération du Congo, a partner
in the coffee business with General Kazini, has been
harvesting coffee directly from plantations he does not
own. During our visit to Gbadolite, some locals
mentioned that coffee was harvested by Mr. Bemba’s
men from some private plantations that belonged to
individuals who had fled the region.
64. Monopolies and price-fixing. In addition to
looting and extracting resources, rebels and Rwandan
and Ugandan troops have abused the commerce and
trade system. In some cases, they forced locally owned
and some foreign-owned businesses to close down. The
methods used varied from looting to harassing the
owners. The end objective was to gain control of local
commerce. The result is unprecedented control of the
economy of the eastern and north-eastern Democratic
Republic of the Congo. During its field visit, the Panel
noted that consumer goods and other merchandise
found in Gbadolite and Bunia originated mostly in
Uganda. During its field visit to Bunia, the Panel
members witnessed the unloading of beer crates from
an aircraft coming from Uganda. In Gbadolite, most
cigarettes, beverages, toilet paper etc. are imported
from Uganda. Equally, goods in Kisangani, Bukavu
and Goma come mainly from Burundi or Rwanda.
Imported goods for the occupied zones arrive via the
ports of Mombasa and Dar es Salaam. This was
confirmed during the Panel’s visit to the customs
services (Internal Revenue Authority) in Kampala.
Furthermore, depending on the importer of the goods,
taxes are not paid. The failure to pay taxes, especially
in Orientale Province, was acknowledged to the Panel
by RCD-ML during our discussions in Bunia in
October 2000.
65. Rwandan and Ugandan troops and their
Congolese allies have also been exploiting local
farmers. They have imposed prices and conditions on
the farmers. In one instance, a farmer living near the
Ubangi River, 20 km from Gbadolite, explained to a
member of the Panel how he is dependent on the coffee
dealers for the supply of the bags imposed by the
coffee collectors (buyers). Failure to use these bags
leads to an automatic reduction in the price of the
coffee. These bags are not produced in the eastern
Democratic Republic of the Congo and they have to
buy them.
66. In another instance, one woman explained how
she and her husband could no longer sell their palm oil
to the neighbouring Central African Republic or ship it

to Kinshasa for a better price. The control of trade and
other business networks for commercial crops, such as
coffee and palm oil, is almost total within the occupied
zones. This translates into a de facto monopoly like the
one Jean-Pierre Bemba has on coffee exports in
Equateur Province. The locals who desperately remain
in the villages work more for less, if anything at all.
Humanitarian organizations working in the occupied
zones told the Panel stories of a number of women in
some villages who have simply stopped taking their
children to the health centres because they no longer
possess simple items of clothing to preserve their
dignity.
67. Exploitation of resources becomes even more
questionable, as some of the players not only produce
counterfeited Congolese francs, but use them to
purchase natural resources. According to reliable
sources, the Victoria Group, whose key shareholder is
General Khaleb Akandwanaho, alias Salim Saleh, was
involved in the making of counterfeit Congolese
francs. These notes are used for the purchase of
commercial crops, primarily coffee. A very reliable
source told the Panel that in mid-1999 Jean-Pierre
Bemba ordered the production of 100-franc Congolese
notes. Simultaneously the Victoria Group also
produced counterfeit Congolese francs. By the end of
1999, Equateur Province was flooded with counterfeit
Congolese currency so that Mr. Bemba decided to
suspend all 100-franc notes, including the ones he had
produced, so as to stop inflation in the areas he
controlled.
68. The Panel has evidence that the illegal
exploitation of natural resources goes beyond mineral
and agricultural resources. It is actively occurring also
in respect of financial transactions, taxes and the use of
cheap labour, which our mandate qualified as other
forms of wealth. Local banks and insurance companies
operating in Goma, Bukavu, Kisangani, Bunia and
Gbadolite deal directly with Kigali or Kampala. A
system of tax collection — enforced in some cases —
has been implemented by MLC, RCD-ML and RCDGoma with their established Ugandan and Rwandan
counterparts. In the rebels own words, these taxes are
aimed at “financing or supporting the war effort”.
Indeed, part of the funds collected is sent to Kigali (in
the case of RCD-Goma). In the case of the former
RCD-ML and MLC, not only was part of the taxes sent
to Kampala but also individual colonels would claim
direct payment from RCD-ML. In Bunia and Bukavu,

13

S/2001/357

people protested, demonstrated and denounced this
practice of abuse. In areas controlled by Mr. Bemba,
peasants carrying palm oil on bicycles have to pay
taxes on the bicycles.
69. The use of child labour is also rampant in the
occupied territories. Some children are reportedly
mining gold in the Kilo Moto mines. In Equateur
Province, some children were seen in the diamond
mines. The Panel members witnessed the presence of
young MLC recruits at Gbadolite airport and in the
city. They were at the airport waiting for a flight,
having recently completed their military training.
70. The aforementioned demonstrates that the
procedures and processes for exploiting the natural
resources of the Democratic Republic of the Congo are
continuously evolving. Occupying forces began with
the easiest method, looting stockpiles. As the wells ran
dry, they developed efficient means of extracting the
additional resources necessary to keep the coffers full.
Eventually, any means necessary was recognized as a
legitimate mode of acquisition. From all the evidence
offered above, it appears that this process will continue
to evolve as is deemed necessary.

D. Current structures of illegal
exploitation
71. Administrative
The
illegal
structures.
exploitation of natural resources is facilitated by the
administrative structures established by Uganda and
Rwanda. Those countries’ leaders directly and
indirectly appointed regional governors or local
authorities or, more commonly, appointed or confirmed
Congolese in these positions. Typical examples are, on
the Ugandan side, the appointment of the Governor of
Ituri Province. On 18 June 1999, Ugandan General
Kazini appointed as Governor of this Province Adele
Lotsove, a Congolese who had already been employed
by the Mobutu and Kabila administrations. Information
gathered clearly indicates that she was instrumental in
the collection and transfer of funds from her assigned
administrative region to the Ugandan authorities in
1999. According to some sources, she also contributed
to the reallocation of land from Lendus to Hemas. On
the Rwandan side, according to one reliable source,
Rwandan authorities have helped secure the
appointment of Gertrude Kitembo as Governor of
Maniema.

14

72. Modes of transportation. Illegal activities have
benefited from the evolution of the means of
transportation in the region. Prior to the second war
most exchanges of goods and products were conducted
through road transportation. To a large extent,
smugglers utilized Lake Kivu and Lake Tanganyika to
smuggle goods and products to and from the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and, in limited
circumstances, used aircraft. The shift over the past
four years has been noticeable. An increasing number
of aircraft are utilized to transport products and arms
into the Democratic Republic of the Congo, while
transferring out vast quantities of agricultural products
and minerals, in particular to Kampala and Kigali. The
other novelty of increased air transport has been the
use of aircraft leased by the army for commercial and
non-military functions. Different categories of people,
including soldiers, journalists and traders, have told the
Panel about their journeys in aircraft alongside bags of
coffee and other non-military products.
73. This change in mode of transportation was
accompanied by a change in players as well as a
redefining of transportation companies. Traditional and
well-established companies such as TMK saw their
share of the market erode while others simply
disappeared (Air Cargo Zaire). At the same time, new
companies emerged and expanded, such as Air Navette
and Jambo Safari; they are owned or controlled by the
relatives and friends of generals, colonels and
Presidents. At the other end, outsiders who entered the
region with the AFDL “conquest” of Kinshasa during
the first war, by transporting troops, remained and
consolidated their position; that is the case of Victor
Butt, a notorious arms dealer in the region. Most flights
to and from Equateur and Orientale Provinces originate
from the Entebbe military airport. During a visit to
Kampala, the Panel was informed about the concern
expressed by the Ugandan Internal Revenue to the
Ministry of Defence. This complaint raised the issue of
revenue loss to the treasury due to the fact that
products entering or leaving the Democratic Republic
of the Congo by air to and from Entebbe military
airport are not checked, and taxes are not levied by the
customs services.
74. On the Ugandan side, three main private
companies are involved:
• Air Alexander, whose owner is Jovia
Akandwanaho, the wife of Salim Saleh and sisterin-law of President Museveni. Her company

S/2001/357

• Uganda Air Cargo, which mainly deals with the
Ugandan Ministry of Defence. Previously, it was
using a C-130, but currently uses an Ilyushin 76
and an Antonov 12. This company flies to
Entebbe, Gemena, Basankasu, Isiro and Buta.

77. Financial network. All illegal activities in the
eastern Democratic Republic of the Congo, primarily
the commercial and trade operations, utilize the
financial network to some extent. One of the
characteristics of this network has been its ability to
quickly adapt to the new political and economic
environment. Cities like Kisangani and Goma were
already big trading centres for diamonds and consumer
goods. Most banks operating in the occupied zones
were already in operation in the Democratic Republic
of the Congo before the August 1998 war. Their
headquarters or corresponding banks were generally in
Kinshasa. With the occupation, headquarters and
corresponding banks tended to move to Kigali. Some
of these banks are:

The Panel has indications that most private air
companies do not own the aircraft they use; the owners
are usually people like Victor Butt.

• Union des banques congolaises. Although the
headquarters remains in Kinshasa, it has ongoing
operations in areas controlled by Rwanda.

75. On the Rwandan side, a number of private
companies operate in the territory. These are:

• Banque commerciale du Congo. The headquarters
is in Kinshasa and it has branches in the eastern
Democratic Republic of the Congo. The Director
was transferred to Kigali in order to oversee
operations in the eastern Democratic Republic of
the Congo. This bank is linked to the Belgolaise,
a Belgian bank consortium.

mainly operated between Entebbe and Kisangani
before the last battle of Kisangani. According to
some sources, the company continues to operate
in the territory held by Ugandan troops.
• Air Navette has dealings with General Salim
Saleh and Jean-Pierre Bemba. The company flies
to Gbadolite, Gemena, Kisangani, Bunia and
Kampala. This company uses an Antonov 26 and
an Antonov 12.

• New Gomair, which flies to Kisangani-Goma and
Kigali. According to some sources, the wife of
the current Minister of Finances of Rwanda is a
shareholder.
• Air Navette flies to Goma, Bukavu, Kisangani
and Kigali. According to some sources, one of the
major shareholders, Modeste Makabuza, also
owner of Jambo Safari, is a known figure in the
entourage of President Kagame.
• Air Boyoma is a shuttle between Goma and
Lodja; according to some sources Mr. Ondekane,
former first Vice-President of RCD-Goma, is a
shareholder.
• Other companies, such as Compagnie aérienne
des Grands Lacs et Cargo fret international, Sun
Air Services and Kivu Air Services, operate in the
area.
76. Clients and other very reliable sources have
indicated that Sabena Cargo is transporting illegal
natural resources extracted from the Democratic
Republic of the Congo. Sabena Cargo is said to carry
coltan extracted from the Democratic Republic of the
Congo from Kigali airport to European destinations.
The Panel asked to meet with the management of
Sabena in Kampala and in Brussels, but no one was
made available to speak to the Panel members.

• Banque
commerciale
du
Rwanda.
The
headquarters is in Kigali, but it has operations in
Kisangani, Bukavu and Goma. The Government
of Rwanda is said to be one of the shareholders.
• Banque à la confiance d’or (BANCOR). One of
the newest banks in Kigali which started its
activities in 1995. It was family owned until 1999
but early in 2000 a businessman, Tibere Rujigiro,
purchased the bank at a very low price according
to various sources.
78. Special cases: BCDI and BCD. The Banque de
commerce, du développement et d’industrie is the
newest bank, created in November 1996 and
headquartered in Kigali. Its involvement with the
Democratic Republic of the Congo dates back to the
beginning of the AFDL conquest of the former Zaire.
BCDI operated most AFDL financial transactions
before Laurent-Désiré Kabila took power. The Panel
was told that its shareholders are essentially the
Rwandan Patriotic Front, COMIEX, Alfred Khalissa
and some Angolans. The real shareholders are the
allies, except Uganda. Some documents, receipts for
payments and authorization for payments made by

15

S/2001/357

some large companies in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo between early and late 1997 clearly indicate
that payments are to be made through BCDI for the
contribution to “the war effort”. When the late
President Kabila came to power, he created the Banque
de commerce et du développement, which has the
peculiarity of having as shareholders Tristar, COMIEX
and Alfred Khalissa of BCDI. The Rwandan Patriotic
Front remains, through BCDI and Tristar, a shareholder
in BCD in spite of the war situation.
79. Other private companies. A number of
companies were created to facilitate illegal activities in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo. Others have
existed in the region for decades and joined the
bandwagon to pursue the obvious financial windfalls
involved in the exploitation of the country. On the
Ugandan, MLC and RCD-ML side, rebel leaders and/or
Ugandan military officials created new companies and
businesses using prête-noms. Most, if not all, of these
companies are privately owned by individuals or a
group of individuals.
80. Among the companies involved in the illicit
acquisition of natural resources in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, Trinity and Victoria seem to be
the most interesting given their modus operandi,
activities and respective shareholders. Victoria Group
is chaired by Mr Khalil and its headquarters is in
Kampala. According to reliable sources, Mr. Khalil
deals directly with Mrs. Akandwanaho on diamond
issues. Mr. Khalil has two collaborators in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, based in Kisangani
and Gbadolite. Both are said to be from Lebanon, they
are Mohammed Gassan and Mr. Talal. During its visit
to Gbadolite, the Panel received confirmation of the
presence of one of them and his leading role in the
purchase of diamonds in the region. A reliable source
told members of the Panel that the Victoria Group
belongs jointly to Muhoozi Kainerugabe, son of
President Museveni, and Jovia and Khaleb
Akandwanaho. Victoria Group is involved in trading
diamonds, gold and coffee. The Group purchases these
mineral and agricultural products in Isiro, Bunia,
Bumba, Bondo, Buta and Kisangani. The company paid
taxes to MLC, but failed to do so with RCD-ML. When
counterfeit currencies (Congolese francs and United
States dollars) were found in areas where the company
buys the natural resources, fingers were pointed at the
Victoria Group. Other sources have confirmed to the

16

Panel the involvement of the Victoria Group in the
making of counterfeit currency.
81. Trinity is an equally interesting case. Ateenyi
Tibasima, second Vice-President of RCD-ML and now
the Commissaire général adjoint of FLC, was the
“manager” of the company. According to reliable
sources, Trinity is a fictitious company and a
conglomerate of various businesses owned by Salim
Saleh and his wife. Its primary purpose was to facilitate
their business activities in Orientale Province. To this
end, Mr. Tibasima granted a tax holiday to all Trinity
activities in the areas controlled by Uganda and
administered by RCD-ML in November 1999. Trinity
has imported various goods and merchandise and has
taken from Orientale Province gold, coffee and timber
without paying any tax. Different individuals,
Ugandans as well as Congolese, have taken the
opportunity created by the confusion over Trinity to
export from the Democratic Republic of the Congo (on
behalf of Trinity) various natural resources, also
without paying taxes.
82. On the Rwandan side, most companies with
important activities related to the natural resources of
the Democratic Republic of the Congo are owned
either by the Government or by individuals very close
to the inner circle of President Kagame. Rwanda
Metals, for example, is a company involved in coltan
dealing. It purchases coltan and exports it out of the
continent. The Panel has strong indications that RPF
controls Rwanda Metals. In mid-January 2001, some
very reliable sources met with the senior management
of Rwanda Metals in Kigali. During these discussions,
the Director told them that Rwanda Metals was a
private company with no relation to the army. He
further explained that he was expecting key partners
that very morning for discussions. As discussions
continued, the so-called partners arrived as planned;
unfortunately they were in Rwandan army uniforms
and were top officers. This incident confirms accounts
from various sources indicating that Rwanda Metals is
controlled by RPF. Meanwhile there are also
indications that RPA is a shareholder of Grands Lacs
Metals, a company also dealing in coltan.
83. Jambo Safari is another company whose
emergence and growth has raised some eyebrows in
Goma and Bukavu. When the August 1998 war started,
Modeste Makabuza was buying oil from Kenya and
selling it in the eastern Democratic Republic of the
Congo. Jambo Safari has benefited from an internal

S/2001/357

network of false receipts within RCD-Goma and RPA.
According to a very reliable source, Jambo Safari
would charge RCD-Goma for three times the quantities
of oil delivered and any attempt to question the figures
would be suppressed. In a rare attempt to clarify the
situation, some members of RCD-Goma during the last
General Assembly meeting, in June 2000, requested
that a commission be set up to conduct an internal
audit. Kigali agreed to send a colonel to conduct the
audit along with an RCD team. When the issue of false
receipts and overpayment was established, Kigali
recalled the colonel and suspended the inquiry. Some
sources have confirmed the close ties between Mr.
Makabuza, the apparent owner of Jambo Safari, and
President Kagame. Jambo Safari has diversified since
its original business venture, is now dealing in coffee,
recently purchased a fleet of new trucks and is also
involved in air transport with Air Navette.
84. Other minor companies also operate with the
protection of some local commanders. For example,
Établissement Habier is involved in the distribution of
oil and petrol in Goma and Bukavu. This company is
said to belong to Ernest Habimana, who is closely
linked to RPA, especially to Major Karasira and
Mr. Gakwerere. STIPAG, a company owed by Mr.
Mbugiye operating in collaboration with Major Kazura
(chief of security of the Rwandan Army in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo) and Major Gatete,
is among those junior companies involved in coffee
and diamond dealing. Finally a myriad of small
companies was created and their shareholders are
invariably powerful individuals in the Rwandan
nomenklatura or in RCD structures. That is the case of
Grands Lacs Metals, where Majors Gatete, Dan and
Kazura are reportedly shareholders. In other cases,
foreign companies incorporate local potentates on their
board, as in the case of Gesellschaft für
Elektrometallurgie (GFE), with Karl Heinz Albers and
Emmanuel Kamanzi as partners, or MDM with Mr.
Makabuza.
85. The Panel, on the basis of the data, accounts and
documents received and analysed, came to the
conclusion that the systems of illegal exploitation
established by Ugandans and Rwandans differ from
each other. In the case of Uganda, individuals, mainly
top army commanders, using their hold over their
collaborators and some officials in rebel movements,
are exploiting the resources of the Democratic

Republic of the Congo. However, this is known by the
political establishment in Kampala.
86. In the case of Rwanda, things are more systemic.
There are linkages and bridges between some key
companies, as in the case of Tristar and BCDI and,
above all, the relationship between RPA, RPF, BCDI,
Rwanda Metals, Grands Lacs Metals and Tristar. The
senior management of these companies seems to report
separately to the same people at the top of the pyramid.
On the other hand, all key managers have personal
relationships with different army commanders who
themselves report to the leadership. This pyramidal and
integrated structure coupled with the strict discipline of
the group has made the exploitation of the resources of
the Democratic Republic of the Congo more
systematic, efficient and organized. There is equally a
bridge between the internal Rwandan structures of
illegal exploitation and the RCD-Goma structures. The
Government of Rwanda made arrangements with RCDGoma to drain resources from the Democratic Republic
of the Congo. There is a case of loans made by BCDI
to RCD to pay suppliers whose business is related to
RPA. This “financial bridge” is statutory; indeed the
RCD statute indirectly recognizes the role of Rwanda
in overseeing the finances of the movement and its
participation in decision-making and control/audit of
finances.

E. Individual actors
87. The list that follows is not exhaustive, but the
Panel’s choice was based on the crucial roles played by
these persons and their direct involvement in either
providing support, entertaining networks or facilitating
the exploitation of natural resources within the
Democratic Republic of the Congo. On the Ugandan
side, some familiar names surface frequently, such as
Major General Salim Saleh, Brigadier General James
Kazini, Colonel Tikamanyire, Jovia Akandwanaho,
Colonel Utafire, Colonel Mugeni, Mr. Khalil, Ateenyi
Tibasima, Mbusa Nyamwisi, Nahim Khanaffer, Roger
Lumbala, Jean-Yves Ollivier, Jean-Pierre Bemba,
Adele Lotsove, Abdu Rhaman and latecomers such as
Colonel Muyombo.
88. The Panel has selected to focus on three key
actors. First and second are Major General (retired)
Salim Saleh and his wife, Jovia Akandwanaho. Khaleb
Akandwanaho, alias Salim Saleh, and his spouse Jovia
are at the core of the illegal exploitation of natural

17

S/2001/357

resources in areas controlled by Uganda. He is the
younger brother of President Museveni (very popular
in the army) and he pulls the strings of illegal activities
in areas controlled by Uganda and allies. James Kazini
is his executing arm and his right hand. He controls
and protects Mbusa Nyamwisi and Ateenyi Tibasima.
In return, they protect his commercial and business
interests in regions controlled by the former RCD-ML.
He used both the Victoria Group and Trinity for the
purchase and the commercialization of diamonds,
timber, coffee and gold. Very reliable sources have told
the Panel that behind Salim Saleh there is Jovia
Akandwanaho, who is more aggressive on the issue of
exploitation of the natural resources of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo. She is particularly interested in
diamonds. According to very reliable sources, she is at
the root of the Kisangani wars. She wanted control of
the Kisangani diamond market after having
confirmation from Mr. Khalil, “Director” of the
Victoria Group, that it was a good idea and that it was
feasible to control the Kisangani market.
89. The third is Brigadier General James Kazini,
former Chief of Staff of UPDF and former commander
of military operations in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo. He is the master in the field; the
orchestrater, organizer and manager of most illegal
activities related to the UPDF presence in north and
north-eastern Democratic Republic of the Congo. He is
the right hand of Salim Saleh. He very much relies on
the established military network and former comrades
and collaborators, such as Colonels Tikamanyire and
Mugeni. He has been close to Messrs. Nyamwisi,
Tibasima and Lumbala and to Jean-Pierre Bemba, all of
whom have facilitated his illegal dealings in diamonds,
coltan, timber, counterfeit currency, gold and coffee,
and imports of goods and merchandise in Equateur and
Orientale Provinces. He is said to have a good
relationship with Mr. Baramoto, a former general of
President Mobutu. In spite of being discharged from
his responsibilities as commander of UPDF forces in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo, his networks
remain in place. The Panel asked to meet with these
key actors, but the request was turned down.
90. Actors from Rwanda and RCD-Goma involved in
the illegal exploitation of natural resources in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo cannot be separated
from the structure they serve. Most of these people
serve a system. The Panel has, however, noticed a
recurrence of some names or the particular role that

18

some individuals have played at a given time and for
some operations. In addition to the names mentioned in
the paragraphs on main companies, certain names can
be highlighted.
91. First, Ali Hussein, who plays a major role in
diamond and gold deals in Bukavu and Kisangani.
Those who have dealt with him in the past have
mentioned the presence of a Rwandan national during
commercial negotiations. There are indications that the
Rwandan citizen attending the meetings is a civil
servant working in the President’s office in Kigali.
Second is Colonel James Kabarebe, who is the RPA
facilitator for some deals. According to some sources
he has been in contact with Victor Butt [or Bout] for
the lease of an Ilyushin 76 that served to carry coltan
from the Democratic Republic of the Congo to Kigali.
He is said to be a partner to Mohamed Ali Salem,
manager of the company Global Mineral. This
company is involved in coltan purchasing in Bukavu
and Goma. Third, Tibere Rujigiro, member of RPF,
who is considered to be one of the main money
providers to the party during the 1990-1994 war. He is
a major shareholder in Tristar Investment, a company
equally close to RPF. He is said to be also involved in
the tobacco business.
92. The fourth, Aziza Kulsum Gulamali, is a unique
case among key actors in the illegal exploitation of the
natural resources of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo. Mrs. Gulamali is said to hold several passports.
She lives in Bukavu, Brussels or Nairobi, depending on
her schedule. Mrs. Gulamali has acknowledged having
been involved in the past in the Burundi civil war.
According to reliable sources she armed and financed
the Hutu rebels of FDD in Burundi. Yet she built new
alliances with the Government of Rwanda and has
become a major ally of the Kigali regime and RCDGoma. Mrs. Gulamali is involved in gold, coltan and
cassiterite dealings in territories controlled by the
Rwandans. Prior to that, she was involved in arms
trafficking for the benefit of the Burundian Hutus and
was equally involved in gold and ivory trafficking. Her
name was also mentioned in connection with cigarette
smuggling. Very reliable sources told the Panel that she
covered her illegal dealings by her cigarette factory,
now in bankruptcy. In the coltan business, her clients
include Starck, Cogecom and Sogem; the Bank
Bruxelles Lambert handles some of her financial
transactions. The Panel requested RCD-Goma several
times for a meeting with Mrs. Gulamali and also

S/2001/357

contacted her aides, but she never arranged a meeting
with the Panel.
93. She was recently appointed by RCD-Goma as
General Manager of SOMIGL, a conglomerate of four
partners, which obtained the monopoly for the
commercialization and export of coltan. This monopoly
has strengthened her position as a major player in the
trade in coltan in the region. RCD-Goma, in an attempt
to explain this partnership, said that she is a very useful
person and would bring $1 million to RCD monthly.
Some sources have told the Panel members that her
network of contacts is impressive and that she controls
almost every official in RCD-Goma. According to
some sources, she is also involved with her daughter
Djamila in counterfeiting currency. Mrs. Gulamali is
famous for forging customs declarations, especially for
the products she exports. Confronted recently with a
false customs declaration where coltan was declared as
cassiterite, she replied, “in this business everybody
does that”. Her declaration alerted the Panel to the
extent to which fraud is prevalent among the
companies that export coltan.

F. Economic data: confirmation of the
illegal exploitation of the natural
resources of the Democratic Republic
of the Congo
94. All the empirical evidence provided above is
complemented by the economic analysis of data
provided by different sources.
Uganda

officials that the volume of Ugandan gold exports does
not reflect this country’s production levels but rather
that some exports might be “leaking over the borders”
from the Democratic Republic of the Congo. The
central bank reported that, by September 1997, Uganda
had exported gold valued at $105 million, compared
with $60 million in 1996 and $23 million in 1995.
98. Second, the data from the Ugandan authorities are
silent with regard to diamond production and export.
Several third party sources (WTO, World Federation of
Diamond Bourses, Diamond High Council) indicate
diamond exports from Uganda during the last three
years. These diamond exports are suspicious for many
reasons:
(a)

Uganda has no known diamond production;

(b) Diamond exports from Uganda are observed
only in the last few years, coinciding surprisingly with
the occupation of the eastern Democratic Republic of
the Congo as shown in table 2 and figure 2;
(c) Finally, these facts corroborate the Panel’s
findings from field investigation, discussions and
external observers on the need to control the rich
diamond zone near Kisangani and Banalia.
99. These figures are understated and there are
indications that Uganda exported more diamonds.
However, this is not well captured in the statistics
because of the loose regulations governing the free
zone areas. These regulations permit diamonds
originating in any country to be repackaged, and then
to be sold from any country as diamonds from a
country of origin that is not necessarily the one
mentioned in the statistics.

95. At the request of the Panel, the Ugandan
authorities provided extensive data, including
production and export values for agricultural products
such as coffee, cotton, tea and tobacco. In terms of
minerals, the data also cover gold and coltan
production and export figures.
96. The
official
data
contain
substantial
discrepancies. First, export figures for gold are
consistently greater than production values, as shown
in table 1 and figure 1.
97. The gap between production and export could
originate from the exploitation of the natural resources
of the Democratic Republic of the Congo. The Central
Bank of Uganda has reportedly acknowledged to IMF

19

S/2001/357

Table 1
Uganda: mineral exports and production, 1994-2000
Year

Gold

Tin

Coltan

Cobalt

1994

0.22

-

-

-

1995

3.09

-

-

-

1996

5.07

3.55

-

-

1997

6.82

4.43

2.57

-

1998

5.03

-

18.57

-

1999

11.45

-

69.5

67.48

2000

10.83

-

-

275.98

1994

0.0016

3.704

0.435

-

1995

0.0015

4.289

1.824

-

1996

0.003

0.38

-

-

1997

0.0064

1.81

-

-

1998

0.0082

1.102

-

-

1999

0.0047

-

-

76.74

2000

0.0044

-

-

287.51

A. Mineral exports (tons)

B. Mineral production (tons)

Source: Uganda, Ministry of Energy and Mineral Development. 2000 data are from January to
October.

Figure 1. Uganda: gold production and exports, 1994-2000
14

12

10

8
Tons

Production
Exports
6

4

2

0
1994

1995

1996

1997
Year

20

1998

1999

2000

S/2001/357

in the transboundary movement of natural resources
between 1998 and 1999.

Table 2
Uganda: rough diamond exports, 1997October 2000

Coffee

Year

Volume
(carats)

Value
(United States dollars)

1997

1 511.34

198 302

1998

11 303.86

1 440 000

1999

11 024.46

1 813 500

2000

9 387.51

1 263 385

1998: 144,911 bags
1999: 170,079 bags
2000: 208,000 bags

Timber

1998: 1,900 m3
1999: 3,782 m3 and 46,299 pcs
2000: 3,272 m3 and 3,722 pcs

Cassiterite* 1998: None

Source: Diamond High Council.

1999: 30 kgs

100. Data collected from any third party consistently
show that Uganda has become a diamond exporting
country; they also show that diamond exports from
Uganda coincide with the years of the wars in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, that is from 1997
onward.

2000: 151 drums
* The sudden increase in the import of cassiterite may
also mean an increase in the import of coltan. The Panel
discovered that cassiterite is often listed in lieu of
coltan, as coltan possesses a higher value, which
implies high import taxes in Uganda.

101. As far as niobium is concerned, the pattern
appears to be the same: no production prior to 1997
followed by a series of increases in exports as shown in
table 3 and figure 3.

Rwanda
103. In response to the request for statistics by the
Panel, the Rwandan authorities provided the following
data:

Table 3
Uganda: niobium exports, 1995-1999
(thousands of United States dollars)

Table 4
Rwanda: mineral production, 1995-2000

Year

Niobium

1995

0

1996

0

Year

Gold
(kg)

Cassiterite
(tons)

Coltan
(tons)

1997

13

1995

1

247

54

1998

580

1996

1

330

97

1999

782

1997

10

327

224

1998

17

330

224

1999

10

309

122

2000

10

437

83

Source: World Trade Organization (aggregated data).

102. Third, the Ugandan authorities, in their response
to the Panel’s questionnaire, stated that there was no
record of transit of mineral products. However, the
Panel received information from one Ugandan customs
post at the border between the Democratic Republic of
the Congo and Uganda. Records for 1998, 1999 and
2000 reveal that mineral products as well as other
commodities left the Democratic Republic of the
Congo and entered Uganda (presumably this would
also prove true for the other dozen or so points of
entry). The following three examples show an increase

Source: Rwanda Official Statistics (No. 227/01/10/MIN).

21

S/2001/357

Figure 2. Uganda: rough diamond exports, by volume, 1997-October 2000

12000
10000
8000
6000

Volume

4000
2000
0
1997

22

1998

1999

2000

S/2001/357

Figure 3. Uganda: niobium exports by volume, 1995-1999

800
700
600
500
400

US Dollars
(thousands)

300
200
100
0
1995 1996 1997 1998 1999

23

S/2001/357

Figure 4.A. Rwanda: mineral production, 1995-2000

450
400
350
300
250

Gold (kg)

200

Cassiterite (tons)
Coltan (tons)

150
100
50
0
1995

1996

1997

1998

1999

2000

Figure 4.B. Rwanda: gold production, 1995-2000 (kg)
18
16
14

Kg

12
10
8
6
4
2
0
1995

1996

1997

1998
Year

24

1999

2000

S/2001/357

104. The Rwandan authorities also underline the fact
that “Rwanda has no production of diamond, cobalt,
zinc, manganese, and uranium”. However, in spite of
this statement, there is substantial evidence that
Rwanda has been exporting diamonds. In fact, several
organizations such as WTO and the High Diamond
Council, and Belgian statistics, have computed import
data for selected commodities and provide support for
the fact that Rwanda has been exporting diamonds (see
table 5 and figure 5). Production figures display some
irregular patterns for gold and coltan starting from
1997 (see figures 4.A and B). It is revealing that the
increase in production of these two minerals appeared
to happen while AFDL, backed by Rwandan troops,
was taking over power in Kinshasa.
Table 5
Rwanda: rough diamond exports, 1997October 2000
Year

Volume
(carats)

Value
(United States dollars)

1997

13 060.39

720 425

1998

166.07

16 606

1999

2 500.83

439 347

2000

30 491.22

1 788 036

and pending deals give clear indications of their
potential impact on the balance of payments.
107. The economic and resource-based analysis above,
by using the figures given by the respective
Governments, reveals that Uganda and Rwanda have
been exporting diamonds, and that this activity is
hidden and does not appear in the statistics they
disseminate. They do not produce diamonds, nor do
they officially export this mineral. It is probable that
these minerals are coming from the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and would constitute the basis
for the re-exportation economy.
108. Regarding the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, mineral production and export display a
declining trend, imputable partly to the occupation of
the eastern side of the country. However, the
deterioration of the rural infrastructure represents a
limiting factor for mining as well as for agricultural
activities.

Source: Diamond High Council.

105. Burundi. An IMF office memorandum indicates
that “Burundi does not produce gold, diamonds,
columbo-tantalite, copper, cobalt, or basic metals”.
Burundi however has been exporting minerals it does
not produce. As in the case of Uganda and Rwanda,
Burundi’s export of diamonds dates from 1998,
coinciding with the occupation of the eastern
Democratic Republic of the Congo. The coltan exports
span a longer period (1995-1999), perhaps suggesting
that this might be a regular activity.
106. Angola, Namibia and Zimbabwe. Only third
party sources were used to determine whether
production and export trends in these countries
displayed abnormalities. Available production and
export statistics relative to Angola, Namibia and
Zimbabwe were fairly normal in terms of trend. They
did not reveal any suspicious behaviour. Additional
data are however needed for a definite stand on the
issue. In the case of Zimbabwe, accounts of ongoing

25

S/2001/357

Figure 5. Rwanda: rough diamond exports, by volume, 1997-October 2000

35000
30000
25000
20000
Volume

15000
10000
5000
0

1997

26

1998

1999

2000

S/2001/357

III. Links between the exploitation of
natural resources and the
continuation of the conflict
109. The following sections explore the links between
the exploitation of natural resources and the
continuation of the conflict in the Democratic Republic
of the Congo. The sections are interrelated, but
separated for clarity. The first section outlines the
countries’ budget allocations for their respective armed
forces versus the actual expenditures. It will be
demonstrated that military expenditures far outweigh
the supposed money allocated for such expenses. The
subsequent section will explore in depth the means by
which these countries find the necessary additional
financial resources to continue the war.4 The panel
finds a link between the exploitation of the natural
resources of the Democratic Republic of the Congo and
the continuation of the conflict.

A. Budgets compared to military
expenditures
Rwanda
110. Rwanda spends about 3 per cent of its GDP or 29
per cent of its annual budget on its defence needs. In
the current fiscal year, $70 million was allocated to
defence in the national budget. These official figures
provided by the Minister of Finance comprise every
single expense of the army, including, soldiers’ pay and
bonuses and the maintenance and acquisition of new
military equipment.
111. Military specialists with a great deal of
experience in the region agreed on the fact that
Rwandan soldiers use light equipment, so that expenses
on equipment have for a long time been limited. They
also recognize that, given the size of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and the portion of the territory
under Rwandan control, there is a minimum number of
soldiers needed to cover this area, which could be
estimated at 25,000 soldiers on average during the
period of the conflict. Moreover, the use of aircraft for
the transport of troops and some types of equipment
and supplies may be costly.
__________________
4 The number of soldiers has fluctuated during the period

112. An aircraft owner operating in the region has
indicated that he charges on average $2,000 per hour.
Based on his experience of three rotations per day in a
smaller area, the Panel estimates five rotations for
Rwanda at an average of six hours each. A simple
calculation gives a figure of $1.8 million per month
and $21.6 million per year.
113. Based on the minimum number of 25,000 soldiers
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo and an
average $100 for pay and bonuses, the Panel has
calculated a total of $2.5 million per month and
$30 million per year. Transportation and pay of troops
alone in the Democratic Republic of the Congo amount
to $51.6 million per year, which is about three quarters
of the total Rwandan official defence budget. By taking
into consideration the remaining 20,000 soldiers
stationed in Rwanda and their average pay of $50 per
month, almost the total defence budget ($63 million) is
used on two items. RPA soldiers in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo have other basic needs,
however, such as ammunition for even their light
equipment, and maintenance and replacement of the
equipment.
114. All military experts consulted suggested that the
official defence budget of Rwanda cannot alone cover
the cost of their war and presence in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo. The Panel concurs with
President Kagame, who described the conflict in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo as “a self-financing
war”.
Uganda
115. Uganda officially spends about 2 per cent of its
GDP on defence, which is being monitored by the
Bretton Woods institutions. For the fiscal year 2000,
the defence budget was about $110 million. This
budget covers pay of about $70 per month for 50,000
soldiers, 10,000 of whom are stationed in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, pays for the
pension of retired soldiers, buys equipment and
addresses other needs.
116. According to various sources, UPDF has on
average 10,000 soldiers in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo out of the 50,000 total. Indeed, the budget
line for pay alone for a year is about $41 million for
the 50,000 Ugandan soldiers. If a bonus of $20 is paid
to each of the 10,000 soldiers, that would amount to

of the war; the numbers used are therefore average
estimates.

27

S/2001/357

$200,000 per month (in 1998 and 1999), a total of
$2.4 million per year.
117. On the basis of a rate of $2,000 per hour and six
hours on average for a return journey and three
rotations a day, UPDF spends on average $12.96
million per year on transportation alone. Other
expenses for purchase, maintenance and replacement of
equipment are important. According to some sources,
Uganda spent about $126 million on its armed forces in
1999, an overspending of about $16 million.
Democratic Republic of the Congo
118. Of all the warring parties, the Democratic
Republic of the Congo presented the greatest challenge
as far as defence budget figures and number of troops
were concerned. Lack of reliable data and the barely
existent State apparatus have made the collection of
data very difficult. The country has been at war since
1996 and prior to that the army was already
disintegrating. Various military experts that the Panel
members met agree on one point: the extreme difficulty
of giving an estimate of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo army. Those who try to give an estimate speak
of 50,000 to 55,000 soldiers.
119. According to some government sources, the
Democratic Republic of the Congo relies on Chinese
and Eastern European companies to supply its military
arsenal and required equipment. The Panel has strong
indications that the Government, despite its economic
problems, has invested a great deal in the defence of its
territory.
Zimbabwe
120. Zimbabwe’s overall defence budget has been
decreasing at the very moment ZDF has troops engaged
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo. A reduction
was announced early in January 2000, lowering the
budget from Z$ 15.3 billion in 2000 to Z$ 13.3 billion
in 2001. Yet, ZDF with approximately 10,000 troops
engaged in the Democratic Republic of the Congo
spent on average about $3 million per month, a total of
$36 million in a year.
Angola and Namibia
121. Angola’s presence is smaller than Zimbabwe’s in
terms of troops. According to some sources, Angolan
troops number about 3,000. Namibia’s presence is
limited to 2,000 troops. The defence budget of

28

N$ 24 million has remained at the same level since
1999 in spite of the support given to the Democratic
Republic of the Congo. However, the emergency or
additional budget for the armed forces has decreased
from N$ 89 million in 1999 to N$ 76 million in 2001.
Rebels
122. The rebel movements MLC, RCD-Goma and
RCD-ML have their own troops. MLC troops are
evaluated at 12,000 to 15,000 men. They usually use
light military equipment bought from Kampala. In
some cases, deals are done between Jean-Pierre Bemba
and other traders and businessmen. These deals consist
of giving them the opportunities to carry out business
activities or granting a mining concession, in exchange
for which the beneficiary would supply some military
items. In 1999, when Mr. Khalil demanded of Mr.
Bemba a concession for a diamond mine, he obtained a
concession in exchange for military fatigues and socks,
all made in Uganda.
123. The pay of these soldiers is unknown. The Panel
gathered however that these young men were not paid,
but could receive from time to time some money as
“help”. The consequence has been their involvement in
the exploitation of natural resources. The cost of war
appears to be minimal. The war expenses are the
purchase of ammunition and light weapons, transport
of soldiers by air and the money MLC paid to UPDF
and individual top officers for their support. A similar
scenario was played out with RCD-ML, which has
approximately 3,000 soldiers.
124. The RCD-Goma troops are estimated to be
around 12,000 to 15,000. According to some sources,
the Rwandan army until recently used to supply the
RCD-Goma troops with military equipment. The
military budget was not offered to the Panel in spite of
its request, and the estimates are very difficult to make.
Military equipment and the transport of troops as well
as supplies of oil and petrol are the major expenses.
Pay is apparently uncertain, so that the soldiers when
possible try to survive, even at the expense of the local
population and the wildlife. For all parties involved in
the conflict in the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
this war seems to be expensive by African standards.
The question is: how do the different parties finance
their war effort?

S/2001/357

B. Financing the war
125. There are three primary means of financing this
war: (a) purchase of arms and equipment through direct
payment; (b) barter (arms for mining concessions); and
(c) creation of joint ventures. The economies of
Rwanda and Uganda, unlike those of Angola and
Namibia, have to varying extents financially benefited
from the conflict. Zimbabwe is a special case given the
potential of concessions attributed to Zimbabwean
companies. Data received from various sources,
including the countries involved in the conflict, OECD
and the Bretton Woods institutions, demonstrate that in
broad terms the mineral production of those three
countries has decreased. However there are some
interesting peaks between 1997 and 1999 (see sect. II.F
above). Isolated and varied examples of how these
countries finance their military presence in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo are given below.
Rwanda
126. Rwanda’s military appears to be benefiting
directly from the conflict. Indeed, the Panel has noted a
great integration between the military apparatus, the
State (civil) bureaucracy and the business community.
RPA finances its war in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo in five ways: (a) direct commercial activities;
(b) profit from shares it holds in some companies;
(c) direct payments from RCD-Goma; (d) taxes
collected by the “Congo desk” and other payments
made by individuals for the protection RPA provides
for their businesses; and (e) direct uptake by the
soldiers from the land.
127. Since 1998, the Department of External
Relations, through the Congo desk has been receiving
substantial amounts of money from various comptoirs.
Several diamond comptoirs were operating in
Kisangani before the monopoly was given to two in
July 2000. According to very reliable sources, taxes
were paid directly to the Congo desk. On average, a
comptoir with a turnover of $4 million per month
would pay $200,000 per month to the Congo desk.
Every diamond dealer who intends to purchase
diamonds in the eastern Democratic Republic of the
Congo or at Kigali would pay 5 per cent of the
diamond value to the Congo desk before the
transaction. This amount is consistent with the
so-called mandatory 5 per cent of the value of
purchased diamonds that the Congo desk takes from

the two comptoirs controlling the Kisangani diamond
market. Messrs. Nassour and Arslanian, the “conflict
diamond dealers” in the eastern Democratic Republic
of the Congo, provided on average $2 million per year,
each directly to the Congo desk. A similar percentage
is applied for other mineral resources in the area
controlled by RCD-Goma.
128. Before July 2000, monopoly holders used to pay
the sum of $200,000 per month in its entirety to Kigali;
this has changed slightly since RCD-Goma claimed its
share. The larger diamond comptoirs would therefore
pay $100,000 to the Congo desk and $100,000 to the
RCD-Goma authority. The Panel believes that over a
period of two years the Congo desk would have
received about $4 million as direct payment for
granting the authorization to operate in the areas under
its control.
129. Some documents point to a direct implication of
the Rwandan Patriotic Army in commercial activities.
As mentioned earlier, RPA, through the companies
Rwanda Metals and Grands Lacs Metals, has big stakes
in the coltan business. Most of the coltan extracted by
civilians and prisoners is sold to intermediaries
(civilians or soldiers) who in turn sell it to comptoirs,
some of which are controlled by the Rwandan military.
The quasi-totality of this coltan is sent to Kigali, and
generally stored in facilities owned by the Government.
A good portion goes to Rwanda Metals and the rest is
exported directly by some professionals. Rwanda
Metals and Grands Lacs Metals, directly or through
Congo desk, contact clients on the availability of
coltan. Some of the letters sent to potential clients in
Europe and the United States of America are signed
Dan, who was the head of the Congo desk.
130. Given the substantial increase in the price of
coltan between late 1999 and late 2000, a period during
which the world supply was decreasing while the
demand was increasing, a kilo of coltan of average
grade was estimated at $200. According to the
estimates of professionals, the Rwandan army through
Rwanda Metals was exporting at least 100 tons per
month. The Panel estimates that the Rwandan army
could have made $20 million per month, simply by
selling the coltan that, on average, intermediaries buy
from the small dealers at about $10 per kg. According
to experts and dealers, at the highest estimates of all
related costs (purchase and transport of the minerals),
RPA must have made at least $250 million over a
period of 18 months. This is substantial enough to

29

S/2001/357

finance the war. Here lies the vicious circle of the war.
Coltan has permitted the Rwandan army to sustain its
presence in the Democratic Republic of the Congo. The
army has provided protection and security to the
individuals and companies extracting the mineral.
These have made money which is shared with the
army, which in turn continues to provide the enabling
environment to continue the exploitation. The last
illustration of how Rwanda finances its war deals with
the financial transactions involving Rwandan banks,
RPA suppliers and RCD institutions. In these particular
cases, Rwanda has used BCDI and SONEX to pay RPA
suppliers.
131. SONEX was founded in March 1999 in Kigali. It
belonged to RCD-Goma and was managed by
Emmanuel Kamanzi, former chief of the Finance
Department of RCD-Goma. Its primary purpose was to
serve as the commercial and financial arm of RCD,
handling most commercial and financial deals. SONEX
was dissolved late in 2000, but it had sufficient time to
put in place a pattern for the transfer of resources from
RCD to Kigali. The Panel received documents
highlighting the financial transactions of SONEX and
BCDI. According to those documents, BCDI released
$1 million in mid-1999 for SONEX as a loan to pay
fuel bills to Jambo Safari. SONEX was to repay this
loan with the money obtained from the selling of coltan
and cassiterite. By February 2000, $200,000 to
$300,000 had already been reimbursed to BCDI. This
loan seems to be part of the financial transaction by
which money is transferred to Kigali, and some
individuals in RCD take their own substantial cut.
132. The same year, SONEX requested another loan of
$10 million from BCDI in Kigali, and $5 million was
approved. According to one of the actors at the time,
the $5 million loan was not physically paid to SONEX.
Instead, BCDI ordered Citibank in New York to pay
RCD suppliers with the loans technically given to
SONEX. This financial arrangement is suspicious in
many ways.
133. First, RPF through Tristar is a shareholder in
BCDI. Second, the suppliers of RCD are mostly
Rwandan companies whose owners are closely
acquainted with RPA or RPF. Third, the deal with
SONEX is handled by Major Dan, at the Congo desk,
who is related by marriage to Mr. Kamanzi, head of the
Finance Department and mastermind of the whole
operation.

30

134. The BCDI loans to SONEX could be well-crafted
operations to transfer money from BCDI to RPA and to
pay RPA suppliers by using SONEX. Paying RPA
suppliers is one way of financing the war without
taking from the official budget. Reliable sources report
that about $700,000 has already been paid back by
RCD. According to a RCD-Goma document explicitly
detailing how debts should be repaid with money made
out of the coltan sale, part of the $1 million per month
in taxes that Mrs. Gulamali pays to RCD for the
monopoly on coltan could also be used to pay back the
BCDI loan.
Uganda
135. Uganda unlike Rwanda did not set up an
extrabudgetary system to finance its presence in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo. The regular
defence budget is used and broadly the deficit is
handled by the treasury. However, the Ugandan
economy benefited from the conflict through the reexportation economy. In turn, the treasury benefited
and this allowed an increase in the defence budget.
136. The re-exportation economy implies that natural
resources imported from the Democratic Republic of
the Congo are repackaged or sealed as Ugandan natural
resources or products and re-exported. That is the case
for some gold, diamonds, coltan and coffee exported by
Uganda. The re-exportation economy has had a
tremendous impact on the financing of the war, in three
ways.
137. First, it has increased the incomes of key
businessmen, traders and other dealers. In the coffee
sector, gains have been substantial for the traders in
Kampala and Bujumbura. According to an expert in the
sector who lives in the region, there is a trick used by
coffee exporters in the region. Arabica coffee produced
in Bujumbura is of a higher grade than the one
produced in Kivu. The difference in price could be in
some cases one third. Burundian dealers by importing
Congolese coffee and mixing it, then presenting it as
Burundian coffee, gain a higher price. The Ugandan
traders use the same schemes. In the case of Uganda,
the dealers gain both ways. The trader buys
inexpensive coffee in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, often with counterfeit currency, eventually
mixes it with Uganda coffee, and then re-exports this
coffee as Ugandan robusta, which is of better quality
than Congolese robusta.

S/2001/357

138. Second, the illegal exploitation of gold in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo brought a
significant improvement in the balance of payments of
Uganda. This in turn gave multilateral donors,
especially IMF, which was monitoring the Ugandan
treasury situation, more confidence in the Ugandan
economy. Third, it has brought more money to the
treasury through various taxes on goods, services and
international trade. Discussions with the Deputy
Commissioner of the Ugandan Revenue Authority
revealed that the tax collection level has increased
dramatically over the past five years. IMF figures on
Ugandan fiscal operations confirm this positive
evolution over the past three years. A detailed analysis
of the structure and the evolution of the fiscal
operations reveals that some sectors have done better
than others, and most of those tend to be related to the
agricultural and forestry sector in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo. Logs, sawn wood or planks
destined for Uganda, Kenya or for export out of the
continent pay customs duties as they enter Uganda.
139. Between 1998 and 2000, about 1,800 trucks
carrying logs, timber, coffee, medicinal barks,
cassiterite, pyrochlore, iron ore, tea and quinina have
transited through Uganda. The official figures from the
Government of Uganda show an average of 600 lorries
per year, all registered by customs officers. As Mrs.
Lotsove once noted, the tax exoneration given to the
Victoria and Trinity companies represents a net loss of
$5 million per month (there are 15 points of entry). The
Panel concludes that, given the absence of the
exoneration on the Ugandan side, and a higher level of
taxes in Uganda, customs duties related to the
transiting of Congolese natural resources exploited by
Ugandans and some Congolese in Equateur and
Orientale Provinces would bring the treasury at least
$5 million every month.
140. Another way of financing the presence of the
army in the Democratic Republic of the Congo was to
purchase military supplies on credit. The Ugandan
army has purchased petrol on credit from a number of
private companies. The accruing debt is treated as
internal debt.
141. The Panel also gathered that the local
commanders of UPDF turn a blind eye to soldiers’
racketeering among the populations or their
involvement in small business. This is seen as a way to
pay their bonuses and this has proved to be a very
successful method. Information received from friends

and relatives of UPDF soldiers who served in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo clearly shows that
there were elements of self-payment much more
satisfactory that the official bonus. Overall, the
military, its leaders and other involved individuals
manage to manipulate budgetary and other factors to
retain their control in the occupied territories.
142. The Ugandan situation can be summarized as
follows: the re-exportation economy has helped
increase tax revenues, allowing the treasury to have
more cash. Businesses related to the conflict and
managed by Ugandans have contributed to an extent to
generate activities in the economy in a sector such as
mining (gold and diamonds). The growth in these
sectors has had a trickle-down effect on the economy
and permitted Uganda to improve its GDP in 1998 and
maintain it somewhat in 1999.5 The improvement in
GDP has permitted, according to Ugandan officials, an
increase in absolute terms of the military budget while
keeping the level of the military budget at the agreed 2
per cent of GDP. The apparent strength of the Ugandan
economy has given more confidence to investors and
bilateral and multilateral donors who, by maintaining
their level of cooperation and assistance to Uganda,
gave the Government room to spend more on security
matters while other sectors, such as education, health
and governance, are being taken care of by the bilateral
and multilateral aid.
MLC, RCD-Goma and RCD-ML
143. Officially, the rebel movements receive the bulk
of their military equipment through UPDF and RPA.
During discussions with the Ugandan Minister of
Defence and the Chief of Staff of UPDF, the Panel was
informed that weapons seized from the Congolese
armed forces are usually given to MLC and RCD-ML.
According to other sources, some military equipment is
acquired by these groups through direct purchase and
barter. The Panel came across a very interesting case in
which Mr. Bemba, at the instigation of General Kazini,
bargained with the highest authorities of Uganda for
the release of some Ukrainian pilots whose Antonov
has been captured. A very reliable source told the Panel
that in exchange Mr. Bemba received military fatigues,
boots and medical supplies for his soldiers from a third
party.
__________________
5 Uganda’s GDP has been increasing since the early

1990s. However, a slight decrease was noted in 1999.

31

S/2001/357

144. RCD-Goma has designed a fiscal system based
mainly on the mining sector. About six different forms
of tax exist in this sector, and they are applied on
approximately eight different types of minerals,
including the most important (coltan, gold and
diamonds). From RCD official statistics the Panel
notes that in 1999 on average 60 kg of gold was
extracted every month from the area controlled by
RCD. That is about 720 kg a year. In 2000, the
extraction was higher, up to 100 kg a month. With
regard to coltan, 27 tons were extracted every month in
1999, while 29 tons were produced every month in
2000. Given the number of comptoirs (19 for coltan),
and the six types of tax, the Panel concludes that
substantial revenues through tax collection are
available to RCD. It is however difficult to estimate the
figures, although some insiders have told the Panel that
the financial situation has been improving since late
2000, and the prospects for a balanced budget are
better than two years ago. Information obtained from
documents and individuals suggests that, in addition to
taxes levied and shares it holds in SOMIGL, RCDGoma has given a monopoly of coltan to SOMIGL, in
exchange for which it receives $1 million monthly.
145. Illustration of the commercial activities of
RCD. A preponderance of information obtained from
documents and individuals regarding the activities of
RCD-Goma in the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
Dar es Salaam, United Republic of Tanzania, and
elsewhere
during
the
current
hostilities
overwhelmingly suggests that RCD-Goma and others
are marketing the natural resources of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo — gold, diamonds and
timber — through Dar es Salaam. Gold and diamonds
belonging to RCD-Goma are shipped through their
financial and logistical network, via Dar es Salaam, for
sale on the international market. In order to facilitate
the movement of the commodities and to give the
appearance of legitimacy, RCD-Goma obtains
documents to hide or cover their ownership. The
documents covering the shipments of gold and
diamonds are completed forms of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo. The forms indicate issuance
from a government organization, complete with the
required stamps and signatures indicating approval and
issuance in Kinshasa and Lubumbashi. RCD-Goma’s
representatives in Dar es Salaam coordinate the receipt,
forwarding and sale of gold and diamond shipments.
The gold shipments transit through Dar es Salaam
international airport for sale to buyers in Sri Lanka and

32

elsewhere. The diamond shipments are held at the
Bank of Tanzania before being forwarded to Belgium,
the Netherlands and South Africa.
146. The gold and diamonds are being sold by RCDGoma in exchange for cash or bartered for armaments
and medicines to support continuation of the current
hostilities. RCD-Goma’s representatives in Dar es
Salaam also arrange for the purchase of foodstuffs and
other logistical needs for the war effort. In addition,
timber resources from the Democratic Republic of the
Congo are being shipped through Dar es Salaam to
Greece and Belgium. In the case of Greece, the timber
transaction is being partially arranged by an
import/export business located in Goma. The
shipments of gold, diamonds and timber are also
processed in Dar es Salaam in cooperation with RCD
representatives by a company believed to be a covert
business entity created for the purpose of facilitating
support for the financial and logistical operations of
RCD-Goma. It is important to note that the activities
described above represent an RCD-Goma operation and
are exclusive of operations handled by the Government
of Rwanda, via Kigali.
147. The Panel concludes on this point that the major
rebel groups are gradually becoming autonomous
(MLC/FLC and RCD-Goma) in terms of supply of
military equipment. They are capable of raising
substantial amounts of cash, enough to buy the light
equipment they use. Equally they have put in place
their own network and contacts, which would allow
them to purchase their own equipment when necessary.
This growing autonomy has manifested itself recently
as RCD-Goma has requested that money usually given
to the Congo desk by diamond dealers be shared
equally between both entities. Equally, RCD-Goma has
initiated some military attacks on RCD-ML positions
in order to occupy mineral-rich areas as shown earlier.
As the need for an autonomous supply of weapons
grows, so does the need to find additional resources,
and therefore clashes for the control of mineral-rich
areas will be recurrent; so goes the vicious circle of
war and exploitation of natural resources on the side of
the rebellion.
Democratic Republic of the Congo
148. The Government of the Democratic Republic of
the Congo has relied on its minerals and mining
industries to finance the war. Between 1998 and early
2001, the strategy for financing the war was based on

S/2001/357

three pillars, namely (a) search for cash through the
attribution of monopolies; (b) direct and indirect
uptake of funds from parastatals and other private
companies; and (c) creation of joint ventures between
parastatals and foreign companies in countries allied
with the Democratic Republic of the Congo.
149. Search for cash. The late President used
different schemes to raise funds. He instituted the tax
parafiscale (see para. 41) and also implemented
schemes such as the creation of a monopoly for the
commercialization of diamonds.
150. Monopoly
on
diamonds
granted
to
International Diamond Industries (IDI). According
to government sources, the objective of this monopoly
was twofold: first, to have fast and fresh money that
could be used for the purchase of needed arms, and
address some of the pending problems with the allies.
Second, to have access to Israeli military equipment
and intelligence given the special ties that the Director
of International Diamond Industries, Dan Gertler, has
with some generals in the Israeli army.
151. This deal turned out to be a nightmare for the
Government of the Democratic Republic of the Congo
and a disaster for the local diamond trade as well as an
embarrassment for the Republic of the Congo, which is
currently flirting with illicit diamonds. According to
different sources, IDI paid only $3 million instead of
$20 million and never supplied military equipment.
152. President
Joseph
Kabila
has
expressed
willingness to liberalize the diamond trade in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, and IMF and the
World Bank are very supportive of this move. IDI is,
however, threatening to sue the Government of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo. The IDI deal also
turns out to be a disaster for the local diamond trade.
As the monopoly was granted to IDI, most diamond
dealers operating in the Government-controlled area
crossed to Brazzaville to sell their diamonds. It is
estimated that during the first three months of the
monopoly, $60 million worth of diamonds from the
Democratic Republic of the Congo were sold on the
international market, and the Republic of the Congo
was mentioned as the country of origin. This
smuggling of diamonds deprived the already ailing
economy of the Democratic Republic of the Congo of
substantial sums of money and the treasury of
substantial tax revenues. This case shows that the
desperate need for quick cash to finance the defence of

its territory has instead brought other problems to the
Government and has paradoxically deprived the
treasury of substantial revenue.
153. Uptaking money from parastatals. Another way
of financing the war has been the direct and indirect
uptake of money from parastatals and other private
companies, mainly the Société minière de Bakwanga
and the Générale des carrières et des mines
(Gecamines). The Government has claimed from
MIBA since August 1998 on average two fifths of their
earnings. The Panel was told that in some cases three
fifths, the equivalent of $4 million per sale, was sent to
the President’s office. The Panel has also confirmation
that oil companies gave important sums of money as
taxes parafiscales to the Government. In most cases,
this cash in Congolese francs was delivered to Victor
Mpoyo, who then reported to the late President Kabila.
This money was used for the salary and bonuses of
Congolese soldiers in the battlefield. According to
some Congolese officials, the taxes parafiscales were
never used for the purchase of weapons.
154. MIBA receives from the Government the
equivalent of two fifths of its sales of diamonds in
Congolese francs changed at the official rate, which is
only one quarter of the black market rate. It is believed
that about 75 Congolese francs for each dollar changed
is unaccounted for and possibly used for defence
needs.6
155. The contribution of Gecamines to the war effort
appears to be on two levels. On the one hand, one third
of the company’s profit was taken directly by the
Government in 1999 and in 2000. On the other, the
Government contributed indirectly to the expenses of
the Zimbabwe Defence Forces between May 1999 and
October 2000.
A special case: Zimbabwe
156. Zimbabwe has financed its involvement in the
conflict in two different ways: (a) by using the defence
budget — the bulk of Zimbabwe’s military expenses
seem to be covered by the regular budget; (b) by
indirect financing of the war through direct payment by
some Congolese entities, mainly companies. According
to two very reliable sources, during the tenure of Billy
Rautenbach money from Gecamines paid bonuses to
the Zimbabwean soldiers. These payments might be
__________________
6 In 2000, the official exchange rate was one dollar for 23

Congolese francs.

33

S/2001/357

linked to the contract between the Government and
Ridgepoint. Indeed, part of the rights to exploit
Gecamines mines was transferred to Ridgepoint
without apparent compensation. According to some
sources, the compensation, which is not mentioned in
the contract, could be the sharing of profits between the
Government of the Democratic Republic of the Congo
and Ridgepoint, on the basis of 80 per cent for the
Government and 20 per cent for Ridgepoint. According
to some sources, curiously, Mr. Mpoyo, the Congolese
minister, signed the contract as one of the officials of
Ridgepoint rather than signing on behalf of the
Government. Two months after the contract of Mr.
Rautenbach as Director of Gecamines came to an end,
discontent among Zimbabwean soldiers in Katanga
over their lack of bonuses was reported.
157. The Panel has, however, noted a practice which is
neither the financing of war nor the provision of direct
assistance. The practice is qualified in this report as
“incentives for assistance”. The former Government of
the Democratic Republic of the Congo often used the
potential of its vast resources in the Katanga and Kasai
regions to secure the assistance of some allies or to
cover some of the expenses that they might incur
during their participation in the war. Among all of its
allies, Zimbabwean companies and some decision
makers have benefited most from this scheme. The
following examples illustrate how different schemes
were implemented and benefited the decision makers,
the very group of officials who can decide about ZDF
assistance to the Democratic Republic of the Congo.
The most utilized scheme has been the creation of joint
ventures.
158. Joint ventures. One way of securing the
engagement of some allies in the war has been the
provision of financial incentives by way of creating
business opportunities in the mining sector. At least
three
features
emerged
from
the
scheme:
(a) Zimbabwean companies received interesting mining
concessions; (b) Zimbabwean companies using their
influence with the Government of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo developed business partnerships
with private companies and parastatals; and (c) in turn,
received preferential treatment for their businesses.
159. Sengamines: example of a joint venture. The
Panel gathered that, late in 1998, a private
Zimbabwean
company,
Operation
Sovereign
Legitimacy (OSLEG), whose shareholders are
Lieutenant General Vitalis Musungwa Zvinavashe, Job

34

Whabira, former Permanent Secretary in the Ministry
of Defence, Onesimo Moyo, President of Minerals
Marketing Corporation of Zimbabwe, and Isaiah
Ruzengwe, General Manager of Zimbabwe Mining
Development Corporation, got into a partnership with
COMIEX; COSLEG was born of this partnership.
Through COSLEG, Zimbabwe (ZANU-PF) could
exploit and market minerals, timber and other
resources of the Democratic Republic of the Congo.
160. Reliable sources told the Panel that a
Zimbabwean delegation headed by the then Minister of
Justice, Emmerson Munangagwa, visited the Kasai
region to see the various mining concessions given by
the late President Kabila to ZDF as barter payment for
its military support. The team was composed of the
former Permanent Secretary in the Ministry of
Defence, Moven Mahachi; the Chief of the Armed
Forces, General Zvinavashe; and the President of
MIBA, Kadende Muya. President Kabila’s gift to the
Zimbabwean military was causing a problem, however,
as they did not have the financial and technical
expertise to exploit their mining concessions. Late in
1998, Thamer Al Shanfari, Chairman of Oryx Natural
Resources, was asked to provide the needed financial
and technical expertise. Mr. Al Shanfari decided to
create Oryx Zimcon, Ltd., a joint venture between
Oryx Natural Resources and COSLEG.
161. Instead of selecting one of the various mines
belonging to COSLEG to start its investment, Oryx
Zimcon wanted the best mines which initially belonged
to MIBA. At the request of ZDF and on the advice of
Victor Mpoyo and Mwenze Kongolo,7 the late
President Kabila transferred two of MIBA’s richest
concessions — the kimberlite deposits in Tshibua and
the alluvial deposits in the Senga Senga River, to Oryx
Zimcon. Oryx Zimcon and COSLEG together created
Sengamines.
162. As promised, Mr. Al Shanfari started investing in
Sengamines and used the Breco group of companies of
John Bredenkamp to transport mining equipment to the
mines. As the technical and financial partner, Oryx was
to receive 40 per cent, OSLEG 40 per cent and
COSLEG 20 per cent. As the need for money grew,
__________________
7 According to some sources, Mwenze Kongolo is involed

in most COMIEX dealings. Most importantly, it is said
to the main bridge between Zimbabwean officials such
as the influential Emmerson Munangagwa and the
Government of the Democratic Republic of the Congo.

S/2001/357

Mr. Al Shanfari decided to launch Oryx on London’s
Alternative Investment Market under the name Oryx
Diamonds. Upon strong objections from various
stakeholders, Oryx Diamonds was withdrawn from the
market. The new statute of the company does not
mention the name OSLEG.8 The Panel was informed,
however, that the increase in the shares of COMIEX as
seen in the new statute was meant to preserve the
interests of Zimbabweans. The Panel was also told that
payment would be made to the Government of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo only after the loan
taken for this operation (about $25 million) was repaid.
163. The ease with which the Tshibua and Senga
Senga River concessions were given to Oryx without
due regard for the legal requirements and the
preferential treatment given to Oryx show the
determination of the former Government of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo to reward some of
its allies.
Attribution of concessions
164. According to some sources, a very recent (26
February 2001) concession of cobalt and copper in
Kambove-Kakanda was to be given KMC Group of the
Zimbabwean Billy Rautenbach. According to very
reliable sources, different ministers had signed the
concession two days before the assassination of the late
President Kabila and only his signature was missing.
The trade unionist of Gecamines has indicated that the
cession was completed, but President Joseph Kabila
told the Panel that the deal has not been signed yet. If it
is signed, there could be a rapprochement of activities.
165. This case shows rapprochement of the activities
and interests of some Zimbabwean businessmen, and a
possible link between arms dealing and mining
activities in the Democratic Republic of the Congo.
Indeed Mr. Bredenkamp is said to have an interest in
this venture, although he was alleged to be an arms
dealer. In November 2000, a month after the departure
of Mr. Rautenbach from Gecamines, Mr. Bredenkamp
is said to have established a direct link with Mr.
Rautenbach. According to three reliable sources, Mr.
Rautenbach, Mr. Bredenkamp and Mr. Munangwana,
the current Speaker of the House of Zimbabwe,
Chairman of ZANU-PF and director of many
__________________
8 The distribution of shares is a follows: Oryx 49 per cent,

COMIEX 33 per cent, MIBA 16 per cent and Congolese
partners 3 per cent.

companies belonging to ZANU-PF, met with the late
President Kabila to negotiate this contract of the
central part of the Gecamines concessions. The Panel
does not draw any conclusions, but wishes to highlight
the quality of the people involved in the negotiations,
their past records, current activities and position in
Zimbabwe.
166. Many other deals are ongoing such as the one
concerning the supply of foodstuffs to the Congolese
army, for which General Zvinavashe’s company is said
to have been attributed the transport. President Robert
Mugabe once told interlocutors that the late President
Kabila had given him a mine concession.
167. The Government of the Democratic Republic of
the Congo, in its effort to defend its territory and
secure the supply of military equipment, has signed a
contract worth several million United States dollars
with the Government of China. Official sources in
Kinshasa, while confirming this deal, have informed
the Panel that in exchange a mining concession was
awarded to a joint venture between a Chinese company
and a parastatal of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo.
168. In the same vein, the Government of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo has made a deal
with the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea,
which trains troops of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo and in exchange, it is believed, has received a
mining concession around Shinkolobwe, very rich in
uranium. The Americans in the past extracted uranium
from this mine. Challenged on this issue, officials of
the Democratic Republic of the Congo mentioned high
radioactivity in the area, making it impossible for
anyone to work there.
169. According to some officials, the Democratic
Republic of the Congo has asked the United States of
America to consider addressing the problem of
radioactivity in the area, given their historical presence
in mining that particular area for uranium. The official
denial of a deal between the Democratic Republic of
the Congo and the Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea was based on the fact that the Government of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo has sought United
States assistance — which it cannot receive if the
Koreans are mining the same area.
170. The Panel has enough elements and evidence to
suggest that the Government of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo under the late President Kabila,

35

S/2001/357

gave strong incentives in the form of access,
exploitation and management of mineral resources.
These incentives in turn have “convinced” the
Zimbabwean authorities to remain engaged in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo. The incentives
have, however, been so important that the whole
balance of the mining industries is likely to be affected.
The question in the region is which course of action
will sidelined companies take in the future to guarantee
their presence in the mining sector? Will it be another
cycle of war or intensification of war in relation to the
securing of access to the rich cobalt and copper area of
the Democratic Republic of the Congo?
Angola and Namibia
171. These two countries have financed their
participation in the conflict with their regular defence
budget. In the case of Angola, some deals, minor
compared to those of Zimbabwe, have been signed,
such as the creation of Sonangol, in which Sonangol
Angola has 60 per cent of shares and COMIEX 40 per
cent. Sonangol Angola is a 100 per cent State-owned
company (Sonangol supplies oil to the Democratic
Republic of the Congo). The two countries have also
signed a letter of intent to jointly exploit crude oil off
their coast when peace returns to the region.
172. In the case of Namibia, the Panel was informed
by the Namibian authorities of the existence of a joint
venture between a Namibian company called August
26, whose main shareholder is the Ministry of Defence,
an American company and a “company” of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo. Other deals
involving individuals have been signed. At this point,
the Panel has not found substantial evidence that
Angola and Namibia have signed commercial deals in
the nature of “arms and support for natural resources”.
Their motivation seems to be solely political and
strategic (for Angola). According to very reliable
sources, joint ventures proposed to these two countries
were a sign of gratitude rather than an incentive for
their support and they never pressed for it.

C. Special features of the links between
the exploitation of natural resources
and the continuation of the conflict
173. It is often said that the conflict in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo is low-intensity warfare, as

36

armies do not confront each other on a daily basis and
battles or rather serious battles are not frequent. The
Panel noted that the conflict, especially in occupied
zones, is fought on three levels:
(a) Government forces and the allies versus the
rebels and their Ugandan-Rwandan and Burundian
allies;
(b) RCD-Goma and its Rwandan allies versus
MLC or RCD-ML and their Ugandan allies;
(c) Rebel movements and their allies (Rwanda
or Uganda versus the so-called negative forces:
Interahamwe, Maï-Maï and other dissident groups).
174. Indeed, the conflict in the Democratic Republic
of the Congo is being fought on two fronts, official and
unofficial. The official front is that of classic
warfare — two or more armies confronting each other.
This front goes from Pweto to Mbandaka on an uneven
line crossing various localities. The unofficial front is
concentrated inside zones controlled by rebels and their
Ugandan and Rwandan allies.
175. The analysis of battles and skirmishes recorded
from mid-1999 to 2001 shows that:
(a) Overall, the number of battles on the official
front with the engagement of the army is lower than the
number of skirmishes, about 96 between 1999 and
2001;
(b) The number of battles has been decreasing
over the years. In the first quarter of 2001, only eight
confrontations were reported on the official front line;
(c) Current big battles have been fought in
areas of major economic importance, towards the
cobalt- and copper-rich area of Katanga and the
diamond area of Mbuji Mayi. Military specialists argue
that the Rwandan objective is to capture these mineralrich areas to deprive the Government of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo of the financial sources of its
war effort. Without the control of this area, the
Government of the Democratic Republic of the Congo
cannot sustain the war. This rationale confirms that the
availability of natural resources and their exploitation
permits the continuation of the war. This may be true
for all the parties. In view of the current experience of
the illegal exploitation of the resources of the eastern
Democratic Republic of the Congo by Rwanda and
Uganda, it could also be thought that the capturing of
this mineral-rich area would lead to the exploitation of

S/2001/357

those resources. In that case, control of those areas by
Rwanda could be seen primarily as an economic and
financial objective rather than a security objective for
the Rwandan borders.

by RCD-ML and captured Kandole, an area rich in
diamonds and with some coltan. Also late in December
2000, RCD-Goma initiated an attack from Lindi to
conquer Lakutu, another diamond-rich area.

176. The number of skirmishes between rebel forces
and their allies, and the armed group Maï-Maï has
increased. From May to December 2000, about 177
clashes were reported. The battlefields are generally
around coltan- and diamond-mining or coltan-rich
areas. The Panel has strong indications that most of the
fights between Rwandan soldiers and Maï-Maï have
occurred in the so-called “coltan belt”. Some areas
experienced up to 10 skirmishes in 2000. According to
some sources, numerous reports and accounts of
eyewitnesses mention the presence of Rwandan and
Ugandan soldiers providing security around coltan and
diamond mines. Officials of RCD-Goma have
confirmed the risk posed by the Maï-Maï and “negative
forces” in those areas. A senior RCD official specified
that only very well organized entities with the
necessary security infrastructure can carry out the
exploitation of coltan in those areas. In this particular
case, the Rwandan army is the only institution with that
capability in the eastern Democratic Republic of the
Congo.

179. Finally, in areas where the risks are too high,
adversaries, if not enemies, become partners in
business. That is the case of the Maï-Maï doing
business with RPA civilian coltan dealers, who in turn
sell to comptoirs controlled by Rwandans and their
companies Grands Lacs Metals and Rwanda Metals.
The most famous case was when the Maï-Maï chief,
General Padiri, informed people in Kigali in November
2000 that he was selling 60 tons of coltan.

177. Rwanda’s “unusual” tactics. The Rwandan
forces will attack the same area for two days then pull
back. According to our sources, these attacks seem to
coincide with the period when coltan has been
extracted and put in bags for evacuation by the MaïMaï. Attacked, the Maï-Maï abandon their coltan,
which is then taken away by small aircraft. The
Rwandan soldiers retreat again waiting for the next
information on available coltan. In the areas where
their grip is weaker, Rwanda in particular has designed
strategies to retain control within certain echelons of
the existing local hierarchies. In those areas controlled
by the Interahamwe and Maï-Maï forces, either RPA,
from time to time, mounts military operations that
allow it to capture the areas temporarily and evacuate
the coltan, or else middlemen are used for the purchase
of coltan from the Maï-Maï and “negative forces”.
178. Battles between rebel movements are also
reported in areas rich in mines. On 18 November 2000,
RCD-Goma and its Rwandan allied troops based in
Kisangani attacked positions of MLC in Bengamisa, 50
km north-west of Kisangani, and took control of this
rich diamond area. On 31 December 2000, RCD-Goma
and its allies launched an attack on the area controlled

180. Strategies to sustain the vicious circle of war
and exploitation: the example of Uganda. Top UPDF
commanders have essentially used the Hema/Lendu
conflict. The Panel has received very reliable
information clearly showing how General Kazini and
Colonels Kyakabale and Arocha assisted in training
different Hema militia, and manipulated those groups
to fight each other. Reports clearly showed that while
the Kazini camp was helping with the training of the
Hemas, the Colonel Peter Karim camp was assisting in
training the Lendus. Both camps belonging to UPDF.
There are strong indications that some UPDF elements
may spark violence so as to remain in the region in an
attempt to control the gold-rich area and the potentially
coltan-rich areas of Nyaleki. There is, therefore, a clear
intent of the military commanders to control these
mineral-rich areas and keep them for long-term
exploitation. The Nia-Nia confrontation in October
2000, in which UPDF General Kazini and Roger
Lumbala fought another UPDF group and RCD-ML is
a variation of the fighting inside UPDF for control of
coltan-rich areas. According to different sources, Roger
Lumbala, of RCD-national, has been used by General
Kazini to control the Bafwasende area, rich in
diamonds and coltan.

D. Facilitators or passive accomplices?
181. The link between the continuation of the conflict
and the exploitation of natural resources would have
not been possible if some entities, not parties in the
conflict, had not played a key role, willingly or not.
Bilateral and multilateral donors and certain
neighbouring and distant countries have passively
facilitated the exploitation of the resources of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and the

37

S/2001/357

continuation of the conflict; the role of private
companies and individuals has also been vital.
182. The Panel has gathered information showing that
linkages between different actors and stakeholders are
very well structured to the point that Governments and
large reputable companies operate in confidence. In the
case of coltan, all the needed documentation for its
export is provided in Kigali, but there are accomplices
in Kinshasa in the Ministry of Mines. The importing
companies and their facilitators are aware of the real
origin of the coltan, however. According to manifests
that the Panel received, Sabena Cargo as well as SDV
of the Bollore group have been among the key
companies in this chain of exploitation and
continuation of war. Thousands of tons of coltan from
the Democratic Republic of the Congo were carried
from Kigali or through the port of Dar es Salaam.
183. The Panel also has indications of the direct and
indirect involvement of some staff of the embassies and
cooperation agencies of developed countries. They
have facilitated the purchase of illegal minerals. The
United States honorary consul in Bukavu, as he
presented himself, Ramnik O. Kotecha, in addition to
promoting deals between American companies and
coltan dealers in the region, is himself Chairman of the
Kotecha group of companies based in Bukavu and
deals in coltan.
184. On the basis of the facts and their analysis, the
Panel reaches the conclusion that the increase in
revenues of the Rwandan army from coltan sales was
made easy by three key factors:
(a) The passive role of some private companies
such as Sabena and SDV for the transport of coltan,
Citibank for the financial transaction as the
corresponding bank of BCDI, the self-proclaimed
United States honorary consul in Bukavu and some
staff in various embassies in Kigali;
(b) The rush to profit of some foreign
companies that were ready to do business regardless of
elements of unlawfulness and irregularities (see
annex I for a sample of companies);
(c) The political legitimization provided by
some developed countries. In November 2000 in
Kigali, the Panel was told that the illegal exploitation
of resources and the financial gains of RPA were
justified as the repayment for the security that Rwanda
provides.

38

Bilateral donors
185. The main bilateral donors to Rwanda and Uganda
have been the United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland, Denmark, Germany and the United
States of America in various sectors. The analysis of
their cooperation shows that sectors benefiting from
this assistance are related to poverty, education and
governance. Priority sectors have been water and
sanitation,
health
and
governance,
including
institutional reforms, justice and human rights,
especially for Rwanda. In some cases, direct aid to the
budget is provided. The balance of payments of
Rwanda shows that budget support has steadily
increased, from $26.1 million in 1997 to $51.5 in 1999.
While such support is legitimate, the problem is that
expenditures and services which were supposed to be
provided and covered by the Governments of Rwanda
and Uganda and which are covered by the bilateral aid
constitute savings in the national budget. Were these
savings used to finance this war?
186. The German Ambassador in Kigali told the Panel
about German support to German business dealing in
pyrochlore and coltan in the occupied Democratic
Republic of the Congo. In this particular case, German
cooperation has given a preferential loan of DM
500,000 to Karl Heinz Albers, a German citizen, to
expand his coltan business in the Democratic Republic
of the Congo (SOMIKIVU) and Mr. Albers’s business
is guarded by RCD-Goma soldiers.
Multilateral donors
187. The World Bank has praised Uganda for its
economic performance and the reforms under the
structural adjustment programme as a success story and
has promoted its case for the new debt relief
programme, the Highly Indebted Poor Countries
initiative.
188. The Panel has however indications that this
economic performance was driven in part, especially
over the past three years, by the exploitation of the
resources of the Democratic Republic of the Congo.
Notes exchanged between World Bank staff clearly
show that the Bank was informed about a significant
increase in gold and diamond exports from a country
that produces very little of these minerals or exports
quantities of gold that it could not produce (see para.
97). Internal discussions of the World Bank staff also
confirm this knowledge of the situation: in one of those

S/2001/357

internal exchanges, a staff member warned his
colleague that the World Bank silence would blow up
in the Bank’s face.
189. In the case of Uganda and its exploitation of the
natural resources of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, the World Bank never questioned the
increasing exports of resources and in one instance a
staff member even defended it. During the Panel’s visit
to Uganda, the representative of the Bank dismissed
any involvement of Uganda in the exploitation of those
resources. The Bank not only encouraged Uganda and
Rwanda indirectly by defending their case, but equally
gave the impression of rewarding them by proposing
these countries for the Highly Indebted Poor Countries
debt relief initiative.
190. The Bank’s shadow on the conflict in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo is even more
apparent on the budget. The balance of payments of
both Uganda and Rwanda shows a significant increase
in long-term borrowing in support of the budget. The
defence budget however has increased in absolute
terms, allowing Uganda and Rwanda to continue the
conflict. There seems to be a precedent for the Bank’s
behaviour. During the Cambodian crisis in the 1980s,
the Bank turned a blind eye to the illicit exploitation of
Cambodian timber; the question is whether it is World
Bank policy to ignore broad governance issues (hard or
soft) while dealing with its clients.
Transit countries
191. Countries in the region have indirectly and
passively facilitated the cycle of exploitation of the
natural resources of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo and the continuation of the conflict. This has
usually happened without any intent to cover up or
protect some interests. That is particularly the case of
countries with seaports. Those countries have served as
the hub for the export of natural resources. They were
bound by regulations and agreements signed within the
framework of subregional organizations such as
COMESA for the seaports of Mombasa and Dar es
Salaam and UDEAC/CEMAC for the port of Douala.
Mombasa and Dar es Salaam were the main ports used
by Uganda, Rwanda and Burundi to export some
natural resources, such as timber, cassiterite, coffee and
various barks. Douala seaport was also used for coffee
from Equateur Province and transported from Bangui.

192. According to some sources, the Government of
the Central African Republic was aware of the
commercial activities of MLC in Bangui. Jean-Pierre
Bemba’s friends, Jean-Yves Ollivier, Jean-Pierre
Dupont and Jean-Pierre Saber, have all used Bangui as
the arrière-base for their diamond and coffee deals.
The Government never prevented MLC from using the
Central African Republic for economic activities. In
addition, some individuals were using the territory of
the Central African Republic to carry out their illegal
activities, as was the case with Victor Butt, who used
Bangui airport to load and offload coffee and arms.
193. According to some sources, some countries in the
region have been very attractive to Rwandan families
with an acceptable level of wealth. Army salaries
cannot sustain such lucrative properties and standards
of living. How do they sustain these families? Where
did the money come from?
194. Kenya has played a different role in the
exploitation of the resources of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo. It has been the base for the
supply of counterfeit United States dollars and also the
venue of financial transactions of various traders who
export their resources (timber, coffee and tobacco)
through the port of Mombasa.
The pivotal role of leaders
195. This section aims to show how Presidents and
other decision makers tolerate, organize or put in place
the framework and conditions to maintain the status
quo of exploitation and war. The Panel refrains from
making allegations about the personal involvement of
Presidents in the illegal and financial activities until
further investigation is carried out. For instance, the
Panel received but dismissed, for lack of evidence,
allegations of the involvement of President Kagame’s
family in diamond dealing; it focused rather on the
objective elements of the President’s political
responsibility. In some reports and accounts, the name
of President Museveni was mentioned as a shareholder
in a specific company. The Panel refrains from citing
these accounts until further research is conducted.
196. President Paul Kagame. His position in the
State apparatus with regard to the exploitation of the
natural resources of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo and the continuation of the war has evolved, yet
his role has remained pivotal. This role can be situated
on three levels: his relations with the Rwandan

39

S/2001/357

business community operating in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, control over the army, and the
structures involved in the illegal activities.
197. According to some reliable sources, President
Kagame has close relationships with top Rwandan
businessmen. For instance, he maintains good relations
with Modeste Makabuza, “owner” of Jambo Safari. He
is also close to Alfred Khalissa, the “founder” of BCDI
and former manager of BCD. The same sources told
the Panel that President Kagame is very close to Tibere
Rujigiro, who is known for generous financial support
to RPF during the 1990-1994 war. Mr. Rujigiro is one
of the shareholders of Tristar Investment, with very
close ties to RPF. This close aide to President Kagame
has business relationships with Faustin Mbundu, who
is known for his arms dealing activities. What all these
businessmen have in common is their direct
involvement in the exploitation of natural resources in
the areas that Rwanda controls. Different sources have
told the Panel that each of these businessmen has at a
certain point benefited from the President’s “help”.
198. President Kagame, when he was Minister of
Defence, reorganized or approved the reorganization of
the Rwandan army and the Ministry of Defence, which
subsequently led to the creation of the Department of
External Relations in which the Congo desk is located.
This unit has been the cornerstone of the financial
transactions of RPA. The former Minister of Defence
should have been aware of the functioning of RPA as
well as the daily operations of the army.
199. Two very reliable sources told the Panel that in
September 1998 the then Vice-President, during a
meeting with various officials of RCD and RPA top
commanders, informed the participants that there was a
need to raise $50 million to make it possible to reach
Kinshasa in two months.
200. Finally, when faced with the question of the
involvement of RPA in the exploitation of the resources
of the Democratic Republic of the Congo, the President
announced in a radio interview that private Rwandan
citizens were carrying out commercial activities in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo. Was this a
deliberate act to mislead various partners or was it
translating the President’s lack of information on the
issue? Meanwhile, the President has admitted in the
past that the conflict in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo was self-financing. All these elements
combined suggest the President’s degree of knowledge

40

of the situation, his implicit approval of the
continuation of the illegal exploitation of the resources
of the Democratic Republic of the Congo and somehow
his complicity as well as his political and moral
responsibility.
201. President Yoweri Museveni. President Yoweri
Museveni’s role in the exploitation of the natural
resources of the Democratic Republic of the Congo and
the continuation of the war can be situated at the
following levels: his policy towards the rebel
movements, his attitude towards the army and the
protection provided to illegal activities and their
perpetrators.
202. He has shaped the rebellion in the area controlled
by Uganda according to his own political philosophy
and agenda. He opted for a more decentralized
authority and only intervenes when major problems
arise, but he has a very good knowledge of the
situation on the ground.
203. Messrs. Mbusa Nyamwisi and Tibasima, former
first and second Vice-Presidents close to General Salim
Saleh and General Kazini, are more inclined to
business and the extraction of natural resources. In
December 1999, a report was handed over to the
President of Uganda, specifically pointing out the
embezzlement of $10 million by Mr. Nyamwisi and
$3 million by Mr. Tibasima. Another report was handed
to President Museveni in February 2000, specifically
denouncing the collusion between Trinity Group and
Mr. Tibasima and the impact on the collection of
customs duties. President Museveni chose to give the
direction of the Congolese Liberation Front to those
who are the accomplices of illegal cartels.
204. President Museveni was also informed of the
situation on the ground, the exploitation being carried
out and the involvement of officials of MLC and RCDML, including the conflict between Hemas and Lendus.
205. The President’s family has also been very
involved in business in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo in the occupied zones. General Salim Saleh and
his wife, shareholders in Victoria and Trinity, have
confidently carried out their activities undisturbed.
206. The Panel concludes that when the information is
passed to the President and he chooses not to act, when
he appoints the very people who carry out criminal
activities, and when his family members get away with

S/2001/357

criminal activities, it becomes overwhelming that the
President has put himself in the position of accomplice.
207. The late President Laurent-Désiré Kabila. His
role in the continuation of the war has survived his
death. On three levels, he bears part of the
responsibility for the current situation. First, as the
chief of AFDL, he created a precedent in giving a
character of “legality” or legitimacy to otherwise
illegal operations. During his advance on Kinshasa, he
granted concessions even though he did not have
authority to do so. These are the same methods being
used by some armed groups to fight for power.
208. Second, he allowed and tolerated some unlawful
ventures as a way of rewarding allies. He also initiated
the barter system in order to defend his territory. This
is gradually becoming the normal practice for the rebel
groups.
209. Third, he offered a good excuse and a pretext to
those who had carefully planned the redrawing of the
regional map to redistribute wealth. Many sources have
told the Panel how they were approached and asked to
think about the distribution of wealth of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo in terms of their
personal enrichment.
210. According to the facts, accounts and information
gathered, the pivotal roles of the Ugandan and
Rwandan leaders reside in the way in which they
diverted the primary mission of their armies from
protection of their territory and made them armies of
business. By the same token, they indirectly created
within their armies conditions for top officers to put in
place networks that they controlled. These networks
are becoming cartels, which will take over the war for
natural resources.
211. Presidents Kagame and Museveni are on the
verge of becoming the godfathers of the illegal
exploitation of natural resources and the continuation
of the conflict in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo. They have indirectly given criminal cartels a
unique opportunity to organize and operate in this
fragile and sensitive region. Finally, the attitude of the
late President has possibly planted the seeds for
another round of war for resources in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo. Politicians such as Jean-Pierre
Bemba, Mwenze Kongolo, Victor Mpoyo, Adolphe
Onusumba, Jean-Pierre Ondekane and Emmanuel
Kamanzi are ready to make any deal for the sake of
power or for personal enrichment. Companies such as

IDI and Sengamines some of which reportedly have
ties with arms dealers, are likely to create a more
troubling situation in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo. Equally, joint ventures and concessions given
to some allies as rewards may cause some problems
given the nature of the shareholders who are either
armed forces or powerful and influential politicians.
The situation is now deeply embedded and the regional
power structures are consequently not stable.
212. The link between the exploitation of natural
resources and the continuation of the conflict in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo does exist, and it is
based on five factors which are not mutually exclusive.
First, the capacity of countries to use their own
resources to sustain the war up to a certain stage, as in
the case of Angola. Second, the ability of countries to
take resources from enemies and use it to fight the socalled “self-sustaining” war, as in the case of Rwanda.
Third, the intent of some Governments to take
advantage of the war situation and use it to transfer
wealth from one country to their national economy, as
is the case with Rwanda and Zimbabwe. Fourth, the
will of private citizens and businesses who endeavour
to sustain the war for political, financial or other gains;
for example, generals and other top officers in the
Ugandan and Zimbabwean army and other top officials
and unsavoury politicians (Victor Mpoyo, Gaëtan
Kakudji, Mwenze Kongolo) in the Government of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo. Fifth, the capacity
of one of the warring parties to give incentives
(mineral and others) to its allies and soldiers, for
example the Democratic Republic of the Congo.

IV. Conclusion and findings
213. The conflict in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo has become mainly about access, control and
trade of five key mineral resources: coltan, diamonds,
copper, cobalt and gold. The wealth of the country is
appealing and hard to resist in the context of
lawlessness and the weakness of the central authority.
214. Exploitation of the natural resources of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo by foreign armies
has become systematic and systemic. Plundering,
looting and racketeering and the constitution of
criminal cartels are becoming commonplace in
occupied territories. These criminal cartels have
ramifications and connections worldwide, and they

41

S/2001/357

represent the next serious security problem in the
region.
215. The role of the private sector in the exploitation
of natural resources and the continuation of the war has
been vital. A number of companies have been involved
and have fuelled the war directly, trading arms for
natural resources. Others have facilitated access to
financial resources, which are used to purchase
weapons. Companies trading minerals, which the Panel
considered to be “the engine of the conflict in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo” have prepared the
field for illegal mining activities in the country.
216. Bilateral and multilateral donors have sent mixed
signals to Governments with armies in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo.
217. Top military commanders from various countries,
for different reasons, needed and continue to need this
conflict for its lucrative nature and for temporarily
solving some internal problems in those countries as
well as allowing access to wealth. They have realized
that the war has the capacity to sustain itself, and
therefore have created or protected criminal networks
that are likely to take over fully if all foreign armies
decide to leave the Democratic Republic of the Congo.
218. The conflict in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, because of its lucrative nature, has created a
“win-win” situation for all belligerents. Adversaries
and enemies are at times partners in business (Maï-Maï
and Rwandans and Congolese rebels), prisoners of
Hutu origin are mine workers of RPA, enemies get
weapons from the same dealers and use the same
intermediaries. Business has superseded security
concerns. The only loser in this huge business venture
is the Congolese people.

V. Recommendations
Prerequisite
219. The Panel acknowledges the validity of Security
Council resolutions 1304 (2000) and 1341 (2001), as
well as the Lusaka Agreement, and puts its report and
recommendations within their broad framework. The
Panel believes its report and recommendations are
consistent with those resolutions.

42

Follow-up
220. The Panel recommends that the Security Council
extend the mandate of the Panel of Experts on the
Illegal Exploitation of Natural Resources and Other
Forms of Wealth of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, to allow it to conduct a follow-up investigation
and report on the structures and networks put in place
or facilitated by warring parties to illegally exploit the
natural resources of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, including the situation after the withdrawal of
foreign military forces.
Sanctions
221. The Security Council should immediately declare
a temporary embargo on the import or export of coltan,
niobium, pyrochlore, cassiterite, timber, gold and
diamonds from or to Burundi, Rwanda and Uganda
until those countries’ involvement in the exploitation
of the natural resources of the Democratic Republic of
the Congo is made clear and declared so by the
Security Council. All countries should abstain from
facilitating the import or export of these resources. Any
country breaking this embargo should face sanctions;
Governments should take the measures necessary to
ensure that companies registered in their territory and
individuals breaking the embargo are punished.
222. The Security Council should decide that all
Member States without delay should freeze the
financial assets of the rebel movements and their
leaders. Member States should take the necessary
measures to ensure that their public and private
financial institutions stop doing business with banks
named in this report that are located in Burundi,
Rwanda and Uganda.
223. The Security Council should strongly urge all
Member States to freeze the financial assets of the
companies or individuals who continue to participate in
the illegal exploitation of the natural resources of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo immediately after
the publication of this report.
224. The Panel recommends that the Security Council
declare an immediate embargo on supply of weapons
and all military materiel to the rebel groups operating
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo and consider
extending this embargo to the States that support or
assist those groups.

S/2001/357

225. The Panel recommends that the Security Council
decide that all military cooperation with States whose
military forces are present in the Democratic Republic
of the Congo in violation of its sovereignty be
suspended immediately until those armies withdraw
from the Democratic Republic of the Congo.
Financial and economic matters
226. The Panel recommends that the Security Council
urge Member States to suspend balance of payments
support to the countries of the region involved in the
illegal exploitation of the natural resources of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, until the Security
Council has evidence to its satisfaction that the illegal
exploitation of natural resources has stopped.
227. The Panel recommends that the Security Council
requests the World Bank and IMF to consider
suspending their support to the budgets of these
countries until the end of the conflict. If, within two
months after the publication of this report, clear
evidence and signs of the disengagement of these
countries from the exploitation of the natural resources
of the Democratic Republic of the Congo are not given
to the Security Council, cooperation between those
institutions and the countries involved should be
suspended. The World Bank and IMF should design a
policy guideline on cooperation between each
institution and countries involved in conflicts.
228. The Panel recommends that the Security Council
urge Member States sharing a common border with the
Democratic Republic of the Congo or serving as transit
countries for goods and natural resources from the
Democratic Republic of the Congo to form a
commission to investigate financial and economic
activities conducted on their territories in connection
with the war in the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
and take the necessary action to curb or halt activities
that contribute to the continuation of hostilities.

doing business with rebels and Burundi, Rwanda and
Uganda. Failure to do so should lead to action through
the World Diamond Council. The Republic of the
Congo and the Central African Republic should take
the necessary measures to stop abetting the trade in
illicit and conflict diamonds.
231. Furthermore, the Panel endorses all the relevant
recommendations on diamonds made by the Panel of
Experts established by resolution 1306 (2000) in
relation to Sierra Leone in its report (S/2000/1195,
paras. 155 to 166), in particular:
(a) A certification scheme similar to that
adopted by Sierra Leone should be required of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and all other
diamond-exporting countries in the region, within a
period of six months;
(b) Major trading centres should agree on a
recording and public documentation system for rough
diamond imports that clearly designates countries of
origin and provenance;
(c) All countries importing rough diamonds
must apply a “rough control” system whether they have
free trade zones or not;
(d) The European Union should have few entry
points for diamonds;
(e) The United Nations and the World Diamond
Council should form a commission to conduct an
annual review of the proper implementation of the
certification system;
(f) An annual statistical production report
should be compiled by each exporting country and
gathered into a central annual report, compiled by the
World Diamond Council and/or by the certification
body that is expected to emerge from the “Kimberley
process”.
Forest and timber

Diamond business
229. The Security Council should call upon the
Democratic Republic of the Congo to take the
necessary steps to curb the flow of illicit diamonds by
liberalizing the diamond trade. A clear signal in this
regard should be sent to all companies that resist and
obstruct the liberalization of the mineral markets.
230. All diamond dealers operating in the territories
occupied by foreign forces should immediately stop

232. The Panel proposes that countries with seaports
and those with transit facilities report to the United
Nations Forum on Forests on the transit of timber
through their territory. As the timber from the
Democratic Republic of the Congo transits through the
ports of Mombasa and Dar es Salaam, the Governments
of Kenya and the United Republic of Tanzania should
declare to the Forum on Forests the origins of the

43

S/2001/357

timber that is being shipped from their seaports, as well
as the certification documents of such timber.
233. The Panel recommends that the United Nations
Forum on Forests unify the different schemes and
procedures for timber certification. The certification
scheme should be based on the broad framework of
principles, criteria and indicators promoted by the
International Panel on Forests and the International
Forum on Forests. New criteria on “conflict timber”
should be considered. The Forum on Forests should
become or designate one single accrediting body for
timber certification. The composition of such a body
should reflect the diversity of actors and interests as
well as the specificity of regions. Such a unified
mechanism would prevent some “loose codification”
and purely commercial certifying bodies from
delivering or attempting to deliver certificates. The
Panel urges the Security Council to declare timber and
non-timber forest products coming from warring areas,
“conflict timber and non-timber forest products”.
Countries importing non-certified timber should put in
place minimum guidelines and sanctions for companies
that import timber and non-timber forest products from
countries at war or experiencing civil war related to the
allocation or distribution of natural resources.
234. The Panel proposes, following the declaration on
the control of illegal logging made by the Group of
Eight in 1998, and the ongoing discussions on “conflict
timber products”, that a mandate be given to the United
Nations Forum on Forests:
(a) To compile information in collaboration
with various non-governmental organizations on illegal
logging and “conflict timber products” in the world;
(b) To publish annually a list of countries
involved in illegal and “conflict timber products” trade;
(c) To submit an annual report to the General
Assembly of the United Nations.
235. The Panel recommends that countries of transit
and final destination of the timber trade request from
logging companies certificates of origin for the timber
that is transiting through or arriving in their territory.
Those countries should send copies of these certificates
to Governments of countries of origin within three
days. Failure to abide by this should be considered to
be complicity on the part of those countries and they
should be listed as countries facilitating “illicit timber”

44

and “conflict timber product” trade in the report of the
Forum on Forests.
Reparation and compensation
236. The Panel recommends that individuals, in
particular farmers, religious groups and companies
whose properties, livestock and crops were damaged,
looted or expropriated by the Burundian, Rwandan or
Ugandan armed forces and their allies should be
compensated by the States concerned. Properties
confiscated should also be returned to their legitimate
owners. The Governments of Burundi, Rwanda and
Uganda and their allies should pay compensation to the
companies whose properties and stocks of coltan,
cassiterite, gold, timber and other materials which were
confiscated or taken between 1998 and 2000. The
Security Council may consider how the Office of the
United Nations Resident Coordinator in Kinshasa could
help in gathering information on the claims.
237. UNESCO, in collaboration with UNEP, the
secretariat
of
CITES
and
non-governmental
organizations working in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo should assess the extent of damage to
wildlife in Garamba Park, Kahuzi-Biega Park, the
Okapi Reserve and Virunga Park, and propose
sanctions to be taken against those Governments whose
soldiers were involved in the mass killing of
endangered species.
Framework for reconstruction
238. The Security Council would give mandate and
means to a United Nations commission created to help
the Government of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo manage the transition in the formerly occupied
regions. The Commission will help design and put in
place the legal and administrative framework and
create an enabling environment for economic activities.
The Commission will also help put in place the
necessary conditions for the enhancement of State
authority and security over its territory.
General
239. The Panel recommends that the Security Council
consider establishing an international mechanism that
will investigate and prosecute individuals involved in
economic criminal activities (such as Khaleb
Akandwanaho alias Salim Saleh, Jean-Pierre Bemba,
James Kazini, Mbusa Nyamwisi, Ateenyi Tibasima,

S/2001/357

Roger Lumbala, Aziza Kulsum Gulamali and others
named in this report), companies and government
officials whose economic and financial activities
directly or indirectly harm powerless people and weak
economies.
240. The Panel recommends that the Security Council
consider establishing a permanent mechanism that
would investigate the illicit trafficking of natural
resources in armed conflicts so as to monitor the cases
which are already subject to the investigation of other
panels, such as those of Angola, the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and Sierra Leone.
241. Member States should be encouraged to adopt
legislation that will forbid companies registered in their
territory from importing or exporting natural resources
to or from invading countries.
Security
242. The Panel urges the Security Council to hold
Governments of countries parties to the conflict in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, rebel movements
and those military representatives cited in the report
responsible if any harm is done to any member of the
Panel. The Security Council should encourage
individual countries to assist the Panel members by
providing security to each of them well after the Panel
is dissolved. The Security Council should urge the
Secretary-General to make the necessary arrangements
to ensure the security of the Panel members well after
the Panel is dissolved. The Panel has received
information of harassment in Bunia and other localities
of individuals who may have been in contact with the
Panel members. The Security Council should hold the
authorities of Rwanda, Uganda, RCD and FLC
responsible for any harm to witnesses who shared their
knowledge with the Panel.

45

S/2001/357

Annex I
Sample of companies importing minerals from the
Democratic Republic of the Congo via Rwanda
Company

Country of destination

Merchandise

Cogem

Belgium

cassiterites

Muka-Enterprise

Belgium

cassiterites

Issa

Germany

cassiterites

Chpistopa Floss

Germany

cassiterites

Redemi

Rwanda

cassiterites

Banro-Resources Corp.

Malaysia

cassiterites, coltan

Canada

cassiterites

Bharat

United Republic of
Tanzania

cassiterites

Extano-Office

Rwanda

coltan

Coopimar

Rwanda

coltan

Geologistics Hannover

Germany

coltan

Rwasibo-Butera

Switzerland

coltan

Eagleswings

Netherlands

coltan

Veen

Netherlands

coltan

Soger

Belgium

coltan

Patel Warehouse

Netherlands

coltan

Afrimex

United Kingdom of Great
Britain and Northern
Ireland

coltan

Netherlands

cassiterites

Netherlands

coltan

Belgium

coltan

Sogem

Belgium

coltan, cassiterites, tin

Cogecom

Belgium

coltan, cassiterites

Cogea

Belgium

coltan

Panalpina

Kenya

coltan

Chimie Pharmacie

46

S/2001/357

Company

Country of destination

Merchandise

Tradement

Belgium

coltan, cassiterites

Ventro Star

United Kingdom of Great
Britain and Northern
Ireland

coltan

Raremet

India

coltan

Finconord

Pakistan

coltan

Finiming Ltd.

Belgium

coltan

Finconcorde

Russian Federation

cassiterites, coltan

Patel

India

cassiterites

Cicle International

Belgium

coltan

Masingiro

Germany

coltan

Union-Transport

Germany

coltan

Specialty Metal

Belgium

coltan

MDW

Belgium

cassiterites, coltan

Transintra

Belgium

cassiterites

Source: The Rwandan Revenue Authority.

47

S/2001/357

Annex II
Countries visited and representatives of Governments
and organizations interviewed
The Expert Panel on the Illegal Exploitation of Natural Resources and Other
Forms of Wealth of the Democratic Republic of the Congo wishes to express its
deep appreciation to the government officials, diplomats, non-governmental
organizations, individual relief workers, journalists, and others who assisted it in its
enquiries and helped to make this report possible.
The Panel further wishes to extend special thanks to the United Nations
Organization Mission in the Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUC), in
particular Ambassador Kamel Morjane; to the United Nations Office at Nairobi, in
particular Klaus Töpfer and Alexander Barabanov; and to the Office of the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for the Great Lakes Region of Africa, in
particular Ambassador Berhanu Dinka.
Among countries involved in the conflict in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, the Panel would like to make special note of the cooperation received from
the Republic of Uganda, which provided the Panel with all information that was
requested.
The following list is incomplete in deference to the wishes of those who
requested anonymity, in particular Congolese individuals who put their lives at risk
in order to provide the Panel with information.
Angola
Government officials
Vice-Minister of External Relations
Vice-Minister of Finance
Minister of Petroleum
Minister of Geology and Mines
United Nations agencies and offices
Representative of the Secretary-General and Head of the United Nations Office
in Angola
United Nations Office in Angola
Belgium
Government officials
Ministry of Foreign Affairs
Ministry of Communications, Civil Aviation Administration
Ministry of Finance
Ministry of Economy and Finance
Cabinet of Deputy Prime Minister and Minister for Foreign Affairs
Department of Customs and Accounts
Office belge du commerce extérieur
Département de douanes et droits indirects
International organizations
Eurostat
World Customs Organization

48

S/2001/357

Other
Belgolaise
BHP Diamonds and Minerals
BHV
Diamond High Council
Independent Diamond Valuators
Institute of Politics and Development Management
Langer Diamonds
Nordiska Afrikainstitutet (Nordic Africa Institute)
Royal Museum for Central Africa, Department of Geology and Mineralogy
SwissCargo
World Federation of Diamond Markets
Burundi
Government officials
His Excellency Major General Pierre Buyoya, President of the Republic of
Burundi
Minister of Agriculture and Livestock
Ministry of Finance
Minister of International Relations and Cooperation
Minister of National and Regional Development and Environment
Minister of Transportation, Post and Telecommunications
Representatives of States
Belgium
Democratic Republic of the Congo
France
United States of America
United Nations agencies and offices, and international organizations
MONUC
Office of the Special Representative of the Secretary-General in Burundi
UNDP
World Bank
Democratic Republic of the Congo
Government officials
His Excellency Major General Joseph Kabila, President of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo
Commissariat général du Gouvernement chargé des affaires de la MONUC
Banque nationale du Congo
Banque centrale
Département des Forêts
Direction générale des contributions (DGC)
Direction générale des recettes administratives, judiciaires, domaniales et de
participations (DGRAD)
Institut congolais pour la conservation de la nature (ICCN)
Ministre des affaires foncières de l’Environnement, de la conservation de la
nature et du développement touristique
Ministre de l’agriculture et elevage
Ministre des droits humains

49

S/2001/357

Ministre de l’economie, du commerce, et de l’industrie
Ministre de l’energie
Ministre des finances et du budget
Ministère des mines
Ministre d’Etat chargé du pétrole
Ministre des transports et communications
l’Office des douanes et accises (OFIDA)
Representatives of States
Belgium
China
France
Italy
United States of America
Diplomatic Corps of Kinshasa
United Nations agencies and offices
FAO
Office of the Special Representative of the Secretary-General
MONUC
Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs
Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights
UNDP
UNHCR
UNICEF
WFP
WHO
Other
COSLEG Holding
Fédération des entreprises du Congo (FEC)
Georges Forrest International
Governor of South Kivu and Provincial Directors
Observatoire gouvernance-transparence (OGT)
Kotecha Group of Companies
Mouvement pour la libération du Congo
Olive Company
RCD-Goma
Rally for Congolese Democracy-ML/Kisangani
Trafca
World Resource Institute
France
Government officials
Ministry of Foreign Affairs
Ministry of Defence
Ministry of the Economy, Finance and Industry – Department of the Treasury
French Development Agency
Inspector General of Civil Aviation and Meteorology
Direction générale des douanes et droits indirects – Sous-Direction de l’Union
douanière et de la coopération internationale
Bureau of Geological and Mining Research (BRGM)

50

S/2001/357

International organizations
Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development
Kenya
Government officials
Minister for Foreign Affairs
Kenya Ports Authority
Representatives of States
Belgium
Democratic Republic of the Congo
France
Japan
Russian Federation
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland Special Representative
for the Great Lakes
Zimbabwe
International organizations
Office of the Facilitator for the peace process in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo
United Nations agencies and offices
MONUC
Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs
Office of the Special Representative of the Secretary-General for the Great
Lakes Region
UNDP
UNEP
United Nations Office at Nairobi
Other
International Crisis Group (ICG)
Namibia
Government officials
Deputy Minister for Foreign Affairs, Information and Broadcasting
Minister of Finance
Deputy Minister of Defence
Minister of Mines and Energy
Minister of Agriculture, Water and Rural Development
Minister of Environment and Tourism
Representatives of States
China
France
Russian Federation
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland
United States of America

51

S/2001/357

Rwanda
Government officials
His Excellency Major General Paul Kagame, President of the Republic of
Rwanda
Chef d’Etat major
Minister of Energy, Water and Natural Resources
Minister for Foreign Affairs
Minister of Finance and Economic Planning
Minister of Agriculture, Forests and Livestock
Minister of Works, Transport and Communications
Minister of Energy, Mines and Water
Minister of Land, Resettlements and Environment
National Bank of Rwanda
Secretary-General of Commerce, Industry and Tourism
Rwanda Revenue Authority
Representatives of States
Belgium
Canada
China
France
Germany
Netherlands
Russian Federation
Switzerland
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland
United States of America
Office of the European Union Delegation
United Nations agencies and offices
ECA
FAO
Heads of United Nations agencies represented in Rwanda
International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda
MONUC
Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs
UNDP
South Africa
Government officials
Ministry of Foreign Affairs
Other
Anglo-American
De Beers
Switzerland
Government officials
Department of Foreign Affairs, Chef de la direction politique
Swiss Federal Administration

52

S/2001/357

International organizations
World Trade Organization
Other
Société générale de surveillance
Uganda
Government officials
His Excellency Yoweri Kaguta Museveni, President of the Republic of Uganda
Civil Aviation Authority
Internal Revenue Authority
Minister of Agriculture
Minister of Defence
Minister of Energy and Mineral Development
Minister of State for Environment, Water and Land
First Deputy Prime Minister and Minister for Foreign Affairs
Minister of Finance
Minister of State for Planning and Investment
Ministry of Works, Transport and Communications
Parliamentary Committee on Presidential and Foreign Affairs
Vice-President of the Republic of Uganda
Representatives of States
Belgium
Denmark
France
Italy
Russian Federation
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland
European Union Special Envoy to the Great Lakes
United Nations agencies
Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs
UNDP
Heads of United Nations agencies in Kampala
Media
East African
Monitor
New Vision
Radio Uganda
Top Radio
Ugandan Television
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland
Government officials
Foreign and Commonwealth Office

53

S/2001/357

Other
Cluff Mining
De Beers
The Economist
International Coffee Organization
World Diamond Council
United States of America
Government officials
Department of State
– Bureau of African Affairs
– Bureau of International Organization Affairs
Congresswoman Cynthia McKinney, Fifth District, Georgia
United Nations agencies and offices
UNESCO and United Nations Foundation/White Oak Conference
International organizations
World Bank
Other
Oregon Certification Group
SmartWood
University of Maryland
Zimbabwe
Government officials
Senior Secretary for Foreign Affairs
Minister of Energy and Mines
Chief Executive Officer, Civil Aviation Authority
Representatives of States
Belgium
China
France
Russian Federation
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland
United States of America
United Nations agencies and international organizations
UNDP
Heads of all United Nations agencies represented in Zimbabwe
Media
Zimbabwe Independent newspaper
Daily News
Other
First Banking Corporation Limited
Zimbabwe Transparency International
ZimTrade

54

S/2001/357

Annex III
Abbreviations
AFDL

Alliance des forces démocratiques pour la libération du CongoZaïre (Alliance of Democratic Forces for the Liberation of
Congo-Zaire)

BCD

Banque de Commerce et du développement (Trade and
Development Bank)

BCDI

Banque de commerce, du développement et d’industrie, Kigali

CEMAC

Communauté économique et monétaire de l’Afrique centrale
(Central African Economic and Monetary Community)

CIFOR

Centre for International Forestry Research

coltan

columbo-tantalite

COMESA

Common Market for Eastern and Southern Africa

COMIEX (1)

Compagnie mixte d’import-export

COMIEX (2)

La Générale de commerce d’import/export du Congo

COSLEG

COMIEX-OSLEG joint venture

ECA

Economic Commission for Africa

FAO

Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations

FDD

Forces pour la défense de la démocratie

FLC

Front de libération du Congo (merger of MLC and RCD-ML)

Gecamines

Générale de carrières et des mines

IDI

International Diamond Industries

IMF

International Monetary Fund

MIBA

Société minière de Bakwanga (Mining Company of Bakwanga)

MLC

Mouvement de libération congolais (Congolese Liberation
Movement)

MONUC

United Nations Organization Mission in the Democratic Republic
of the Congo

OECD

Organisation for Economic Cooperation and Development

OSLEG

Operation Sovereign Legitimacy

RCD

Rassemblement congolais
Congolese Democracy)

RCD-Goma

Rassemblement congolais pour la démocratie, based in Goma

RCD-Kisangani

Rassemblement congolais pour la démocratie, based in Kisangani,
later based in Bunia and referred to as RCD-ML

pour

la

démocratie

(Rally

for

55

S/2001/357

56

RCD-ML

Rassemblement congolais pour la démocratie — Mouvement de
Libération, first based in Kisangani, later in Bunia

RCD-National

Rassemblement congolais pour la démocratie — National, located
in Bafwasende

RPA

Rwandan Patriotic Army

RPF

Rwandan Patriotic Front

SOMIGL

Société minière des Grands Lacs (Great Lakes Mining Company)

SOMIKIVU

Société minière du Kivu

SOMINKI

Société minière et industrielle du Kivu

UDEAC

Union douanière et économique de l’Afrique centrale (Central
African Customs and Economic Union)

UNDP

United Nations Development Programme

UNEP

United Nations Environment Programme

UNHCR

Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees

UNESCO

United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization

UNICEF

United Nations Children’s Fund

UPDF

Uganda People’s Defence Forces

WFP

World Food Programme

WHO

World Health Organization

WTO

World Trade Organization

ZANU-PF

Zimbabwe African National Union Patriotic Front

ZDF

Zimbabwe Defence Forces
