S/PV.7440

United Nations

asdf

Security Council

Provisional

Seventieth year

7440th meeting

Tuesday, 12 May 2015, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Ms. Murmokaitė . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Lithuania)

Members:

Angola . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Chad . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Chile . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Jordan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Malaysia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
New Zealand. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Nigeria . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Spain . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . .
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Mr. Lucas
Mr. Mangaral
Mr. Barros Melet
Mr. Wang Min
Mr. Lamek
Mr. Omaish
Mr. Ibrahim
Mrs. Schwalger
Mrs. Ogwu
Mr. Churkin
Mr. González de Linares Palou
Mr. Rycroft
Mr. Pressman
Mr. Henry Alfredo Suárez Moreno

Agenda
The situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina
Letter dated 29 April 2015 from the Secretary-General addressed to the President
of the Security Council (S/2015/300)

15-13840 (E)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

*1513840*

S/PV.7440

The situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina

The meeting was called to order at 10.05 a.m.

Dayton will be viewed by the people of Bosnia and
Herzegovina.

Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina
Letter dated 29 April 2015 from the
Secretary-General addressed to the President
of the Security Council (S/2015/300)
The President: In accordance with rule 37 of the
Council’s provisional rules of procedure, I invite the
representatives of Bosnia and Herzegovina, Croatia and
Serbia to participate in this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite His Excellency
Mr. Valentin Inzko, High Representative for Bosnia
and Herzegovina, to participate in this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite His Excellency
Mr. Thomas Mayr-Harting, Head of the Delegation of
the European Union to the United Nations, to participate
in this meeting.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

12/05/2015

its

Peace is, of course, a priceless commodity. It should
never be taken for granted. But it is a starting point,
not the end state. It is entirely right that after 20 years
the people of Bosnia and Herzegovina — especially the
young — expect so much more from their country and
their politicians. They are suffering from the highest
youth unemployment rate in Europe and many of them
are leaving the country. They are right to expect more
because Bosnia and Herzegovina truly does have the
potential to offer its citizens prosperity and a normal
way of life. I take this opportunity to encourage
members of the Security Council to visit that beautiful
land to see for themselves its spectacular landscapes
and its rich cultural diversity.
What needs to happen in the next six months so
that we can mark the twentieth anniversary with a sense
of renewed optimism about the future and, even more
importantly, so that we can re-energize the people of
Bosnia and Herzegovina? The answer is very simple. We
need to see the newly elected authorities in Bosnia and
Herzegovina — and the country in general — coming
together to deliver the steps that are required to take
advantage of the new European Union (EU) initiative
for Bosnia and Herzegovina.

Mr. Inzko: In six months’ time, when I next appear
before the Security Council, Bosnia and Herzegovina
will be marking the twentieth anniversary of the Dayton
Peace Accords. At the beginning of July, we will also
be marking the twentieth anniversary of the Srebrenica
genocide.

The good news is that we now have Governments
in place at the State and entity levels that are showing
signs that they are ready to start implementing the
written commitment that was adopted in March and has
opened the way for the Stabilization and Association
Agreement with the EU to enter into force. However,
progress will require concrete results to be delivered.
Some of the reforms will be very difficult, but they
will deliver new opportunities for the country and its
people. Specifically, we need to see concrete results
that will create new jobs, improve the functioning and
functionality of institutions, and entrench the rule of
law, especially when it comes to the fight against crime
and corruption.

Much has been achieved since that all-important
day in November 1995 when Richard Holbrooke finally
succeeded in brokering an agreement to end Europe’s
most tragic conflict since the end of the Second World
War. Bosnia and Herzegovina has come a long way
since then, but it is also true that what happens during
the next six months will play a hugely significant
role in determining how the twentieth anniversary of

I believe that a great deal can be achieved in 2015 if
there is a renewed commitment within the country and
among its political leaders to pulling together and to
working together — to working as one. This is what we
need to see and we need to see it quickly so that the new
Governments can build up real momentum for reform.
Bosnia and Herzegovina has been given a fresh chance
and it must be taken. I would therefore like to take

I wish to draw the attention of Council members
to document S/2015/300, which contains the text of a
letter dated 29 April 2015 from the Secretary-General
addressed to the President of the Security Council,
transmitting the forty-seventh report of the High
Representative for Bosnia and Herzegovina.
I now give the floor to Mr. Inzko.

2/22

15-13840

12/05/2015

The situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina

this opportunity to sincerely thank Foreign Secretary
Philip Hammond and Foreign Minister Frank-Walter
Steinmeier for launching the initiative that has given
Bosnia and Herzegovina this fresh chance.
I also want to thank High Representative
Mogherini and Commissioner Hahn for taking the
initiative forward. High Representative Mogherini has
already been to Bosnia and Herzegovina three times.
Commissioner Hahn visited Bosnia and Herzegovina
just last week and again showed his commitment to that
country.
A new Special Representative of the European
Union, Ambassador Lars-Gunnar Wigemark, has
recently joined us in Sarajevo, and I would like to
take this opportunity to welcome him warmly and to
once again express my strong commitment to working
hand-in-glove with him to assist those citizens and
politicians who want to move the country forward.
The initiative offers Bosnia and Herzegovina the
chance to end years of stagnation and to get the country
back on track towards the brighter future we all want
for its people. However, we need to recognize that there
are no guaranteed outcomes. Is there an alternative? Of
course there is. That alternative is to continue doing
what we have seen over and over again. The alternative
for the country’s politicians is to continue practicing the
politics of the past that have been driving the country
ever deeper into crisis at the expense of all its citizens,
especially the young.
I must be frank — there are some politicians
who may be tempted to follow this negative and
dangerous path. As I have made clear in my report
(S/2015/300, annex), there have also been negative
developments over the past six months that include
direct challenges to the Peace Agreement. Of particular
concern is the declaration adopted by the National
Assembly of the Republika Srpska on 17 April, which
directly challenges the authority of the Bosnia and
Herzegovina Constitutional Court. A second example
is the declaration of the ruling party in the Republika
Srpska of 25 April. While it is only a party document
that has no official value, I am nevertheless concerned
by its threat to hold an independence referendum in
Republika Srpska in 2018. The problem has a name — it
is “referendum” — and it has a date: 2018. As I have
made clear repeatedly, the Peace Agreement does not
grant the entities the right to secede, and any attempt to
change the Peace Agreement requires the agreement of
all the parties.

S/PV.7440

A week after I submitted my report, Bosnia and
Herzegovina was rocked by a shocking incident, when
a lone attacker killed one police officer and injured
two others at a police station. I take this opportunity to
again offer my condolences to the family of the police
officer who lost his life in the line of duty. I also wish
a speedy recovery to the two injured police officers.
The response of the authorities was swift, and it will be
important for us to see ever-closer cooperation between
authorities at all levels, inside the country and in the
region, in tackling a wide range of law enforcement
challenges facing the country, including the ongoing
fight against terrorism, which as we know is a global
change.
To conclude my remarks today, an opportunity is on
the table from the EU that offers the people of Bosnia
and Herzegovina a chance to ensure a prosperous and
dignified life for themselves and their children. This is
the time for the country’s politicians to decisively look
to the future in the interests of the people of Bosnia and
Herzegovina, especially the young. This is the moment
when the country needs to finally say farewell to the
politics of the past and to decisively commit to a new
way of doing politics that puts the interests of citizens
firmly in first place. This is truly the time for Bosnia
and Herzegovina to come together and to work as one.
I very much hope that the visit of the Pope to
Sarajevo in June will help to foster a sense of unity in
the country. I cannot stress strongly enough that this
opportunity must be taken. If we see hard work and
results in the weeks and months ahead, then we will be
able to look forward with real optimism when we come
together to mark the twentieth anniversary of the Peace
Agreement in November. There are politicians and
people in Bosnia and Herzegovina who want to work
together in good faith to take the country forward. They
must have our full and proactive support in the months
ahead.
The drawing of borders in Bosnia and Herzegovina
is behind us. Division and secession are failed strategies
that were defeated 20 years ago. Their place is in the
history books; God forbid that anyone should seek to
reactivate these dangerous strategies. If they do, they
will need to be dealt with firmly and decisively. In this
respect, I will continue to take my responsibilities under
the Peace Agreement with the utmost seriousness.
As more and more people in Bosnia and
Herzegovina, the region and indeed beyond now
fully understand, the future of that part of Europe is

15-138403/22

S/PV.7440

The situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina

reintegration from within and integration with the
wider continent. This is the era not of division, but
of renewed bridge-building. The expanding force of
forward-looking people in Bosnia and Herzegovina
is growing stronger by the day, and what a positive
force it is as it crosses ethnic and religious lines and
re-energizes the people of Bosnia and Herzegovina to
work together to build a better tomorrow. As an aside, I
should like to inform the Council that two Muslims are
currently building and renovating a Catholic Church in
Bosnia and Herzegovina. Such interreligious dialogue
for a better tomorrow is also a fact that we should not
forget.
We, the international community, are dutybound
to recognize the importance of this moment. We must
do all we can to help the forces of positive change in
the country to reach their surge capacity. I must add,
however, that the international community’s support for
the Office of the High Representative is in fact waning,
and it is becoming increasingly difficult for me to fulfil
my mandate. Now is not the time for us to lose focus or
resolve, and I ask for the Council’s full support as we
help Bosnia and Herzegovina to move along the path
towards the EU.
Let us do all we can in the next six months to help
these peoples to seize the opportunity the country has
been given by the EU so that 2015 is remembered as
the year Bosnia and Herzegovina turned decisively to
the future. I hope that this is what we will achieve so
that we can mark the twentieth anniversary of the Peace
Agreement with a sense of genuine optimism about the
future. This is what I hope to report to the Council
when I return in November, six months from now.
The President: I thank Mr. Inzko for his briefing.
I now give the floor to the members of the Security
Council.

12/05/2015

elections in October 2014. Although the process has
not been without some rough patches, this is a major
achievement that must be acknowledged. With elections
completed and Governments formed, we encourage
elected officials to take seriously the promises they
have made to pursue an ambitious and necessary set of
political and economic reforms, focusing on investment
and economic growth as a priority. In that regard,
statements by the respective Prime Ministers have been
encouraging, and we are now looking for actions to back
those statements, particularly in the implementation of
badly needed socioeconomic reform.
We congratulate the Bosnian Government’s formal
decision to commit to the EU integration process, and
we commit to supporting Bosnia and Herzegovina’s
express goal of Euro-Atlantic integration. The country’s
14 political leaders, its Presidency and its Parliamentary
Assembly have endorsed a commitment to pursuing
reforms necessary for Bosnia and Herzegovina to
advance on the EU track, and the United States welcomes
the EU Foreign Affair Council’s decision of 21 April
concluding the EU Stabilization and Association
Agreement with Bosnia and Herzegovina. When it
comes into force on 1 June, Bosnia and Herzegovina
will have an opportunity to make real progress on its
integration into the EU.
On the specific issue of defence property
registration, one of the conditions for ending
international supervision of Bosnia and Herzegovina,
we were pleased to see that authorities have made some
progress through the registration of three properties
in the Federation of Bosnia and Herzegovina. We will
continue to work with Bosnia and Herzegovina’s leaders
to ensure the registration of the remaining properties
so that the country will be able to activate its NATO
membership action plan.

Mr. Pressman (United States of America): I
thank High Representative Inzko for his work and his
briefing today. We reiterate our support for him and his
Office, as well as for the Council’s mandate and the
European Union (EU) military mission in Bosnia and
Herzegovina, and we commend his continued efforts in
Bosnia and Herzegovina.

We also welcome Bosnia and Herzegovina’s efforts
to address the issue of foreign fighters heading into
Syria. Bosnia and Herzegovina is an integral member
of the counter-Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant
coalition and has provided needed ammunition to
the Iraq security forces. We are also grateful for the
country’s active participation in our efforts to counter
violent extremism.

On behalf of my Government, I want to congratulate
the people of Bosnia and Herzegovina on some of the
very positive progress that has been made since the
Council met in November (see S/PV.7308), most notably
the formation of a new Government following general

Bosnia and Herzegovina’s armed forces have
benefited greatly from the presence of the European
Union military mission in Bosnia and Herzegovina
(EUFOR). As we reiterated to the Council last
November, the United States fully supports the efforts

4/22

15-13840

12/05/2015

The situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina

of EUFOR to mentor the country’s armed forces to
ensure that Bosnia and Herzegovina has the tools
needed to respond to crises. We welcome Bosnia and
Herzegovina’s active contribution to United Nations
peacekeeping operations.
The United States also shares the concerns of
High Representative Inzko about a number of issues
he referred to today, which he wrote about more fully
in his report (S/2015/300, annex). One of our greatest
concerns has been the continuing actions by Republika
Srpska President Dodik that undermine Bosnia and
Herzegovina’s sovereignty and territorial integrity.
In March, Dodik’s Alliance of Independent Social
Democrats party decided to boycott the State-level
Parliament. And he recently made statements calling
into question the authority of Bosnia and Herzegovina’s
federal Government. He promised to put forward a
resolution for Republika Srpska independence unless
the entity was able to strengthen its autonomy by the end
of 2017. That is an unfortunate about-face for a leader
who, less than two months ago, committed to pursue
reforms that would bring the entire country of Bosnia
and Herzegovina closer to Europe. Those reforms
focus on improving the country’s socioeconomic
and political conditions, with the goal of attracting
investment and creating jobs. The reforms also address
the needs on the ground and, once implemented, will
provide tangible benefits to all the peoples of Bosnia
and Herzegovina. Nationalistic rhetoric not only runs
counter to the commitment that leaders have made,
it also threatens the integrity of the country and the
potential for much-needed economic assistance. The
Dayton Peace Agreement guarantees the existence of
both the Federation of Bosnia and Herzegovina and the
Republika Srpska. We strongly condemn any action
that seeks to undermine the territorial integrity of the
Bosnian State.
Moreover, we are also concerned about democratic
backsliding in the Republika Srpska, whose law on
public order is a big and unfortunate step backward.
The law seeks to control digital media and social
networks by determining that the Internet is a “public
space” and leaves individuals subject to prosecution if
the Government determines that public order has been
threatened as a result of their online activities. Efforts
by the Republika Srpska to control online activities
through the threat of prosecution is a dangerous and
worrisome attempt to curb the freedom of speech.
That kind of censorship stunts democratic growth

S/PV.7440

and runs contrary to the values required for European
integration.
The Republika Srpska’s lack of compliance with
its obligations to provide the High Representative with
timely access to officials, institutions and documents
is also of concern. In that regard, we reiterate call for
all authorities in Bosnia and Herzegovina to cooperate
with the High Representative’s request for information
and documents.
As the twentieth anniversary of Srebrenica
approaches, on 11 July, we are reminded that, while the
war in Bosnia and Herzegovina is over, much remains
to be done. All of us have a responsibility to remember
the horrors and atrocities, but we have an obligation
to do more than remember. We have an obligation to
vigorously and steadfastly oppose policies of hate and
discrimination. We continue to call for all of Bosnia and
Herzegovina’s citizens and its leaders to work together
to pursue a common vision for a secure and prosperous
future — or, in Mr. Inzko’s words, a better tomorrow.
Mr. Barros Melet (Chile) (spoke in Spanish): We
would like to thank the High Representative for Bosnia
and Herzegovina, Mr. Valentin Inzko, for submitting
his report (S/2015/300, annex).
Chile supports the implementation of the 1995
Dayton Peace Accords, as well as safeguarding the
sovereignty, independence and territorial integrity of
Bosnia and Herzegovina. We believe that effectively
implementing the Accords, along with respect for the
rule of law, is essential to a lasting peace in Bosnia
and Herzegovina. In that regard, we welcome the new
Government formed on 31 March. We urge all political
leaders to take advantage of that opportunity to move
towards genuine integration and national reconciliation.
Chile regrets the lack of progress on implementing
the Dayton Accords, which illustrates the persistence of
disagreement among political parties and the difficulty
in forming the new Government in the various cantons.
It is necessary that the political leaders of the different
communities in the country do more to advance
the strengthening of democratic institutions, while
expanding institutional reforms in an inclusive manner.
We also urge them to refrain from negative rhetoric
that undermines the cohesion among the various ethnic
communities in the country, thereby hindering national
reconciliation. For instance, calls encouraging options
that could create the potential for the secession of

15-138405/22

S/PV.7440

The situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina

Republika Srpska present a critical situation. We call
for cooperation with the High Representative with
regard to events that have the potential to affect the
sovereignty and territorial integrity of Bosnia and
Herzegovina.
We support the efforts of Bosnia and Herzegovina
to overcome its past. We also emphasize the importance
of the return and reintegration of refugees and
internally displaced persons, which will contribute
to mending the broken social fabric and which is an
essential step towards national reconciliation. In that
context, cooperation with the International Criminal
Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia remains a priority
challenge so that those responsible for genocide, ethnic
cleansing, war crimes and crimes against humanity do
not go unpunished. The effectiveness of institutions
such as the Tribunal contributes to the development of
jurisprudence and to safeguarding universally shared
ethical principles of justice and reparation.
We reiterate our strong support for a stable Bosnia
and Herzegovina with functioning institutions in the
service of its people, in peace and prosperity. Chile
participated in the United Nations Mission in Bosnia and
Herzegovina with police personnel. Our participation
continues today in Operation Althea of the European
Union military mission in Bosnia and Herzegovina.
This year marks 12 years of uninterrupted Chilean
military presence in the latter.
Likewise, we call on the international community
to continue to honour its commitment to support the
aspirations of the people of Bosnia and Herzegovina, as
well as to provide the necessary resources to fulfil the
mandate provided for under the Dayton Accords.
We conclude by reiterating our appreciation for the
work of the High Representative as part of his efforts
to strengthen the rule of law, monitor compliance with
the rulings of the International Tribunal for the Former
Yugoslavia and facilitate reforms aimed at ensuring
conditions for the functioning of institutions, social
stability and prosperity in Bosnia and Herzegovina. We
emphasize that his Office should continue to receive
political support to carry out its important functions.
Mr. Churkin (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): Welcome Mr. Inzko, High Representative
for Bosnia and Herzegovina. His regular briefing has
confirmed that the situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina
remains stable, which we view as the basis for the
sustainable functioning of the country’s institutions

6/22

12/05/2015

in strict compliance with the equality of the three
constituent peoples, in accordance with the Dayton
Peace Agreement.
The establishment, on 31 March, of the new State and
entity ruling bodies, following the elections in October,
which took place democratically, has confirmed the
ability of local actors to resolve their problems without
the support of an international protectorate. It is
important to continue the process of transferring full
responsibility for the situation to Bosnians themselves.
The abolition of the Office of the High Representative
is long overdue. In that context, the primary task is to
conclude the implementation of the agreement of the
“5+2” programme. The problems that have not been
settled within that framework must be resolved by the
Bosnians themselves through an inclusive dialogue and
on the basis of agreement among all three constituent
peoples. The exclusive task of the High Representative
is to move the local parties towards such dialogue and to
seek points of understanding, but instead of reporting on
what has been been done towards the timely drawdown
of the Office of the High Representative, the current
report simply reiterates what happened in the country
during the reporting period.
It does not propose any constructive solutions. It
looks for people to blame. There is no end to the illegal
and unjustified accusations against Bosnian Serbs, who
are allegedly undermining the Dayton constitutional
foundations, sovereignty and integrity of Bosnia and
Herzegovina. Such a one-sided philosophical approach
will only distort the real state of affairs and aggravate
the situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina. It ignores in
practice the claims of other sides. Bosniaks, for example,
speak in favour of unitarism, and Croats demand the
creation of a third entity, which can be interpreted as a
violation of the spirit of the Dayton Agreement.
The High Representative gives the impression that
his role is to find artificial reasons to continue the
existence of an Office that has become outdated. The
High Representative should shake the habit of shedding
factological light on what has taken place in Bosnia
and Herzegovina and focus on practical steps to wind
down this foreign protectorate, which is an insult to the
sovereignty of the country. Such an understanding of
the role of the international community is in keeping
with the spirit of the twentieth anniversary of the
Dayton Peace Agreement. To achieve an objective
picture of developments in the country, we recommend
that the Secretary-General and the Security Council
15-13840

12/05/2015

The situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina

carefully familiarize themselves with the regular
report of the Republika Srpska, which draws attention,
inter alia, to attempts to gradually revise the Dayton
Agreement towards greater centralization in Bosnia
and Herzegovina, and to undermine the constitutional
autonomy of the entities and the functionality of the
State as a whole.
Recognizing the importance of extending the
European Union-led peacekeeping force Althea in order
to maintain the stability of Bosnia and Herzegovina in the
context of implementing the Dayton Peace Agreement,
we oppose the use of the international presence as an
instrument for accelerated integration of the country
into the European Union (EU) and the North Atlantic
Treaty Organization (NATO). In that regard, we are
concerned by the fact that the High Representative is
arbitrarily interpreting his mandate with respect to
fulfilling civil aspects of the Dayton Agreement, and
is pushing for integration into NATO and the EU. It is
unacceptable, first, for the High Representative to set
himself new tasks that go beyond the mandate of the
Peace Agreement, the decisions of the implementation
conference and relevant Security Council resolutions.
Secondly, such far-reaching decisions cannot be forced
from outside; they must be the result of the sovereign,
voluntary decision of the three constituent peoples.
In conclusion, I wish to draw attention to trends
that should raise real concerns, in the context not
only of Bosnia and Herzegovina, but of the region as
a whole. I refer to a growth of extremism among the
Bosniak population in Bosnia and Herzegovina and
other Muslim communities in the Western Balkans.
That threat must be seen and assessed appropriately.
The terrorist act in the city of Dvornik on 27 April,
when an armed Islamist attacked a police station, is
confirmation of that trend. Special attention should be
devoted to the participation of Bosniaks in the conflicts
in the Middle East on the side of international terrorist
organizations. Hundreds of citizens have joined the
Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL) and Jahbat
Al-Nusra through Bosnia and Herzegovina, which
serves as a channel for fighrers from Western Europe.
We welcome the efforts of Sarajevo to increase the
accountability of foreign fighters and their facilitators
for their actions abroad.
Last year, amendments were made to the criminal
code to limit the recruitment of Bosniaks into
ISIL and other illegal formations abroad. Bosnian
law enforcement agencies are carrying out special

S/PV.7440

operations to identify such networks and arrest local
mujahids. At the same time, as practice has shown, such
actions and measures remain insufficient and do not
provide the necessary impact to reduce the influence
of Islamists. Of course, in the fragile post-conflict
situation in the Balkans, that phenonemon is especially
dangerous. That has been confirmed by the recent
outburst of inter-ethnic and interreligious confrontation
in multinational Macedonia and neighbouring regions.
Mr. Ibrahim (Malaysia): I would like to thank High
Representative Valentin Inzko for his briefing and for
his comprehensive report to the Council (S/2015/300,
annex). Since this is Malaysia’s first Security Council
meeting with High Representative Inzko, I wish to
express Malaysia’s strong support for his work and
commitment to carrying out the implementation of the
Dayton Peace Accords.
Malaysia welcomes the formation of the
Government in Bosnia and Herzegovina in March 2015,
following the seventh general elections in October last
year. The new Government’s expressed commitment to
prioritizing a reform agenda, especially in the economic
sector, is a step in the right direction. We urge the
country’s leaders and political parties to close ranks
and focus on accelerating efforts based on collective
responsibility towards reforming the country’s
economy. The lack of progress in socioeconomic
reforms of recent years, as highlighted in previous
reports of the High Representative, must not be allowed
to fester. Unemployment, particularly among young
people, and the increasing flow of brain-drain in the
country must be addressed as a matter of urgency. We
saw how damaging that can be early last year, when
the population took to the streets to engage in massive
demonstrations and riots, demanding a better future
and quality of life for themselves and their children.
Economic development can take place only when
there is political stability. In that regard, Malaysia
shares the concerns of the High Representative on the
self-serving and divisive politics of certain quarters in
Bosnia and Herzegovina. That is a dangerous game to be
played with the future of the country, especially in view
of its traumatic history. We therefore urge all parties to
enhance efforts towards national reconciliation with a
view to ensuring political stability in the country.
We take note that this year marks the twentieth
anniversary of the Dayton Peace Accords. We hope
that will present a good opportunity for all parties to
renew their commitment to the Dayton Agreement.

15-138407/22

S/PV.7440

The situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina

Efforts to undermine or revise the Dayton Peace
Accords must cease. We also take note of the priority
accorded by the leaders of Bosnia and Herzegovina
to European Union (EU) integration as a cornerstone
of its foreign policy. We welcome the progress made
by Bosnia and Herzegovina towards this aim with the
recent conclusion of the Stabilization and Association
Agreement with the EU last month. We believe that will
provide further impetus for the country to accelerate its
reform in the areas of the economy, the rule of law and
good governance towards a future of peace, stability
and prosperity within the EU, as desired by the people.
Malaysia reaffirms its commitment to the
independence, sovereignty, national unity and territorial
integrity of Bosnia and Herzegovina. We have long
supported the country in its reconstruction after the war,
and will continue to do so. Our investment in Bosnia and
Herzegovina in the areas of real estate, construction,
energy, education and capacity-building are aimed at
strengthening the socioeconomic foundation of the
country towards growth and prosperity. In our effort
to bring the ethnic groups together towards economic
and social integration, Malaysia has sought to involve
the three main ethnicities in the country in our various
investment projects. Based on our own multiracial and
multireligious experience, we believe that is a win-win
formula for all to ensure a united, stable and prosperous
future for Bosnia and Herzegovina.
In conclusion, Malaysia stands ready to play
a constructive role in the Council on the issue of
Bosnia and Herzegovina. We reiterate our unwavering
commitment to contributing to the country’s
nation-building, inclusive democracy, reconciliation
and economic progress.
Mr. Henry Alfredo Suárez Moreno (Bolivarian
Republic of Venezuela) (spoke in Spanish): We thank
the High Representative for Bosnia and Herzegovina,
Mr. Valentin Inzko, for his briefing.
The Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela reiterates that
full compliance with international law — as expressed
in the principles of non-intervention; respect for the
sovereignty, territorial integrity, unity and political
independence of States; and the peaceful settlement of
disputes — is fundamental to maintaining international
peace and security. While advocating a peaceful solution
of the issue of Bosnia and Herzegovina, we support the
implementation of the General Framework Agreement
for Peace because we believe that it is the outcome of
a political consensus among the parties involved. We
8/22

12/05/2015

therefore encourage the High Representative to work
impartially, transparently and constructively so as to
ensure a balanced and prudent approach in which the
opinions and views of the stakeholders are reflected.
We believe that the international community must
continue to support Bosnia and Herzegovina in its
implementation of the Peace Agreement, and to that
end we call for a guarantee of the sovereignty and
territorial integrity of Bosnia and Herzegovina. The
primary responsibility for the full implementation of
the Dayton Peace Agreement lies with the Government
and the people of that country, an obligation that must
be exercised in full sovereignty, with the support of the
international community.
We welcome the fact that the political situation in
Bosnia and Herzegovina remained stable until 21 April.
We note with regret the terrorist attack on a police
station in the city of Zvornik in Republika Srpska in
late April, which has given rise to fresh political and
social tensions.
The European Union military mission in Bosnia
and Herzegovina has carried out its work under the
mandate assigned to it, in cooperation with the national
authorities, so as to provide a safe environment for
citizens of all ethnic groups in that country.
We express our solidarity with Bosnia and
Herzegovina and our support for its firm commitment
to peace and stability for the benefit of its citizens.
To that end, we welcome the policies adopted by the
Government of Bosnia and Herzegovina to prevent the
recruitment of its nationals by the Islamic State in Iraq
and the Levant and the Al-Nusra Front to participate as
foreign terrorist fighters in the armed conflicts in Syria
and Iraq.
On the political front, we welcome the formation of
the new Government following the elections of October
2014, which is an encouraging sign for the new leaders,
who must now continue to work to tackle the country’s
main challenges. We call on all parties to redouble their
efforts with renewed political resolve and courage so
as to promote trust and joint work in the framework of
international law, which are necessary components of a
political, just and lasting solution in the interests of the
parties and the entire region.
Mrs. Ogwu (Nigeria): I want to thank High
Representative for Bosnia and Herzegovina Inzko for
his briefing and for his forty-seventh report on the
implementation of the Peace Agreement on Bosnia and
15-13840

12/05/2015

The situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina

Herzegovina (S/2015/300, annex). We have carefully
studied the report and taken due note of the main issues
contained therein.
Nigeria is pleased to see that, following the
elections of October 2014 and the certification of the
election results in November 2014, Governments and
legislatures have been formed at the State, entity and
cantonal levels. We encourage the political leaders
in cantons where Governments are yet to be formed
to work together to resolve their differences over the
distribution of ministerial positions. We are concerned
about reports of continued challenges to the General
Framework Agreement for Peace. The divisive rhetoric
and actions of political leaders that threaten the
sovereignty and territorial integrity of the State are
contrary to the spirit of the Dayton Peace Accords.
Public figures must refrain from making inflammatory
statements promoting secession, which are indeed
capable of undermining the stability of the country and
the entire region.
It must be understood by all concerned that the
Constitution of Bosnia and Herzegovina does not
envisage secession by any of the entities. We believe
that the interests of the entities can and should be
accommodated within the framework of a united Bosnia
and Herzegovina. The rejection of the authority of the
Constitutional Court at the entity level is also a matter
of grave concern. It is a direct challenge to the rule of
law and the independence of the judiciary, which are
two critical elements of democratic governance. We
urge all entities to respect the decisions of the Court as
final and binding, in accordance with their obligations
under a democratic system of Government. Boycotts
and walkouts are impeding the work of the House of
Representatives and the House of Peoples. While we
recognize the rights of parliamentarians to protest,
we urge them to do so in a manner that allows the
legislature to continue to function unimpeded.
Despite these impediments, the two legislative
houses have appointed their leaders and elected their
working bodies. That is a welcome development and a
strong step towards development. We also take note of
the fact that joint parliamentary working committees
have been appointed. We call on all concerned to work
diligently to resolve their disputes over the membership
of the joint committee for oversight of the Intelligence
and Security Agency of Bosnia and Herzegovina.
We note that the Parliament has adopted an
amendment to the Criminal Code of Bosnia and

S/PV.7440

Herzegovina. We are concerned, however, that
the amendment is considered to be inadequate to
meet international standards on countering moneylaundering and the financing of terrorism. In view of
the importance of closing gaps in the law that could
be exploited to finance terrorism, we would urge
parliamentary leaders to take action to strengthen
the Criminal Code. In terms of public security and
law enforcement, we note with concern that policing
in Bosnia and Herzegovina is confronted by the
challenge of political interference, which is causing
delays in the formation of the independent boards
that select police directors. We commend the Office
of the High Representative for its collaboration with
various stakeholders to update police legislation. It is
our expectation that those reforms would enhance the
independence and operational efficiency of the police.
We want to pay tribute to the High Representative
for his unflinching efforts to fulfil his mandate. We
support without reservation his call for the adequate
staffing and funding of his Office. We believe this
would greatly enhance his efforts.
Mrs. Schwalger (New Zealand): The briefing
and report of the High Representative for Bosnia and
Herzegovina (S/2015/300, annex) today are frank
in noting areas of concern, but also show that some
important and positive developments took place over
the reporting period.
New Zealand welcomes the formation of a new
Government of Bosnia and Herzegovina subsequent to
the elections in October 2014. Electoral arrangements
are complex, making the holding of peaceful elections
and an orderly installation of the duly-elected
Government a significant achievement. We wish the
Government well as it confronts the many challenges
ahead. Navigating these challenges will require strong
political will and determination.
The commitment of representatives from across the
political spectrum to social and economic reforms, with
a view to closer engagement with the European Union
through the Stabilization and Association Agreement,
is a positive step. The socioeconomic and good
governance reforms that are part of this process will
benefit all the population of Bosnia and Herzegovina.
The strengthening of institutions and the rule of law
will support lasting stability and prosperity within a
well-functioning State. We encourage the international
community, especially neighbours in the region and the

15-138409/22

S/PV.7440

The situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina

12/05/2015

European Union, to support Bosnia and Herzegovina as
it undertakes the necessary but difficult reforms ahead.

the Office of the High Representative and with the
European Union.

While healthy debate stimulates a healthy
democracy, unlocking a country’s full potential
requires all parties to share a common aspiration for a
united and prosperous future. The divisive rhetoric once
again identified in the High Representative’s report is
therefore concerning. Attempts to undermine the unity
of the country, such as through calling for a referendum
on secession, distract from the important reform agenda
Bosnia and Herzegovina has ahead of it. As the High
Representative pointed out, they also directly challenge
the basic tenets of the General Framework Agreement
for Peace. We hope that such rhetoric can be left behind
and for all of Bosnia and Herzegovina to move forward
together in the spirit of reconciliation.

The task facing the Bosnian authorities is
considerable, and Bosnians expect their leaders to
demonstrate that they are capable of facing it. Refusing
to succumb to rhetoric that exacerbates ethnic
divisions, the Bosnian people as a whole have shown
that their priority is socioeconomic improvement. Year
after year the country has remained powerless in the
face of a major issue: seeing young people take their
talents abroad because of the lack of opportunities and
prospects for the future. We urge the Bosnian authorities
to act to improve the situation as rapidly as possible.

In the twentieth year of the Dayton Peace
Accords, progress is clearly evident, yet still much
remains to be achieved. The five objectives and two
conditions set by the Steering Board of the Peace
Implementation Council, which are prerequisites for
the closure of the Office of the High Representative,
have not yet been accomplished. While the future
of Bosnia and Herzegovina is, as it should be, in the
hands of its citizens, the international community has
a responsibility to encourage and support Bosnia and
Herzegovina. To that end, New Zealand reiterates its
commitment to the territorial integrity and sovereignty
of Bosnia and Herzegovina and wishes it well on its
path to unity, stability and lasting peace.
Mr. Lamek (France) (spoke in French): At the
outset, I also would like to thank the High Representative
for Bosnia and Herzegovina, Mr. lnzko, for his briefing.
France fully associates itself with the statement to
be made shortly on behalf of the European Union. I will
focus my remarks on three points.
First, concerning the political dynamics, the
Bosnian people were able to exercise their democratic
duty last October and to choose new representatives.
A great many things in fact remain in need of
improvement; testimony to that is the fact that the
process for appointing the executive was significantly
delayed and was not finalized until the end of March.
However, we are pleased to see a new team in place,
both at the level of the two entities and at the State
level, where the tripartite Presidency has quickly gotten
to work and has been collaborating constructively with

10/22

Secondly, I would like to consider a very important
topic, that is, the European integration of Bosnia and
Herzegovina. Above all, the goal is to improve the
socioeconomic conditions of the country. For that reason,
we relaunched the European Union initiative with
regard to Bosnia and Herzegovina, including European
integration, which remains a strategic priority. That is
a wish expressed by the Bosnians themselves, despite
what some outside Bosnia and Herzegovina might want
to believe. The lack of movement of the last few years
could not reasonably continue, while most neighbouring
States experienced considerable progress along this
path. It is in that spirit that the European Union has
decided to lend new momentum to the process, which,
I reiterate, meets the wishes of the Bosnian population.
The formation of a new governmental team provides
an ideal opportunity to take a further step towards
integration, and we welcome the positive reception
to date to the European Union initiative by Bosnia
and Herzegovina — on the part of the Presidency, the
Parliament and the main political forces in the country.
The written commitment undertaken by the authorities
should open the path for the socioeconomic reforms
so sorely needed by the country, which will enable
it to become closer to its European neighbours. The
logical result of that commitment is the Stabilization
and Association Agreement, which will enter into force
in a few weeks and which we welcome. The upcoming
Bosnian presidency of the Council of Europe, which
begins on 19 May, will provide an opportunity for
Bosnia and Herzegovina to affirm its desire to become
closer to Europe and to the fundamental principles
guaranteed by the European Convention on Human
Rights, so dear to the heart of the European Union.

15-13840

12/05/2015

The situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina

Finally, I would like to say a few words on the
existing institutional framework. The whole of Europe
wishes to participate in the transformation of Bosnia
and Herzegovina and to contribute its integration as
a united, sovereign country that enjoys full territorial
integrity. In that regard, it is unacceptable that the old
nationalist ideas are still voiced, thus endangering the
unity and stability of the country. We reiterate our call
for an end to any actions or rhetoric likely to divide
the country. Our message is clear: there can be no
questioning of the territorial integrity of Bosnia and
Herzegovina.
We also call upon all parties to cooperate fully with
the High Representative, in keeping with the Dayton
Accords, which constitute the reference framework
for the international community’s role in Bosnia and
Herzegovina. I would like to pay tribute to the High
Representative and his team for their commitment and
dedication to uphold the General Framework Agreement
for Peace in Bosnia and Herzegovina, which for 20
years now has preserved peace. At the same time, the
consideration of the reconfiguring the Office of the
High Representative should continue. That conclusion is
based on the fact that the persisting political difficulties
force us to re-craft and adapt our strategy. Maintaining
the exact framework and mechanisms established at
the end of the 1990s does not serve the needs of the
Bosnia and Herzegovina people at a time when the
situation in the country and the region has considerably
evolved. We wish to reinforce the cohesiveness of the
international mechanism on Bosnia and Herzegovina
by seeking complementarity between the Office of the
High Representative and that of the European Union,
the leadership of which is recognized today.
I cannot conclude by mentioning a very painful
memory. We are preparing to commemorate the sad
twentieth anniversary of the Srebrenica massacre,
described as genocide by the International Criminal
Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia. We hope that the
country will be able to demonstrate that it has been
able to overcome old grudges and demonstrate national
unity. The future of Bosnia and Herzegovina requires
closer cooperation between the entities that compose
it on the basis of equality and mutual respect. In that
regard, intercommunity reconciliation is essential to
consolidate a sense of belonging to a common history
and destiny, which is a requirement for the construction
of a common future. The European Union, like France,
will assist Bosnians in the process.

S/PV.7440

Mr. González de Linares Palou (Spain) (spoke in
Spanish): I would like to thank the High Representative
for Bosnia and Herzegovina, Ambassador Valentin
Inzko, for his briefing and his detailed report
(S/2015/300, annex) for the period 21 October
2014 to 21 April 2015. I also welcome the presence of the
Permanent Representative of Bosnia and Herzegovina
in the Council today.
Spain is a friend and partner of Bosnia and
Herzegovina. Not only do we have strong links at
the political level, but we have also enjoyed a steady
closeness between our citizens during the difficult
years of the conflict. We have seen a deepening of
those relations since then. For that reason, this meeting
is particularly important for Spain, because this is
our first opportunity to take part in a debate on this
issue since our country has been seated in the Security
Council.
I would like to reiterate Spain’s support for the
work of the Office of the High Representative. Along
with the countries and international bodies on the
Peace Implementation Council for the Dayton Peace
Accords, my country hopes that the 5+2 agenda can be
carried out as soon as possible. We therefore call upon
the various stakeholders to work together to that end.
Until that happens, however, the High Representative’s
work will continue to be necessary.
In a few months we will commemorate the
twentieth anniversary of the Dayton Peace Accords,
which established the basis for peace and stability
in Bosnia and Herzegovina and for making progress
at the political and socioeconomic levels in the
country — and, by extension, the entire region. I would
like to emphasize the importance of that, as well to
reiterate the the call upon all political actors in Bosnia
and Herzegovina to use the Accords to create greater
stability in the country, to ensure its full functionality
and to move towards the prosperity that we all desire.
In that context, I also wish to reiterate Spain’s
support for the sovereignty, unity and territorial
integrity of Bosnia and Herzegovina as enshrined
in the Dayton Accords. Along with cooperation and
constructive relations with its neighbours, as well as
fulfilling the conditions and respecting communal
heritage, those principles are the only way to make
progress in the country’s European integration process.
Spain fully aligns itself with the statement to be
made later by the observer of the European Union.

15-1384011/22

S/PV.7440

The situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina

Along with other European Union partners, we welcome
the pending entry into force of the Stabilization and
Association Agreement. With that momentum, the
European Union is once again resolutely demonstrating
its readiness to help Bosnia and Herzegovina and ensure
its European future.
In parallel, the written commitment adopted by the
tripartite Presidency, which was subsequently signed
on to by the leaders of the political parties and endorsed
by the Parliament, is a formal basis for the way ahead
for all of the institutions and representatives of the
citizens of Bosnia and Herzegovina. It is our hope
that they will continue making progress on the path of
reforms, including those set out in the plan for growth
and employment as well those of a constitutional nature
having to do with the functioning of State institutions.
We are on the right path, but there is still a way to go.
Spain once again joins others in calling on the
political leaders of Bosnia and Herzegovina to continue
their steady progress along the path of reform in
accordance with the commitments made. In that regard,
it is very important to establish an effective coordination
mechanism. As seen today, the circumstances call
for that, and they should be taken advantage of. In
particular, the recent establishment of the various
levels of Government following the October elections is
good news. We must now take advantage of the existing
momentum to deliver on the legitimate responsibilities
incumbent upon them following the elections.
I conclude by stating that the elections now
call for not only legitimacy, but above all rigour and
responsibility. The people of Bosnia and Herzegovina
have made clear their desire for progress. They have
made their voices heard. It is now necessary to listen
and to act accordingly without delay.
Mr. Rycroft (United Kingdom): I thank High
Representative Inzko for his briefing today. It is
fitting that my first statement in an open debate of
the Security Council is on the subject of Bosnia and
Herzegovina. Earlier in my career, I served in the
British delegation at the Dayton peace talks. I saw firsthand how the international community, led by Dick
Holbrooke, came together to help end years of brutal
fighting. Later, as the British Ambassador in Sarajevo
from 2005 to 2008, I witnessed how far Bosnia had
progressed after the war and saw the first steps taken
towards a future in the European Union (EU) and in
NATO. Although those steps have faltered, the United

12/22

12/05/2015

Kingdom has always been a strong supporter of Bosnia
and Herzegovina’s long-term stability and prosperity. I
am pleased to reassert that commitment unambiguously
in the Council today.
This year, Bosnia’s political leaders have an
opportunity that they must not miss — to stop the drift
and accelerate the journey towards a better future. They
have a chance to implement the social and economic
reforms their citizens expect and deserve. We must do
our utmost to support them. I believe there are three
areas in which we can do so.
First, let us all give our full backing to the EU
initiative on Bosnia and Herzegovina, first developed
by the United Kingdom and Germany. The written
commitment to reform by Bosnia’s leaders, including
those in the Republika Srpska, is a sign that the
initiative can succeed. The EU will fulfil its side of the
bargain; the Stabilization and Association Agreement
will soon come into force. As the British Ambassador
to Bosnia and Herzegovina when the Agreement was
signed, seven years ago, I am amazed and disappointed
that it has not yet come into force.
Bosnia and Herzegovina’s leaders can now harness
momentum to deliver meaningful reform. Their actions
need to match their written commitments. Stabilizing
and stimulating Bosnia and Herzegovina’s economy
should be their priority — because in an average group
of five young Bosnians, three of them have no jobs.
Public dissatisfaction is growing. The many levels
of Bosnia and Herzegovina’s Government must now
define their agenda for reform.
If Bosnia and Herzegovina’s leaders do not take
that opportunity to reform, we may see a repeat of the
anger that shook the streets of Sarajevo last year. The
violence and challenges to law and order showed that
tensions still lie just below the surface. On occasions
tensions have been high this year, and we condemn the
unacceptable attack against a police station in Zvornik
last month. Although the frequency of such attacks may
be low, their effects can be far reaching.
Secondly, the Council must continue its support
to preserve the security and stability of Bosnia and
Herzegovina. The seventieth anniversary of the end of
the Second World War and the twentieth anniversary
of the Srebrenica genocide this year illustrate that in
every generation Bosnians, Bosniaks, Bosnian Croats
and Bosnia Serbs have suffered from conflict. Until
security and stability is embedded across Bosnia and

15-13840

12/05/2015

The situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina

Herzegovina, we must do all we can to reassure this
generation that we mean it when we say “Never again!”
The United Kingdom believes that the continued
presence of the European Union-led peacekeeping force
(EUFOR), with an executive mandate, is the best way
to provide that reassurance. We advocate the retention
of this vital asset when its mandate is up for renewal in
November. And we also support the continued work of
the High Representative and his efforts to fulfil the five
objectives and two conditions, which were set back in
my time in Sarajevo and still have not been fully met.
Together, the international community has a
continued role to play to deter those who question
Bosnia and Herzegovina’s sovereignty and territorial
integrity. Last month’s declaration by the Alliance of
Independent Social Democrats on the independence of
the Republika Srpska shows that there are those who
still relish in division. But their proposed referendum is
a clear breach of the Dayton Agreement. The Republika
Srpska does not have the right to secede. Borders will
not be redrawn. And the EU position is simple and clear:
only a united, functioning, effective State of Bosnia
and Herzegovina will be offered EU membership, when
it meets all the conditions.
Let me conclude on my third point. In November we
will mark the twentieth anniversary of Dayton. For two
decades, it has been up to Bosniab and Herzegovina’s
political leaders, supported by the international
community, to overcome their narrow interests and
find common ground. They have not always managed
to do so, but they will continue to have our support.
This year, Bosnia and Herzegovina’s newly elected
leaders have a chance to demonstrate to the Council
that they can act in their collective national interests
and end years of stagnation. We cannot do it for them.
Just as they showed at Dayton, nearly 20 years
ago, and in signing the Stabilization and Association
Agreement seven years ago, they have shown in their
commitment to the EU initiative that they can find
consensus, they can succeed and deliver real reform,
they can set aside their differences for the greater prize
of economic growth, stability and prosperity. They owe
it to the Bosnian people to seize this opportunity.
Mr. Omaish (Jordan) (spoke in Arabic): I wish to
start by thanking the High Representative for Bosnia and
Herzegovina for his briefing. Jordan has taken note of
the conclusions contained in the High Representative’s
forty-seventh report on implementation of the Bosnia

S/PV.7440

and Herzegovina peace agreement (see S/2015/300,
annex). The report includes a number of positive steps
forward, which we welcome. At the same time, we are
concerned by actions that continue to undermine the
foundations of the Dayton Peace Agreement.
The agreement between the Bosnian parties to
form the current Government has placed Bosnia and
Herzegovina back on the path to normalization. Jordan
therefore welcomes the formation of the Government
and calls on it to pursue its efforts to meet the political,
social and economic aspirations of its citizens. Jordan
commends the efforts undertaken in Bosnia and
Herzegovina in the area of reform in general, but
reaffirms the importance of redoubling efforts in the
areas of the rule of law, the fight against corruption
and other pivotal issues. If Bosnia and Herzegovina is
to meet these challenges, the current authorities, the
leaders of the various parties and the political elite
need to work together vigorously to confront these
challenges, regardless of their differences.
In the light of the difficult economic conditions
afflicting Bosnia and Herzegovina, all stakeholders
must stand together to revive the country’s weakened
economy. This responsibility lies primarily with
Bosnians themselves, who must work to create
the conditions necessary to reviving the country’s
economic system. At the same time, we urge the
international community to continue to assist Bosnia
and Herzegovina in that vital sector, and we urge all the
countries of the region to develop and strengthen their
relations with Bosnia and Herzegovina.
In that context, and in the interest of strengthening
the country’s cooperation and regional integration,
Jordan welcomes the adoption by the Bosnian
Parliamentary Assembly in February of the Presidency’s
written commitment to maintaining the country’s
efforts to accede to the European Union, in accordance
with the aspirations of Bosnians within their broader,
more comprehensive vision of the future. This will
require greater effort on the part of Bosnian leaders by
taking important decisions to overcome the challenges
involved in meeting the necessary criteria for accession.
The political difficulties experienced by Bosnia
and Herzegovina during the period that preceded the
agreement on the formation of the current Government
show that the only path open to the Bosnians is to work
together to overcome the problems and difficulties
currently afflicting the country. Thus, the respect of all
Bosnians for the unity and sovereignty of Bosnia and

15-1384013/22

S/PV.7440

The situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina

Herzegovina within its recognized international borders
is essential to the country’s progress and prosperity. We
urge all those who promote the idea of secession from
Bosnia and Herzegovina to refrain from making such
calls, which contravene the provisions of the Bosnian
Constitution and the Dayton Peace Agreement. We
also urge them to harness their energies to strengthen
national unity and to engage in positive cooperation
with all entities in Bosnia and Herzegovina.
In conclusion, we pay tribute to the multinational
stabilization force in Bosnia and Herzegovina and
commend its efforts to assist with the implementation
of the peace agreements and promote capacity building.
Mr. Lucas (Angola): We welcome and thank
Mr. Valentin Inzko, High Representative of the
Secretary-General, for his briefing, for introducing
the report on the implementation of the peace
agreement (S/2015/300, annex), and for the work being
accomplished by his Office in ensuring steady progress
in the consolidation of the multinational State of Bosnia
and Herzegovina. At the outset, we would like to
declare the strong support of the Republic of Angola for
the unity, territorial integrity and sovereignty of Bosnia
and Herzegovina, in accordance with the Dayton
Peace Agreement. In our statement, we will focus on
three main issues: the general political enviornment,
challenges to the General Framework Agreement for
Peace, and objectives and conditions for the closure of
the Office of the High Representative.
Concerning the political environment, we welcome
the new Government established on 31 March, six
months after the general elections. Despite coalition
agreements signed at the federation and entity levels,
disagreement over the distribution of ministerial posts
delayed the formation of the Government, justifying the
view expressed in the High Representative’s report on
the need to improve the electoral process, including by
reforming the electoral law and relevant constitutional
provisions. The joint declaration on tripartite presidency,
confirming the commitment to institutional reforms
at all State levels in order to prepare the country for
future European Union membership, is an important
political development as well, as is the statement of
the European Union Foreign Ministers on the need
for meaningful progress in implementing the reform
agenda for European Union membership application.
The initiative launched by the Foreign Ministers
of Germany and the United Kingdom in November
2014 — now a European Union initiative — offers
14/22

12/05/2015

Bosnia and Herzegovina a real opportunity to make
progress towards integration into the Euoprean Union.
We expect that the decision adopted by the Council
of the European Union, adopting the European Union
Stabilization and Association Agreement with Bosnia
and Herzegovina, will effectively enter into force on
1 June and that it will provide the road map for its full
integration into the European Union, guaranteeing
the future of a united, sovereign, multi-ethnic, stable,
prosperous and developed country.
With respect to the challenges of the General
Framework Agreement for Peace 20 years after the
signing of the Dayton Peace Agreement, we are
concerned about statements made by senior officials
of Republika Srpska advocating the dissolution of the
State of Bosnia and Herzegovina. Such acts undermine
cohesion among the multi-ethnic communities in the
country and national reconciliation. In this regard, we
call upon political leaders to refrain from such rhetoric
and to make every effort towards national reconciliation
and the integration of all ethnic communities in order
to consolidate the positive achievements made so far.
We are deeply concerned that many young people
from Bosnia and Herzegovina have been joining
terrorist groups in the Middle East. We call upon the
authorities to adopt energetic measures and policies to
counter such negative and dangerous trends.
On the issue of objectives and conditions for the
closure of the Office of the High Representative, it is
regrettable that, in the reporting period, Bosnia and
Herzegovina made limited progress towards meeting
the outstanding objectives set by the Steering Board of
the Peace Implementation Council as a prerequisite for
the closure of the Office, as recalled in resolution 2183
(2014).
Finally, the Republic of Angola welcomes the
fact that the overall security situation in Bosnia and
Herzegovina remains calm and stable. We acknowledge
the activities of the European Union-led peacekeeping
force Operation Althea in support of peace and security
in Bosnia and Herzegovina. We commend the work
carried out by the Office of the High Representative to
maintain a safe and secure environment in accordance
with its mandate and are confident of a new future for
Bosnia and Herzegovina, hoping that the new leaders
will look beyond the divisions of the past and will focus
on good governance, rule of law and economic reforms
towards a peaceful and prosperous future.

15-13840

12/05/2015

The situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina

Mr. Wang Min (China): I thank High Representative
Inzko for his briefing.
The situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina of late
has remained generally stable. There has been positive
progress in the political process and the area of the rule
of law. Despite the floods that ravaged the country in
May 2014, and thanks to the efforts of the country’s
people, the overall economy is moving in the right
direction. Elections were held successfully late last
year, and in March a new Government was formed
without difficulty, for which China would like to offer
its congratulations.
China respects Bosnia and Herzegovina’s
sovereignty, independence, unity and territorial
integrity and believes it is the country’s sovereign
right to choose its own development path and foreign
policies. The international community should respect
and support the Government and people in their choice
of a path to development. We hope that under the new
Government’s leadership, all communities can live in
peace and work together on their shared development
in order to build on their significant achievements
in national reconstruction. We also hope that
comprehensive implementation of the Dayton Peace
Agreement will continue and that more progress will
be made in all reconstruction areas.
Bosnia and Herzegovina is an important country
in the Balkans, and its achievement of peace, stability
and development is in the common interests of
the international community, including the other
countries in the region. At the moment, its economic
development and national reconstruction are still facing
complications and difficulties, and the country needs
the continuing support and help of the international
community if it is to achieve sustainable economic
and social development and lasting peace and stability.
The international community should take a balanced
and prudent approach to Bosnia and Herzegovina’s
issues while fully respecting its people’s ownership
and independence, with a view to enhancing unity and
achieving harmonious development that can benefit all
its communities. China supports High Representative
Inzko in his efforts to fulfil his mandated tasks in a
way that will enable him to play a constructive role in
advancing the country’s political process. We are ready
to join the international community in a continuing
effort to contribute to lasting peace, stability and
development in Bosnia and Herzegovina.

S/PV.7440

Mr. Mangaral (Chad) (spoke in French): I would
like to thank the High Representative for Implementation
of the Peace Agreement on Bosnia and Herzegovina for
the briefing on his report for the period from 21 October
2014 to 21 April 2015 (S/2015/300, annex). The period
was dominated by three main political developments,
the process of forming a Government following the
October 2014 elections, the efforts to kick-start Bosnia
and Herzegovina’s integration into the European
Union and the actions and statements challenging the
fundamental principles of the Dayton Peace Agreement.
In that regard, we welcome the High Representative’s
efforts to ensure the upholding of the civilian aspects of
the Dayton Agreement, promote recent advances and to
continue to implement the gains that have been made in
implementing the Agreement. We further welcome the
announcement on 10 November of the official election
results for the State of Bosnia and Herzegovina and for
the two entities and the 10 cantons in the Federation.
We also commend the progress made regarding
concerns about the Law on the Temporary Prohibition
of Disposal of State Property enacted in March 2005,
while deploring the challenges that various parties
have made during the reporting period to the General
Framework Agreement for Peace, which are an affront
to Bosnia and Herzegovina’s sovereignty and territorial
integrity. We were surprised by the announcement by
a member of the Bosnia and Herzegovina House of
Peoples, reported in the media on 9 April, about his
party’s intention to adopt a resolution on a free and
independent Republika Srpska, and we condemn it,
since it undermines the country’s cohesion.
We welcome the election of the new joint Presidency,
composed of a Serb, a Croat and a Bosniak member, which
took office in November in a constructive spirit. We also
commend the Parliamentary Assembly’s endorsement
on 23 February of the commitment to reforms ahead
of the country’s entry into the European Union. We
call on all authorities in Bosnia and Herzegovina to
cooperate fully with the High Representative and the
relevant international organizations, as laid down in
article 9 of the General Framework Agreement, and to
allow the High Representative access to information
and official documents that he needs in order to carry
out his mandate. We are concerned about the attitude of
authorities at various levels who continue to refuse to
implement many decisions of the Constitutional Court
and the general lack of progress in strengthening the
rule of law in the country.

15-1384015/22

S/PV.7440

The situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina

Concerning the perpetrators of war crimes, we
note the federal authorities’ lack of persistence in
prosecuting them. The political pressure being put on
the police is also a serious obstacle to its ability to
function properly. Regarding the issue of refugees and
displaced persons, we believe that this is a central piece
of the General Framework Agreement for Peace, and
one that will require that the State authorities and its
constituent bodies ensure the creation of the political,
economic and social conditions conducive to their return
and harmonious reintegration without discrimination.
We should also note that the reforms designed to ensure
the independence of public media are stalled, thanks to
disagreement between the three public broadcasters in
Bosnia and Herzegovina and their consequent failure to
establish a national public television and radio entity as
required under State legislation.
We pay deserved tribute to the European Union
military mission in Bosnia and Herzegovina, which
continues to play an important role in supporting the
country’s efforts to maintain conditions conducive to
safety and security. We also reaffirm our belief in Bosnia
and Herzegovina’s territorial integrity and sovereignty,
and we support the Office of the High Representative
in its efforts to achieve the five objectives and two
conditions necessary of the Office’s closure.
The President: I will now make a statement in my
capacity as representative of Lithuania.
I am pleased to welcome High Representative
Valentin Inzko back to the Council, and to thank him
for his report (S/2015/300, annex), his briefing and all
the work he does on the ground.
Lithuania aligns itself with the statement to be
delivered on behalf of the European Union (EU).
This year is the twentieth since the end of a
three-and-a-half-year war and an immense human
tragedy. It also marks the 20th anniversary of the
Srebrenica massacre, which has been described as
true scenes from hell, written on the darkest pages of
human history. The progress achieved since the signing
of the Dayton Peace Agreement has been remarkable.
The past two decades are proof of the international
community’s commitment to building a safer and more
stable region. The sustained engagement of the EU
has provided an essential framework and incentive for
change. There are challenges ahead, but a great deal of
progress has been achieved in the region, and Bosnia
and Herzegovina is no exception. Significant steps

16/22

12/05/2015

have been taken in realizing the vision of a prosperous,
united, multi-ethnic nation. Our commitment to Bosnia
and Herzegovina’s integrity as a sovereign and united
country remains strong.
The latest developments in Bosnia and Herzegovina
are a clear demonstration of its people’s choice of
Europe and the country’s firm determination to move
forward on the path of EU integration. The renewed EU
approach has generated momentum. With their written
commitment to undertake further reforms signed by
the leaders of the political parties and endorsed by
the Parliamentary Assembly, the authorities of Bosnia
and Herzegovina made a remarkable decision. It was a
defining moment in relations between the EU and Bosnia
and Herzegovina and a solid step towards realizing the
country’s European perspective, enabling the entry into
force of the Stabilization and Association Agreement
as of next month. Further steps must be taken to carry
on the reform agenda supporting necessary economic
and social change, including measures provided by the
Compact for Growth initiative, as well as close dialogue
between the EU and Bosnia and Herzegovina.
While we have seen the resilience the economy has
displayed in the context of the floods that affected Bosnia
and Herzegovina and other countries in the region last
spring, tackling social and economic issues, as the High
Representative’s report notes, requires urgent attention.
The high unemployment rate, especially among the
young, is a matter of concern. Continuous reform
should translate into real opportunities for the benefit
of all citizens, including the youth and the unemployed.
We are encouraged by the intentions of newly elected
leaders to focus on their reform efforts.
We call on the authorities to capitalize on the
opportunities that the renewed EU approach presents.
Their full realization requires determination and unity
among the political elites. The divisive nationalistic
and separatist rhetoric is threatening the very
foundations of the State, is counterproductive and
should be discarded. As mentioned, Lithuania firmly
supports the independence, unity and sovereignty and
territorial integrity of Bosnia and Herzegovina. Further
reconciliation and strengthening of the rule of law and
administrative capacities at all levels would require
overcoming the political differences and uniting for
the common goal. Good-neighbourly relations and
regional cooperation are essential for ensuring security
and prosperity in the Western Balkans. Joint efforts on
connectivity and other areas are important unifying

15-13840

12/05/2015

The situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina

factors. We encourage the newly elected authorities to
further promote regional cooperation and strengthen
ties with the neighbouring countries.
Regional cooperation initiatives also contribute to
addressing security threats. While the overall security
situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina remains stable,
the recent incident in the city of Zvornik, where a
police station was attacked and a policeman was killed
underlines the need to scale up efforts by the authorities
aimed at ensuring public order, safety and security.
The European Union and Lithuania, as its member,
will continue to provide, through the European
Union-led peacekeeping force, support to Bosnia and
Herzegovina’s efforts to maintain a safe and secure
environment under the United Nations mandate.
In conclusion, we encourage Bosnia and
Herzegovina’s leadership to demonstrate clear, strategic
political will and determination and use the momentum
for all citizens of Bosnia and Herzegovina to benefit
from the real progress in economic and social reforms.
This is essential in realizing the vision of a united and
prosperous country that is strong in its diversity.
I now resume my functions as President of the
Council.
I give the floor to the representative of Bosnia and
Herzegovina.
Ms. Čolaković (Bosnia and Herzegovina): At
the outset I would like to thank High Representative
Mr. Valentin Inzko for his presentation of the fourtyseventh report (S/2015/300, annex) on the situation
in my country. We appreciate the activities he has
undertaken in his role under the General Framework
Agreement for Peace in Bosnia and Herzegovina.
Positive political developments have taken place
since the last report of the High Representative
(S/2014/314, annex). A six-month period of intensive
and sometimes painful post-election negotiations
has come to an end in my country. All government
institutions in Bosnia and Herzegovina are formed
and ready to address a number of important issues
for the present and future of the country. First of all,
the much needed reforms to establish a framework for
socioeconomic measures aimed at realizing a better
and more prosperous life in Bosnia and Herzegovina
cannot wait any more.
After seven years, the strong European Union
perspective is again occupying a central place in the

S/PV.7440

political agenda of Bosnia and Herzegovina. The joint
declaration on commitment — adopted by the Presidency
on 29 January, signed by the leaders of the 14 parties
represented in Parliament and fully endorsed by the
Parliamentary Assembly on 23 February — reaffirmed
the membership of the European Union as a strategic
goal of Bosnia and Herzegovina.
Following this, on 21 April the Council of the
European Union adopted a decision concluding the
Stabilization and Association Agreement with Bosnia
and Herzegovina. It is expected that the Agreement will
enter into force on 1 June. In this historic decision, the
Council of the European Union noted
“that having regard to the commitments thus
undertaken by Bosnia and Herzegovina, and in
accordance with its conclusions of 15 December
2014, the Council notes that the necessary
conditions contained therein have been met and
agrees to proceed with the conclusion and entry
into force of the Stabilisation and Association
Agreement with Bosnia and Herzegovina”.
It is our deep conviction that this new, modified
approach of the European Union towards Bosnia and
Herzegovina represents a unique opportunity to leave
behind for good a period of stagnation and immobility
thus showing the people of Bosnia and Herzegovina
that their leaders have understood their message and
call for changes.
Of course, we must be conscious that the task in
front of us is massive, that a number of vital areas need
serious restructuring and adaptation to the European
Union standards. The relevant Bosnia and Herzegovina
institutions are in the process of drawing the list of
priorities for the forthcoming period. Along with
internal reforms, Bosnia and Herzegovina is closely
focusing on enhanced cooperation within the region,
especially when it comes to infrastructure projects. As
has been proved many times over, the pull of European
Union integration is crucial to provide a positive
incentive for my country to advance its socioeconomic,
judicial and other necessary reforms and to resolve
the remaining obstacles on the path towards European
integration.
We are aware that our socioeconomic situation calls
for urgent reform measures. As many speakers today
have pointed out, youth employment and the creation
of new jobs are of critical importance to keeping
young professionals in Bosnia and Herzegovina and is

15-1384017/22

S/PV.7440

The situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina

one of the most urgent tasks for the newly appointed
authorities at all levels. The Compact for Growth and
Jobs in Bosnia and Herzegovina offers a comprehensive
set of measures to be undertaken in that regard.
We have witnessed lately a new dynamic in regional
cooperation in the Western Balkans region. It is a clear
sign of the improved relations among the countries and at
the same time the awareness that a number of issues are
of common interest and can be dealt with successfully
only if all interested countries are involved. It pertains
particularly to the big infrastructure projects related to
the communication, transport and energy sectors. This
course of action was confirmed and fine-tuned at the
meeting of the six Prime Ministers from the Western
Balkans in Brussels on 21 April. The announced
financial support of the European Union in this field
will be of crucial importance.
Our active participation in the activities of a number
of regional organizations, as well as the United Nations,
is by now well known. We are part of the peacekeeping
forces of the United Nations to name just one example.
Also, we are to take over as Chair of the Committee
of Ministers of the Council of Europe on 19 May for a
period of six months. In that regard, the meeting of the
Standing Committee of the Parliamentary Assembly of
the Council of Europe in Sarajevo in May is to be the
first political event of our six month tenure. We see this
as an exceptional opportunity to show that Bosnia and
Herzegovina has all the necessary capacities to chair
the Council of Europe and its 47 countries members.
The attack on the police station in Zvornik, which
took place on 27 April, serves as a reminder that the
threat of terrorism and violent extremism is of great
concern for our region, as it is for the rest of the
world. Although we believe that this was an isolated
case, it certainly calls for increased vigilance, better
coordination among law enforcement and security
agencies, and regional and international cooperation in
fighting terrorism. My country remains fully committed
and will continue to actively participate in the global
effort to counter terrorism and violent extremism, for
we believe that terrorism can be defeated only through
the international community’s coordinated action based
on a sustained and comprehensive approach involving
the active participation and collaboration of all States.
I would like to conclude by stating our conviction
that the glass is half full. In other words, I am optimistic
that today the synergy established between the
country’s internal political players and the international
18/22

12/05/2015

community, especially the European Union, will yield
tangible and positive results. Although it has taken a
long time, we now have a political process based on
dialogue suitable for fulfilling the promises made to the
citizens of Bosnia and Herzegovina, a country whose
landscapes are spectacular and whose cultural diversity
is rich, as Mr. Inzko rightly pointed out in his opening
remarks.
The President: I now give the floor to the Head of
the Delegation of the European Union.
Mr. Mayr-Harting: I have the honour to speak
on behalf of the European Union (EU) and its member
States. The candidate countries Turkey, the former
Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Montenegro and
Albania, as well as Ukraine and the Republic of
Moldova, align themselves with this statement.
I join other speakers in welcoming my good friend
High Representative Valentin Inzko back to the Security
Council and would like to reassure him of our continued
support. I also thank the Permanent Representative of
Bosnia and Herzegovina for her statement.
The European Union continues to closely follow
developments in Bosnia and Herzegovina. Stability
and progress in the country are both very important
to us. I have the pleasure to inform the Council that
the Stabilization and Association Agreement between
the European Union, its member States and Bosnia and
Herzegovina will enter into force on 1 June, following the
adoption in Sarajevo of the written commitment, which
sets out an ambitious framework for a comprehensive
reform agenda. We attach strategic importance to the
written commitment to reform and progress towards
EU membership, which has been adopted by Bosnia
and Herzegovina’s Presidency, signed by the leaders
of the country’s political parties and endorsed by the
Parliamentary Assembly. These positive developments
are crucial signs of Bosnia and Herzegovina’s strong
partnership with the European Union and evidence of
the country’s commitment to the EU path in the context
of the renewed EU approach outlined by the Council of
the European Union in December 2014.
Following the October 2014 general elections, the
process of forming State and entity parliaments and
Governments has now been concluded. Representatives
of the newly formed State and entity-level Governments
are now engaging with the European Union and
international partners, including with the international
financial institutions, towards the development and

15-13840

12/05/2015

The situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina

S/PV.7440

implementation of the initial reform agenda. This reform
agenda should be in line with the EU acquis and will
need to focus on Copenhagen criteria: socioeconomic
reforms, including rule of law and good governance,
and agreed functionality issues, including the EU
coordination mechanism. It should also embrace the
Compact for Jobs and Growth initiative, of which the
Council was informed in May 2014 (see S/PV.7176).

was attacked by an individual and a policeman was
killed, is an indicator of the persistent risks in the area
of public order and security and a reminder of the need
for continuous efforts in these areas. In addition, the
authorities of Bosnia and Herzegovina need to address
the root causes of the socioeconomic difficulties and
further improve the capacity of law enforcement
agencies.

Comprehensive efforts towards the implementation
of reforms by the leadership of Bosnia and Herzegovina
will benefit all citizens of the country, irrespective of
their ethnicity or religious affiliation. Meaningful
progress in the implementation of reforms will
strengthen stability and build strong foundations for
future development and prosperity. It will also play a
role in further progress on the EU integration path.

In relation to the foregoing, the EU is ready to keep
the EU-led peacekeeping force (EUFOR) Operation
Althea focused on capacity-building and training while
retaining the capability to contribute to the authorities’
deterrence capacity, if the situation so requires.
EUFOR Althea is also ready to play an executive
military role to support Bosnia and Herzegovina’s
efforts to maintain a safe and secure environment under
a United Nations mandate. Further, in the context of
the overall EU strategy for Bosnia and Herzegovina,
we look forward to continuing the discussions with the
international community in the appropriate forum on
the reconfiguration of the international presence and
call on the authorities in Bosnia and Herzegovina to
meet the outstanding objectives and conditions for the
closure of the Office of the High Representative.

Despite the foregoing important positive signs,
there is a long way to go in Bosnia and Herzegovina
before we can declare unreserved success. Deeply
rooted divisions remain and reconciliation is slow.
Socioeconomic challenges can be easily manipulated
for political purposes. There have been attempts to do
so. Divisive and separatist rhetoric remains a cause
for serious concern and is highly disruptive of the
reforms that Bosnia and Herzegovina has to implement.
Statements are made and initiatives are taken for shortterm political purposes. Misleading and harmful political
visions are offered to the public, often to consolidate
power and distract attention from deep socioeconomic
challenges and from the political responsibility for the
state of the economy. Such behaviour undermines trust
in the domestic political leadership and questions its
intentions and its commitment to the success of the
reform process in the country.
Since September 2011, the consolidated presence
of the European Union in Bosnia and Herzegovina has
been fully engaged in supporting the country, including
in all EU-related matters. The recently appointed
Special Representative of the European Union, who is
also our Head of Delegation in Sarajevo, Lars-Gunnar
Wigemark, has just arrived there, and will, like his
predecessors, continue to provide political guidance on
military issues with a local political dimension to the
EU Force Commander.
The European Union also continues to accompany
Bosnia and Herzegovina’s progress in the security field.
The overall security situation has remained calm and
stable, yet stability has not been entrenched. The recent
dramatic incident in Zvornik, where a police station

The EU reiterates its unequivocal commitment
to the territorial integrity of Bosnia and Herzegovina
as a sovereign and united country as well as to
Bosnia and Herzegovina’s European Union prospects.
The European Union will continue to provide the
necessary support and assistance for promoting the
country’s stability, reforms, development and European
integration process.
A new energy and spirit are evident. They must be
sustained and further strengthened to take on the deeprooted divisions and challenges that remain, including
the need for significant improvement of the efficiency
and functionality of the country’s institutions in
general, to ensure the sustainability and continuity of
democratic reforms that have been in place since 1995,
and to develop capacities and capabilities required in
the context of EU accession, particularly as regards
coordination among various levels of Government.
Therefore, I would like to take this opportunity
to invite the Security Council to urge the leadership
of Bosnia and Herzegovina to respond to its citizens’
demands, maintain positive momentum by delivering on
its commitments to reforms, including those relating to
the implementation of the Stabilization and Association
Agreement, to look beyond persistent political divisions

15-1384019/22

S/PV.7440

The situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina

and to finally and decisively move the country forward
on its reform agenda towards stability and prosperity
for all its citizens as it advances on the path to the
European Union.
The people of Bosnia and Herzegovina deserve
progress, prosperity and prospects for a better future.
The European Union stands ready to help and assist
the country to fulfil this vision and encourages all the
stakeholders in the country and the region to provide
their share of support. Bosnia and Herzegovina’s
tangible progress on the comprehensive reform path is
in the best interest of the country, the region and the
European Union itself.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Croatia.
Mr. Drobnjak (Croatia): At the outset, I join other
speakers in welcoming High Representative Valentin
Inzko and expressing our appreciation for his briefing
and the report (S/2015/300, annex), as well as for the
personal efforts he has tirelessly invested in carrying
out his mandate.
Croatia aligns itself with the statement delivered on
behalf of the European Union, and I will add several
remarks in my national capacity.
For Croatia, Bosnia and Herzegovina is not
only a neighbouring country with which we share a
1,000-kilometre long border; it is a country with which
we nourish friendly partnership relations and which we
consider our ally. The fact that the Croatian President,
Ms. Kolinda Grabar-Kitarović, chose Bosnia’s capital
Sarajevo for her first foreign bilateral visit since taking
office in February this year tellingly confirms the
importance Croatia assigns to its relations with Bosnia
and Herzegovina.
Croatia strongly supports the sovereignty and
territorial integrity of Bosnia and Herzegovina. Its
stability and prosperity are of paramount importance to
us. We will continue to advocate for sustained attention
from the international community to Bosnia and
Herzegovina, with a goal of achieving concrete progress
in the country’s process of European integration.
Ensuring genuine equality between its three
constituent peoples is an important and necessary
element for achieving the stability and functionality
of Bosnia and Herzegovina. Six months after the
elections, all authorities have finally been established
in Bosnia and Herzegovina. We note with satisfaction

20/22

12/05/2015

that Croats — the numerically smallest of the three
constituent peoples in the country — finally have
a legitimate member of the Presidency and are
represented at all levels of the Government in an equal
and legitimate manner.
The last thing Bosnia and Herzegovina needs
is secessionist and inflammatory rhetoric. For that
reason, we condemn recent statements and actions
by the Republika Srpska, such as the adoption of
the declaration on free and independent Republika
Srpska, as well as the controversial interpretation
of what happened in Srebrenica 20 years ago. Such
acts are completely unacceptable. On the other hand,
Mr. Milorad Dodik’s visit to Srebrenica in April could
be an encouraging harbinger in the much-needed
reconciliation process.
The twentieth anniversary of the genocide in
Srebrenica this July will be another opportunity for
all of us to honour the memory of the worst atrocity
in Europe since the end of the Second World War.
What happened in Srebrenica constitutes genocide,
as established by the International Tribunal for the
Former Yugoslavia. Attempts to deny it are simply
unacceptable.
We strongly believe that the steady and forwardlooking European integration process is the most
efficient and constructive way to reach the internal
consolidation of Bosnia and Herzegovina. Croatia
firmly supports the new European Union (EU) approach
towards Bosnia and Herzegovina. It has put the country
back on the EU agenda and provided it with a real
opportunity to achieve progress through comprehensive
and feasible reforms. We fully support the Presidency
of Bosnia and Herzegovina’s engagement on this
new EU initiative in the hope that it will continue to
initiate much-needed political and economic reforms.
In order to succeed, these reforms will require, besides
improved administrative capacities and lots of hard
work, consensus from all political parties.
The Croatian Minister for Foreign Affairs,
Mrs. Vesna Pusić, visited Sarajevo last month and
afterwards organized a ministerial working breakfast
on the margins of the EU Foreign Affairs Council
on 20 April in Luxembourg. It was an excellent
opportunity to exchange views on the preparation of
the initial reform agenda and reaffirm once again the
EU perspective on Bosnia and Herzegovina.

15-13840

12/05/2015

The situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina

Croatia welcomes the entry into force of the
Stabilization and Association Agreement between the
EU and Bosnia and Herzegovina on 1 June. This is its
first contractual relationship with the EU, providing
a structured blueprint for far-reaching political,
economic and social reforms. As far as Bosnia and
Herzegovina’s advancement to NATO is concerned,
we urge the newly elected political leaders to intensify
efforts on the implementation of the six parties’ political
agreement on the issue of military property and to work
constructively to implement the agreement in order to
start the first membership action plan cycle as soon as
possible.
We condemn the recent terrorist attack on the
police station in Zvornik and express condolences
to the family of the police officer who was killed in
the attack. We expect the competent authorities and
institutions in Bosnia and Herzegovina at all levels to
cooperate closely in order to prevent such incidents
in the future. Bearing this in mind, the EU military
mission in Bosnia and Herzegovina, with an executive
mandate, remains of vital importance.
We regret that the additional protocol to the EU
Stabilization and Association Agreement with Bosnia
and Herzegovina has not yet been concluded. It is
long overdue. It is therefore crucial that Bosnia and
Herzegovina re-engage in constructive discussions with
the EU in order to approve the Agreement’s technical
adaptation as a matter of urgency. We also expect that
Bosnia and Herzegovina will correct its present conduct
regarding some customs-control related issues on parts
of its border with Croatia.
In conclusion, I echo my opening remarks by
stressing that Croatia fully supports Bosnia and
Herzegovina and extends to it a hand of true friendship
and partnership. Bosnia and Herzegovina deserves a
secure and prosperous future and Croatia will spare no
effort in providing its help along this challenging road.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Serbia.
Mr. Milanović (Serbia): I would like to thank
High Representative Inzko for his report (S/2015/300,
annex) and his statement made today. As a next-door
neighbour, Serbia has a vital interest in the stability
and prosperity of Bosnia and Herzegovina. In this
context, we are firmly committed to the sovereignty
and territorial integrity of the country as provided for
by the Dayton Agreement.

S/PV.7440

Bosnia and Herzegovina is one of Serbia’s key
partners in the region and my country is resolved to
continue promoting good-neighbourly relations with
all political structures and in all areas and at all levels
of Government in Bosnia and Herzegovina. Serbia
welcomes and fully supports the new Government
of Bosnia and Herzegovina on its path to European
integration, as well as the reforms it intends to introduce.
My country is very concerned at the killing of one
and the wounding of two other officers of the Ministry
of the Interior of the Republika Srpska at Zvornik on
27 April. We condemn these heinous acts of terrorism
in the strongest terms and expect the perpetrators to be
prosecuted to the fullest extent of the law.
Terrorism and radicalism in general, and the
departure of men and women from our part of the world
to fight in foreign wars, in particular, do not contribute
to the peaceful and prosperous life of our citizens. Both
Serbia and Bosnia and Herzegovina are members of the
global coalition to fight terrorism and have amended
national laws to incriminate foreign terrorist fighters.
Notwithstanding the fact that many of the fighters
fight far from home, the recent terror attack is stark
and sad evidence that our countries will not be spared
from these monstrous practices, for terrorism has no
knowledge of, or will to respect, national borders.
This modern scourge must be confronted, and Serbia
is ready to cooperate with Bosnia and Herzegovina in
fighting terrorism, extremism and organized crime in
all their forms in the belief that regional cooperation
is the mainstay of stability and prosperity of the entire
region.
Serbia and Bosnia and Herzegovina maintain a
very high level of political dialogue. This is evinced,
among other things, by the visit of Serbia’s Prime
Minister Aleksandar Vučić to Sarajevo last year, his
first international visit upon taking office. He will visit
Sarajevo again tomorrow. This April, Serbia’s Foreign
Minister Ivica Dačić met Bosnia and Herzegovina’s
Foreign Minister Igor Crnadak in Belgrade, while
Foreign Minister Dačić travelled to Sarajevo on 29 April
in his capacity as Chairperson of the Organization for
Security and Cooperation in Europe. Furthermore, an
initiative to hold a joint session of the Government of
the Republic of Serbia and the Council of Ministers of
Bosnia and Herzegovina has been launched.
Serbia and Bosnia and Herzegovina are agreed
that economic cooperation, especially in the field of
transport, infrastructrue and energy, is of paramount

15-1384021/22

S/PV.7440

The situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina

importance to promoting good bilateral and regional
relations. That is particularly significant in the context
of recovery that is taking place in the two countries
in the wake of last year’s immense flooding, and
makes it incumbent upon them to address themselves
to rebuilding of infrastructure, without which no
successful country-to-country cooperation would be
possible, and which, just as importantly, links ordinary
people as they go about their everyday lives.
Serbia is a staunch supporter of the European
integration of Bosnia and Herzegovina and welcomes
the conclusion of the Stabilization and Association
Agreement with the European Union. That is good
news not only for Bosnia and Herzegovina, but for the
region as a whole. We believe that European integration
is the most efficient way to bring overall progress and
economic development to all countries of the region. We
are therefore ready to promote cooperation in that area,
exchange experiences and coordinate our activities. In
that context, of particular importance is the work of
the commission for the implementation of the action
plan of the bilateral agreement on cooperation in the
area of European integration. Also, we are committed
to continuing our cooperation with Bosnia and
Herzegovina within the framework of the programme
of cross-border cooperation of the Instrument for
Pre-Accession Assistance.
At the beginning of this year, my country assumed
the chairmanship of the Organization for Security and
Cooperation in Europe. Bosnia and Herzegovina will
soon preside over the Council of Europe. That will
provide various possibilities to embark upon a whole
range of joint activities and projects that will contribute
to development, stability and cooperation in the region.
In addition to the fight against terrorism, which
currently preoccupies us all, we intend, in that context,
to include in our agenda the question of young people.

22/22

12/05/2015

The young people of our countries are our greatest asset
in the long run and the most important building block
as they strive to promote democracy and tolerance and
bring about much-needed stability and prosperity.
Serbia cooperates with Bosnia and Herzegovina
on a partnership basis, with understanding and respect
for mutual interests and differences. In our efforts to
promote mutual relations, we are ready to work hard
to find timely and efficient solutions to all outstanding
issues. To that end, let me point out the concrete
contribution that was made recently by my country to
the efforts of the Offices of the War Crimes Prosecutors
of the two countries to investigate and punish all the
perpetrators of war crimes in the territory of Bosnia
and Herzegovina. Through constructive cooperation
and partnership, we must continue to work together
to build mutual respect and understanding, thereby
contributing to the prosperity of our citizens. We
stress that overcoming unease with some past legacies
and the promotion of regional cooperation and goodneighbourliness are what we are after.
Reconciliation and stability in Bosnia and
Herzegovina are in our mutual interest for the future of
new generations. Illustrative of that — and as mentioned
in the report before us — was the visit by the President
of Republika Srpska, Mr. Milorad Dodik, on 16 April
to the Potocari Memorial Centre and the wreath he laid
in honour of the victims.
In conclusion, let me point out that, even though
George Santayana’s poignant maxim that those who
cannot remember the past are condemned to repeat it is
indeed very true, we must not allow the legacies of the
past to cause us to stumble and go astray on our road to
a common European future.
The meeting rose at 12.05 p.m.

15-13840
