S/PV.7234

United Nations

asdf

Security Council

Provisional

Sixty-ninth year

7234th meeting

Tuesday, 5 August 2014, 5.20 p.m.
New York

President:

Sir Mark Lyall Grant . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

(United Kingdom of Great Britain
and Northern Ireland)

Members:

Argentina . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Australia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Chad . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Chile . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Jordan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Lithuania . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Luxembourg . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Nigeria . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Republic of Korea . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Rwanda . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mrs. Perceval
Mr. Quinlan
Mr. Gombo
Mr. Barros Melet
Mr. Liu Jieyi
Mrs. Le Fraper du Hellen
Mr. Naber
Ms. Murmokaitė
Ms. Lucas
Mr. Sarki
Mr. Oh Joon
Mr. Churkin
Mr. Nduhungirehe
Mrs. DiCarlo

Agenda
Letter dated 13 April 2014 from the Permanent Representative of the Russian
Federation to the United Nations addressed to the President of the Security Council
(S/2014/264)

14-49657 (E)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the
delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506.
Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official Document System of the
United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

*1449657*

S/PV.7234

Russian Federation

The meeting was called to order at 5.20 p.m.
Expression of thanks to the outgoing President
The President: As this is the first public meeting
of the Security Council for the month of August
2014, I should like to take this opportunity to pay
tribute, on behalf of the Council, to His Excellency
Mr. Eugène-Richard Gasana, Permanent Representative
of Rwanda, for his service as President of the Council
during the month of July. I am sure that I speak for
all members of the Council in expressing deep
appreciation to Ambassador Gasana and his team for
the great diplomatic skill with which they conducted
the Council’s business last month.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Letter dated 13 April 2014 from the Permanent
Representative of the Russian Federation to the
United Nations addressed to the President of the
Security Council (S/2014/264)
The President: In accordance with rule 37 of the
Council’s provisional rules of procedure, I invite the
representative of Ukraine to participate in this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite Mr. John Ging,
Director of the Coordination and Response Division
of the United Nations Office for the Coordination of
Humanitarian Affairs, to participate in this meeting.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I give the floor to Mr. Ging.
Mr. Ging: I thank you, Mr. President, for this
opportunity to brief the Security Council on the
humanitarian situation in Ukraine on behalf of UnderSecretary-General and Emergency Relief Coordinator
Valerie Amos.
Ongoing efforts to find a political solution to the
crisis in Ukraine have borne little fruit. Therefore,
insecurity and violence prevail in conflict areas,
resulting in a steadily worsening humanitarian
situation, which will continue to deteriorate for as long
as violence persists.
An estimated 3.9 million people live in areas
directly affected by violence. Those remaining in

2/16

05/08/2014

the conflict zone face imminent security threats
from the fighting, which is increasingly occurring in
more-densely populated urban areas. Fighting has
caused significant damage to infrastructure, affecting
the power and water supply and access to basic
services. In Donetsk and Luhansk, home to a total of
1.5 million people, the water supply is reduced to a few
hours per day. Health supplies are running low and an
estimated 70 per cent of health personnel have fled
the area, leaving access to medical care significantly
reduced. Damage to housing has so far affected 1,600
families. Supply routes are increasingly disrupted by
conflict, and coping mechanisms among the affected
populations are inevitably deteriorating.
The protection of civilians is a key concern. As
conflict intensifies, casualties are on the rise. The
human rights monitoring mission of the Office of the
United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights
and the World Health Organization (WHO) report that
at least 1,367 people, both civilians and combatants,
have been killed and 4,087 people have been wounded
by the fighting in eastern Ukraine since mid-April.
Since the latest humanitarian briefing to the
Security Council by Under Secretary General Amos,
on 16 June, the number of internally displaced persons
(IDPs) has increased significantly. An additional 58,000
people have fled their homes since the start of July.
Reportedly, more than 1,000 people are leaving the
conflict zone every day. Today there are 117,910 people
registered as internally displaced throughout Ukraine,
87 per cent of whom are from the east of the country.
Most have left with few belongings and are in need of
shelter, food and other essential assistance. That places
pressure on host communities in neighbouring regions.
At the same time, many people from areas affected
by fighting in the Donetsk and Luhansk regions are
fleeing to the Russian Federation. Since the start of
the year, 168,677 Ukrainians have registered as having
crossed into the Russian Federation, with nearly 60,000
having applied for refugee status and a further 115,952
having applied for other forms of legal stay.
However, that is not the full picture, as many
Ukrainians who have fled their homes do not register
with Ukrainian authorities or officially apply for
assistance. The Russian Federation is reporting that
740,000 people have crossed their borders since the
start of the year, availing themselves of the special
270-day visa programme for Ukrainians. UNHCR has
also reported that figure.
14-49657

05/08/2014

Russian Federation

The majority of the humanitarian response to date
has been delivered through local and communitybased organizations. The local authorities have been
successful in restoring water and power to areas where
fighting has subsided. However, as prolonged fighting
starts to exhaust the capacity of the local authorities to
respond, United Nations partners are scaling up their
support to those response efforts.
Over the last weeks, humanitarian organizations
have been working with a broad range of partners,
including national and local authorities, civil society
organizations and community-based organizations,
to undertake emergency preparedness measures and
address the most urgent needs of affected people.
The Office of the United Nations High Commissioner
for Refugees is reaching hosting areas for internally
displaced persons and areas to which people are able to
return with food, hygiene kits and essential household
items. UNICEF is working with national partners in
the provision of health services to displaced persons.
A United Nations-led response plan, with detailed
planning and planned interventions sector by sector,
will be published this week.
The Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian
Affairs (OCHA) has deployed a humanitarian advisory
team to Ukraine to assess the needs and support the
coordination of the response. Two senior missions
from OCHA headquarters have been deployed in
recent weeks to further reinforce and strengthen the
response capacity. Our priority remains to support the
Government-led humanitarian response effort and to
ensure that we are ready to complement that response
effort with direct support to people as the need arises.
Humanitarian corridors from badly affected
areas to areas under Government control are open for
several hours each day, but those are regularly blocked
by combatants, and the evacuation of people through
those channels is regularly impeded. We therefore call
upon all sides to the conflict to enable the free and safe
movement of the population, while at the same time
ensuring full access by humanitarian organizations to
the affected population remaining behind.
We call on the Ukrainian Government to address
some key challenges in implementing relief activities.
A unified registration system for IDPs is crucial to
enabling a comprehensive analysis and understanding of
the existing needs. Humanitarian assistance should also
be exempted from tax, and the signing and ratification

S/PV.7234

of the United Nations-Government customs agreement
facilitating the entry of humanitarian workers and the
import of humanitarian goods should be expedited.
Finally, we request the Ukrainian Government to
adopt a temporary exemption to facilitate the import
of medical supplies certified by the World Health
Organization, which are required in response to the
immediate health needs of the affected population.
In conclusion, the humanitarian situation is
deteriorating, and the worrying increase in violence
in urban areas puts a greater number of people at risk.
Until the violence has ended we will continue to see
an increase in the numbers of people being killed and
a deterioration of the overall humanitarian situation.
Immediate action is therefore required to prevent that.
The President: I thank Mr. Ging for his briefing.
I shall now give the floor to the members of the
Security Council.
I would like to recall for the Council the provisions
of note of the President of the Security Council
contained in document S/2010/507, which encourages
both members and non-members of the Council to
deliver their statements in five minutes or less. As
communicated to Council members in advance of the
United Kingdom presidency, it is our intention to use
the flashing light on the collar and at the base of the
speaker’s microphone to indicate when five minutes
have elapsed. I shall strongly encourage both members
and non-members of the Council to conclude their
remarks promptly once five minutes have elapsed.
Mr. Churkin (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We thank the Director of the Coordination and
Response Division of the Office for the Coordination
of Humanitarian Affairs (OCHA), Mr. John Ging, for
his briefing on the situation in eastern Ukraine. We
think that OCHA and other humanitarian agencies
should regularly inform the Security Council of the
humanitarian situation in the region and provide
objective statistics on the situation of civilians,
including data on those wounded or killed, as well as
on the destruction of civilian infrastructure.
On a human scale, the situation in the east,
particularly in Donetsk and Luhansk, is disastrous.
Today there is a definite need to speak about a true war.
The International Committee of the Red Cross (ICRC)
has officially recognized that there is an internal armed
conflict in the east of Ukraine.

14-496573/16

S/PV.7234

Russian Federation

In spite of international agreements, including
the 17 April Geneva agreement and the 2 July Berlin
agreement, both of which were signed onto by the
Ukrainian Government, Kyiv continues to step up its
military operations, taking hundreds and thousands
of lives with it. According to information we have
received, the punitive militia are playing a leading role.
They are subordinate to no armed forces in Ukraine.
They are carrying the orders of certain leaders of the
Security Council of the country and are financed by
local oligarchs.
Overflights of cities have become a daily reality.
Artillery, tanks and Grad rockets are used. Locals are
continuously reporting that phosphorous bombs and
cluster bombs are being used. There is indiscriminate
shelling of housing blocks and critical civilian
infrastructure. In many small towns, about 80 per cent
of the houses have been destroyed. According to most
conservative estimates, more than 600 buildings have
been reduced to rubble. Today there was a rocket attack
in Shakhtyorsk. On 2 August, Ukrainian artillery
shelled the city of Pervamaisk, where homes, two
electrical power plants and hospitals were destroyed.
As a result of shelling by the Ukrainian armed
forces, shells have been falling into Russia. There
have been about 20 such incidents. On 3 August, a
Ukrainian army mine exploded at the Gukovo crossing,
Rostov oblast, where monitors from the Organization
for Security and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE) were
working.
According to the most conservative estimates by
international humanitarian agencies, more than 1,367
people have been killed and thousands have been
wounded, including children. Those are worrisome
numbers. In one day alone, 40 people were killed in
the city of Golov. More than 4 million people live
in the areas where military operations are taking
place. Of them, more than 200,000 have been left
without drinking water. There is a critical health and
epidemiological situation in Luhansk. Houses are
without electricity and, because of shelling, there is no
clean water. Telephone communications are impaired
and there are no garbage removal services. Ukrainians
have begun to leave the country en masse.
Almost 800,000 Ukrainians have come to Russia
since the beginning of the crisis. Some — about 170,000
of them — have come to Russian migration services to
legalize their situation. Centres have been opened for

4/16

05/08/2014

refugees. Our country stands ready to undertake that
great burden. We do not need material assistance from
outside. We stand ready to provide human assistance to
Ukrainians on our own.
The most dramatic situation in the east of Ukraine
is on the health front. The majority of doctors have been
evacuated. It must be understood that in the areas where
military clashes are taking place the most vulnerable
have been left behind, and they have no way of leaving.
It seems that the Kyiv authorities are not interested
at all. We have made multiple appeals to them to create
humanitarian corridors to evacuate children and the
vulnerable, including orphans. We have also appealed
to them to allow humanitarian assistance from Russia
to be let in. But Kyiv has rejected all of those proposals.
Russia calls upon the international community to
take emergency measures to improve the humanitarian
situation in the east of Ukraine. Because of that,
on 4 August, Russian Minister for Foreign Affairs,
Mr. Sergey Lavrov, once again sent an official appeal
to humanitarian agencies associated with the United
Nations, the OSCE, the Council of Europe and the
ICRC to create a humanitarian mission. We would like
to send a convoy with Russian humanitarian assistance
under the aegis and with the support of the ICRC to
Donetsk and Luhansk and other areas of Ukraine
where internally displaced persons from the east are
concentrated.
We stand ready to act with full transparency. We
will allow the International Committee of the Red
Cross monitor the convoys, their transport routes and
the distribution of aid. We think that, first and foremost,
there is a need to provide food, medicine and medical
equipment, as well as water purification systems and
generators.
There are many cases in which providing assistance
to civilians suffering from an armed conflict is very
difficult. That applies, for example, to the situations in
the areas controlled by terrorist organizations in South
Sudan, Iraq and Syria. The situation in eastern Ukraine
demands that an end be put to the political posturing
and that international humanitarian principles be
genuinely respected.
Finally, Kyiv’s approach of violently repressing the
eastern regions will have very difficult consequences
for the entire Ukrainian population, and that is simply
regrettable.

14-49657

05/08/2014

Russian Federation

Mr. Barros Melet (Chile) (spoke in Spanish): At the
outset, we thank the Director of the Coordination and
Response Division of the Office for the Coordination of
Humanitarian Affairs (OCHA) for his briefing on the
humanitarian situation in Ukraine.
We regret the worsening humanitarian situation
in eastern Ukraine as a result of the escalation in the
fighting, particularly in the Donetsk and Luhansk
regions. Chile is very concerned about the security
of those who are trapped in the conflict zone and the
increase in deliberate attacks on civilian facilities,
including basic infrastructure such as electricity and
water, as well as housing and public buildings. It is
worrying that access to drinking water in those zones
has decreased, with an impact on the population.
The worsening situation is also reflected in the
increase in the numbers of internally displaced persons
and people who who have crossed borders. We are
particularly concerned that this group of individuals
are mainly made up of women, boys and girls. We
reiterate that any response strategy must address the
special needs of girls and adolescents, as they are
doubly vulnerable.
In that regard, we support the recommendations
made by the United Nations in connection with the need
for the Ukrainian Government to establish a unified
and centralized registration system to document the
movement of internally displaced persons and to assess
in the best way possible how to meet their needs.
We reiterate that there is also a need for the United
Nations to be present on the ground in support of
national authorities. In that connection, we welcome
the development by OCHA and other members of the
humanitarian community of a preliminary response
plan that will lay the foundations for the future
humanitarian response in Ukraine. We hope that the
donor community will support that appeal.
In conclusion, we urge the parties to find a peaceful
solution to the crisis through direct political dialogue, to
act with moderation and refrain from taking unilateral
measures, which could increase the tension, and to
participate in international mediation efforts.
We would like to reiterate our appreciation for the
ongoing efforts of the Secretary-General and the United
Nations, through its various agencies to put an end to the
situation being experienced by Ukraine. We also trust
that the various independent international mechanisms

S/PV.7234

will be able to continue to contribute towards the search
for a solution to the crisis.
Mr. Liu Jieyi (China) (spoke in Chinese): I wish to
thank Mr. Ging of the Office for the Coordination of
Humanitarian Affairs for his briefing.
Recently, the armed conflict in eastern Ukraine
has continued to escalate, causing increasing civilian
casualties and a dire humanitarian situation, which
continues to deteriorate. China is deeply worried about
the situation. We hope that the international community
will play a constructive role in easing the humanitarian
situation in eastern Ukraine and that United Nations
humanitarian agencies will strictly abide by the
principle of neutrality and objectivity.
We now face the urgent task of engaging in political
consultations with a view to achieving a ceasefire
as soon as possible and engaging in comprehensive
dialogue, which is the only way out of the Ukrainian
crisis. The parties concerned should remain calm and
maintain restraint, respect the Charter of the United
Nations, work on the basis of the various initiatives,
including the Geneva agreement, step up dialogue and
consultation, meet each other half way, respect the role
of current dialogue and liaison mechanisms and seek a
comprehensive settlement through peaceful means.
A political settlement to the Ukrainian crisis should
include the legitimate claims of various areas and
ethnic groups and realize a balance of interests. The
international community should do more to promote
peace and dialogue and should create favourable
conditions for the parties concerned to maintain
dialogue and engagement and make a constructive
effort to achieve political progress in the Ukrainian
crisis.
China supports all efforts aimed at easing the
tension, resolving the crisis and achieving the proposed
political settlement, and will continue to play a
constructive role.
Mrs. Le Fraper du Hellen (France) (spoke in
French): I would like to thank Mr. John Ging from the
Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs
for his briefing. He has told us that the humanitarian
situation is worsening and he has described how the
Ukrainian authorities are dealing with that situation
with the support of the international community.
The number of internally displaced persons is
increasing, as pointed out by the Office of the United

14-496575/16

S/PV.7234

Russian Federation

Nations High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR).
Why is that the case? It is because people are fleeing
the fighting precipitated by the separatists, who have
refused to accept the hand extended by President
Poroshenko. It is because people are fleeing separatist
attacks in the areas they control — attacks that are
becoming deadlier every day.
The report of the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Human Rights that the Security
Council will consider in the near future is very eloquent
in that regard. In fact, no report mentions instances of
people fleeing cities in which Ukrainian armed forces
have restored public order and the rule of law. Wherever
Kyiv has re-established its authority, public services
and basic services have been restored to the population.
According to statements by UNHCR, the return of the
internally displaced persons to areas now controlled
by the Government serves to clearly indicate that the
separatists were the main cause of the displacement.
The worsening humanitarian situation is also a
result of the presence of armed combatants coming from
outside of Ukraine. The question of external support
with regard to recruitment, the provision of equipment
and training is increasingly urgent and requires the
attention of the international community. Those who
arm the criminals who are terrorizing the population are
responsible for the worsening humanitarian situation.
All those events demonstrate the pressing need
for international cooperation in order to stabilize the
situation in Ukraine and ensure its sovereignty and
territorial integrity. We call for a sincere commitment by
the Russian Federation, which has so far been lacking.
Despite the number of appeals made to President Putin,
we regret the fact that the Russian Federation has not
put pressure on the separatists in order to bring them
to the negotiating table and has not taken the expected
concrete measures in order to ensure control of the
Russian/Ukrainian border.
We are also extremely vigilant with regard to any
direct military support that the Russian Federation
could give to the separatists in the fighting. In that
context, new measures against the Russian Federation
were taken by the European Union, but also by a
number of its partners — including the United States
and, later, Japan and Switzerland. That step shows that
there is unanimity in the international community in
condemning the lack of coordination by the Russian
Federation. The message is clear: the fleeing must end.

6/16

05/08/2014

The Russian Federation can choose to de-escalate the
situation.
The tightening of sanctions has only one goal, that
is, to facilitate the emergence of a political solution. Our
priority continues to be, first of all, to put an end to the
escalation and to establish a lasting ceasefire among all
parties. We call upon the Russian Federation to involve
itself in a constructive way in that endeavour and to use
its influence with the armed groups to convince them to
put down their arms and engage in dialogue.
Mrs. DiCarlo (United States of America): I thank
Mr. Ging for his briefing.
As a result of the ongoing violence in eastern
Ukraine, thousands of Ukrainians have had to flee
their homes. Many have been subjected to harassment,
arbitrary detention and killing at the hands of Russiansupported separatists. The general environment of
insecurity and instability has contributed to a growing
number of internally displaced persons (IDPs) inside
Ukraine and in those seeking refuge outside of Ukraine.
To address the serious situation, the Government
and the people of Ukraine have undertaken important
steps to provide humanitarian assistance to internally
displaced persons throughout the country. We commend
the quick response of the Ukrainian Government in
the areas recently liberated from separatists’ control.
Electricity and water services are coming back on,
pensions are being paid again and rebuilding has
already begun.
For those who have not yet been able to return
home, a rapid, coordinated effort by Ukraine and the
international humanitarian community is essential to
identify and respond to the urgent needs of the most
vulnerable. To that end, we encourage Ukraine to
coordinate quickly a comprehensive IDP registration
system, ensure the harmonization of assistance efforts
and assist in disseminating information on registration
procedures and services.
Doing so will allow for the targeted delivery of
assistance, to which international donors can more
effectively respond. It will also pave the way for a
calibrated response to the unique needs of IDPs. We
commend the United Nations for mobilizing so quickly
to support the Government of Ukraine’s efforts.
Regarding Russia’s call for a humanitarian
mission in Ukraine, United Nations agencies and
non-governmental organizations are already on

14-49657

05/08/2014

Russian Federation

the ground carrying out assessment missions and
providing assistance to vulnerable, conflict-affected
persons, particularly those in liberated areas. Those
organizations are standing by and are ready to provide
more assistance to conflict areas if permitted greater
access and security guarantees by Russia-backed
separatists.
When addressing the humanitarian situation, we
cannot lose sight of one underlying fact: Russia can
stop all of this. The surest way to end the violence is
for Russia to stop the flow of fighters, weapons and
money from Russia into eastern Ukraine. Russia has
the ability to get the separatists it supports to lay down
their arms, sit at the negotiating table and work to
implement President Poroshenko’s peace plan. Russia
must also respect Ukraine’s sovereignty and territorial
integrity and end its occupation of Crimea.
Yet instead of positive steps, Russia has nearly
doubled the number of its battalions near the Ukrainian
border. Equally troubling is Russia’s plan to conduct a
large military exercise near the Ukrainian border, which
will only serve to escalate tensions. We again demand
that Russia halt any and all destabilizing actions.
We understand that Russia has expressed its
concern over the plight of displaced persons and
refugees. Therefore, we call on Russia to allow an
independent assessment of humanitarian needs within
Russia and along the Ukrainian border so that the
international community can better understand the
scale of the issue and so that assistance can be made
available. Otherwise, there is no way to verify the scale
of the outflow to Russia.
I want to note that nearly a month has passed
since the Council agreed to support in every way a
full, thorough and independent investigation into the
downing of Malaysia Airlines Flight 17. We commend
the Government of Ukraine for its cooperation with the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe,
the International Civil Aviation Organization, the
Netherlands, Australia and Malaysia in coordinating
the investigation and allowing Dutch, Australian and
Malaysian police to secure the crash site. We also hold
all sides accountable for the commitment they made on
31 July to protect the integrity of the site and secure
safe access for international investigators. Bodies
remain unaccounted for and there are personal effects
that still need to be retrieved.

S/PV.7234

Finally, we appreciate the ability of the Secretariat
to arrange emergency briefings on short notice. There
are times when such urgency is merited. We question
whether the situation we are discussing today meets the
standard of urgency, especially as we will be discussing
the overall situation in Ukraine on Friday.
Ms. Murmokaitė (Lithuania): I thank Mr. John
Ging, Director of the Coordination and Response
Division of the United Nations Office for the
Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs, for his briefing.
Perhaps no other crisis has given rise to as many
meetings this year as the situation in Ukraine. The
number has, if I am correct, surpassed 20 and counting.
Reports on the situation on the ground provided by the
monitoring mission of the Organization for Security
and Cooperation in Europe and by the Office of
the United Nations High Commissioner for Human
Rights and other institutions have been essential in
understanding the real situation on the ground. Earlier
today, my delegation requested a briefing on the fourth
report of the United Nations High Commissioner for
Human Rights later this week.
As the fourth report — which, as previous speakers
have mentioned, we will have another occasion to discuss
very soon — makes clear, the rule of law has collapsed
in the areas controlled by the so-called Donetsk People’s
Republic and Luhansk People’s Republic and has been
replaced by the rule of lawlessness.
Illegal armed groups are increasingly well
equipped, with heavy weaponry, tanks and armoured
vehicles capable of inflicting major damage and losses
to the Ukrainian troops.
Abductions and detentions of civilians, torture
and ill-treatment continue in the parts controlled
by pro-Russian militant separatist groups. Local
administration buildings are still occupied, illegal
parallel institutions are being put into place, and
separatist leaders announce summary executions to
maintain order in their ranks. Fighters take selfies with
the remains of killed Ukrainian soldiers. Last Friday, the
self-proclaimed defence minister, Igor Girkin, declared
a state of siege and the introduction of martial law in
Donetsk. Warnings were issued that all troublemakers
would be sent directly to courts martial.
Pro-Russian rebels in eastern Ukraine have
threatened medical staff, stolen and destroyed medical
equipment and hospital furniture, compromised the

14-496577/16

S/PV.7234

Russian Federation

ability of civilian patients to receive treatment and
expropriated ambulances and used them to transport
active fighters, as documented by non-governmental
organizations. Attacks on hospitals with explosive
weapons have also been reported. Such acts are strictly
prohibited under international humanitarian law, which
provides for special protections to medical units and
personnel and to the wounded and sick.
In Crimea, in contravention of General Assembly
resolution 68/262, the laws and regulations of the
Russian Federation are being applied, causing
confusion and jeopardizing the rights of all those who
are reluctant to take Russian citizenship. Harassment of
and discrimination against the indigenous population of
the Crimean Tatars and religious and other minorities
continue to take place.
No wonder the humanitarian situation is
deteriorating in areas under the illegal rule of armed
separatist groups. According to figures recently
released by the United Nations High Commissioner
for Refugees, some 117,000 people are displaced inside
Ukraine and, as of 1 August, an estimated 168,000
people had left the country for Russia. In just the past
seven days, more than 6,000 people have been forced
from their homes. Deliberate targeting by armed
groups of critical utilities and illegal seizures of public
and private property continue to take place.
Armed separatist groups do not shy away from
installing themselves among civilian populations,
in the midst of towns, as they retreat under the
pressure of Ukrainian forces. One recent example
involved Ukrainian attempts to recapture the town
of Yasinovataya, north of Donetsk. A few days ago,
Ukrainian forces entered Yasinovataya, but due to
the threat to the lives of civilians, a commander took
the decision to return to their original positions on
the outskirts of the town to avoid harming the local
population. Sources on the ground note that the tendency
over the recent days has been that when Ukrainian
troops deploy sufficient manpower and firepower to
pose a threat to the militants, the illegal armed groups
redeploy to a nearby town, forcing the local population
to flee as they install their armed vehicles, artillery and
Grad rockets in residential areas.
As fighting continues, Ukrainian authorities have
been doing what they can to issue advance warnings
to the civilian populations and establish unilateral
humanitarian corridors in Donetsk, Luhansk and

8/16

05/08/2014

Horlivka in order to enable the population to leave
combat areas. Ukraine, like any other country, has the
right and duty to restore law and order within its borders
and to protect its unity, sovereignty and territorial
integrity. We reiterate the need for the Ukrainian forces
to take all the necessary measures to prevent damage
to civilian infrastructure and civilian casualties. At the
same time, the efforts of the Ukrainian Government to
continue the overall reform process of addressing the
ills inherited from the previous regime must continue.
On many occasions in the Council, we have called
for de-escalation. De-escalation, however, can never
be interpreted as Ukraine’s unilateral surrender and
acceptance of the dismemberment of the State. Russia,
which has from the very beginning stoked the illegal
war carried out by militant separatists against Ukraine,
could have prevented the current humanitarian situation
from developing long ago by disassociating itself
from the militant separatism in eastern Ukraine, by
cutting off all support for the insurgents, by securing
its borders and by stopping the flow of Russian-made
weaponry. As the Ukrainian forces do what they can to
free the terrain from illegal armed groups and to ensure
the unity of the State, we may have to wait a long time
for any of that to happen.
Mr. Naber (Jordan) (spoke in Arabic): I would like
to thank Mr. Ging for his briefing.
The increasing hostilities in eastern Ukraine are
a cause of concern for the Government of Jordan, in
particular in the light of the reports of the worsening
humanitarian situation and the growing number of
people killed and injured. We call on all parties to
show restraint, to calm all actors and to refrain from
engaging in any hostile or provocative act.
Jordan would like to emphasize the right of States
under international law to extend their authority
throughout their territory and to protect their citizens
from threats. In that regard, the sovereignty, territorial
integrity and independence of Ukraine must be fully
respected. We call on the Government of Ukraine to
ensure that international norms are upheld with regard
to respect for human rights in applying the law. We
reiterate the need to ensure the protection of civilians
and to avoid using civilians as targets or undertaking
any reprisals against them.
A political solution is the only way to re-establish
stability in eastern Ukraine. We therefore reiterate our
appeal to all the relevant parties in Ukraine to do their

14-49657

05/08/2014

Russian Federation

S/PV.7234

utmost to find a political solution to the crisis, to stop
the escalation of violence and to call on combatants
to put down their weapons in order to re-establish
stability in the eastern part of the country. We also call
for the return of internally displaced persons as soon
as possible.

Mrs. Perceval (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish):
I would like to thank Mr. John Ging, Director of the
Coordination and Response Division of the United
Nations Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian
Affairs, for his briefing on the worrying humanitarain
situation in southern and eastern Ukraine.

We urge the parties to respect the provisions of
the Geneva declaration and to facilitate access for the
United Nations human rights monitoring mission, as
well as to ensure the rights of journalists, in particular
in the eastern part of the country.

Argentina once again expresses its deep concern
about the situation in southern and eastern Ukraine
and its increasing deterioration. The fears that we
have already expressed about the impact of the
re-escalation in violence on the civilian population
unfortunately seem to be justified, with the threat
that the humanitarian crisis will become increasingly
severe. We are concerned about the growing number of
displaced persons as as result of the violent clashes in
the Donetsk and Luhansk regions. There is no need to
reiterate the information provided to us by the Office
for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs. Rather,
we must understand that the international community
cannot remain indifferent towards the number of people
in Ukraine, most of whom are women and children,
seeking refuge in Russia.

Mr. Oh Joon (Republic of Korea): I would like to
thank Mr. John Ging for his briefing today.
The Republic of Korea remains deeply concerned
about the continuing escalation of tensions in eastern
Ukraine. Despite the ongoing diplomatic efforts of the
international community, the situation on the ground
shows no sign of abating. The continung violence has
led to a growing loss of life and a further deterioration in
the humanitarian situation. We are especially concerned
about the report that the number of internally displaced
persons (IDPs) in Ukraine has reached 117,000, having
risen sharply since June. At the same time, the lack of
adequate shelter and basic services, such as water and
electricity for the IDPs, also remains a major source
of concern. Given the gravity of the situation, further
and broader humanitarian measures, such as more
humanitarian corridors, are urgently needed.
The volatile situation in eastern Ukraine clearly
demonstrates that a solution to the ongoing crisis
can be found only through an immediate cessation of
hostilities and through meaningful dialogue among
all the parties concerned. In that regard, we welcome
the recent meeting of the trilateral contact group held
in Minsk on 31 July with representatives of separatist
groups from eastern Ukraine. We call on all parties to
engage in constructive dialogue so that they can agree
on an immediate ceasefire on the basis of the Berlin
declaration of 2 July. In that connection, all illegal
armed groups must halt all violence and lay down their
arms. That is the key for any sustainable solution to the
crisis.
Finally, turning to the downing of Malaysia
Airlines Flight MH-17, we reiterate our support
for a full, thorough and independent international
investigation. All the parties concerned must comply
with their obligations under resolution 2166 (2014) and
fully cooperate with the international investigation.

The reports of the increasing number of civilians
who have lost their lives as a result of artillery fire
in areas controlled by armed groups are alarming.
In addition, the attacks by armed groups on water
facilities, power plants and other key infrastructure — it
has been said, and we agree — subject the population
to an extremely vulnerable situation, which increases
the threats directly generated by the violence. We find
ourselves in a situation where it is difficult to access
health services, sanitation is worsening and there could
be outbreaks of infectious or non-infectious diseases
associated with those difficulties and the lack of access
to health services.
We launch an urgent appeal for strict respect of
obligations with regard to the protection of civilians
in the areas affected by the violence. We must also
ensure that there are the conditions for civilians to
leave the areas affected by the clashes between the
Ukrainian forces and the armed groups, in particular in
the Donetsk region. All measures must be taken so that
the urgent needs of the displaced can be addressed. We
must underscore that if the hostilities continue, the low
temperatures that will come with the arrival of winter
will put the displaced persons, in particular women and
children, in an even more fragile situation.
We would also like to acknowledge the work done
by the Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian

14-496579/16

S/PV.7234

Russian Federation

Affairs in coordination with other United Nations
agencies, particularly in developing the basis for a
future humanitarian response in Ukraine. There can be
no question that we support the call to the international
community to lend all its support to the efforts under
way to help the displaced and provide the necessary
assistance.
Lastly, we believe it is vital to emphasize the
importance of ensuring that an investigation be made
of all the incidents in which civilians have lost their
lives or been injured, because we must determine who
is responsible and guarantee accountability, a condition
that Argentina believes is necessary if security, peace
and the required social dialogue that Ukraine needs are
to be achieved. We therefore emphasize the urgent need
for an inclusive and constructive political dialogue,
which is the only way this crisis can be resolved.
Ms. Lucas (Luxembourg) (spoke in French): I would
also like to thank the Director of the Coordination and
Response Division of the United Nations Office for the
Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs (OCHA) for his
briefing.
Luxembourg shares OCHA’s concern about the
deterioration of the humanitarian situation and the
increase in violence in the regions of Donetsk and
Luhansk controlled by separatists. While illegal armed
groups and their outside support continue to destabilize
the country and undermine its territorial sovereignty
and integrity, the first victims are, once again, civilians.
The numbers that Mr. Ging just mentioned speak for
themselves. We are also deeply concerned about the
number of cases of intimidation, torture, abduction
and murder that have been reported for a little more
than the past four months in areas controlled by the
separatists. Such human-rights violations must stop,
and international humanitarian law must be respected.
Given the situation, we must intensify our efforts
to help the population affected, in particular the
110,000 people who have been displaced. We call on
the Ukrainian Government to continue and to step
up its efforts in this area, in close cooperation and
coordination with the United Nations and international
humanitarian agencies. We believe that establishing
a centralized registry, as promised by the Office of
the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees,
is essential. We would also encourage humanitarian
actors to cooperate closely with other international
players present in Ukraine, including the human rights
observation mission of the Office of the United Nations
10/16

05/08/2014

High Commissioner for Human Rights and the special
observation mission of the Organization for Security
and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE), which has been
deployed in Ukraine since March.
But beyond such humanitarian work, we must
above all step up our efforts to create the conditions
for realizing President Poroshenko’s peace plan and
to find a peaceful solution to the crisis in Ukraine.
The talks that have begun under the auspices of the
Chairperson-in-Office of the OSCE are crucial in that
regard, as is the deployment of civilian monitors to
the two border checkpoints of Donetsk and Gukovo on
the Russian-Ukrainian border, decided by the OSCE
Permanent Council on 24 July. It is crucial that the
borders be made secure and that the separatist armed
groups do not continue to receive equipment. In order
to support and enhance the efforts under way, it is also
important that the Secretary-General continue to use
his good offices.
On 18 July, we condemned the tragic deaths of
the 298 passengers on Malaysia Airlines Flight 17
(see S/PV.7219), brought down from the skies above
Ukraine. We hoped then that 17 July would not simply
remain in our memories as the day of that tragedy, but
would also be remembered as a day that was a turning
point in the search for a solution to the crisis in Ukraine.
The time has come to honour the memory of the victims
of the Ukrainian crisis and finally make a commitment
in good faith to seeking a peaceful solution.
Mr. Quinlan (Australia): I thank Mr. John Ging for
his briefing this afternoon. I would also like to thank
the United Nations agencies that are already working
on the ground in Ukraine for their efforts.
The continuing conflict in eastern Ukraine has
inevitably produced a humanitarian situation that is
worsening. There has been further displacement of
civilians and disruption of the provision of essential
services. Advice from the Office for the Coordination
of Humanitarian Affairs that the conflict has resulted
in displacing 117,000 persons and that a further 163,000
have fled Ukraine is troubling. Reports of armed
groups deliberately targeting civilian facilities such
as electricity and water plants, roads and bridges are
alarming. Such attacks on facilities that are necessary in
order to sustain the well-being — indeed, the lives — of
civilians must cease. Civilian infrastructure must be
protected and respected. All parties to the conflict must
comply with international humanitarian law.

14-49657

05/08/2014

Russian Federation

We commend the United Nations and other
humanitarian actors for their efforts to respond to the
needs of displaced people and host communities. We
welcome the determination of the Ukrainian authorities
to ensure that the needs of the Ukrainian people who
have been displaced or affected by violence are met.
We endorse calls for a systematic registration system to
facilite that. Continued cooperation between the United
Nations and the Ukrainian authorities is essential in
planning and implementing the humanitarian response.
In that regard, we look forward to the preliminary
response plan developed by the humanitarian
community, which we understand is to be released
this week. Obviously, to restore essential services and
protect civilians caught up in the conflict, it is necessary
that all violence cease and that all parties commit to and
embark on genuine dialogue. We commend the efforts
of the Organization for Security and Cooperation in
Europe (OSCE) to promote dialogue, including through
the trilateral contact group, We welcome the start of the
Minsk talks, but they must deliver. In order for them to
do so, it is essential that all support for armed groups
operating in eastern Ukraine stop.
As we know only too well, it is just slightly less
than three weeks ago that Malaysia Airlines Flight 17
was downed over separatist-held territory in eastern
Ukraine, with the terrible loss of 298 lives. Their deaths
were a direct consequence of this needless violence
in eastern Ukraine. The Council, through resolution
2166 (2014), rightly demanded a full, thorough and
independent international investigation into the MH-17
incident. It also demanded immediate and unrestricted
access to the site to allow for the investigation and
recovery of the bodies, prohibited any actions that
could compromise the integrity of the site, most
notably by local armed groups, and insisted that those
responsible be held accountable. Two weeks later, we
still need the full and urgent implementation of that
resolution. Although some access to the crash site has
been secured, we still do not have the unimpeded and
complete access to the whole of the site that is essential.
Last Friday, on 1 August, the Netherlands informed
the Council of the establishment of the international
mission to protect the investigation, led by the
Netherlands, with the participation of Australia and
Malaysia. Unarmed Dutch, Australian and Malaysian
personnel have been assisting with the investigation and
the removal of the remaining bodies and belongings, as
well as securing the wreckage and physical evidence.

S/PV.7234

This is an unarmed operation of limited scope and
duration. Personnel have been working closely and
meticulously through the OSCE, which is negotiating
site access and local ceasefires on their behalf. But that
has not always enabled the access required to complete
the essential tasks. The area around the site remains
contested. Although today we had the cooperation of
the Ukrainian authorities, armed separatists restricted
access to several areas of the crash site, hampering
the investigation and the recovery of remains and
personal effects. Urgent, unrestricted access to every
area of the site, in accordance with the unambiguous,
plain provisions of resolution 2166 (2014), remains
imperative. The unarmed personnel on the ground
need the Council’s own demands to be met in order to
undertake their work. The sooner they can achieve full,
free access, the sooner they will be able to complete
their work.
To conclude, a lasting solution to the humanitarian
situation in eastern Ukraine self-evidently requires an
end to the conflict. The Council has repeatedly urged
that, and the information we have received today only
reaffirms for us the importance of bringing to an end
the impact of the violence and destabilizing activities
in the east of Ukraine.
Mr. Sarki (Nigeria): First, Mr. President, we share
fully your words of commendation directed towards
the delegation of Rwanda for its capable leadership of
the Council during the past month. I should also like to
thank Mr. John Ging, Director of the Coordination and
Response Division of the United Nations Office for the
Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs (OCHA), for his
briefing.
Only yesterday, Europe and the rest of the world
solemnly commemorated the 100th anniversary of the
beginning of the First World War. Today, the people
of Ukraine and eastern Europe are experiencing the
misery felt by the people of Belgium and France 100
years ago.
Mr. Ging’s briefing today is evidently disconcerting.
Nearly 4 million people are trapped in the conflict area
in southern and eastern Ukraine. According to recent
reports, Luhansk in eastern Ukraine is on the verge of
a humanitarian disaster, with 230,000 people internally
displaced due to the conflict.
The conflict has led to a scarcity of available
drinking water, an indispensable and essential factor of
life; and the shutdown of the power grid that supplies

14-4965711/16

S/PV.7234

Russian Federation

electricity to homes, schools and hospitals. Every new
day brings new tales of death and destruction. With
gas reserves exhausted and the shortfall in medical
supplies, the population is understandably eager to
evacuate tumultuous cities.
The net result of the crisis is a mass exodus, as
innocent civilians flee deprivation and the incessant
violence. As the conflict in southern and eastern
Ukraine intensifies, support and solidarity from
the international community becomes increasingly
important. In that connection, we take positive note
of the preliminary response plan developed by the
humanitarian community, which lays the foundation
for the future humanitarian response in Ukraine, based
on an overarching structured goal and the four strategy
objectives that will guide sector-specific action and
response. We commend OCHA for being central to
those planning and response strategies.
Once again, the leadership role of the United Nations
in addressing humanitarian issues and concerns across
the globe has been demonstrated. We urge the relevant
agencies to remain engaged with the humanitarian
situation in eastern Ukraine until it stabilizes.
We also call on the authorities in that country to
take steps and measures to ensure the establishment
of an effective system to engender the coordination
and implementation of relief efforts. There is no doubt
that the humanitarian situation is an outcome of the
conflict in that country, which has intensified and
assumed a perilous scale. The only sustainable solution
to the humanitarian situation, and indeed to the overall
situation in that country, is the cessation of hostilities
and a return to dialogue.
In that regard, the Organization for Security and
Cooperation in Europe road map for de-escalating
tensions in Ukraine and the 17 April Geneva agreement
presents viable avenues to pursue a peaceful resolution
of the conflict in Ukraine.
Mr. President, if you allow me a few seconds,
I should like to just ask two questions of the OCHA
Director, to take advantage of his presence. First, is
the unified registration system for internally displaced
persons (IDPs) that he mentioned being examined
positively by the Ukrainian authorities with a view
to its adoption? Secondly, we understand that winter
conditions in that part of the world can be very severe.
Is OCHA and the rest of the international humanitarian
community putting in place some measures to cater to

12/16

05/08/2014

IDPs and refugees in case the conflict is not resolved
now and spills over into the winter period?
The President: I shall give Mr. Ging the opportunity
to respond to those questions a bit later.
Mr. Nduhungirehe (Rwanda): I wish to thank you,
Mr. President, for having convened this emergency
meeting on the humanitarian situation in Ukraine and
for your kind words to Mr. Gasana and the delegation of
Rwanda concerning the presidency in July.
Let me also thank John Ging, Director of the
Coordination and Response Division of the United
Nations Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian
Affairs (OCHA), for his briefing.
The humanitarian crisis in eastern Ukraine,
especially in the regions of Luhansk and Donetsk, has
fast deteriorated over the past weeks. The violence
continues to put the lives of Ukrainians in grave danger,
particularly women and children; 3.9 million people
live in areas affected by violence, a number of them
deprived of basic services, including water, electricity
and health services. The Office of the United Nations
High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR), the
United Nations refugee agency, reported that 117,000
people have been displaced inside Ukraine and that a
total of 740,000 people have crossed into the Russian
Federation since the beginning of the year.
Some are displaced because of fear of persecution
for political views, ethnicity and possible recruitment in
eastern Ukraine, but the large majority are Ukrainians
caught in the crossfire, fearing for their own security
and seeking a safe location. We commend United
Nations agencies and other humanitarian actors for
their work on the ground, and we support UNHCR’s
call for the establishment by the Ukrainian Government
of a central registration system for internally displaced
persons.
Meanwhile, Rwanda is concerned at the continued
fighting around the crash site of Malaysia Airlines
Flight MH17, preventing international investigators
from doing their work. Those continued violations of
resolution 2166 (2014) cannot be tolerated, particularly
as we know that some family members have not been
able to receive the remains of their loved ones. We
renew our call on all parties — as they committed
themselves to doing on 31 July — to allow unhindered
access in and around sites so that the investigators can
safely perform their duties in an expedited manner.

14-49657

05/08/2014

Russian Federation

Given that context, it is unfortunate that the
Council continues to be deeply divided on the crisis
in Ukraine. The risk of a full-blown war will remain
as long as there is division among Council members.
Also, the worsening humanitarian situation in Ukraine,
although it has not reached the level of that of Syria
or Gaza, should be a wake-up call for the Council and
for all stakeholders to redouble their efforts and take
meaningful action towards a sustainable solution to the
crisis.
It is true that the volatility of the situation on the
ground continues to hinder political and diplomatic
efforts to find a sustainable solution to the Ukrainian
crisis. We thank the Secretary-General for his good
offices and continued efforts for a peaceful settlement
of the conflict. In that respect, we reiterate our support
for President Poroshenko’s peace plan, which should
be the basis for a long-term solution to the crisis. We
also appreciate the initiatives of the trilateral contact
group of senior representatives of Ukraine, the Russian
Federation and the Organization for Security and
Cooperation in Europe, as well as the commitments
contained in the joint Berlin declaration of 2 July of the
ministers for foreign affairs of Germany, France, the
Russian Federation and Ukraine.
Let me reiterate our call for the respect of the
independence, sovereignty and territorial integrity of
Ukraine. In that regard, we urge all armed groups in
eastern Ukraine to disarm and adhere to a ceasefire in
order to de-escalate the situation. We believe that the
Government of Ukraine has a right to restore public
order on its territory, provided that right is exercised
in a proportional manner with a view to preserving the
chance for a genuine and inclusive dialogue among all
Ukrainians.
In conclusion, Rwanda notes that today the Security
Council is considering the humanitarian situation in
the Ukraine and that in two days it will hold another
meeting focused on the human rights situation in the
country. We believe that such a piecemeal approach
of considering different aspects of a particular crisis
is not helpful, as all of them are interconnected.
Consequently, Rwanda suggests holding a monthly
meeting on the situation in Ukraine. That would enable
us to remain seized of this matter and to consider the
Ukrainian crisis in all its aspects.
Mr. Gombo (Chad) (spoke in French): I would like
to start by thanking Mr. John Ging of the the Office

S/PV.7234

for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs for his
briefing.
The intense clashes between Ukrainian forces and
separatists in eastern Ukraine is occurring in urban
centres, with civilians caught in the crossfire. Many
civilians have been killed or wounded recently. Certain
sources refer to the use of Grad rockets in inhabited
areas, which is a serious crime. Civilians continue to
flee in large numbers and those who remain have to face
various shortages and violations. Health centres and
hospitals in Donetsk and Slavyansk have been occupied,
preventing civilians from receiving treatment. We call
upon both sides to respect the norms of international
humanitarian law. Attacks and reprisals risk worsening
the situation, which will no doubt have a negative
impact on the civilian population.
In conclusion, we are convinced that only an
inclusive and constructive dialogue could lead us to
an unfreezing of the situation that Ukraine is currently
experiencing. Ukrainians have the right to peace just
like all the other peoples of the world.
The President: I shall now make a statement in my
capacity as the representative of the United Kingdom.
I thank Mr. Ging for his briefing this afternoon. As
we have heard from him, the situation in separatist-held
areas of eastern Ukraine continues to deteriorate. The
number of casualties is rising, public infrastructure is
failing and the number of internally displaced persons
(IDPs) is growing. Thankfully, we do not have in
Ukraine a situation that is comparable to humanitarian
crises elsewhere. But that is of little comfort to those
Ukrainian civilians who are experiencing increasing
levels of daily hardship.
Let us be absolutely clear: it is the continuing
separatist violence that is responsible for the worsening
humanitarian situation in the cities of Donetsk and
Luhansk. Where there are no separatists there is no
humanitarian distress. In those cities and towns that
have been liberated by the Ukrainian Government,
life is returning to normal, IDPs are returning to their
homes and the Ukrainian Government is working to
repair and re-establish public services. There have been
no reprisals.
In contrast, in those areas that remain under
separatist control, civilians are increasingly vulnerable.
The United Nations reports that separatists have
deliberately targeted critical public utilities, including

14-4965713/16

S/PV.7234

Russian Federation

water, electricity and sewage plants. They have replaced
the rule of law with what the United Nations describes
as the rule of violence, thereby creating an atmosphere
of fear, intimidation and harassment. The latest report
of the United Nations human rights monitoring mission,
released on 15 July, leaves little doubt about the violent
and abusive nature of the separatist groups. It describes
in detail their abduction of civilians, their looting, their
torture, their killings and their executions of civilians.
Recent reports indicate that separatist groups have been
refusing to allow fighting-aged men to evacuate the
areas under its control. These illegal armed separatist
groups have no grounds to pursue their campaign of
violence. They must lay down their arms, vacate all
illegally seized-Government buildings and address
their grievances through exclusively peaceful and
democratic means.
But we must also address the root causes of the
situation, and not just focus on its symptoms. Despite
professing concern for Ukrainian citizens in the east,
Russia has at no point called upon the separatists to
cease their violent and illegal insurgency. Instead, it has
fuelled the crisis, sustained the violence and prolonged
the humanitarian distress. It has been equipping
separatists with sophisticated heavy weaponry,
including Grad rocket launchers and artillery, tanks
and surface-to-air missiles. It has been recruiting and
training fighters and waging a propaganda war on
their behalf. There has even been been direct shelling
of Ukraine from Russian territory. The truth of the
matter is that this is not an insurrection born in the
Donbass; it is an insurgency manufactured in Moscow.
It is led by Russians using Russian-supplied weapons
in a deliberate effort to destabilize Ukraine and to exert
control over Kyiv. The profile of the separatist leaders
makes that abundantly clear.
Last month, Vladimir Antyufeyev joined the
ranks of the separatists’ military command alongside,
Igor Strelkov and Alexander Borodai. Antyufeyev is
wanted for his role in suppressing pro-independence
demonstrations in Latvia in 1991 and was most recently
the KGB chief in Transnistria. All three of those
individuals are Russian citizens and all three have
worked for Russian intelligence. It is deeply ironic
that Russia should call for an emergency meeting for
the Security Council to discuss a humanitarian crisis
largely of its own creation. We agree that there needs
to be an end to the violence. We agree that alleviating
humanitarian distress is a matter of priority. But Russia
cannot credibly present itself as supporting the people
14/16

05/08/2014

of eastern Ukraine when it is the architect of the
violence that afflicts them.
I now resume my functions as President of the
Council.
I give the floor to Mr. Ging to respond to the
questions raised.
Mr. Ging: I would like to thank all the members of
the Security Council for their support for humanitarian
action in Ukraine and for acknowledging the excellent
work that is being done by all involved in humanitarian
action, starting with the communities themselves that
are hosting so many displaced people and extending
their generosity to them. We build on that spirit of
humanity.
Two particular questions were raised. One was
about the issue of a unified registration system for
internally displaced persons and how positive the
engagement is in that regard. I would say that we are
hoping for an early positive outcome on that issue. I
raise it here today because it is indeed very urgent and
important to our effort.
The second question was on the issue of
winterization. I think it is very important that this
point be raised because the harshness of the winter in
the region is very severe. In that regard, I can assure
Council members that winterization is at the core of
all the humanitarian plans. We are ensuring that every
effort is made to alleviate what we can expect to be a
very severe winter for those who are displaced. Once
again, I reassure Council members that it is a core
component of all of the humanitarian plans.
The President: I thank Mr. Ging for the
clarifications he has provided.
I now give the floor to the representative of Ukraine.
Mr. Pavlichenko (Ukraine): I would like to thank
you, Mr. President, for convening this important
meeting on the current situation in my country. Let me
also thank Mr. Ging for his briefing today.
My delegation would like to express its appreciation
to those who are engaged in providing assistance to
the Government of Ukraine to address humanitarian
issues in the regions of Donetsk and Luhansk affected
by the activities of terrorists. We value the efforts of
the United Nations and other organizations aimed at
addressing humanitarian needs. I want to assure the
Council that the Government of Ukraine gives due

14-49657

05/08/2014

Russian Federation

S/PV.7234

consideration to all the recommendations of the United
Nations and other international players.

weapons, compromise the ability of civilian patients to
receive treatment, and expropriate ambulances.

As my delegation has stated previously, there
is no humanitarian crisis in Ukraine, as continually
portrayed by our Russian colleagues. It is evident,
though, that the humanitarian situation in the Donetsk
and Luhansk regions remains serious. However, the
situation is manageable by the Government of Ukraine,
which remains open to cooperation with international
partners.
Significant
humanitarian
difficulties
currently exist only in those cities that are temporarily
under the control of the terrorist groups supported by
Russia. Their actions have already led to a disruption of
work, water and electricity supply facilities, and other
utilities vital to the normal life of the population.

Human Rights Watch, in its report, condemned
those acts by pro-Russian fighters and called on them to
cease immediately. On the other hand, the anti-terrorist
forces, which successfully freed the cities of the
Donbass region from the terrorists, are restoring peace
to its citizens, providing for the gradual restoration of
infrastructure and helping them return to normal life.

Meanwhile, the Government of Ukraine is ensuring
the fulfilment of all of its social obligations regarding
retirement payments, social benefits and salaries in the
public sector to the population throughout the Donetsk
and Luhansk regions, except in certain towns that
remain under the control of the terrorists.
The restoration and reconstruction of the territories
affected by the terrorists are among the top priorities
of the Ukrainian Government. As the Council might
be aware, the terrorists have now been pushed out
of the city of Slavyansk and many other towns and
villages, which are now being restored to normal life.
A few days ago, the President of Ukraine announced
the establishment of the foundation on international aid
to Donbass. We are pleased that many countries have
agreed to make significant contributions, which will
allow us to ease the burden of the recovery.
What our Russian colleagues continue to say about
the situation in Ukraine, as well as their proposal on
the so-called international humanitarian mission
in Donbass, sounds very cynical. This is Russia,
which continues to destabilize the situation in the
east of Ukraine. Russia is supporting the activities
of the terrorists and bears full responsibility for the
humanitarian problems in the Donetsk and Luhansk
regions.
In addition to the deliberate destruction of vital
infrastructure and buildings in the region and of water
and electricity supply systems, the terrorists from the
so-called Donetsk People’s Republic and Luhansk
People’s Republic, which include a large number of
Russian citizens, are carrying out attacks on medical
units and personnel, fire on hospitals with explosive

Since June, the inter-agency coordination unit,
which includes representatives of the United Nations
system and the International Committee of the Red
Cross, has been operating successfully in Ukraine
to ensure that the urgent humanitarian needs of the
civilian population and internally displaced persons
are met.
Upon the instruction of the President of Ukraine,
humanitarian corridors have been established for
anyone who wishes to leave the anti-terrorist operation
area. Unfortunately, the corridors are not able to
operate fully today due to the activities of the illegal
armed groups.
The State service for emergencies was charged with
establishing a multi-task coordination centre in order to
transport the persons affected as well as to meet the
health-care and social needs of civilians.
The real cause of the current humanitarian
difficulties in the Donetsk and Luhansk regions is the
activities of the terrorists and illegal armed groups
supported by Russia. Those groups are intimidating the
local population, disrupting the normal functioning of
city infrastructures and normal life, and robbing and
kidnapping people. All humanitarian problems will
be eliminated as soon as Russia stops supporting the
terrorists and illegal armed groups operating in the east
of Ukraine.
We demand that Russia take under effective control
its part of the border and stop the flow of illegal armed
groups, weapons and now heavy military machinery.
Unfortunately, our calls on the Russian Federation to
fulfil its obligations under the Geneva statement have
not been heard. Russia continues to destabilize the
situation in the eastern part of Ukraine.
Let me provide you with some recent information
that reflects the reality of the situation.
I am now wrapping up.

14-4965715/16

S/PV.7234

Russian Federation

Russia continues to shell the settlements and
positions of the armed forces of Ukraine near the State
border from Russian territory. The number of Russian
armed forces, heavy armoured vehicles and troops
positioned along the Russian-Ukrainian border has
been constantly increasing. The shelling has resulted in
casualties among civilians and soldiers, and destroyed
residential, administrative and commercial buildings.
If the Russian Federation is truly interested in the
stabilization of the humanitarian situation in Ukraine,
we propose just a few easy steps to be taken by Russia:
that it stop sending mercenaries as well as weapons
and ammunition to the territory of Ukraine; establish
effective control over its part of the border to prevent
the infiltration of illegal armed troops and weapons;
stop provoking instability; and withdraw all military
and paramilitary formations of the Russian armed
forces from Ukrainian borders. We are confident that
the sooner the aforementioned steps are taken by the
Russian Federation, the sooner the situation in my
country will stabilize and return to normal.
The President: The representative of the Russian
Federation has asked for the floor to make a further
statement.
Mr. Churkin (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): Unfortunately, a number of members of the
Security Council have not heeded our call to reject

16/16

05/08/2014

any politicizing of this discussion of the humanitarian
situation in the eastern part of Ukraine on the provision
of humanitarian assistance to the population in need.
Someone, as always, has protected the Kyivan authorities
by distorting the role of the Russian Federation, others
have repeated speeches that they have given previously
in Security Council meetings, and some have said that
the killing and wounding of individuals as a result of the
armed conflict in Ukraine is not worthy of a separate
discussion.
Such propaganda was repeated by the representative
of Ukraine as well. We are grateful to those members
of the Council who shared our concern and our alarm.
We would like to once again reaffirm our readiness to
closely cooperate with the humanitarian agencies and
all relevant organizations and institutions that not only
can but must play their role in providing assistance and
help to the people of eastern Ukraine.
We cherish the hope that today’s Council meeting
will serve to promote the coordination of our common
efforts with them.
The President: There are no more names inscribed
on the list of speakers. The Security Council has thus
concluded the present stage of its consideration of the
item on its agenda.
The meeting rose at 6.45 p.m.

14-49657
