A

UNITED
NATIONS

General Assembly
Distr.
GENERAL
A/RES/50/118
16 February 1996

Fiftieth session
Agenda item 97
RESOLUTION ADOPTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY
[on the report of the Second Committee (A/50/619)]
50/118.

Cooperation between the United Nations and
the Southern African Development Community

The General Assembly,
Reaffirming its resolutions 37/248 of 21 December 1982, 38/160 of
19 December 1983, 39/215 of 18 December 1984, 40/195 of 17 December 1985,
42/181 of 11 December 1987, 44/221 of 22 December 1989, 46/160 of 19 December
1991 and 48/173 of 21 December 1993, in which, inter alia, it requested the
Secretary-General to promote cooperation between the organs, organizations and
bodies of the United Nations system and the Southern African Development
Coordination Conference, and urged intensification of contacts in order to
accelerate the achievement of the objectives of the Lusaka Declaration of 1
April 1980, by which the Conference was established, 1/
Having considered the report of the Secretary-General, 2/
Welcoming the strengthening of the Southern African Development
Community 3/ through the admission of South Africa and Mauritius as member
States,
Commending member States of the Community for demonstrating their
support and commitment to deeper and more formal arrangements for cooperation
within the new Community,

1/

See A/38/493, annex I.

2/

A/50/664.

3/

Formerly, Southern African Development Coordination Conference.

96-76675

/...

A/RES/50/118
Page 2

Commending also the efforts made by the Community to implement its
programme of action,
Reaffirming that the successful implementation of the development
programmes of the Community can be achieved only if the Community has adequate
resources at its disposal,
Noting that the effects of war, loss of life and destruction of economic
and social infrastructure in southern Africa demand the continuation and
strengthening of rehabilitation programmes to regenerate the economies of the
countries of the region,
Noting with grave concern the recurrence of drought in the region and
the increase of poverty as a result, especially in rural communities,
Recognizing the strengthening of democratic governance and other
positive developments in the region, including the holding of elections and
installation of a democratic Government in South Africa, and the restoration
of democratic rule in Lesotho in September 1994, as well as the holding of
multi-party elections in Malawi and recently in the United Republic of
Tanzania,
Welcoming with satisfaction the reintegration of Walvis Bay and the
offshore islands into Namibia, and noting the impact of Walvis Bay as a major
harbour on regional economic cooperation,
Also noting that despite the positive developments in the political and
military situation in Angola, the economic, social and humanitarian situation
remains dire, and reaffirming both the importance of and the need for a
continued and effective United Nations presence in promoting a negotiated
settlement in Angola with a view to fostering the peace process,
Noting with satisfaction the successful implementation of the General
Peace Agreement for Mozambique, 4/ which has created favourable conditions
for the establishment of lasting peace, the enhancement of democracy, the
promotion of national reconciliation, and the implementation of a programme of
national reconstruction and development in Mozambique,
Recognizing the valuable and effective economic and financial
contribution that some organs, organizations and bodies of the United Nations
system have made to complement national and subregional efforts for the
advancement of the process of democratization, rehabilitation and development
in southern Africa,
Welcoming the outcome of recent United Nations conferences, in
particular the Fourth World Conference on Women, 5/ and recognizing the
important role that women play in development in the region,
1.
Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General, 2/ in which he
describes progress made in the implementation of General Assembly resolutions

4/

See S/24635 and Corr.1, annex.

5/

See A/CONF.177/20.
/...

A/RES/50/118
Page 3

dealing with cooperation between the United Nations and the Southern African
Development Community;
2.
Commends the States Members of the United Nations and organs,
organizations and bodies of the United Nations system that have maintained,
enhanced and initiated development cooperation with the Community;
3.
Calls upon the States Members of the United Nations and organs,
organizations and bodies of the United Nations system that have not yet
established contact and relationships with the Community to explore the
possibility of doing so;
4.
Commends also the members of the Community for the progress that
has been achieved to date in implementing its programme of action, and
encourages perseverance with those efforts;
5.
Expresses appreciation to the international community for the
financial, technical and material support given to the Community;
6.
Renews its appeal to the international community to maintain
current levels of, and increase, where appropriate, its financial, technical
and material support to the Community in order to enable it to implement fully
its programme of action and to meet the reconstruction and rehabilitation
needs of the region;
7.
Appeals to the international community and to relevant
organizations and bodies of the United Nations system to extend appropriate
assistance to the Community in order to enable it to advance further the
process of regional economic integration;
8.
Appeals to the United Nations, its related organs and the
international community to assist the Community with appropriate resources to
implement the programmes and decisions adopted by various United Nations world
conferences, with specific emphasis on the enhancement of the role of women in
the development process;
9.
Welcomes the economic and political achievements and reforms
undertaken within the Community, which are intended to address better the
challenges of regional cooperation and integration in the 1990s and beyond;
10.
Appeals to the international community to extend the needed
assistance to the newly democratized South African nation to enable it to
implement its reconstruction and development programme as speedily as
possible;
11.
Calls upon the United Nations to intensify its efforts to assist
the Government of Angola and the National Union for the Total Independence of
Angola in the rapid implementation of the Lusaka Protocol 6/ in all its
aspects;
12.
Expresses its appreciation for the substantial contributions of
Member States, United Nations agencies and non-governmental organizations to

6/

See S/1994/1441.
/...

A/RES/50/118
Page 4

meet the needs of the Angolan people, and encourages additional substantial
contributions;
13.
Calls upon the international community to continue to extend its
support to the people of Mozambique in their efforts to consolidate their
newfound peace and democracy based on national reconstruction and development
in that country;
14.
Reaffirms its appeal to the international community to continue
rendering assistance to Namibia to enable it to implement its national
development programmes;
15.
Commends the Secretary-General and members of the international
community for their timely response to the drought situation in southern
Africa, which has averted famine in the region;
16.
Appeals to the United Nations and the international community for
continued assistance in addressing the drought situation in the southern
African region, especially through strengthening the capacity of the Community
in drought mitigation, drought monitoring, early warning and preparedness;
17.
Invites the donor community and other cooperating partners to
participate at a high level in the Annual Consultative Conference of the
Southern African Development Community, to be held at Johannesburg on 1 and
2 February 1996;
18.
Requests the Secretary-General, in consultation with the Executive
Secretary of the Southern African Development Community, to continue to
intensify contacts aimed at promoting and harmonizing cooperation between the
United Nations and the Community;
19.
Also requests the Secretary-General to report to the General
Assembly at its fifty-second session on the implementation of the present
resolution.
96th plenary meeting
20 December 1995
