Regulation 17
There shall be established one cash control record to
which shall be credited ali cash receipts accruing to the
benefit of the Organization. The cash control record
shall be divided into such subsidiary receipts classifi:ations as may be deemed necessary.

Regulation 10
The budget shall be accompanied by:
(a) a summary of the estimated expenditure under
the separate parts divided into the appropriate general headings;
( b) a statement of total income; and
(e) a statement showing the amount to be contributed by each Member in accordance with the
approved scale of contributions.
Regula/ion 11
After the General Assembly has adopted the budget
and the total amount voted has been apportioned
among Members on the scale agreed upon, the Secretary-General shall transmit ali relevant documents to
Members and request them to remit their contributions
as soon as possible.

v.

Regulation 18
Cash shall be depositcd in one or more bank accounts as required; branch accounts, or special funds
which involve a separation of cash assets, shall be established as charges to the cash control record under
appropriate regulations as to objects, purposes and
limitations of such accounts and funds.
Regulation 19
The accounts shall consist of:
(a) budget accounts showing within the appropriations:
( i) the original allotments;
( ii) the allotments after modification by any
transfers;
( iii) the actual obligations or expenditures incurred; and
(iv) the unobligated balance of allotments.
(b) cash account showing ali cash receipts and
actual disbursernents made;
(e) a working capital fund account;
( d) property records showing:
( i) capital acquisitions;
( ii) equipment and supplies purchased and
on hand; ami
(e) a record which will provide a statement of
assets and liabilities at 31 December 1946.

CuRRENCY OF THE CoNTRIBUTION

Regulation 12
The contributions of Members shall be assessed and
paid in the currency of the State in which the United
Nations has its headquarters.

VJ.

APPROPRIATION OF FUNDS

Regulation 13
The adoption of the budget by the General Assembly shall constitute an authorization to the SecretaryGeneral to incur expenditures for the purposes for which
credits have been voted up to the amounts so voted.
The Secretary-General shall allot in writing the appropriations voted by the General Assembly to the various
headings of expenditure prior to the incurring of obligations, commitments or expenditures therefore. He
shall keep a record of such allotments and ali liabilities
incurred showing at ali times the amount available
under each heading.

VII.

IX.

Regulation 20
Auditors, who shall be persons not in the service of
the United Nations, shall be appointed in a manner to
be determined by the General Assembly during the
second part of its first session. The auditor, shall be appointed for the purpose of auditing the accounts for
the period ending 3 l December 1946.

lNTERNAl CONTROL

Regulation 14
The Secretary-General shall :
(a) establish detailed financia) rules and budgetary
procedure in order to ensure effective financia! administration and the exercise of economy;
(b) cause an accurate record to be kept of ali
capital acquisitions and ali supplies purchased and
used;
(e) render to the auditors with the accounts a
statement as at 31 December 1946, showing the supplies in hand and the assets and liabilities of the
Organization;
(d) cause ali payments to be made on the basis
of supporting vouchers and other documents which
ensure that the services or commodities have been
received and that payment has not previously been
made;
(e) designa te the officials who may incur liabilities
and make payments on behalf of the Organization;
(/) maintain an interna) financia! control which
shall provide for an effective current examination or
review of financia! transactions in order to ascertain:
(i) the regularity of the receipt, disposal and custody of ali funds and other financia! resources
of the Organization;
(ii) the conformity of ali expenditure with the estimates voted by the General Assembly; and
( iii) any uneconomic use of the resources of the
Organization.

X.

CusTODY oF FuNos

Regulation 21
The Secretary-General shall, in consultation with thc
Advisory Group of Experts designate the bank or banh
in which the funds of the Organization shall be kept.

XI.

TRANSFERS VNDER THE Bl'DGET Dl'RINO THE
fINANCIAL YEAR ]946

Regulation 22
Transfers by the Secretary-General within the budget
shall be permitted during the financia] ye ar l 946 and
shall be effected only under his written authority.

150). AMENDMENTS TO THE PROVISIONAL
RULES OF PROCEDURE
The General Assembly resolves that:
Rules 37 and 40 and supplementarv rules J and
K of the provisional rules of procedure be amended
to read as follows:
Rule 37

Regulation 15
Where in the discretion of the Secretary-General it
seems desirable, tenders for supplies shall be invited by
advertisement.

VIII.

APPOINTMENT OF ExTERNAL Auo1TORS

Thc General Assernbly shall appoint an Advisory
Committce on Adrninistrative and Budgetary
Questions ( hereinafter called the "Advisory Committee") with a membership of nine, including at
least two financia! experts of recognized standing.

TnE AccouNTs

Rule 4{)

Regulation 16
The accounts of the Organization shall be kept in the
currency of the State in which the United Nations has
its headquarters.

The General Assembly shall appoint an expert
Committee on Contributions, consistin~ of ten
members.

22

Supplementary rule J
At the second part of the first session, the General Assembly shall elect simultaneously, in accordance with rule 75, the nine members of the Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary
Questions, two of whom at Jeast shall be financia)
experts of recognized standing. It shall then, by a
second vote, choose three of the elected members
one of whom shall be a financia) expert, for th~
three-year term. By a third vote it shall choose
three of the remaining elected members, one of
whom shall be a financia) expert, for the twoyear term.

under the terms of reference laid down in rule 42
of the provisional rules of procedure:
Mr. Paul H. APPLEBY
Mr. M. BAUMONT
Mr. J. P. BRIDGEN
Dr. Cm Chao-ting
Mr. Seymour JACKLIN
Sir Cecil K1scH
Mr. Pavle LuKIN
Dr. MARTINEZ CABAÑAS
Mr. Nedim EL-PACHACHI
Mr. Nicolai V. ÜRLOV

Supplementary rule K
At the first part of the first session, the General
Assembly shall elect simultaneously, in accordance
with rule 75, the ten members of the Committee
on Contributions. It shall then, by a second vote,
choose four of the elected members for the threeyear term. By a third vote it shall choose three of
the remaining elected members for the two-year
term.
Thirty-first plenary meeting, 13 February 1946.

Mr. J. P. BRIDOEN
Mr. Seymour JACKLIN
Dr. MARTINEZ CABAÑAS
Mr. Nicolai V. ÜRLov
to be elected for a three-year term, and
Mr. M. BAUMONT
Sir Cecil K1scH
Mr. Nedim EL-PACHACHI
to be elected for a two-year term;
3. Draws the attentiim <>f the Committee to
paragraphs 12, 13, and 14 of the report on budgetary and financia! arrangements contained in section 2 of chapter IX of the Report of the Preparatory Commission;
4. Requests the Committee to submit a detailed
~ale f?r the apportionment of expenses for cons1deration at the second part of the first session of
the General Assembly.
Thirty-first plenary meeting, 13 February 1946.

2. Declares:

16 (1). APPOINTMENT OF A COMMITTEE ON
CONTRIBUTIONS

The General Assembly:
l. Declares the following persons to be elected
as members of the Committee on Contributions

23
