S/PV.8466

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-fourth year

8466th meeting

Wednesday, 20 February 2019, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Esono Mbengono . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Equatorial Guinea)

Members:

Belgium. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Côte d’Ivoire . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Dominican Republic. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Germany . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Indonesia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kuwait. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Peru. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Poland . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
South Africa . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Pecsteen de Buytswerve
Mr. Yao Shaojun
Mr. Ipo
Mr. Singer Weisinger
Mr. Delattre
Mr. Schulz
Mr. Djani
Mr. Alotaibi
Mr. Meza-Cuadra
Mr. Radomski
Mr. Safronkov
Mr. Matjila
Mr. Allen
Mr. Cohen

Agenda
The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestian question

.

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

19-04893 (E)
*1904893*

S/PV.8466

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

The meeting was called to order at 10.05 a.m.

under occupation for more than 50 years — need our
support now more than ever. It should never be about
Israel or Palestine. It should always be about Israel
and Palestine.

Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in the Middle East, including the
Palestinian question
The President (spoke in Spanish): In accordance
with rule 39 of the Council’s provisional rules of
procedure, I invite the following briefers to participate
in this meeting: Mr. Nickolay Mladenov, Special
Coordinator for the Middle East Peace Process and
Personal Representative of the Secretary-General,
and Ms. Ursula Mueller, Assistant Secretary-General
for Humanitarian Affairs and Deputy Emergency
Relief Coordinator.
Mr. Mladenov is joining the meeting via videoteleconference from Jerusalem.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I give the floor to Mr. Mladenov.
Mr. Mladenov: I brief the Security Council
today as we continue to face a growing humanitarian,
security and political crisis in Gaza and the West Bank,
including East Jerusalem.
The prospect of sustainable peace is fading by the
day as the spectre of violence and radicalism grows. Our
efforts today focus on the immediate challenges, namely,
preventing the risk of an economic and humanitarian
implosion in the West Bank and Gaza and preserving
the hope, slim as it is, that Israelis and Palestinians
will be able to live in peace, side by side, in States of
their own that are recognized and integrated into the
global and regional community. We are working hard to
preserve that prospect as the viability of the two-State
solution is systematically eroded by the deteriorating
reality on the ground. The number of extremists is on
the rise again and the risk of war continues to loom
large. In order for Israelis and Palestinians to get back
on track towards a peaceful resolution of the conflict,
the first thing that is required is leadership that believes
that peace is possible through negotiations. It also
requires an international community that is committed
to supporting both parties in reaching agreement on
the basis of the relevant United Nations resolutions
and bilateral agreements and that understands that the
weaker party — the Palestinian people, who have lived
2/13

20/02/2019

Unfortunately,
unilateral
steps,
continuing
violence, financial pressure and the lack of progress
towards peace are exacting a heavy toll on Palestinian
society and undermining the foundations of peace.
In 2018, the Palestinian Authority (PA) had a budget
deficit of approximately $1.04 billion, over 60 per cent
of which was covered by donor aid. That shortfall is
expected to increase in 2019 because of the withdrawal
of significant amounts of donor funding and a worsening
economic situation.
Earlier this week the Government of Israel decided
unilaterally to withhold approximately $140 million
in Palestinian tax revenue transfers. That decision is
the result of legislation adopted by the Knesset last
year that instructs the Israeli Government to withhold
money equivalent to the amount that the PA pays to
Palestinians convicted of involvement in terrorism or
other security-related offences by Israeli courts and to
their families.
Today the Palestinian leadership is meeting
to discuss its financial and political response to
that measure. These are very serious developments
that put at risk the financial stability of the Palestinian
Authority and, ultimately, the security of Israelis
and Palestinians alike. The Secretary-General has
repeatedly warned that unilateral moves undermine the
chances for peace.
The recent halting of United States assistance to
Palestinians may also impact ongoing efforts to bridge
existing divisions. The ending of vital training, facilities
and equipment support could potentially risk security
coordination. I encourage ongoing efforts to ensure
that this crucial assistance is continued. The important
work being carried out by civil society organizations
working towards peace is also under threat, and I hope
that donors will continue their support to civil society,
which serves a critical role in preserving the fraying
links between Israelis and Palestinians.
We also regret Israel’s decision on 28 January not
to renew the mandate of the Temporary International
Presence in Hebron, established pursuant to the
provisions of the 1995 Interim Agreement on the
West Bank and the Gaza Strip — also known as the
Oslo II accord — between Israel and the Palestine
19-04893

20/02/2019

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

Liberation Organization (PLO). I echo the SecretaryGeneral’s appreciation for their service and the
generous contribution of all participating countries
over the years. The United Nations continues to engage
with relevant Member States and the parties on the
ground to ensure the protection, safety and well-being
of civilians in Hebron and the rest of the occupied
Palestinian territory.
Alongside these worrying developments, and
despite the concerted efforts of Egypt to bring the
Palestinian factions together, recent Palestinian
political moves may further widen the growing divide
between the West Bank and Gaza. On 27 January, the
Fatah Central Committee recommended the formation
of a new Government comprising PLO factions and
independent figures. On 29 January, Prime Minister
Hamdallah’s Cabinet submitted its resignation.
Consultations on the way forward continue, including
on holding long-overdue legislative elections. Hamas
and the other factions have called, instead, for the
formation of a Government of national unity with
the task of organizing legislative, presidential and
Palestinian National Council elections.
Elections conducted in line with Palestinian laws
and with established international democratic standards
throughout the occupied Palestinian territory may now
be the only way out of the current internal political
impasse. As the Palestinian political dynamics evolve
and as we drift further away from the realization of a
negotiated two-State solution, I again call on Israeli and
Palestinian leaders to recommit to the principles and
vision enshrined a quarter of a century ago in relevant
resolutions and bilateral agreements.
Last month (see S/PV.8449), I outlined some
steps that were necessary to support the stability
of the Palestinian Authority, including expanding
opportunities for free trade, addressing fiscal leakages,
enabling the Palestinian Government to increase
the services it provides to its people, and ensuring
continued security coordination. Such steps are not a
substitute for peace. They must be matched by political
moves, including an end to the policy of settlement
construction and expansion and the designation of
land for exclusive Israeli use, as well as creating
opportunities for Palestinian development in Area C.
In this context, I reiterate that settlements are
illegal under international law and remain a substantial
obstacle to peace. In the absence of final status

S/PV. 8466

negotiations, however, such steps should significantly
support Palestinian institution-building and improve
lives. The United Nations, together with our partners
in the Ad Hoc Liaison Committee for the Coordination
of International Assistance to Palestinians (AHLC)
format, will continue working to create an environment
conducive to such developments.
Meanwhile, in Gaza and the West Bank, including
East Jerusalem, 11 Palestinians were killed during
the reporting period by the Israeli security forces in
various incidents, including attacks on Israeli civilians,
demonstrations, clashes and military operations. On
7 February, an Israeli teenager was murdered in a park
outside Jerusalem by a Palestinian perpetrator, who
was later arrested by Israeli security forces. There is no
justification for violence and terror.
Meanwhile protests and violent incidents at
the Gaza fence continued, with seven Palestinians,
including three children, killed by Israeli live fire on
8 February. This brings to 40 the number of children
killed in the context of Gaza protests since they began
in March 2018. Children must not be targeted or put
in harm’s way. They must be protected. Lethal force
should be used only as a last resort.
During the reporting period, Palestinian militants
fired 18 rockets towards Israel. The indiscriminate
launching of rockets, mortars and incendiary kites or
balloons from Gaza must stop. Hamas must ensure that
protests remain peaceful and prevent provocations near
the fence, including attempts to breach it.
In the West Bank this past month, Israeli forces
killed four Palestinians, including two children.
Demolitions and seizures of Palestinian-owned
structures also continued across the occupied West
Bank, including East Jerusalem. Thirty-nine structures
were demolished or seized by the authorities or by their
owners upon receipt of a demolition order, resulting
in the displacement of some 70 people. Overall, some
200 Palestinian households in East Jerusalem have
eviction cases filed against them, mostly by Israeli
settler organizations, placing some 900 people at risk
of displacement.
The upsurge in settler violence over the past
year continues to be a serious concern. During the
reporting period, the Office for the Coordination of
Humanitarian Affairs recorded 20 incidents in which
Israeli settlers injured Palestinians or damaged their
property. On 26 January, armed Israeli settlers entered

19-048933/13

S/PV.8466

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

Al-Mughayyir village near Ramallah, where they
attacked Palestinian residents. Ensuing clashes, also
involving the Israel Defense Forces (IDF), resulted in
the killing of a 38-year-old Palestinian man and the
injury of 15 others.
For years, we have described the situation facing
the population and focused on the urgency of providing
Palestinians confined within Gaza’s boundaries with
the means to live a dignified life and to have hope for
the future. Hamas’s continuing control of Gaza, Israel’s
severe movement and access restrictions, and the
Palestinian Authority’s restrictive measures are pushing
the situation to a breaking point. The militant build-up
continues as the risk of ever-more radical and extremist
groups pushing both sides into war grows by the day.
With the prospects of intra-Palestinian reconciliation
dimming, the people of Gaza feel more and more left to
their own devices, with no representation, no relief and
no way out. On 5 February, the PA paid its employees
in Gaza reduced salaries for the month of January
and reportedly over 5,000 employees did not receive
salaries or other payments due.
Despite the difficulties, the United Nations
continues its efforts to implement the package of urgent
humanitarian and economic interventions in Gaza
called for at the September AHLC meeting. The State of
Qatar has donated an additional $20 million to expand
United Nations cash-for-work programming in Gaza.
This will create some 10,000 new temporary jobs. The
World Bank has also launched its $17-million cash-forwork programme, which will create an additional 5,000
temporary jobs.
Job creation is critical to the stabilization of Gaza’s
economy. However, all our efforts that we are currently
undertaking are short- to medium-term only. Ultimately,
only sustainable political solutions — including
reuniting Gaza and the West Bank under a single,
democratic and legitimate Palestinian Government
and ending the closures of the Strip — will genuinely
change the current course. I welcome the tireless efforts
of Egypt to continue dialogue with Palestinian factions
with the aim of maintaining stability in Gaza and
achieving genuine reconciliation. I urge all parties to
remain engaged in this critical effort.
Turning very briefly to the region, recent incidents
that occurred on the Golan, heightening tensions
between Israel and Syria, are also of concern. On
11 February, the United Nations Disengagement
4/13

20/02/2019

Observer Force observed, in several separate incidents,
the Israel Defense Forces firing tank and high-explosive
rounds into the area of separation, which was followed
by three rockets being fired into a different part of the
area of separation. These developments undermine
the 1974 Disengagement of Forces Agreement and
jeopardize the long-standing ceasefire between Israel
and Syria.
Lebanon, meanwhile, formed a Government
on 31 January, almost nine months after the last
Parliamentary elections. The Cabinet adopted a
ministerial statement that laid out a wide-ranging
economic reform agenda. This was followed by a vote of
confidence on 15 February, for which the Government
gained majority support of 111 out of 128 votes.
The situation in southern Lebanon and along the
Blue Line remained generally calm, and on 13 February
the United Nations Interim Force in Lebanon (UNIFIL)
facilitated the second tripartite meeting of this year.
UNIFIL has also requested to visit and independently
verify the sixth tunnel that the IDF discovered in
January, but has yet to receive a date for an assessment.
In closing, I have repeatedly raised the alarm on the
dangerous trajectory of the Israeli-Palestinian conflict.
The United Nations and its partners have provided
a series of recommendations that, if implemented
effectively, would begin to establish an environment
that is conducive to a return to negotiations. We
have advocated for a strengthened commitment to
bilateral agreements; we are implementing a series of
humanitarian interventions aiming at stabilizing Gaza,
supporting Palestinian reconciliation and ultimately
lifting the closures; and we have continued to stress
that the recommendations of the 2016 Quartet report
(S/2016/595, annex) remain deeply relevant.
What is needed, first and foremost, is the necessary
leadership and political will for change. Until that can
be found, Palestinians and Israelis will continue to slide
into increasingly hazardous territory.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I thank
Mr. Mladenov for his briefing.
I give the floor to Ms. Mueller.
Ms. Mueller: I thank you, Mr. President, for
the opportunity to update the Security Council on
the humanitarian implications of the situation in the
occupied Palestinian territory.
19-04893

20/02/2019

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

As the Special Coordinator, Mr. Nickolay Mladenov,
noted, the situation on the ground is of concern. At its
core, the situation remains a protection crisis. Violations
of international humanitarian and human rights law
are a key driver of high levels of acute vulnerability
among Palestinians. The international community
is mobilizing to provide assistance, but funding is
diminishing, while needs and constraints continue to
grow. Ultimately, the solution is not humanitarian.
The lives and well-being of people must
be placed beyond political considerations, and
humanitarian aid facilitated and supported. Overall,
the humanitarian situation in the occupied Palestinian
territory, particularly in the Gaza Strip, deteriorated
in 2018. That included an increase in casualties
associated with the demonstrations at the Gaza fence,
limitations on the movement of people and goods, and
financial restrictions.
The growing casualty figures cited by Special
Coordinator Mladenov are stretching the capacity of
health-care providers. The health system in Gaza is
at risk of collapse as injuries during protests at the
Gaza fence and in related violent incidents continue.
Since the start of demonstrations in March 2018, over
27,000 Palestinians have been injured, more than 6,000
of them by live ammunition. According to the World
Health Organization, 122 amputations, including 21
paediatric amputations, have taken place since the start
of the mass demonstrations.
I join the numerous calls of the Secretary-General
upon Israel to ensure that its use of force in response
to those public demonstrations is in compliance with
international law as a last resort and in response to an
imminent threat of death or serious injury. I call upon
the organizers of the demonstrations, the demonstrators
themselves and Hamas to ensure non-violent protests.
I condemn the continued launching of rockets and
incendiary devices from Gaza.
Less than two weeks ago, three Palestinian children
were killed in Gaza, bringing the total number of children
killed this year to four. Since March, 40 children have
been killed in the context of demonstrations. Great
effort must be made to spare children from violence.
They should never be put in harm’s way.
The World Health Organization also reports
that since the start of the protests, three health-care
providers have been killed and over 620 others have been
wounded. Medical personnel carrying out their duties

S/PV. 8466

must be protected and their work facilitated. Many of
the injuries sustained require complex treatment that
is not available in Gaza. However, obtaining treatment
outside of Gaza remains challenging. In 2018, 61 per
cent of all patient requests to cross the Erez checkpoint
with Israel to access appropriate health care were
approved; since March last year, 17 per cent of the
applications by those injured in demonstrations have
been approved. Patients are also able to exit Gaza via
the crossing with Egypt. That crossing has been open
five days per week since July 2018. In December, 98
patients crossed through Rafah.
Compounding the burden on health services in
Gaza, essential drugs and medical supplies are scarce.
Health-care providers continue to coordinate and
preposition field treatment posts to minimize the loss of
life. The recent boost in the electricity supply, enabled
by Qatar’s donation of funding to purchase fuel, has
remained steady, with 9 to 12 hours of electricity per
day. However, emergency fuel for back-up generators to
run emergency and surgery rooms during the outages
is running out. Multiple times in the past year, the
provision of essential services in Gaza have been at risk
of shutdown, with potentially harsh consequences for
the population.
The ongoing internal Palestinian divide has
contributed to that deteriorating situation and the rising
vulnerability of Palestinians in Gaza, who already
struggle to meet basic daily needs. Recent reports of
reductions or the withholding of the salaries of some
public sector employees are of concern. Over 5,000
people have reportedly had their salaries cut, including
in the health and education sectors. Unemployment
exceeds 50 per cent and food insecurity is estimated
to be nearly 70 per cent in Gaza. In order to avoid a
recurring need for humanitarian aid, further sustained
action is needed on longer-term projects, such as those
of the Ad Hoc Liaison Committee for the Coordination
of International Assistance to Palestinians, on which
Special Coordinator Mladenov updated the Council.
As of 2 January, for the first time since 2000, Israel
has partially expanded the fishing zone from 6 to 12
nautical miles in the middle area off the Gaza coast.
That expansion may potentially help revive the fishing
sector and provide a sustainable source of income.
While the humanitarian situation in the West
Bank is less acute, many Palestinian families and
communities in Area C, the city of Hebron and East

19-048935/13

S/PV.8466

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

Jerusalem face growing pressures. Demolitions,
evictions, restrictions on movement and access and
rising settler-related violence continue to foster an
environment that heightens the risk of forcible transfer
for many Palestinians.
Between 22 January and 19 February, four
Palestinians were killed and 85 were injured by Israeli
forces in the West Bank within the context of searchand-arrest operations, demonstrations, clashes and
Palestinian attacks and alleged attacks. In addition,
the Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian
Affairs (OCHA) has recorded 20 incidents in which
Palestinians were injured and their property damaged
by Israeli settlers.
On 26 January, armed Israeli settlers entered
the village of Al-Mughayyir, where they reportedly
attacked Palestinian residents. Subsequent clashes,
also involving the Israeli Defense Forces, resulted in
the death of a 38-year-old Palestinian man and injury
to other Palestinians. In some 280 incidents during
2018, one Palestinian was killed and 115 others were
injured as a result of settler-related violence. That is the
highest recorded number of incidents in any single year
since 2014.
Israeli authorities have stepped up law enforcement
efforts in response to such events. I call on authorities to
strengthen those efforts so as to ensure accountability
and reverse the trend in growing settler-related violence.
Palestinian attacks against Israelis have also
continued, resulting in one fatality and at least four
injuries. Of note, on 7 February, a 19-year-old Israeli
woman was stabbed to death in Jerusalem.
The protection of the Palestinian population in the
H-2 section of Hebron is of concern. As described by
Special Coordinator Mladenov, the departure of the
Temporary International Presence in Hebron leaves
Palestinians with a greater sense of exposure and
vulnerability to settler harassment. A recent survey
coordinated by OCHA in the H-2 settlement area, which
is home to some 7,000 Palestinians, indicates that nearly
70 per cent of families have been exposed to settlerrelated violence and harassment in the past three years.
The aid community is examining how it can increase
the provision of assistance and promote protection.
As reflected by Special Coordinator Mladenov,
Palestinians continue to face displacement and loss of
property, which occurs due to demolitions of structures
6/13

20/02/2019

lacking Israeli-issued building permits, which are nearly
impossible to obtain. Many families live under the threat
of eviction orders. As mentioned, approximately 200
Palestinian households in East Jerusalem have eviction
cases filed against them, predominantly by settler
organizations claiming ownership of the buildings.
On 17 February, members of the Abu Asab family
were evicted following such a legal battle. Of similar
concern is the risk of eviction facing 32 members of
the Sabbagh family, who are Palestinian refugees. The
Humanitarian Coordinator, the United Nations Relief
and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near
East (UNRWA) and the Office of the United Nations
High Commissioner for Human Rights have called on
the Israeli authorities to immediately halt the eviction
of this family and those facing similar actions.
Alongside the deterioration of humanitarian
conditions, our ability to provide humanitarian
assistance is increasingly constrained. Funding last year
was at a record low, with the 2018 appeal for the occupied
Palestinian territory only 46 per cent funded — far below
the global average of 60 per cent. The situation reflects
not only cuts to UNRWA, the largest humanitarian
provider in the occupied Palestinian territory, but also
to other United Nations agencies and non-governmental
organizations, thereby reducing their ability to provide
aid. For instance, funding cuts have forced the World
Food Programme to suspend food assistance to about
27,000 people and reduce rations to another 166,000
beneficiaries. In addition, humanitarian organizations
face challenges to their operating space from both the
Israeli and Palestinian authorities. There is mounting
pressure on human rights defenders and attempts to
delegitimize humanitarian action in the occupied
Palestinian territory.
The humanitarian response plan for 2019 requests
$350 million to provide basic food, protection, health
care, shelter, water and sanitation to 1.4 million
Palestinians, down from the 1.9 million targeted last
year. The request is based on the maximum number
of vulnerable people whose needs we are able to
address. Recognizing this lack of funding, the occupied
Palestinian territory will receive an allocation of
$8 million from the Central Emergency Response Fund.
About 70 per cent of this funding will help to address
the immediate health crisis in Gaza, as well as water
and sanitation issues; some 30 per cent will enhance
international assistance in Hebron and the rest of the
West Bank. However, the amount is far from enough
19-04893

20/02/2019

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

to bridge the considerable funding gaps. I therefore
urge Member States to step up and increase their
support to humanitarian operations in the occupied
Palestinian territory.
In order to reduce vulnerability, it is also
critical that all parties uphold their obligations under
international human rights law and humanitarian law.
And, ultimately, the solution is not humanitarian. It is
for stakeholders to continue to work towards a viable
political solution.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I thank
Ms. Mueller for her briefing.
I shall now give the floor to those members of the
Council who wish to make statements.
Mr. Alotaibi (Kuwait) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, we would like to thank the Special Coordinator
for the Middle East Peace Process, Mr. Nickolay
Mladenov, for his briefing. The State of Kuwait renews
its full support for his role in bringing about the
resumption of the stalled peace process and improving
the daily lives of Palestinians, who have been
languishing under occupation for more than 50 years.
We look forward to the Secretary-General presenting
at least two written reports per year on the status of the
implementation of resolution 2334 (2016), in line with
its provisions and the note by the President contained in
document S/2017/507, and similar to other items on the
Council’s agenda.
We would also like to thank Assistant SecretaryGeneral for Humanitarian Affairs, Ms. Ursula Mueller,
who reminded us of the deteriorating humanitarian
situation of Palestinians. If we compare her briefing to
the last briefing to the Council by Mr. Stephen O’Brien,
the previous Under Secretary-General for Humanitarian
Affairs, in November 2016, we can clearly see that the
situation has deteriorated, raising the threat of the onset
of a grave humanitarian situation (see S/PV.7820). A
case in point is the decision by the Israeli authorities
taken last Monday, which Ms. Mueller just mentioned,
to evict a Palestinian family of 10, including three
children, from their house in East Jerusalem where they
had lived since 1951.
The Security Council discusses the Palestinian
question every month, while there are growing calls
from the international community for the Council to
assume its responsibilities under the Charter of the
United Nations. At the same time, Israel continues to take

S/PV. 8466

advantage of the Council’s inaction by persisting in its
illegal policies and practices in the occupied Palestinian
territory, including East Jerusalem. We have seen
growing Israeli hate speech and inflammatory rhetoric,
including on the part of Israeli authorities and members
of the Knesset, thereby contributing to instability and
undermining the hope for a peaceful solution.
The most recent example is the decision by the Israel
to terminate the Temporary International Presence in
Hebron, which is a unilateral and unjustified decision
that ends a neutral two-decades-long international
presence in one of the most sensitive areas. That is
why, along with Indonesia, we called for the convening
of Council consultations on 6 February to discuss the
consequences of that decision under the item “Any other
business”. We have also seen increasing frequency in
Israeli acts of hostilities and stepped-up violence from
settlers against Palestinian civilians in the Palestinian
territories, including East Jerusalem.
That decision serves to underscore the need
to provide Palestinian civilians with international
protection, in line with the recommendations set
forth in the report of the Secretary-General entitled
“Protection of the Palestinian civilian population”
(A/ES-10/794). Their humanitarian and security
situation is untenable and might lead to further tension
and instability, especially since the Office for the
Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs noted that settler
violence increased by 57 per cent in 2018 over 2017, and
by 175 per cent over 2016.
The Council must not stand idly by while the
occupying Power continues its practices. We must call
on Israel, the occupying Power, to renew the mandate
of the Temporary International Presence in Hebron in
order to protect Palestinian civilians and to commit to
fulfilling its international obligations, including those
set forth in resolution 2334 (2016), resolution 904 (1994),
the second Oslo Accord, international humanitarian
law and international human rights law.
In addition, Israel continues to raid the Al-Aqsa
Mosque, while allowing settlers to enter the courtyards
of the Mosque under the protection of Israeli security
forces. The Israeli Agriculture Minister, accompanied
by a number of settlers, repeatedly entered the Mosque
courtyards under the protection of Israeli forces, most
recently at the beginning of this month. We condemn
that act, as we consider it to be a provocative action that
would lead to fuelling sentiments, disturbances and acts

19-048937/13

S/PV.8466

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

of violence. We call on the occupying Israeli authorities
to ensure safe access to Muslim and Christian places of
worship in Jerusalem, as a human right.
There are continued attempts to undermine
Palestinian authority over the city of Jerusalem. We
renew our rejection of any attempts to violate the legal
status of Jerusalem. It is a violation of international law
and the relevant international resolutions, especially
resolutions 476 (1980) and 478 (1980), as well as
General Assembly resolution 72/15, adopted in 2017.
That resolution considers that any decision or measure
to change the status or demographic structure of
Jerusalem has no legal effect and is null and void. We
call on all States to refrain from taking any stances
or decisions that might undermine the legal status of
Jerusalem. We also call on them not to establish any
diplomatic missions in Jerusalem, as we stress that
Jerusalem is one of the final-status issues.
We condemn any attacks on innocent civilians by
any party, anywhere and at any time. We hold Israel, the
occupying Power, accountable for any acts of violence
or escalation. Israel would not have been able to carry
out its acts as we have seen in recent years, including
provocative actions against the Palestinian people, if the
Council had been able to take a serious position against
such acts, including during the peaceful Great March
of Return in 2018, which resulted in 263 Palestinian
martyrs, including scores of children, and left nearly
28,000 injured. Such acts amount to war crimes and
crimes against humanity, according to international
humanitarian law and international human rights law.
Given its imminent financial challenges, we renew
our full support to the United Nations Relief and
Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East
(UNRWA). The Agency provides basic services to more
than 5 million registered Palestinian refugees. We stress
the need to provide sustained financial support for the
Agency’s programmes and activities. Funding UNRWA
is the responsibility of the international community. It is
not the responsibility of specific Member States. Kuwait
has voluntarily contributed $113 million to UNRWA
over the past four years. We renew our rejection of any
attempts to end or limit its role and mandate through
systematic campaigns. We call on the international
community to commit to the mandate of the Agency
and provide it with the necessary sustainable funding
in order for the Agency to continue its role and provide
the necessary services to the victims of the Nakba. It is
a right, and the international community must uphold
8/13

20/02/2019

that right, according to General Assembly resolution
194 (III) of 1948.
In conclusion, the realities and facts we mentioned
today are not new. Regrettably, they have been present
for the past five decades. They clearly reflect what
Mr. Mladenov has been saying, namely, that the
situation on the ground undermines the possibility of
establishing the Palestinian State, thereby undermining
the two-State solution. We call on the international
community to honour its obligations and take the
necessary measures to revive the peace process in
order to achieve the two-State solution, end the Israeli
occupation of all Arab territories occupied since 1967
and attain lasting and just peace, according to the
relevant United Nations resolutions, including the
principle of land for peace, the Arab Peace Initiative
and the Quartet road map.
Mr. Matjila (South Africa): Before I start my
intervention, I would like to pay tribute to Ambassador
Vitaly Churkin. We commemorate the second
anniversary of his death today. His tireless efforts in
the Security Council will forever be remembered.
At the outset, we join others in thanking Special
Coordinator Mladenov for his comprehensive briefing.
Likewise, we welcome the briefing by the Assistant
Secretary-General for Humanitarian Affairs and
Emergency Relief Coordinator, Ms. Ursula Mueller, on
the dire humanitarian situation in Gaza and in some
parts of the occupied Palestinian territory.
The briefing we heard today clearly indicates one
thing: peace in Palestine remains elusive. As time
goes on, we have seen the positions of the Israelis
and Palestinians growing further and further apart.
Key final-status issues that ought to be dealt with
through negotiations are rapidly being eroded as the
issue of Jerusalem is being predetermined and illegal
settlements continue to be built on Palestinian land in
flagrant violation of international humanitarian law
and numerous Security Council resolutions.
The briefing today takes place a few weeks after
the Government of Israel decided not to renew the
Temporary International Presence in Hebron, after
22 years of dedicated service to both Palestinians and
Israelis. It is appropriate that I use this opportunity to
express South Africa’s deep regret at the decision taken
by Israel, which clearly undermines one of the few
confidence-building mechanisms between Palestinians
and Israelis. We have no doubt that that decision by the
19-04893

20/02/2019

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

Israeli Government will be yet another step that will
have negative implications on the Middle East peace
process. It is also unfortunate that we were not even able
to adopt a press statement to support the mechanism that
promoted peace and stability in Hebron. Despite that
setback, we appreciate the efforts by the President of the
Council to consult with both Palestinians and Israelis
on the matter, and we welcome the valuable feedback
that he has provided to the Council in that regard.
The Council began dealing with the issue of Israel
and Palestine almost from the beginning of its work,
more than 70 years ago. Yet as the Council, we have
regrettably done very little or, more often, nothing at all.
On almost any other issue that the Council addresses,
if there were a similar magnitude of violations or
deterioration of the situation, we would waste no time
in taking decisive action, including all other means to
enforce its decisions and resolutions.
On 21 December 2018, Belgium, Bolivia, China,
Cote d’Ivoire, Equatorial Guinea, France, Indonesia,
Kazakhstan, Kuwait, the Netherlands, Peru, Sweden
and my own country, South Africa, wrote to the
Secretary-General and to the President of the Security
Council raising concern over the lack of implementation
of resolution 2334 (2016), including the need for the
Secretary-General to provide written reports every
three months on its implementation.
We wish to reiterate our call for the submission of
timely written reports by the Secretary-General to the
Security Council on its implementation of resolution
2234 (2016), every three months, in order for progress
to be adequately monitored. This Council receives
written reports on other matters that it is seized with
and the situation in Palestine should be no different. We
must not allow the decisions made by the Council to be
undermined and in some cases blatantly violated. This
selectivity undermines the credibility of the Council
and in fact erodes its legitimacy.
We express deep concern about the dire humanitarian
situation of more than 2 million Palestinians living in
Gaza and some parts of occupied Palestine, of whom
about 50 per cent are children. The people of Gaza
desperately need humanitarian assistance. In that
connection, we wish to call upon the international
community to continue to support the United Nations
Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in
the Near East, which continues play a pivotal role in
providing the basic services to the people of Palestine.

S/PV. 8466

I wish to reiterate South Africa’s position in support
of a two-State solution based on pre-1967 borders.
We, as part of the international community, support
and encourage both parties towards this endeavour.
Dialogue and negotiation remain the only way forward
to finding a lasting solution for peace between Palestine
and Israel. The guidelines for these negotiations should
be based on the already established international legal
framework, including General Assembly and Security
Council resolutions, the Madrid principles, the Arab
Peace Initiative and the Quartet road map, among others.
South Africa was elected to this Council with
the aspiration to work, together with other member
States represented here, for a long-lasting peace in
the Middle East. That is why we are elected to this
Council. We must, as a Council, show consistency and
act to promote peace between Israelis and Palestinians.
During our time in the Council, we will continue to
call on the Council to show consistency and act on this
matter without any favour and without any selectivity
to advance peace in the Middle East.
Mr. Djani (Indonesia): My delegation would like
to join Ambassador Jerry Matjila in paying tribute
to Ambassador Vitaly Churkin for his services to
the Council as we honour him today, two years after
his passing.
My delegation would also like to join other
delegations in thanking Mr. Nickolay Mladenov,
Special Coordinator for the Middle East Peace Process
and Personal Representative of the Secretary-General,
and Ms. Ursula Mueller, Assistant Secretary-General
for Humanitarian Affairs and Deputy Emergency Relief
Coordinator, for their briefings. Today’s briefings are
of great importance as they follow the recent important
incident of the termination of the mandate of the
Temporary International Presence in Hebron (TIPH),
less than one month ago.
The briefings provide a succinct demonstration
that the situation is tense and fragile and that the
cycle of violence is still escalating. After listening to
the two briefers, I have the impression that people are
continuing to die — money is being withheld and a
number of children have died in the past few months.
Today, I will focus on three points.
First, regarding the termination of the
TIPH — at a time when international attention is
focused on developments on the situation on the ground,

19-048939/13

S/PV.8466

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

the TIPH was abruptly been terminated. This is another
in the series of policies in the occupied Palestinian
territory that defy common sense and logic. Sadly, each
time we need to do or see something positive, what is
offered is something negative.
Take Hebron as an example. The basic fact that
we need to bear in mind is that the presence of the
occupying Power is wrong and illegal. It is also wrong
to transfer the settlers there as this clearly violates
international humanitarian law. It is furthermore
wrong that the settlers and the occupying Power
commit violence against the Palestinian people, in
addition to the fact that the occupying Power is under
obligation by international law to protect Palestinians
in all parts of the occupied territory. There are many
other wrongdoings and violations of human rights that
we could mention, such as restrictions of movement,
expansion of settlements and so on.
Despite all of this evidence before our eyes, the
TIPH was closed. Am I exaggerating if I say that this
phenomenon defies my logic? Yet statements have been
made affirming the legality of the occupying Power’s
decision on these issues. Moreover, the Council has
failed to express its position regarding this development
and I must say that this has been an unpleasant way for
us, as Indonesians, to end our first month in the Council.
We again express our regret that the Council has failed
to express its position in the form of a presidential
statement, due to an objection by one member.
The closure of the TIPH is a very sad development.
For over two decades, the civilian presence of the
TIPH greatly helped to mitigate tensions between the
Palestinians and Israelis in Hebron. At a time when
Palestinians were left defenceless, it offered them
a minimal sense of protection. These unnecessary
and unilateral provocations harm not only the
Palestinians — as they are intended to — but the very
hopes and prospects of peace.
We fail to see any sign in the region that justifies
the decision of the Government of Israel not to renew
the mandate of the TIPH. Violence continues in many
places, particularly in Hebron, where a group of
extremist settlers attacked several Palestinian homes,
injuring 48-year-old Hisham Saifan and his 10-year
old son. On a bypass road near the village of Silwad,
an Israeli soldier fired live ammunition at a group of
young Palestinians, killing a 16-year old boy, Ahmed
Othman Hamed.
10/13

20/02/2019

The potential for violence is real and at any time
may trigger an incident similar to the 1994 massacre
that resulted in the call for an international presence
in resolution 904 (1994). But do we need to wait for
another massacre? Are the continued use of force by the
occupying Power and the policies of arbitrary detention
and restriction of movement, the 11 years of Gaza’s
blockade, and so on, not sufficient? In the past year,
more than 200 Palestinians lost their lives and more
than 20,000 were injured. What other justifications
does this body need to react appropriately to activities
that take the lives of innocent people? The Palestinians
are defenceless, they are victims and are not equal in
capacity to the occupying Power. It is our responsibility
to fill the gap.
Secondly,
regarding
the
humanitarian
situation — the humanitarian situation in the occupied
territory is also deteriorating and more assistance is
needed, particularly for Gaza Access to health care,
clean water and other basic necessities is being hindered.
As I mentioned earlier, the already dire situation has
been aggravated by massive casualties since the Great
March of Return last year.
Apart from Gaza, one of the targets of humanitarian
support is the vulnerable H-2 area in Hebron, which
was formerly covered by the Temporary International
Presence in Hebron. We need to anticipate the impact
of increasing settlement activity in this area, more
displaced Palestinians and further settler violence. In
a report dated 13 February, for instance, the Office for
the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs points out
that 55 Palestinians, including 20 children, have been
forcibly evicted by the Israeli authorities from their
homes in the Karm Al Jaouni area since late 2008.
Among the various grave physical, social, economic
and emotional impacts on Palestinian families, one of
the saddest is how the children concerned are often
then unable, or afraid, to return to school, as they bear
the burden of psychological scars that may last for life.
Moreover, we join others in the call for the international
community to continue to assist the United Nations
Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in
the Near East, including in terms of its financing.
The socioeconomic situation of Palestinian children is
at stake.
The third point is the silence of the Council.
The occupied Palestinian territory is breaking apart,
settlement activity is increasing, and the situation is
19-04893

20/02/2019

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

heading towards a one-State solution, even as we see no
prospects of a political solution. The lives and freedom
of the Palestinians are at risk because of our inaction.
No steps have been taken to implement resolution
2334 (2016). Actions prohibited under the resolution
have been taken but totally ignored, at the expense of
the victims. My question is, has the Council ever faced
such contempt before?
We stress that the expansion of settlements, the
increasing violence, the inflammatory rhetoric and
many other violations are a blatant affront to the
authority of this body. Instability in the occupied
territories has a negative impact on the region and
beyond, including in Indonesia. It will be impossible
to bring about peace in the region if a just and lasting
solution is not ensured.
Indonesia reiterates its call for an intensification
of international and regional efforts, based on United
Nations resolutions and the Quartet road map, the
Madrid principles and the Arab Peace Initiative, to end
the Israeli occupation, which has existed since 1967.
We call on countries to honour resolution 2334 (2016)
and not move their diplomatic presence to Jerusalem.
Moreover, I wish to reiterate Indonesia’s request for
another written report of the Secretary-General on
the implementation of resolution 2334 (2016). The
aforementioned violations, and many others, deserve to
be addressed in the context of comprehensive reports.
Let me close by calling on both sides, particularly
the occupying Power, to stop the provocations
and inflammatory rhetoric. These not only violate
resolution 2334 (2016), but also fuel the conflict and the
violence against the Palestinian people. I believe that
all Members of the United Nations are peace-loving
States and speak the same language. Inaction is not a
language. It is a threat to peace.
Mr. Ipo (Côte d’Ivoire) (spoke in French): My
delegation welcomes the holding of this briefing on
the latest developments in the Middle East, including
the Palestinian question. It congratulates Mr. Nickolay
Mladenov, Special Coordinator for the Middle East
Peace Process, on his edifying presentation, which has
once again recalled for the members of the Council the
need to collectively pursue efforts to ensure the lasting
return of peace and stability to a region that for many
years has been afflicted by multidimensional crises.
I wish also to thank Ms. Ursula Mueller, Assistant

S/PV. 8466

Secretary-General for Humanitarian Affairs, for her
very clear briefing.
Seventy-two years after the adoption of resolution
181 (II), in 1947, on the Palestine Plan of Partition,
the international community continues to face the
challenge of addressing a complex crisis. In the Gaza
Strip and the West Bank in particular, the political and
security situation continues to deteriorate, resulting
in a deeply worrisome humanitarian crisis. Given
this concerning situation, my country would like to
recall its commitment to both the security of the State
of Israel and the inalienable right of the Palestinian
people to self-determination. It also reiterates its firm
support for the two-State solution, with both States
coexisting peacefully in the framework of the 1967
borders. Here my delegation urges the Palestinian and
Israeli parties to demonstrate wisdom by relaunching
the dialogue on the basis of the relevant resolutions of
the United Nations.
According to the World Bank, the unemployment
rate in the Palestinian territories is close to 32 per cent,
a rate that has not been seen in more than two decades,
while the poverty rate is approximately 29 per cent. The
situation is even more concerning in the city of Gaza,
where 54 per cent of the active population, including
70 per cent of the youth, is unemployed. In addition,
there is an inadequate supply of decent housing and of
basic services such as health care, education, access to
drinking water and electricity.
In the face of this serious humanitarian situation,
Côte d’Ivoire reiterates its call on the Council to work
in close coordination with the specialized agencies of
the United Nations and all partners in the urgent quest
to find solutions that would make it possible to mobilize
the assistance necessary to meet the basic needs of the
peoples affected.
On this point, it wishes to urge once again all
international partners to step up their support for the
United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine
Refugees in the Near East (UNRWA), which plays a key
role in the international architecture of support for the
Palestinian people, who are in distress. Such support
will make it possible not only to continue UNRWA’s
humanitarian efforts in the region but also to gradually
reduce its budget deficit, which is estimated at more
than $200 million.
Here Côte d’Ivoire welcomes Switzerland’s
commitment to providing a significant contribution

19-0489311/13

S/PV.8466

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

with a view to UNRWA reform and to allowing the
Agency to continue its mission of assisting the more
than 5.4 million Palestinian refugees living in Lebanon,
Jordan and Syria, and in Gaza and the West Bank.
My country believes that the worrisome
humanitarian situation, as well as the threat of a
region-wide spillover of the conflict, will be under
control only when a consensual solution to the IsraeliPalestinian crisis is found. On this point, it welcomes
the international consensus on the need to resume the
peace process, which is the only viable framework for
mutually acceptable solutions on such key issues as the
status of Jerusalem, the lifting of the blockade of Gaza,
putting an end to the building of settlements in the West
Bank and the issue of the security of the Palestinian
people in Hebron.
On this point, my country calls for the creation of
conditions conducive to the renewal of the mandate
of the Temporary International Presence in Hebron, a
civilian observation mission set up in the framework
of the Protocol in accordance with the 1995 Interim
Agreement on the West Bank and the Gaza Strip, also
known as Oslo II.
My delegation urges all parties to show restraint and
to engage in a constructive dialogue in the framework
of renewed peace negotiations and to refrain from any
unilateral actions that could compromise the efforts
of the international community to reach a peaceful
resolution of the conflict. In that context, it supports
all actions and initiatives that could contribute to
inter-Palestinian reconciliation, in particular between
Fatah and Hamas, so as to allow the Palestinian
Authority to exercise its sovereign functions in Gaza
and the West Bank.
In conclusion, Côte d’Ivoire reiterates its support
to Mr. Nickolay Mladenov and Ms. Ursula Mueller in
their tireless efforts to ensure a resolution to the IsraeliPalestinian conflict and its humanitarian consequences,
which is necessary for the restoration of lasting peace
and stability in the region as a whole.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I shall now
make a statement in my capacity as the representative
of Equatorial Guinea.
We would first echo those delegations that spoke
before us in paying tribute to the late Ambassador
Vitaly Churkin on the second anniversary of his death.
12/13

20/02/2019

I should like at the outset to convey our usual
thanks for the excellent work that Special Coordinator
Mladenov and his team are doing in the Middle East.
His briefing today, as on previous occasions, depicts
the reality of the lives of Israelis and Palestinians. We
also welcome and commend the clear-sighted briefing
by Ms. Ursula Mueller, Assistant Secretary-General
for Humanitarian Affairs and Deputy Emergency
Relief Coordinator.
We are meeting today once again, as we do monthly,
to address the Palestinian question, which for 71 years
has been debated at the United Nations. If that is a long
time for those of us sitting here today, it must seem
like an eternity for those who suffer and have suffered
through it. That is what causes hopelessness and despair
and generates frustration among the Palestinians to the
point of rioting against Israel, which always responds
disproportionately, although we also recognize that it
has a right to legitimate self-defence. This prevailing
trend dynamic has caused and continues to cause
tremendous damage to the parties and to sow hatred in
several places in the region.
A few weeks ago, we expressed our concern about
the unilateral decision of the Israeli Government not
to renew agreement on the Temporary International
Presence in Hebron (TIPH), based on the Oslo Accords
signed between the Israelis and the Palestinians. The
TIPH has engaged for over two decades in monitoring
and making the necessary efforts to maintain normal
living conditions in the city of Hebron, which gave a
sense of security to its Palestinian inhabitants. We hope
that the Israeli decision will be accompanied by further
measures to reassure the Council and the international
community about the living conditions of the residents
of Hebron and the entire West Bank, who have a right
to an atmosphere of respect, calm and tranquillity, in
accordance with international humanitarian law.
On the situation in Gaza, my delegation welcomes
the continued efforts of Mr. Mladenov’s team, donors
and all partners who have been supporting various
initiatives on the ground to improve the life of that
Palestinian enclave. According to a series of reports,
the people lack jobs and have very limited access to
adequate services such as health care, education, water
and electricity, which has wreaked havoc on the lives
of almost 2 million of its inhabitants. In that regard,
we associate ourselves with the words of SecretaryGeneral António Guterres, who spoke to the United
Nations Committee on the Exercise of the Inalienable
19-04893

20/02/2019

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

Rights of the Palestinian People on 15 February in
Addis Ababa, where he urged Israel
“to lift restrictions on the movement of people and
goods, which also hamper the efforts of the United
Nations and other humanitarian agencies”.
Similarly, we call on Palestinian groups, such as
Hamas and other extremist groups, to refrain from all
attacks and provocations, which contribute only to the
escalation of the conflict.
However, the main Palestinian factions must
understand the importance of their collaboration in
the management of the Gaza Strip, which in current
conditions will always pose a problem for the security
of Israel. To that end, we have called for the presence
of the Palestinian National Authority, which must do a
better job of safeguarding the socioeconomic situation
and strive to ensure a secure environment. It is therefore
necessary to fulfil the agreements and commitments
already made by Fatah and Hamas in October 2017.
The tension between Israelis and Palestinians,
apart from hindering the reopening of the stalled
negotiations between the parties, has also affected the
good relations that should exist between the countries of
the region, given the prevalence of other, related issues

S/PV. 8466

that jeopardize regional stability. In that connection
and in view of the damage caused by this conflict, we
cannot doubt the threat that the Palestinian question
poses to international peace and security. Its potential
harm cannot be underestimated. The various activities
recently carried out by the parties, as mentioned by
Mr. Mladenov and Ms. Mueller, are precisely those
that the parties must refrain from carrying out as they
only exacerbate an already explosive situation. We
also ask countries with influence in the area to bring
pressure to bear so as to find a just solution to this longstanding problem.
Finally, I reiterate the position of the Republic
of Equatorial Guinea in support of any initiative that
respects the resolutions of the United Nations and other
instruments in force that allude to the creation of two
States, based on the pre-1967 borders.
I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.
There are no more names inscribed on my list.
I now invite Council members to informal
consultations to continue our discussion on the subject.
The meeting rose at 11.15 a.m.

19-0489313/13
