l

UNITED

NATIONS
Distr.
G:CNERAL

GENERAL
ASSEMBLY

A/ES--8/1
2 September 1981
ORIGINAL:

ENGLISH/FRETT CH

-------------------------------------~·-Eighth emergency special session
COI-JVENING OF TEE SESSIOlT
· Note by the Secretary-General

1.
In a letter dated 12 August 1981 addressed to the Secretary-General (see
annex), the Permanent Representative of Zimbabwe to the United Nations requested
the convening of an emergency special session of the General Assembly to discuss
the question of Hamibia.
2.
Upon receipt of the aforementioned letter, the Secretary-General, in a note
dated 13 August 1981, transmitted the text to Member States requesting them,
bearing in mind his responsibilities cmder rule 9 (b) of the rules of procedure
of the General Assembly, to inform hi:m. whether they concurred in t 11e request for
the convening of an en,ergency specis.l session.
3.
In a note dated 2 September, the Secretary-General informed Member States
that the majo:eity of Members had concurred in Zimbabwe 1 s request and that,
accordingly, the eighth emergency special session ,rould convene at United Nations
Headquarters, New York, on Thursday, 3 September, at 3 p.m.

4.

The provisional agenda of the session will be issued as document A/ES-8/2.

81-22370

A/ES-,8/1
English
Page 2

ANNEX

Letter dated 12 August 1981 from the Permanent Representative of Zimbab!!~
to the United Nations addressed to the Secretary-General

I have the honour to refer to paragrs.phs 28 and 29 of General Assembly
resolution 35/227 A of 6 March 1981, by which the Assembly called upon the
Security Council :ito act decisively against any dilatory manoeuvres and fraudulent
schemes of the illegal occupa,tion regime aimed at frustrating the legi tirnate
struggle of the Namibian people 11 and "to convene urgently to impose comprehensive
mandatory sanctions against South Africa, as provided for under Chapter VII of
the Charter of the United Nations, in order to ensure South Africa's immediate
compliance with the resolutions and decisions of the United Nations relating
to Namibia 11 •
As you know, pursuant to a request of the representative of Uganda acting
as Chairman of the African Group, the Security Council convened on 21 April 1981
to respond to the call addressed to it by the General Assembly. At the conclusion
of 11 meetings devoted to this subject, the Council considered four resolutions
proposed to it to implement the General Assembly I s recommendations; however, each
of these four resolutions failed of adoption by reason of t11e negative votes
of several permanent members of the Security Council.
Subsequent negotiations have failed to resolve or even to advance towards
the resolution of the issues addressed by the General Assembly and the Security
Council.
Consequently, I have the honour to request, as the representative of'
Zimbabwe, and as current Chairman of the African Group at the United Nations,
that an emergency special session of the General Assembly be convened pursuant
to its resolution 377 A (V) in order to discuss these important questions.
I would therefore be· very grateful if you would kindly initiate the
procedures for convening an emergency special session.

(Signed) Elleck K. MASHINGAIDZE
Permanent Representative of Zimbabwe
Chairman of the African Groun
