A /72/PV.81

United Nations

General Assembly

Official Records

Seventy-second session

81st plenary meeting

Wednesday, 4 April 2018, 3 p.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Lajčák . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (Slovakia)

In the absence of the President, Mrs. Pobee
(Ghana), Vice-President, took the Chair.
The meeting was called to order at 3.05 p.m.
Agenda item 127 (continued)
Global health and foreign policy
Draft resolution (A/72/L.40)
Report of the Fifth Committee (A/72/811)
The Acting President: The Assembly will now
take a decision on draft resolution A/72/L.40, entitled
“Scope, modalities, format and organization of the
high-level meeting on the fight against tuberculosis”.
May I take it that the Assembly decides to adopt the
draft resolution?
Draft resolution A/72/L.40 was adopted (resolution
72/268).
The Acting President: I would like to express my
sincere thanks to Ambassador Walton Alfonso Webson
of Antigua and Barbuda and Ambassador Koro Bessho of
Japan, the co-facilitators of the informal consultations,
who demonstrated great ability and patience in their
conduct of the discussion and complex negotiations
on the draft resolution. I also thank Member States for
their valuable contributions to reaching an agreement
on resolution 72/268.
The General Assembly has thus concluded this
stage of its consideration of agenda item 127.

Reports of the Fifth Committee
The President: The General Assembly will now
consider the reports of the Fifth Committee on agenda
items 136, 142, 148 and 134.
I request the Rapporteur of the Fifth Committee,
Mr. Felipe García Landa of Mexico, to introduce in one
intervention the reports of the Fifth Committee before
the Assembly.
Mr. García Landa (Mexico), Rapporteur of the
Fifth Committee (spoke in Spanish): I have the honour
to introduce to the General Assembly the reports of
the Fifth Committee containing recommendations on
issues considered during the first part of the resumed
seventy-second session of the General Assembly.
The Fifth Committee met from 14 to 29 March and
held five plenary meetings, as well as numerous
informal consultations.
Let me now present the reports of the Fifth
Committee, containing recommendations on issues that
require action by the General Assembly.
Under agenda item 136, “Programme budget for
the biennium 2018-2019”, the Committee provides
advice to the General Assembly on programme budget
implications should it adopt draft resolution A/72/L.40.
The relevant report of the Fifth Committee is contained
in document A/72/811.
Under the same agenda item, in paragraph 6 of
its report contained in document A/72/681/Add.1, the
Committee recommends to the General Assembly the
adoption of a draft resolution on special subjects relating

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of speeches
delivered in other languages. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only.
They should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

18-09450 (E)

*1809450*

A/72/PV.81

04/04/2018

to the programme budget for the biennium 2018-2019,
which was adopted by the Committee without a vote.

May I remind members that, under paragraph 7 of
decision 34/401, the General Assembly agreed that:

Under agenda item 142, “Joint Inspection Unit”,
in paragraph 6 of its report contained in document
A/72/810, the Committee recommends to the General
Assembly the adoption of a draft resolution that was
adopted by the Committee without a vote.

“When the same draft resolution is considered
in a Main Committee and in plenary meeting, a
delegation should, as far as possible, explain its
vote only once, i.e., either in the Committee or in
plenary meeting, unless that delegation’s vote in
plenary meeting is different from its vote in the
Committee.”

On agenda item 148, “Financing of the International
Residual Mechanism for Criminal Tribunals”, in
paragraph 6 of its report contained in document
A/72/669/Add.1, the Committee recommends to the
General Assembly the adoption of a draft resolution
that was adopted by the Committee without a vote.
Finally, on agenda item 134, “Review of the
efficiency of the administrative and financial
functioning of the United Nations”, in paragraph 5
of its report contained in document A/72/682/Add.1,
the Committee recommends to the General Assembly
the adoption of a draft decision entitled “Questions
deferred for future consideration”, which was adopted
by the Committee without a vote.
I thank delegations for their cooperation during this
session and for the spirit of compromise that enabled
the Committee to finish its work on time.
I would also like to thank the Chair of the Committee,
Ambassador Tommo Monthe, for his guidance and
encouragement. I look forward to working with him
and my colleagues of the Bureau to ensure the success
of the second part of the resumed session, which will
take place in May, the agenda of which includes issues
of great importance to the Organization.
The Acting President: I thank the Rapporteur of
the Fifth Committee.
The positions of delegations regarding the
recommendations of the Fifth Committee have been
made clear in the Committee and are reflected in the
relevant official records.
If there is no proposal under rule 66 of the rules
of procedure, I shall take it that the General Assembly
decides not to discuss the reports of the Fifth Committee
that are before the Assembly today.
It was so decided.
The Acting President: Statements will therefore
be limited to explanations of vote.
2/3

May I further remind delegations that, also in
accordance with General Assembly decision 34/401,
explanations of vote are limited to 10 minutes and
should be made by delegations from their seats.
Before we begin to take action on the
recommendations contained in the reports of the Fifth
Committee, I should like to advise representatives
that we are going to proceed to take decisions in the
same manner as was done in the Committee, unless
the Secretariat is notified to the contrary in advance.
That means that, where recorded votes were taken, we
will do the same. I also hope that we may proceed to
adopt without a vote those recommendations that were
adopted without a vote in the Fifth Committee.
Agenda item 136 (continued)
Programme budget for the biennium 2018-2019
Report of the Fifth Committee (A/72/681/Add.1)
The Acting President: The Assembly has before
it a draft resolution entitled “Special subjects relating
to the programme budget for the biennium 2018-2019”,
recommended by the Fifth Committee in paragraph 6
of its report.
We will now take a decision on the draft resolution.
The Fifth Committee adopted it without a vote. May I
take it that the Assembly wishes to do the same?
The draft resolution was adopted (resolution
72/262 B).
The Acting President: The Assembly has thus
concluded this stage of its consideration of agenda item
136.
18-09450

04/04/2018

Agenda item 142
Joint Inspection Unit
Report of the Fifth Committee (A/72/810)
The Acting President: The Assembly has before it
a draft resolution recommended by the Fifth Committee
in paragraph 6 of its report.
We will now take a decision on the draft resolution.
The Fifth Committee adopted it without a vote. May I
take it that the Assembly wishes to do likewise?
The draft resolution was adopted (resolution
72/269).
The Acting President: The Assembly has thus
concluded this stage of its consideration of agenda item
142.
Agenda item 148 (continued)
Financing of the International Residual Mechanism
for Criminal Tribunals
Report of the Fifth Committee (A/72/669/Add.1)
The Acting President: The Assembly has before
it a draft resolution entitled “Construction of a new
facility for the International Residual Mechanism for
Criminal Tribunals, Arusha branch”, recommended by
the Fifth Committee in paragraph 6 of its report.
The Assembly will now take a decision on the draft
resolution. The Fifth Committee adopted it without
a vote. May I take it that the Assembly wishes to do
likewise?

A/72/PV.81

The draft resolution was adopted (resolution
72/270).
The Acting President: The Assembly has thus
concluded this stage of its consideration of agenda item
148.
Agenda item 134 (continued)
Review of the efficiency of the administrative and
financial functioning of the United Nations
Report of the Fifth Committee (A/72/682/Add.1)
The Acting President: The Assembly has before it
a draft decision entitled “Questions deferred for future
consideration”, recommended by the Fifth Committee
in paragraph 5 of its report.
The Assembly will now take a decision on the
draft decision. The Fifth Committee adopted it without
a vote. May I take it that the Assembly wishes to do
likewise?
The draft decision was adopted (decision 72/547 B).
The Acting President: The Assembly has thus
concluded this stage of its consideration of agenda
item 134.
The General Assembly has thus concluded its
consideration of all the reports of the Fifth Committee
before it for this meeting.
The meeting rose at 3.20 p.m.

18-094503/3
