S/2018/250

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
23 March 2018
Original: English

Report of the Secretary-General on conflict-related
sexual violence
I. Introduction
1.
The present report, which covers the period from January to December 2017, is
submitted pursuant to Security Council resolution 2106 (2013), in which the Council
requested me to report annually on the implementation of resolutions 1820 (2008),
1888 (2009) and 1960 (2010) and to recommend strategic actions. The reporting
period was marked by the liberation of territories and the attendant release or escape
of numerous women and girls formerly held by armed or terrorist groups. That
development has lent urgency to efforts to alleviate the stigma associated with sexual
violence, which can have life-long, and sometimes lethal, repercussions for both
survivors and for children conceived through rape. It also underscores the importance
of socioeconomic reintegration support aimed at restoring community cohesion in the
wake of war. In the context of the mass migration crisis, sexual violence continued to
serve as a driver of forced displacement and a factor inhibiting the return of uprooted
communities to their places of origin. In the year under review, sexual v iolence was
also used by belligerent parties to attack and alter the ethnic or religious identity of
persecuted groups. As an integral component of strategies to secure the control of
land and resources, conflict-related sexual violence has devastated the physical and
economic security of displaced and rural women and women belonging to minority
groups.
2.
The term “conflict-related sexual violence” refers to rape, sexual slavery, forced
prostitution, forced pregnancy, forced abortion, enforced sterilizatio n, forced
marriage and any other form of sexual violence of comparable gravity perpetrated
against women, men, girls or boys that is directly or indirectly linked to a conflict.
That link may be evident in the profile of the perpetrator, who is often affil iated with
a State or non-State armed group, which includes terrorist entities, the profile of the
victim, who is frequently an actual or perceived member of a political, ethnic or
religious minority group or targeted on the basis of actual or perceived se xual
orientation or gender identity, the climate of impunity, which is generally associated
with State collapse, cross-border consequences such as displacement or trafficking,
and/or violations of a ceasefire agreement. The term also encompasses traffickin g in
persons when committed in situations of conflict for the purpose of sexual violence
or exploitation.
3.
While many settings are affected by conflict-related sexual violence, in the
present report I focus on 19 countries where verifiable information e xists. It should
be read in conjunction with my eight previous reports on the subject, which

18-04633 (E)

120418

*1804633*

S/2018/250

cumulatively provide the basis for the listing of 47 parties (see annex). The majority
of listed parties are non-State actors, with seven having been designated as terrorist
groups on the ISIL (Da’esh) and Al-Qaida sanctions list. Those national military and
police forces that are listed are required to engage with my Special Representative on
Sexual Violence in Conflict to develop specific, time-bound commitments and action
plans to address violations, as several have done since 2010. Cessation of violations
and effective implementation of commitments are key factors in the consideration of
the delisting of parties.
4.
The present report is based on information verified by the United Nations, unless
indicated otherwise. In that regard, the presence of women’s protection advisers, who
are responsible for convening the monitoring, analysis and reporting arrangements on
combating conflict-related sexual violence in the field, has improved the availability
and quality of information. Currently, 21 women’s protection advisers are deployed
in seven mission settings. All peacekeeping missions with mandates that include the
protection of civilians have established the monitoring arrangements and incorporated
early warning indicators of conflict-related sexual violence into their broader
protection structures. Two special political missions have also established such
arrangements.
5.
National authorities and civil society are working with the United Nations to
prevent and address conflict-related sexual violence in the countries mentioned in the
present report. Efforts include legal reforms, legal assistance programmes,
community security programmes, the development of specialized services for victims
and witnesses, awareness-raising campaigns and rehabilitation programmes. Support
for country-level assistance on justice and the rule of law has been coordinated and
scaled up through the Global Focal Point for Police, Justice and Corrections, and
peacekeeping missions continue to implement their mandate of protection of
civilians, prioritizing the prevention of conflict-related sexual violence.
6.
Strengthening the capacity of national institutions is critical to ensuring
accountability for past crimes, and for prevention and deterrence of future crimes. In
that regard, the Team of Experts on the Rule of Law and Sexual Violence in Conflict,
in accordance with its mandate under Security Council resolution 1888 (2009),
continues to work closely with Governments and United Nations missions and
country teams on the ground to support the investigation, prosecution of perpetrators
and adjudication of such crimes under civilian and military systems, legislative
reform, the protection of victims and witnesses and reparative justice. Situated in the
Office of the Special Representative, the Team of Experts is composed of specialists
from the Department of Peacekeeping Operations, the Office of the United Nations
High Commissioner for Human Rights (OHCHR) and the United Nations
Development Programme supplemented by a roster of experts with a range of
specializations. To date, engagements of the Team of Experts have been conducted in
the Central African Republic, Colombia, Côte d’Ivoire, the Democratic Republic of
the Congo, Guinea, Iraq, Liberia, Mali, Myanmar, Nigeria, Somalia, South Sudan and
the Sudan, as well as with regional organizations such as the African Union, the
International Conference on the Great Lakes Region and the League of Arab States.
During the reporting period, its support to national authorities and the United Nations
in various settings have contributed to achievements of Member States, including in
the successful prosecutions for rape as a war crime and a crime against humanity in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo; the establishment of a specialized police unit
for sexual violence in the Central African Republic; the development of strategies for
investigating and prosecuting sexual violence perpetrated by Islamic State in Iraq and
the Levant (ISIL/Da’esh) in Iraq; and the formulation of an action plan with the South
Sudanese Armed Forces to strengthen accountability. In Guinea, the Team of Experts
continued to support the investigation of crimes of sexual violence perpetrated in
2/35

18-04633

S/2018/250

Conakry in September 2009, a nationally led effort to combat impunity, with technical
support from the international community. The Government has since indicted 17
high-ranking military officials, conducted over 450 hearings, which included the
testimony of at least 200 victims and witnesses of sexual violence, and increased
judicial cooperation with neighbouring countries, which has led to the arres t and
extradition of alleged perpetrators. The Team of Experts has committed to supporting
preparation of the trials, including in the areas of victim and witness protection, the
design of a reparations strategy, sensitization, outreach and resource mobili zation.
The work of the Team of Experts demonstrates that, with political will and dedicated
assistance, Governments can hold perpetrators of conflict -related sexual violence
accountable and deliver justice for victims.
7.
The United Nations Action against Sexual Violence in Conflict network, which
consists of 14 United Nations entities and is chaired by my Special Representative,
aims at strengthening the prevention of and response to sexual violence through a
coordinated, coherent and comprehensive approach. In 2017, through the United
Nations Action multi-partner trust fund, funding was provided to support a project on
children conceived through rape in Iraq, and to support the Gender-based Violence
Information Management System, an inter-agency initiative that enables
humanitarian actors to safely collect, store, analyse and share data. In 2017, the
network continued to fund the post of senior women’s protection adviser in Iraq and
successfully advocated for its inclusion in the regular budget of the mis sion. The
network also provided financing for an adviser to support the development of a
national strategy on gender-based violence, including sexual violence in conflict, in
Mali. United Nations Action continued to fund a joint programme in Bosnia and
Herzegovina, which aims at addressing the legacy of conflict -related sexual violence,
and five projects in the Middle East and North Africa, which primarily support Syrian
and Iraqi survivors, including those who are refugees in Lebanon and Jordan. The
project in Jordan contributed to the adoption of a national action plan on women and
peace and security, which provides a protective framework for refugees who are
survivors of sexual violence. In 2017, the United Nations Action network conducted
joint technical support missions to Bangladesh, Bosnia and Herzegovina, the Central
African Republic, Iraq, Jordan and Lebanon to help to improve the response to
conflict-related sexual violence.
8.
Recognizing the existence of acts of sexual exploitation and abuse in the United
Nations, I have pledged to dramatically improve the way the Organization prevents
and responds to such conduct by any United Nations personnel. In my report on
special measures for protection from sexual exploitation and abuse ( A/72/751), I
provided an update on progress in implementing a new strategic approach, led by the
Special Coordinator on Improving the United Nations Response to Sexual
Exploitation and Abuse, including the appointment of a victims’ rights advocate,
improved transparency and information-sharing and the signing by 89 Member States
of a voluntary compact committing to a policy of zero tolerance of sexual exploitation
and abuse.

II. Sexual violence in conflict as a tactic of war and terrorism:
overview of current and emerging concerns
9.
A decade ago, the Security Council adopted the groundbreaking resolution 1820
(2008), which elevated the issue of conflict-related sexual violence on its agenda to a
threat to security and an impediment to the restoration of peace. The recognition of
the fact that such incidents are not random or isolated but integral to the operations,
ideology and economic strategy of a range of State actors and non-State armed groups
marked a shift in the classic security paradigm. Wars are still being fought on and
18-04633

3/35

S/2018/250

over the bodies of women, to control their production and reproduction by force.
Across regions, sexual violence has been perpetrated in public or witnessed by loved
ones, to terrorize communities and fracture families through the violation of taboos,
signifying that nothing is sacred and no one is safe. While significant normative
progress has been achieved in recent years, it is also clear that words on paper are not
yet matched by facts on the ground. Through successive resolutions, the Council has
called for a complete halt to sexual violence in conflict zones. The issue has since
been included in an increasing number of peace mandates, designation criteria of
sanctions regimes, training curricula of security sector institutions, mediation
processes and jurisprudence of national and international tribunals. As the issue has
become part of security discourse, we must remain vigilant to ensure that such
atrocities are never “normalized” or become entrenched in post-conflict societies,
because countless women, girls, men and boys still live under the shadow of sexual
violence.
10. The rise or resurgence of conflict and violent extremism, with the ensuing
proliferation of arms, mass displacement and collapse of the rule of law, triggers
patterns of sexual violence. That was evident across a range of settings in 2017, as
insecurity spread to new regions of the Central African Republic, as violence surged
in Ituri, the three Kasai provinces, North and South Kivu and Tanganyika in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, as conflict engulfed South Sudan, as “ethnic
cleansing” under the guise of clearance operations unfolded in northern Rakhine,
Myanmar, and in besieged areas of the Syrian Arab Republic and Yemen. In each case,
the atrocities were presaged by violations of human rights, including discrimination
on the basis of gender and group identity. In addition , in 2017 the space for civil
society continued to shrink, and the work of defending human rights became ever
more dangerous, with activists being raped for denouncing sexual violence, witnesses
intimidated for testifying at trials for war crimes and promi nent women silenced by
the threat of rape.
11. The preponderance of victims were politically and economically marginalized
women and girls, living beyond the reach and protection of the institutions that ensure
the rule of law. They are concentrated in remote, rural areas, which have the least
access to quality services, and in refugee and displacement settings. A risk factor
correlated with exposure to sexual violence is the increase in female -headed
households in the wake of war: in Yemen, their prevalence rose from 9 per cent before
the conflict to 30 per cent to date; in post-conflict Sri Lanka, they account for one
quarter of all households.
12. In 2017, sexual violence continued to be employed as a tactic of war, terrorism,
torture and repression, including the targeting of victims on the basis of their actual
or perceived ethnic, religious, political or clan affiliation. In many cases, the intent
and impact of such violence was to forcibly displace and disperse the targeted
community, with corrosive effects on social cohesion. That alarming trend is common
to a range of otherwise diverse conflicts examined herein, including in the Central
African Republic, the Democratic Republic of the Congo, Iraq, Mali, Myanmar,
Nigeria, Somalia and South Sudan. In those cases, to varying degrees, the strategic
nature of sexual violence was evident in the selective targeting of victims from
specific ethnic, religious or political groups, mirroring the fault lines of the wider
conflict or crisis and, in some cases, in the explicit enactment of the nationalist or
extremist ideologies espoused by the perpetrators. In such cases, conflict -related
sexual violence has served as an expression of ethnic hatred, even “ethnic cleansing”,
often accompanied by insults based on the victim’s identity and presumed allegiance.
It was also noted in several settings that women and girls rarely report sexual violence
by members of their own community in times of war, owing to overarching political
and ethnic loyalties and pressures.
4/35

18-04633

S/2018/250

13. Sexual violence has been employed by the armed and violent extremist groups
named in the present report as a vehicle of persecution, directed in particular towards
women and girls of reproductive age, as the perceived transmitters of cultural and
ethnic identity and the symbolic repositories of familial and national “honour”. Those
patterns of violence are embedded in the underlying structural conditions, including
inequality, discrimination on the basis of gender and the neglect of the rights of
minority groups, often exacerbated by militarization. Sexual violence in turn impedes
the realization of other rights. It continued to have a chilling effect on the participation
of women in the political, economic and security sectors in contexts such as
Afghanistan, Burundi and Libya. Moreover, a pattern observed across all 19 countries
considered herein is that the threat of sexual violence constrains freedom of
movement: the more militarized an area, the more constrained civilian existence
becomes, with devastating effects on lives and livelihoods.
14. The effects of sexual violence echo across generations, through trauma, stigma,
poverty, poor health and unwanted pregnancy. The children whose existence emanates
from that violence have been labelled “bad blood” or “children of the enemy”, and
alienated from their mother’s social group. Their vulnerability may leave them
susceptible to recruitment, radicalization and trafficking. In South Sudan, sexual
violence has become so prevalent that members of the Commiss ion on Human Rights
in South Sudan have described women and girls as “collectively traumatized”.
15. In the context of mass migration, sexual violence continued to be a push factor
for forced displacement in contexts such as Colombia, Iraq, the Syrian Arab Republic
and the Horn of Africa and elsewhere and remained a heightened risk in transit and
in refugee and displacement settings. Many women and girls were subjected to sexual
extortion by camp officials or by migrant smugglers in exchange for their assis tance.
The fear of rape as a factor inhibiting the return of displaced communities to their
homelands became more prevalent over the past year. Many women are reticent to
return to locations still under the control of the forces that compelled them to flee , in
particular in the absence of accountability, as noted by Rohingya refugees. Rapes have
been reported in villages to which displaced Darfuri women have returned, and
refugee women re-entering Burundi have been sexually harassed in retaliation for
having fled.
16. Conflict-related sexual violence has led to the dispossession of land, resources
and identity. In resolution 2331 (2016), the Security Council recognized that the threat
and use of sexual violence was a tactic used in the shadow economy of conflict and
terrorism, often forcing populations to flee contested territory, allowing aggressors to
seize control of the assets left behind. It has particularly severe effects on the physical
and economic security of rural women; indeed, the percentage of women who hold
legal title to land is halved in the aftermath of war. In conflict-affected settings, sexual
violence is frequently perpetrated in the course of forced evictions and raids, which
are rife with abductions for the purpose of ransoming or trafficking.
17. There is a discernible pattern of combatants profiting from sexual violence,
while communities suffer increased economic hardship. Women have been sexually
assaulted while conducting livelihood activities that are prescribed on the basis of
gender, such as trading at marketplaces, tending fields and fetching firewood, as seen
in the Central African Republic, the Democratic Republic of the Congo, Myanmar,
Nigeria, South Sudan and the Sudan. In certain cases, combatants have been permitted
to rape with impunity or with the tacit approval of their commanders, who rationalize
the practice as a form of compensation. Combatants raid, pillage, abduct, extort,
ransom, trade and traffic to supplement their personal micro-economies, while women
suffer structural discrimination at the macroeconomic level, which reduces their
resilience to financial and security shocks. Conflict thus compounds the gender gap

18-04633

5/35

S/2018/250

in access to land and other productive resources, by further reducing women to an
expendable “currency” in the political economy of war and terrorism.
18. Although it is increasingly clear that self-reliance, economic empowerment and
having a political voice are the most effective forms of protection fro m sexual
violence, desperate families are increasingly resorting to harmful and negative coping
mechanisms, including child marriage, polygamy, withdrawal from educational and
employment opportunities, transactional sex and/or “survival sex” and commercial
sexual exploitation. The despair wrought by protracted conflict has given rise to
further repression in the name of protection. In countries such as the Central African
Republic, Mali, Somalia and Yemen, rates of child marriage are among the highest in
the world; they have also spiked among Syrian refugees. Armed, terrorist and
transnational criminal groups directly profit from trafficking, with victims being
either abducted or deceived by false promises of lucrative job offers, their dreams of
finding safety and opportunity becoming nightmares of sexual slavery and forced
prostitution.
19. The persistent barriers to reporting are as much socioeconomic and cultural as
they are logistical, rendering sexual violence perpetrated in wartime among the least
reported crimes. For many survivors, fear of rape is swiftly followed by fear of
rejection, with communities being more likely to punish the victim than the
perpetrator. In addition to the debilitating physical and psychological trauma, the
stigma that follows in the wake of rape can have lasting, potentially lethal,
repercussions, including: “honour killings”, suicide, diseases, HIV and sexually
transmitted infections going untreated, traumatic fistula, unsafe abortion, maternal
mortality, poverty and high-risk survival behaviour. While the stigma in the wake of
rape is almost universal, its manifestations vary widely. For male survivors, sexual
violence remains shrouded in cultural taboos, with few, if any, support networks
available. Over 60 countries still do not include male victims within the scope of
sexual violence legislation, and many men and boys remain silent for fear of ostracism
or accusations of homosexuality, in particular where it is criminalized. Lesbian, gay,
bisexual, transgender and intersex individuals experience stigma and exclusion in
refugee settings, notably in the Middle East, with some citing fear of sexual violence
as a factor inducing their flight from the Syrian Arab Republic. Children conceived
through rape in wartime often struggle with issues of identity and belonging for
decades after the end of war, as seen in Bosnia and Herzegovina, Nepal and elsewhere.
Colombia is the only country in which children conceived through rape in wartime
are legally recognized as victims, although it has been difficult for them to gain access
to redress without being stigmatized. Socioeconomic reintegration support, including
stigma-alleviation efforts, should be a part of post-conflict reconstruction, however,
the limited rehabilitation packages available tend to focus on men who have
disengaged from armed and extremist groups, with scant assistance available for
women. Societies tend to view women and children formerly associated with violent
extremist groups as “affiliates” rather than victims, and, in some cases, actions by the
authorities have reinforced those suspicions. Local-level officials in Iraq have
reportedly designated children as “Da’esh terrorists” on their birth certificates, and,
in Libya, Nigeria and Somalia, returning women and girls have been detained as
“accomplices”. Fear of reprisals has driven renewed displacement, with some
survivors relocating to escape abuse by their own family and community. Former
abductees have even been forced to choose between keeping their children conc eived
through rape and returning to their families of origin. To alleviate stigma, concerted
engagement with religious and traditional leaders is required to help to shift harmful
social norms around honour, shame and victim-blaming.
20. Despite the increased awareness of the issue, most incidents of mass rape
continue to be met with mass impunity, as conflict shreds the social fabric and social
6/35

18-04633

S/2018/250

contract, subverting the rule of law. To date, not a single member of ISIL or Boko
Haram has been prosecuted for offenses of sexual violence. The accumulation of
unresolved crimes fuels new cycles of violence, vengeance and vigilantism, which
are inimical to reconciliation. The chronic underrepresentation of women in the
justice and security sector impedes reporting and response efforts. In some cases,
suspects have been released from custody with the collusion of local officials who
share their political or ethnic affiliation, and victims have been retraumatized. The
practice of mandatory reporting to the police, including as a prerequisite to gaining
access to health care, deters survivors from seeking services in several settings. Even
where that requirement has been waived in law, the change has yet to be realized in
practice. Transitional justice presents a window of opportunity for tackling systemic
discrimination, yet structurally transformative reparations continue to elude survivors
of sexual violence. It is still challenging to ensure that they are recognized as
legitimate victims of war and terrorism, which would guarantee equality before the
law and pave the way for meaningful redress. Most cases are referred to customary
or traditional courts, including an estimated 90 per cent of cases in Somalia and South
Sudan, which often require victims of rape to marry the perpetrator. Thirty-seven
countries still exempt perpetrators of rape from prosecution when they are married
to, or subsequently marry, their victims. Such practices fail to provide victims with a
remedy, prospective perpetrators with a deterrent or society with a precedent for the
future.
21. In 2017, some progress was made towards combating cultures of impunity, such
as in Afghanistan, Somalia, and the Sudan, where national penal codes were brought
into alignment with international standards by delinking rape from adultery. Pursuant
to Security Council resolution 2106 (2013), several States continued to implement
joint communiqués and action plans to curb conflict-related sexual violence, notably
in the Central African Republic, Côte d’Ivoire, the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, Guinea, Iraq, Somalia and South Sudan. In the case of Côte d ’Ivoire, whose
army was the first party to be delisted pursuant to that mandate, no new cases of
sexual violence by members of the Ivorian security forces were recorded in 2017,
which illustrates what is possible when political will and comprehensive risk
mitigation measures are put into place. Progress was noted in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, where two emblematic cases were prosecuted in 2017: a
colonel of the Forces armées de la République démocratique du Congo (FARDC) was
convicted for the war crimes of rape and pillage affecting 150 civilians in Musenyi,
South Kivu; and a member of Parliament in South Kivu was convicted of a crime
against humanity for his role in the abduction and rape of 39 children in Kavumu. In
South Sudan, trials of Sudan People’s Liberation Army (SPLA) soldiers for the rape
and gang rape of humanitarian workers at the Terrain hotel compound commenced,
although no senior commanders had been indicted. In June, in a landmark ruling in
the case concerning Bosco Ntaganda, the International Criminal Court decided that
international humanitarian law did not contain a general rule that cat egorically
excluded members of an armed group from protection against crimes, including
crimes of rape or sexual slavery, committed by members of the same armed group. In
addition, the Court continued its hearings on reparations for victims of sexual
violence in the case concerning Jean-Pierre Bemba.
22. Transitional justice must help to address the underlying causes of conflict and
crises. As I have emphasized since the start of my tenure, the international community
spends far more time and resources responding to crises than preventing them. It is
critical to rebalance our approach by upholding human rights, ensuring sustainable
development and harnessing the power of the participation of women, which makes
peace agreements more durable, societies more resilient and economies more
dynamic. As part of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development, we must address
the structural drivers of conflict and build stable, equitable societies by reinforcing
18-04633

7/35

S/2018/250

institutions that uphold the rule of law. My Special Representative Pramila Patten
took office in June and has since articulated a three-pillar priority strategy that aligns
with that approach, namely: (a) converting cultures of impunity into cultures of
deterrence; (b) addressing structural gender-based inequality as the root cause and
invisible driver of sexual violence in times of war and peace; and (c) fostering
national ownership and leadership for a sustainable, survivor-centred response that
empowers civil society and women’s rights defenders. Many of the atrocities
enumerated in the present report could have been prevented if more had been done,
early and collectively. I therefore urge the international community to give that
agenda the investment and action it deserves, so as to replace horror with hope.

III. Sexual violence in conflict-affected settings
Afghanistan
23. Reporting of and response efforts to sexual violence across Afghanistan
remained limited, owing to instability, inadequate services, access constraints,
discriminatory cultural practices and a climate of impunity in which those who defend
women’s rights face threats from the Taliban and other anti-Government elements. In
2017, the United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA) documented
53 cases of sexual violence against women and girls, of which 3 were verified as
conflict-related sexual violence committed by members of illegal armed groups and
the local police. UNAMA also verified four cases of sexual violence against boys,
three by members of the Afghan National Defence and Security Forces and one by
members of the Taliban, including incidents of bacha bazi, a practice involving the
sexual abuse of boys by men in positions of power. UNAMA received a further
78 credible allegations of bacha bazi that could not be verified due to the sensitivities
involved. Efforts led by the Afghanistan Independent Human Rights Commission
resulted in the criminalization of the practice in the revised Penal Code, which entered
into force in February 2018. The revised legislation also incor porates provisions that
bring the definition of rape closer to aligning with international standards, rectifying
the prior conflation of rape with adultery, which had discouraged reporting.
24. With regard to response, a major challenge is that women still comprise just
1.8 per cent of the Afghan National Police. In October, the Ministry of Interior Affairs
inaugurated separate station facilities, including interview rooms, for female officers
in Herat and Kabul as part of efforts to recruit and retain mo re women. The Ministry
has also taken steps to develop a complaints mechanism for reporting sexual
harassment, assaults and threats against female officers. Following the 2015 launch
of its national action plan on Security Council resolution 1325 (2000), the
Government tabled a budget for implementation that includes measures to address
sexual violence.
Recommendation
25. I urge the Government to reinforce the capacity of its justice and security sect or
to provide accountability for crimes of sexual violence, including by vetting the
armed and police forces for suspected perpetrators and increasing the representation
of women. I further call upon the Government to allocate adequate resources for the
implementation of its national action plan and to put into place comprehensive
measures to implement its revised Penal Code.
Central African Republic
26. As insecurity spread to previously stable regions of eastern Central African
Republic during 2017, conflict-related sexual violence also increased in severity and
8/35

18-04633

S/2018/250

scale. Armed clashes propelled mass population movements, including across the
border to the Democratic Republic of the Congo, with numerous cases of sexual
violence occurring during flight. Internally displaced persons number more than
688,000 nationwide, with armed elements posing a threat to civilians in the camps
due to the absence of Government personnel to manage and secure the sites. Sexual
violence employed as a tool of intimidation, retaliation and punishment, in order to
terrorize entire families and communities, have been reported with shocking
regularity. Patterns of sexual violence of an ethnic and sectarian nature impede the
mobility needed for women to undertake vital economic and livelihood activities,
such as gaining access to fields and markets. The rape of men and boys has also been
a feature of attacks by armed groups on civilian villages, such as in Nana-Grébizi or
in Basse-Kotto where 13 men were raped. Children conceived through rape are rarely
accepted by society, and unsafe abortion remains a leading cause of maternal
mortality.
27. During the reporting period, the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated
Stabilization Mission in the Central African Republic (MINUSCA) documented
308 incidents of conflict-related sexual violence, affecting 155 women, 138 girls
(including 48 recruited by armed groups), 13 men and 2 boys. Tho se incidents
included 253 rapes, of which 181 were gang rapes, five attempted rapes, 28 forced
marriages, 2 cases of sexual slavery and 20 cases of other sexual assault. The
perpetrators included elements of ex-Séléka (179 cases), anti-balaka (55), the Lord’s
Resistance Army (14) and Retour, réclamation et réhabilitation (12). A member of the
armed forces of the Central African Republic was also implicated in one incident. The
179 cases attributed to ex-Séléka elements included: 36 cases perpetrated by the
coalition of the Front populaire pour la renaissance de la Centrafrique (FPRC) and
the Mouvement patriotique pour la Centrafrique (MPC); 29 by the coalition of MPC
and Révolution et justice (RJ); 39 by Union pour la paix en Centrafrique; 17 by MPC;
14 by the Front démocratique du peuple centrafricain; nine by FPRC; one by the
Rassemblement patriotique pour le renouveau de la Centrafrique; one by RJ; and
33 by unspecified elements.
28. Humanitarian service providers assisted 272 survivors of rape perpetrat ed by
parties to the conflict. In the face of the virtual collapse of the public health system,
most medical and psychosocial support services are provided by non -governmental
organizations. The scarcity of services is compounded by poor infrastructure,
including limited transportation, which poses particular challenges for women in
remote, rural areas. As a consequence, only 36 per cent of registered victims were
able to gain access to emergency assistance within 72 hours of the incident. Of the
victims of rape receiving care, 98 per cent of the adults were women and 99 per cent
of the children were girls. In 2017, the United Nations Children ’s Fund and partners
helped to secure the release of 3,419 children (1,090 girls and 2,329 boys) from armed
groups, with most of the forcibly-recruited girls reporting incidents of sexual abuse.
Girls associated with armed groups who return home pregnant or with children are
often rejected by their communities, forcing many to turn to sex work as a means of
survival. In some cases, stigmatization is itself a driver of displacement: two girls
from Haute-Kotto who became pregnant as a result of rape were force d to relocate to
different districts to escape abuse by their families. Instability has also perpetuated
child marriage as a perceived means of protecting girls from sexual violence.
29. In August, the United Nations registered the first case in which mem bers of a
party to the conflict were convicted for crimes of sexual violence , namely, two
anti-balaka elements for the rape of a 16-year-old girl in Bambari. Although their
public trial sends an important message, they received lenient sentences of two y ears’
imprisonment and a fine. MINUSCA conducted sensitization sessions with
ex-combatants, local authorities and community members to raise awareness of the
18-04633

9/35

S/2018/250

gravity of sexual violence. The Government has accelerated efforts to activate the
special criminal court established in law in 2015 through the appointment of national
and international staff. President of the Central African Republic Faustin Archange
Touadéra inaugurated the joint rapid intervention unit on sexual violence in June
2017, which has since addressed 254 complaints.
Recommendation
30. I encourage the Government to ensure the provision of medical, psychosocial
and legal support services to survivors of conflict-related sexual violence and to
provide the means necessary, including a dedicated budget, to strengthen the capacity
of the joint rapid intervention unit on sexual violence to investigate cases, working in
collaboration with the prosecutor of the special criminal court. I call upon the
Government to prioritize the investigation and prosecution of cases of sexual
violence, including the provision of adequate protection for victims and witnesses.
Colombia
31. In November 2016, negotiations between the Government of Colombia and the
Fuerzas Armadas Revolucionarias de Colombia-Ejército del Pueblo (FARC-EP)
culminated in a historic peace accord, marking the close of half a century of conflict
between the parties, a conflict in which sexual violence was wides pread and
systematic. Gender justice was placed at the heart of the agreement, which includes
100 provisions on gender and women’s rights, a number of which specifically address
conflict-related sexual violence. The agreement names the Office of my Special
Representative, the United Nations Entity for Gender Equality and the Empowe rment
of Women (UN-Women), the Government of Sweden and the Women’s International
Democratic Federation as parties supporting implementation. In its resolution
2366 (2017) of 10 July 2017, the Security Council authorized the creation of the
United Nations Verification Mission in Colombia to oversee the next phase of
implementation, including monitoring the political, economic and social reintegration
of FARC-EP. Efforts have been made to ensure that all monitors and observers are
trained on matters relating to gender and conflict-related sexual violence. In October
2017, a ceasefire was agreed upon between the Government and the Ejército de
Liberación Nacional, as well as a mechanism for monitoring, oversight and
verification, the terms of which include an annex on gender mainstreaming and a road
map for responding to sexual violence, although talks have since been suspended.
32. Colombia has a robust normative framework, although gaining access to justice
remains a challenge. In 2017, the national victims’ unit registered 24,576 victims of
conflict-related sexual violence, of which one third had received compensation.
Although that level of reparative justice for sexual violence perpetrated in wartime is
unprecedented globally, administering collective reparations remains difficult owing
to the large number of victims concerned and the challenge of identifying victims in
ways that are non-prejudicial. Regarding efforts to promote accountability, by the end
of 2017, the Office of the Attorney-General had issued indictments in 17 per cent of
cases of sexual violence, 5 per cent of which resulted in convictions, including three
criminal sentences for conflict-related sexual violence perpetrated by members of the
Autodefensas Gaitanistas de Colombia.
33. Despite positive steps towards consolidating peace, sporadic violence continued
to displace thousands of civilians in 2017, most of them women and children (70 per
cent), with Colombians of African descent and indigenous communities
disproportionately affected (73 per cent). Sexual violence continued to be a driver of
forced displacement. In one illustrative incident, a displaced woman from Arauca
province was forcibly taken across the border to the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela
where she was raped by members of an armed group who had been threatening her
10/35

18-04633

S/2018/250

and demanding money. Upon her release, she fled to a new location in search of safety.
Women’s rights defenders who are Colombians of African descent and indigenous
persons have been forced to flee their homes following threats of sexual violence.
Women community leaders, especially those who denounce gender-based violence,
face threats, attacks and sexual assaults by members o f armed groups. Illegal
economic activity continues to fuel the conflict and the heightened risk of sexual
violence. In response to the demand for sexual services by certain armed groups, drug
trafficking cartels have facilitated the sexual exploitation of women and girls.
Criminal networks, primarily involved in illicit mining activities, have also trafficked
indigenous women and girls internally and across borders for the purpose of forced
prostitution. In 2017, the early warning system of the Office of t he Ombudsman
issued 22 reports on the elevated risk of conflict-related sexual violence, including
two cases of the cross-border trafficking of Venezuelan women.
34. Official statistics indicate that 73 per cent of victims of rape are girls, often
leading to teenage pregnancy and school dropout. Girls between 12 and 16 years of
age were subjected to targeted rape threats by members of the post -demobilization
groups Autodefensas Gaitanistas de Colombia and Clan del Golfo, in four
departments in the west of the country. The United Nations verified the sexual abuse
of two civilian men by members of a post-demobilization group in Putumayo province
in 2017, although male survivors are generally reluctant to seek support for fear of
reprisals. Lesbian, gay, bisexual, transgender and intersex persons have also been
harassed by armed actors, but rarely report sexual or other abuse. In the report of
September 2017, the Ombudsman noted the risk of sexual violence in and around
FARC-EP demobilization sites, also noting that women ex-combatants had suffered
domestic and intimate partner violence, which underscores the importance of having
a gender-responsive policy on disarmament and reintegration.
Recommendation
35. I commend the parties on elevating gender to the heart of the peace process and
urge them to ensure that it remains central during implementation, including by
strengthening institutional capacity and fostering broad social ownership of the
gender-related provisions of the agreement. I urge the Government to ensure services,
justice and reparations for survivors of conflict-related sexual violence, paying
particular attention to the plight and rights of women and girls from rural areas,
indigenous communities, Colombians of African descent, lesbian, gay, bisexual,
transgender and intersex individuals and female-headed households. I urge relevant
parties to ensure that gender and conflict-related sexual violence are central
considerations in the Ejército de Liberación Nacional peace process.
Democratic Republic of the Congo
36. The progress achieved in the Democratic Republic of the Congo in addressing
the decades of widespread sexual violence used as a tactic of war has been jeopardized
in recent months by an unstable political environment, unpreceden ted levels of
displacement, continued armed clashes and weak State structures. Alarming patterns
of ethnically-motivated sexual violence emerged in Tanganyika province, arising
from the perceived marginalization of the Twa ethnic group, which has set in mo tion
cycles of violence and revenge between Twa and Luba militias. In 2017, Twa militia
in Tanganyika were responsible for the highest number of documented cases of sexual
violence perpetrated by a non-State armed group. Conflict-related sexual violence
perpetrated with extreme brutality has also spread to the three Kasai provinces. In
that context, anti-Government Kamuina Nsapu militia and pro-Government Bana
Mura militia have both targeted civilians believed to support their adversaries.
Deliberate attacks against communities along ethnic fault lines have included the use
18-04633

11/35

S/2018/250

of taboo practices, such as victims being raped in front of relatives, a pregnant woman
having her fetus ripped out and at least one victim being forced to perform sex acts
on a family member before being executed. In April, Bana Mura militants raped
41 women and two girls in a series of attacks on Lulua and Luba villages.
37. During the period under review, the United Nations Organization Stabilization
Mission in the Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUSCO) verified 804 cases
of conflict-related sexual violence, affecting 507 women, 265 girls, 30 men and
2 boys, representing an increase from the previous reporting period. During the same
period, the United Nations Population Fund (UNFPA) reported 5,783 cases of sexual
violence in conflict-affected provinces, more than twice as many as in 2016.
Approximately 72 per cent of cases were attributed to non-State armed groups,
notably Twa militia in Tanganyika and the Force de résistance patr iotique de l’Ituri
(FRPI) operating in Irumu territory in Ituri. More than half of the sexual assaults by
FRPI involved multiple attackers, and 40 per cent of incidents were perpetrated in
conjunction with looting, pillage and theft.
38. There was an increase in the number of incidents attributed to both FARDC
(28 per cent) and the Congolese National Police (109 per cent) in 2017. Over one
third of those sexually assaulted by members of the national police were being
detained in police custody at the time. A significant proportion of the victims were
children, in 41 per cent of offences perpetrated by members of FARDC and in 42 per
cent of those perpetrated by national police officers. Despite recent developments of
concern, the overall number of incidents of conflict-related sexual violence by
elements of the State security apparatus has declined since 2013, following concerted
efforts by the authorities. The FARDC hierarchy has continued to implement its action
plan, resulting in undertakings being signed by 57 commanders and 370 officers being
trained, although disciplinary action against high-ranking offenders is uneven.
Implementation of the national police action plan is also advancing slowly.
39. The military authorities in South Kivu successfully prosecuted three emblematic
cases of conflict-related sexual violence in 2017, which included the conviction of a
FARDC colonel in the Becker case for command responsibility for rape as a war crime
in Musenyi, a commander in the Forces démocratiques de libération du Rwanda for
sexual violence as a war crime in the Nzovu case and a member of Parliament in South
Kivu and his militia of a crime against humanity for the abduction and rape of
39 children in the Kavumu case. In addition, commander Ntabo Ntaberi Sheka
surrendered to the authorities in July and is expected to stand trial for his role in the
2010 mass rape of 387 civilians in Walikale, North Kivu. Overall, 42 members of
FARDC and 17 members of the national police were convicted by military tribunals
of rape, although bureaucratic hurdles preclude victims from obtaining reparations.
40. Medical assistance was provided to over 5,200 survivors of sexual violence by
United Nations agencies in 2017, with a further 2,243 civilians receiving counselling
and referrals in legal clinics supported by MONUSCO. The Government made
significant progress in its advocacy and outreach to raise awareness of sexual
violence, through radio and television programmes, and by oper ating a nationwide
helpline for victims. In July 2017, the Deputy Secretary-General, the UnderSecretary-General/Executive Director of the United Nations Entity for Gender
Equality and the Empowerment of Women, my Special Representative and the Special
Envoy of the Chairperson of the African Union Commission on Women, Peace and
Security jointly visited Goma to highlight the importance of the participation of
women in peace, security and development processes and the necessity of safe and
dignified return for displaced women under conditions that guarantee their economic
and physical security.

12/35

18-04633

S/2018/250

Recommendation
41. I urge the Government to reinforce its efforts to combat sexual violence and to
scale up services, including socioeconomic reintegration support for displaced and
returnee women. I call for the armed and security forces to be adequately vetted and
trained, to uphold a policy of zero tolerance of such violence by bringing offenders
to justice, irrespective of rank, and to ensure that victims and witnesses are protected
and that adequate reparations are made to victims.
Iraq
42. The liberation of Mosul, Tall Afar and other areas from the control of ISIL in
2017 marked a major milestone for Iraq and the region. Government data indicate that
100 Yazidi and Christian women and children were rescued during the operation in
Mosul in July, with a further 25 freed following the operation in Tall Afar, which
ended in August. Turkmen Shi’a women and girls were also reportedly rescued during
those offensives. Sunni women and girls living under ISIL occupation also endured
forced and coerced marriages, in which rape was used as a weapon of punishment for
disobeying ISIL rules. Overall, as at November 2017, 3,202 civilians (1,135 women,
903 girls, 335 men and 829 boys) had been released from ISIL captivity, while a
further 3,215 (1,510 women and girls and 1,705 men and boys) remain missing.
43. The United Nations verified nine cases of conflict-related sexual violence
during the period under review, affecting seven girls and two boys. It included forced
marriage to ISIL fighters in the cases involving girls and abducti on in the cases
concerning boys, with a 16-year-old boy being held by an armed actor suspected of
ISIL affiliation who severely beat his genitals and threatened him with other forms of
sexual assault and a 14-year-old boy who was raped for three consecutive nights in
an ISIL training camp. As ISIL militants retreat into the Syrian Arab Republic, there
is a heightened risk of the sale, trade and trafficking of women and children who
remain under their control. Concerns have also been raised about a practice of local
officials registering children on their birth certificate with the designation “ISIL
terrorist” on the basis of assumptions about their parentage.
44. Following the appointment of a senior women’s protection adviser in February,
monitoring, analysis and reporting arrangements on conflict-related sexual violence
were established to expand the evidence base for action. The United Nations
continues to support the Government in building its capacity for the timely delivery
of multisectoral services for survivors of sexual violence, including scaling up the
provision of psychosocial, medical and legal assistance in areas with a high
concentration of internally displaced persons. The Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR) has supported a relocation programme,
through which 844 survivors of conflict-related sexual violence and members of their
family were referred for resettlement. Progress has also been made in advancing the
implementation of the joint communiqué on the prevention and response to conflictrelated sexual violence signed between the Government and the United Nations on
23 September 2016. Prime Minister of Iraq Haider Al Abadi issued a statement on
19 June 2017 to mark the International Day for the Elimination of Sexual Violence in
Conflict, underscoring his commitment to the full implementation of the
communiqué. Pursuant to that agreement, the Government is working to ensure that
a gender perspective is included in its national counter-terrorism strategy. My Special
Representative visited Iraq in February 2018 to finalize an implementation plan for
the communiqué in consultation with high-level focal points in Baghdad and Erbil.
45. Justice and reparations for crimes of conflict-related sexual violence, which
particularly affected women and girls belonging to ethnic and religious minority
groups pursuant to the ISIL policy to suppress, expel or destroy those groups, will be
18-04633

13/35

S/2018/250

critical to both intracommunal and intercommunal reconciliation. Currently, trials are
being conducted under antiterrorism legislation, which does not explicitly designate
sexual violence as a crime. Moreover, international crimes are not yet reflected in
national law. The investigative team to be established by the Secretary-General
pursuant to Security Council resolution 2379 (2017) is expected to play an important
role in supporting national efforts to hold ISIL to account. Another challenge is the
continued underreporting of sexual violence, owing to insecurity, fear of retaliation
and the prevailing context of gender inequality and harmful social norms relating to
“family honour”, compounded by the presumption of “guilt by association” facing
women and girls forcibly married to ISIL fighters. Negative coping mechanisms have
been adopted in situations where survivors are deprived of the material support of
their families, including early marriage, in particular in displacement settings.
Declarations by Yazidi and Sunni spiritual leaders that encourage solidarity with
survivors of rape and children conceived as a result have helped to foster family
reunification. One such example is the ruling of the Sunni Endowment Diwan on
Islam’s position on raped women of February 2017. Conversely, amendments
proposed in November 2017 to the Personal Status Law No. 188 (1959) to authorize
polygamy and lower the age of marriage sparked national and international concern,
before being quashed by the women’s parliamentary committee.
Recommendation
46. I call upon the Government to ensure that offenses of sexual violence are
prosecuted as standalone crimes, including in the context of terrorism trials, and that
services, including shelters operated in collaboration with women ’s civil society
groups, are protected and scaled up as part of efforts to ensure the socioeconomic
reintegration of women and children released from ISIL captivity and to refrain from
recording prejudicial information on birth certificates.
Libya
47. Libya remains at the epicentre of the global migration crisis, while also being
affected internally by instability, political fragmentation and the proliferation of arms
and armed groups. That volatile climate has allowed transnational smuggling and
trafficking networks to thrive. Patterns of sexual violence against migrants, refugees
and asylum seekers, perpetrated not only by smugglers, traffickers and criminal
networks, but also by police and guards associated with the Ministry of the Interior
in some cases, have been documented. The Department of Combating Illegal
Migration and the coastguard have also been implicated in violations. Cases of sexual
assault have been documented in the internal security apparatus in Kuwayfiah, under
the command of Colonel Mohammad Idriss al-Seaiti (see S/2017/466). In such
settings, migrants have described being taken by armed men, including Department
guards, from their shared cells to be repeatedly raped by multiple perpetrators.
Testimonies also indicate that migrant women have been abducted, raped and detained
by armed groups, with some released following the payment of ransom and others
sold into sexual slavery. In October 2017, a Somali national was convicted by a court
in Italy of multiple crimes against migrants in Bani Walid, including sexual violence.
In September 2017, following international pressure over alleged sexual abuse, the
Department announced the closure of a notorious detention centre in Surman. The
Tariq al-Sikkah detention centre was also closed, following similar allegations,
although none of the abusers have been brought to justice. In some detention centres,
in particular those in which men, women and children were not detained separately,
women have been subjected to strip searches under the scrutiny of male guards. In
2017, the United Nations Support Mission in Libya (UNSMIL) documented cases of
ill treatment, including threats of a sexual nature, at the Mitiga detention facility
operated by the Special Deterrence Force and the Central Security- Abu Salim brigade
14/35

18-04633

S/2018/250

and at other locations formally under the control of the Ministry of the Interior. Sexual
violence has also reportedly been used as a form of torture against men in detention
centres operated by armed actors.
48. Groups known to have pledged allegiance to ISIL have been implicated in
abductions and sexual abuse. Libyan authorities have detained a number of women
and girls rescued from ISIL captivity, often held in precarious conditions. Following
military operations in Sirte against fighters loyal to ISIL, at least 117 Libyan and
foreign women, including many who had endured physical and sexual abuse, were
taken into the custody of the security forces in Misratah and transferred to Jawwiyah
prison in December 2016. Of those women, 31 were released in April 2017, having
been cleared of terrorism charges by a prosecutorial committee. The remainder
continue to be held arbitrarily, without judicial review. UNSMIL has received reports
of physical and sexual abuse of women held in Jawwiyah prison.
49. Women’s rights defenders and women active in public life continue to be
targeted by non-State armed groups and subjected to sexual and other abuse, including
by the Libyan National Army. Women and girls accused of engaging in sexual
relations outside of marriage, which is criminalized in Libya , have been subjected to
invasive “virginity tests” pursuant to judicial orders. In September 2017, UNSMIL
supported a women’s forum on constitutional and legislative reform, which produced
a draft law criminalizing all forms of violence against women.
Recommendation
50. I call upon the authorities to take measures to mitigate the risk of sexual violence
in detention settings, inter alia, by staffing women’s facilities with female guards and
allowing humanitarian access. In line with Security Council r esolution 2331 (2016),
those who escape from ISIL captivity should not be presumed to be accomplices
without credible evidence, but rather be supported as victims of terrorism. I further
call upon the authorities to cooperate with the International Criminal Court, including
its investigation into sexual violence, and to prosecute perpetrators of sexual violence
and deliver reparations to victims, in line with Decree No. 119 (2014) of the Council
of Ministers concerning recognition of victims of sexual violence as victims of war,
which allows for reparations, healing and legal support.
Mali
51. The precarious security situation in the northern and central regions of Mali,
where threats continue to be directed against peacekeepers, national security forces
and humanitarian actors, impedes efforts to investigate conflict -related sexual
violence. Many survivors suffer in silence, due to the scarcity of services and the lack
of trust in national institutions. Cultural taboos, compounded by the fear of
stigmatization and reprisal, also perpetuate underreporting. Many women and girls
remain traumatized by the Islamist occupation of 2012 –2013, during which rape and
forced marriage were rampant. Impunity prevails in the northern regions, where there
is no functioning justice system. In addition to its internal security challenges, Mali
has become a transit point for migratory flows, with numerous violations reported
along migration routes, as well as in mining zones, where women have been abused
by smugglers and forced into prostitution.
52. In 2017, the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission
in Mali (MINUSMA) documented 16 cases of conflict-related sexual violence, most
of which concerned women and girls traveling by public transportation on the axis
connecting key regions of Gao, Timbuktu, Ménaka, Mopti and the Niger border. Of
those cases, eight were committed by unidentified armed men, one by a member of
the Haut Conseil pour l’unité de l’Azawad (HCUA), three by elements of the
18-04633

15/35

S/2018/250

Coordination des mouvements et fronts patriotiques de résistance II, two by elements
of the Mouvement pour le salut de l’Azawad and two by members of the Malian
Defence and Security Forces. The cases involved 11 incidents of rape and five
incidents of gang rape in Gao, Timbuktu, Ménaka and Mopti. Two of the victims were
members of the Bella ethnic minority group, adding to the 10 cases of sexual violence
reported against Bella women in 2016 that remain unaddressed. On 7 July in Kidal,
the Coordination des mouvements de l’Azawad (CMA) issued a unilateral
communiqué on preventing and responding to conflict-related sexual violence,
endorsed by the movements that compose CMA, including HCUA, the Mouvement
arabe de l’Azawad and the Mouvement national de libération de l’Azawad, the latter
of which is listed in the annex to the present report. The Platform coalition of armed
groups continued to implement the provisions of its 2016 communiqué on preventing
and punishing perpetrators of sexual violence.
53. The United Nations continued to support the development of a national strategy
to combat gender-based violence through the provision of technical and financial
support to the Government. MINUSMA also facilitated the economi c reintegration of
survivors of sexual violence through quick-impact projects for income generation.
Prevention and response to conflict-related sexual violence was reflected in the
framework for the Joint Force of the Group of Five for the Sahel, and area s of
cooperation were identified, such as training members of the Joint Force on referral
pathways for survivors, including those released from terrorist and trafficking
networks. As part of ongoing trust-building measures between women and the
members of the justice sector, projects supported by the Peacebuilding Fund in Gao
and Timbuktu have helped to increase the rate of reporting gender-based violence to
the police from 1 per cent in 2014 to almost 14 per cent in 2017. In recent years,
MINUSMA has supported a coalition of non-governmental organizations in bringing
to court 120 cases of conflict-related sexual violence perpetrated during the Islamist
occupation and the Tuareg rebellion in the north.
Recommendation
54. I urge the Government to sign the joint communiqué with my Special
Representative, which has been pending since April 2016, in order to enable a more
structured response to conflict-related sexual violence, to adopt legislation
prohibiting all forms of sexual violence, to provide access t o justice and services for
survivors and to expand socioeconomic reintegration support. I call upon the
Government and the donor community to ensure that sufficient resources are made
available to prioritize the investigation and prosecution of cases of se xual violence.
Myanmar
55. The mass exodus of almost 700,000 Rohingya civilians from Rakhine state in
Myanmar, to Cox’s Bazar, Bangladesh, created a humanitarian crisis that seized the
attention of the world. As documented by international medical staff and service
providers operating in Bangladesh, many civilians bear the physical and
psychological scars of brutal sexual assault. The assaults were allegedly perpetrated
by members of the Myanmar Armed Forces (Tatmadaw), at times acting in concert
with members of local militias, in the course of the military “clearance” operations in
October 2016 and August 2017 characterized by the United Nations High
Commissioner for Human Rights as “ethnic cleansing”. The widespread threat and
use of sexual violence was integral to their strategy, humiliating, terrorizing and
collectively punishing the Rohingya community and serving as a calculated tool to
force them to flee their homelands and prevent their return. Violence was visited upon
women, including pregnant women, who are seen as custodians and propagators of
ethnic identity, as well as on young children, who represent the future of the group.
16/35

18-04633

S/2018/250

The violence is linked with an inflammatory narrative alleging that high fertility rates
among the Rohingya community represent an existential threat to the majority
population. When my Special Representative visited camps and settlements in Cox ’s
Bazar in November 2017, she heard accounts from almost every woman and girl of
patterns of rape, gang rape, forced nudity and abduction for the purpose of sex ual
slavery during military campaigns of slaughter, looting and the razing of homes and
villages. She also received first-hand testimony of women having been subjected to
invasive body searches, including vaginal searches, performed by male security
officers, ostensibly to look for valuables and documentation, and to sexual harassment
during house-to-house searches. In its resolution S-27/1 of 5 December 2017, the
Human Rights Council expressed grave concern at consistent allegations of
widespread sexual violence, including rape and gang rape. In its resolution 72/248 of
24 December 2017, the General Assembly expressed its deep distress about the
excessive and unlawful use of force in Myanmar, including sexual violence.
Moreover, paragraph 6 of the arrangement on the return of displaced persons from
Rakhine state, agreed upon between the Governments of Myanmar and Bangladesh
on 23 November, refers to “children born of unwarranted incidents”, which implies
children conceived through rape. My Special Representative visited Nay Pyi Taw and
Yangon, Myanmar, in December where she met with the State Counsellor and senior
military officials, with a view to generating commitments to address conflict -related
sexual violence in line with Security Council resolution 2106 (2013), and following
the presidential statement of 6 November 2017 (S/PRST/2017/22), which encouraged
the Government to work with the Office of the Special Representative.
56. The United Nations verified the following specific and indicative cases of
conflict-related sexual violence perpetrated during the military “clearance”
operations in northern Rakhine: seven rapes reportedly perpetr ated by Tatmadaw
elements in Buthidaung on 4 and 5 May; the rape of 32 Rohingya women and one
girl, allegedly by the Tatmadaw and border guard police, also in Buthidaung, as part
of perceived “punitive operations”; the rape of a girl by a Tatmadaw soldier in
Maungdaw in January; 30 girls subjected to sexual violence by Government forces
during military operations; and one girl allegedly raped by a member of the Arakan
Rohingya Salvation Army. In early 2017, Tatmadaw soldiers allegedly raped a
16-year-old girl and her 20-year-old sister during operations in Maungdaw. After
mentioning the incident to visiting journalists, she was arrested and forced to undergo
a medical examination. On 30 August, a report was received of the alleged arbitrary
detention and rape of several women in the village of Maung Nu in Buthidaung
township. Three girls who reported sexual violence were provided with case
management services in northern Rakhine, as well as four children who were victims
of sexual assault, in central Rakhine. The prevailing security environment precludes
more complete documentation, given the climate of impunity, intimidation, reprisals
and access restrictions.
57. Women and girls who manage to flee to Bangladesh may confront new risks,
including forced marriage, sexual exploitation and trafficking. Humanitarians have
provided services to 2,756 survivors of sexual and gender-based violence, although
47 per cent of settlement areas still lack basic clinical management services for
survivors of rape and other forms of sexual and reproductive health care. Despite the
urgency, the immediate funding gap for the provision of those services exceeds
$9 million. The “women- and child-friendly spaces” provide a lifeline for survivors
and those at risk, fostering peer support and solidarity, in a setting where men have
the monopoly on leadership, decision-making and public space, with all imams and
Rohingya community leaders (or majhis) being men. Moreover, educational and
employment opportunities are extremely limited in the camps, even though they are
critical for offsetting the disillusionment and despair that can give rise to alcohol and

18-04633

17/35

S/2018/250

substance abuse, criminality, communal tensions and radicalization, which are risk
factors for gender-based violence.
58. Other ethnic minority groups were also affected by conflict-related sexual
violence in 2017, linked with intensified clashes and militarization in regions such as
Kachin, northern Shan and parts of the south-east. More than 98,000 civilians live in
displaced persons camps in Kachin and northern Shan states, with reports of high
levels of harassment at checkpoints by members of both the military and ethnic armed
groups. Trafficking and sexual slavery remain serious risks facing women and girls
in those locations. In Kachin, 10 cases of rape of internally displaced minors were
reported, including one incident involving the Tatmadaw and another involving the
Kachin Independence Army. Reports of the trafficking of six women for purposes
including forced marriage, rape and sexual exploitation were also reported in Kachin.
In northern Shan, a report surfaced of a rape allegedly committed by two members of
the Ta’ang National Liberation Army in October 2017. In the south-eastern region of
Taninthayi, a Tatmadaw soldier who allegedly raped a 16-year-old girl in April 2017
absconded and has been missing since the incident.
59. Such patterns of violence occur against a backdrop of entrenched gender-based
inequality, which impedes the ability of women to participate in political, economic
and social life. In 2017, the Government took several significant steps to address this,
such as drafting a law on prevention of violence against women for submission to
parliament, constituting a cross-ministerial committee to implement the national
strategic plan for the advancement of women, establishing a gender-based violence
hotline and revising the Child Law to include a provision on conflict -related sexual
violence. Concerns remain about the mandatory reporting to the police of cases of
sexual violence by service providers, an obligation that was waived in law in 2014
but persists in practice, inhibiting many from seeking support.
Recommendation
60. I commend the Government of Bangladesh for providing refuge to the Rohingya
community and encourage the international community to support its efforts to meet
the needs of both refugees and host populations. I acknowledge the agreement
between the Governments of Bangladesh and Myanmar to ensure that any returns of
refugees to their places of origin or choice will be safe, voluntary, dignified,
sustainable and based on informed consent and urge the parties to ensure engagement
with UNHCR and specific consultations with women. I urge the Government of
Myanmar to create conditions conducive to safe return and peaceful coexistence, by
prosecuting suspected perpetrators of sexual and other violence, training its armed
and security forces on international humanitarian and human rights law, granting
unfettered access to service providers for the delivery of medical, psychosocial and
reproductive health care and to human rights monitors, including OHCHR, the
Special Rapporteur and the independent international fact-finding mission established
pursuant to Human Rights Council resolution 34/22, and ensuring the equal rights of
all minority groups, women and girls. Further to the visit of my Special
Representative to Myanmar in December 2017, I call upon the authorities to agree
upon a joint communiqué with the Office of the Special Representative.
Somalia
61. Protracted conflict in Somalia continues to expose women and girls to a
heightened risk of sexual violence, in particular those who are internally displaced or
returnees located in areas controlled by Al-Shabaab, and members of minority clans.
That risk is exacerbated by entrenched gender inequality, weak social cohesion and
limited access to justice. Of the three justice systems of Somalia, namely, statutory
law, sharia and a system of customary practices known as xeer, most cases of sexual
18/35

18-04633

S/2018/250

violence continue to be handled according to xeer, which focuses on the clan rather
than the survivor. That often results in double victimization for survivors, who may
be forced to marry their assailant, while imposing no sanctions to deter future crimes,
apart from a nominal fine paid to the victim’s male relatives. In response, the
Government has developed a policy on traditional dispute resolution, which aims at
addressing practices that discriminate against women and encouraging the bringing
of cases of sexual violence before the courts.
62. In 2017, the United Nations verified cases of conflict-related sexual violence
perpetrated against 329 girls and 1 boy, attributed to unknown armed actors (125),
Al-Shabaab (75), Southwest State forces (26), Jubbaland forces (28), unidentified
clan militia (19), Galmudug forces (5), Puntland forces (3), Ahl al -Sunna wal-Jama‘a
(1), Somali Police Force (1), Ethiopian Liyu Police (10) and the Somali National
Army (37). Three members of the national armed forces who raped an 11 -year-old
boy have since been arrested. The following patterns have emerged regarding
conflict-related sexual violence: it disproportionately affects displaced women and
girls from marginalized groups; most perpetrators are described as men in military
uniform; most cases involve rape or gang rape, with forced marriage continuing to be
perpetrated by Al-Shabaab; the perpetrators are rarely investigated; and survivors
generally do not receive assistance to support their recovery. The United Nations
received reports of women and girls being trafficked by Al-Shabaab from the coastal
regions of Kenya to Somalia, where they were forced into sexual slavery, having been
deceived by false promises of work abroad. Some of those women were reportedly
held as sex slaves, while others were forced to become the “wives” of insurgents.
Many of the forced “wives” and their children are deeply traumatized, yet reluctant
to seek assistance for fear of persecution. Public recrimination by the authorities has
exacerbated the stigma faced by current and former wives of Al-Shabaab and their
children. On 9 May, police in Baidoa, Southwest State, registered the wives of
Al-Shabaab militants and asked them to leave the camp where they lived. On 10 May,
the District Police Commissioner confirmed that a group of wives of Al-Shabaab had
been summoned by the police and told to either persuade their husbands to surrender
or to leave the area. On 29 July, the Security Minister of Jubbaland, on national
television, threatened to expel “Al-Shabaab wives and children” from Governmentcontrolled towns, describing them as “enemies of the State” for allegedly providing
intelligence to the insurgency.
63. The United Nations Assistance Mission in Somalia, in partnership with the
International Organization for Migration, supported the Government in providing
rehabilitation for women formerly associated with Al -Shabaab. The pilot project
involved the provision of accommodation, food, health care and security for 19
women and their dependants, as well as reintegration support, including vocational
training and business start-up grants. Upon completion of the pilot, the safe house for
women closed due to lack of funds. There are three rehabilitation centres for men who
have disengaged from Al-Shabaab, but no comparable facilities for women. Some
positive developments during the reporting period included the following: efforts by
the Government to accelerate implementation of the national action plan on ending
sexual violence; in August, the Chief of Defence Forces of the Somali Nati onal Army
issued a command order including the prohibition of sexual violence and affirming a
policy of zero tolerance of such crimes; and, in September, Somalia established its
first forensic laboratory, which is critical to effective prosecution, given t hat many
rape cases are dropped or referred to traditional justice mechanisms due to lack of
evidence. The Government has expanded legal aid, established mobile courts, and
invested in building prosecutorial capacity. The national police have established a
Woman and Child Protection Unit, and the Office of the Attorney-General has
developed a policy on the prosecution of sexual offences, which incorporates a
survivor-centred approach.
18-04633

19/35

S/2018/250

Recommendation
64. I reiterate my calls for the Government to enact the sexual offences bill, which
will classify sexual violence as a crime against the victim rather than a “crime against
morality”, and to strengthen reporting mechanisms to enable prosecutions. I
encourage the Government to implement its national action p lan to combat sexual
violence, through training, accountability and oversight of the security sector. I urge
the authorities to ensure that women and children separated from Al -Shabaab receive
support as victims, rather than being collectively treated as t hreats.
South Sudan
65. During the hostilities that erupted in Juba in July 2016 and engulfed other
regions of South Sudan, and in the aftermath, attacks on civilians included widespread
and systematic sexual violence employed as a tactic of war, with marked political and
ethnic undertones. That trend continued unabated throughout 2017. In almost all
recorded cases, the perpetrators and victims came from rival ethnic groups, with the
physical violence often accompanied by verbal insults levelled against victims on the
basis of their identity and presumed allegiance. According to the Commission on
Human Rights in South Sudan (A/HRC/37/71), appalling acts of rape, mutilation of
sexual organs and other forms of sexual violence were perpetrated against women,
girls, men and boys, often in front of relatives, in order to humiliate victims, families
and entire communities, or as a form of punishment in detention settings. The
proliferation of militias with ready access to arms increased the rate of sexual
violence, including as a driver of displacement. By the end of 2017, there were almost
2 million civilians displaced in South Sudan, including 209,898 living in sites for the
protection of civilians managed by the United Nations Mission in South Sudan
(UNMISS). An additional 2 million civilians had fled across the border, with the risk
of sexual violence exacerbated during flight, because elements of the security forces,
militias and roving bands of armed young people were preying upon women and girls.
Social stigma and community pressure perpetuate the silence surrounding such
crimes, which can result in wives being shunned by their husbands and girls being
withdrawn from school. An estimated 90 per cent of disputes are referred to traditional
mechanisms, which may order victims to marry their attackers.
66. In 2017, UNMISS documented 196 cases of conflict-related sexual violence,
affecting 128 women and 68 girls. The incidents involved rape (88), gang rape (63),
abduction for the purpose of sexual assault (31) and attempted rape (14). The decrease
in reported incidents, from 577 verified in 2016, is ascribed to the severely restricted
access to conflict zones. Moreover, UNMISS was unable to verify violations suffere d
by persons who relocated to other regions or to third countries. The attacks were
attributed to SPLA (67), the pro-Taban Deng Sudan People’s Liberation Army-inOpposition (SPLA-IO) (4), the pro-Machar SPLA-IO (7), the South Sudan National
Liberation Movement (SSNLM) (1), the South Sudan People’s Patriotic Front
(SSPPF) (2), militia allied to SPLA (5), militia allied to SPLA-IO (4), the South Sudan
National Police Service (1), with the remainder attributed to unidentified gunmen.
None of the incidents have been prosecuted to date.
67. Since 2014, successive commitments, ceasefire agreements, command orders
and communiqués have been signed, including to prevent and punish sexual violence,
and the United Nations continues to engage with the parties to encour age compliance,
which remains at a vastly insufficient level. Therefore, as noted in my special report
on the renewal of the mandate of UNMISS (S/2018/143), it is my intention to further
strengthen accountability. The working group of the United Nations and the
Government on the implementation of the joint communiqué on sexual violence met
regularly throughout 2017, including to design an implementation plan with the

20/35

18-04633

S/2018/250

national security forces. UNMISS, in collaboration with the Team of Experts,
facilitated training for 310 members of SPLA and 85 officers of the national police
(including 21 women) to reinforce individual and command responsibility for
preventing and addressing sexual violence. SPLA commanders have approved an
action plan to address conflict-related sexual violence, and, in November 2017, the
Inspector General of Police formed a committee to prepare a similar plan for the
police. In May 2017, the special tribunal constituted under the general court martial
of SPLA commenced its trial of SPLA soldiers charged with crimes, including the
rape and gang rape of humanitarian workers housed at the Terrain hotel compound in
2016. The court allowed victims to give statements via videoconference and permitted
the use of closed sessions to protect the identities of victims and witnesses. The court
dismissed charges against one defendant (now deceased) and the trial of the remaining
11 continues, with UNMISS monitoring the proceedings.
68. In an increasingly arduous operating environment, UNMISS and humanitarian
actors have managed to enhance early warning systems, increase the speed of patrols,
including firewood patrols, and establish weapons-free zones around sites for the
protection of civilians. Those measures notwithstanding, conflict-related sexual
violence continues to be reported in and around displacement settings, with women
being frequently robbed and raped when they attempt to fetch water or firewood, gain
access to markets or mills or cultivate fields. The attendant fear restricts mobility,
impeding women from undertaking vital sustenance activities on which families
depend. A total of 2,670 victims of gender-based violence nationwide received
medical and psychosocial support through established referral pathways, and the
United Nations continued to support medical facilities to ensure that rape kits were
stocked and personnel were trained on the clinical management services for survivors
of rape.
Recommendation
69. I urge parties to the conflict to honour the commitments made in the respective
communiqués to prevent and punish conflict-related sexual violence, to remove
suspected perpetrators from the armed and security forces and to respect the sanctity
of sites for the protection of civilians. I call upon the authorities to ensure the effective
functioning of special protection units in the police so as to enhance their
responsiveness to women affected by the conflict.
Sudan (Darfur)
70. The reduction in military confrontations between Government forces and rebel
groups and the sustained unilateral cessation of hostilities during 2017 resulted in an
overall improvement of security conditions in Darfur. The situation remains
precarious, however, owing to the presence of militia groups, and is fuelled by a
volatile regional situation. Conflict-related sexual violence has primarily occurred
around displaced persons camps, but has also been noted in villages and remote areas
to which displaced persons have begun to return, where perpetrators typically prey
upon victims when they are engaged in livelihood activities. In some cases, security
fears have forestalled the return of civilians to their villages of origin. In one incident,
a family living in West Darfur, which had previously fled to Chad as refugees, were
forced back across the border into Chad after a relative was gang-raped, for fear of
further attacks (see S/2017/1125). The government campaign to collect illegal
weapons in Darfur, pursuant to Presidential Decree 419 (2017), is an important
measure for the protection of vulnerable populations. Although those efforts were
hampered by resistance from some communities, incidents of intercommun al armed
violence appeared to have declined significantly, likely as a result of efforts by the
Government to contain and mediate tribal disputes. While the rate of new
18-04633

21/35

S/2018/250

displacements was lower in 2017 than in previous years, and humanitarian access had
improved, sexual violence remained prevalent, owing to a volatile security
environment awash with small arms and light weapons, criminality and sporadic
clashes.
71. In 2017, the African Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur
documented 152 cases of conflict-related sexual violence, affecting 84 women, 66
girls and 2 boys, across the five states of Darfur, a decrease from the 222 victims in
2016. The cases involved rape (90 per cent), attempted rape (6 per cent) and gang
rape (4 per cent). In 2 per cent of cases, the victims were killed and, in many others,
suffered grievous bodily harm. Sexual violence continues to be chronically
underreported due to stigma, harassment, trauma, the lack of protection afforded to
victims and witnesses and the perceived inaction of law enforcement, with police and
service providers alike having been pressured to drop cases. Rape is often resolved
through traditional justice mechanisms, which tend to order victims to marry the
perpetrator.
72. The perpetrators of conflict-related sexual violence were identified by victims
as armed men or militia members in civilian attire in 70 per cent of cases, and as
members of the national security apparatus, namely the Sudanese Armed Forces,
Rapid Support Forces, border guards and members of the Sudanese Police Force, in
30 per cent of cases. As in previous years, a spike in sexual violence coincided with
the farming season, from July to October, especially along the migration routes of
armed nomadic herders, with male farmers being physically attacked and women
subjected to sexual assault. Data compiled by the Special Prosecutor for Crimes in
Darfur indicated that the rape of minors, especially girls, is on the rise, with the
highest rates of child rape recorded in South Darfur (58 per cent). Of 286 cases of the
rape of minors reported in 2017, only 86 cases have been adjudicated, although in the
view of the Special Prosecutor, none of those cases constituted conflict -related sexual
violence. The Government attributes the increased nu mbers to efforts to raise
awareness and improve evidence collection.
73. Although article 149 of the Sudanese Criminal Act (1991) was amended in 2015
to define rape in a manner more consistent with international standards, in practice,
victims continue to fear that a failure to prove rape may expose them to being charged
with adultery, a situation that perpetuates the reluctance of survivors to report. Local
justice authorities have reaffirmed their commitment to ensuring accountability for
such crimes, noting the deployment of additional prosecutors and police, including to
rural areas. The United Nations has delivered training to justice and security sector
personnel and supported the creation of “gender desks” in a number of police stations.
UNFPA helped to build the capacity of medical personnel to deliver life -saving
clinical management services for survivors of rape and to extend programmes on
combatting gender-based violence to the newly-accessible areas. In February 2018,
the Government facilitated the first visit of my Special Representative to the Sudan,
which included several locations in North and West Darfur. I am encouraged by the
constructive dialogue that began during that visit, with a broad range of stakeholders,
including senior officials within the security, justice and health sectors.
Recommendation
74. I encourage the Government to swiftly adopt a framework of cooperation with
the United Nations in line with Security Council resolution 2106 (2013), which will
provide a basis for future support to national authorities to enhance prevention and
response measures. I also encourage the Government to adopt and implement its draft
national action plan on Council resolution 1325 (2000), which will enable progress
to be measured against clear benchmarks with associated budget lines. I urge the

22/35

18-04633

S/2018/250

international community to support the Government in addressing issues relating to
the voluntary return of displaced persons.
Syrian Arab Republic
75. Seven years of conflict and humanitarian crisis continues to cause intolerable
human suffering, with sexual violence used as a tactic of war, torture and terrorism.
Sexual violence, harassment, abduction and forced marriage have affected numerous
women and girls. A recurrent concern is the fear of sexual assault when passing
checkpoints, which results in restricted mobility. Those who are most vulnerable are
internally displaced women and children from previously besieged towns (see
A/HRC/36/55). First-hand accounts from women who have been detained in
connection with the conflict consistently involve sexual violence, torture and
psychological trauma. The rape and sexual torture of men and boys in detention
settings, often aimed at extracting confessions during interrogation, has also been a
hidden horror of the conflict. Owing to social norms and honour codes, however, men
tend to be celebrated by their community upon their release, whereas women face
shame, stigma and rejection by husbands or parents, who assume that they were raped
in custody. “Honour killings” of women and girls have followed not only in cases of
rape, but even in cases of assumed rape, indecent assault and street harassment. Such
killings have reportedly increased since the onset of the crisis, owing to rising rates
of sexual violence and lawlessness and the proliferation of extremist groups. Syrian
women describe a daily struggle to survive, with many suffering serious physical
injuries consistent with rape, including traumatic fistulae and sexually transmitted
infections. In response to the elevated risk of sexual assault, child marriage has
morphed from a cultural practice into a coping mechanism. While early marriage is
not a new phenomenon in the Syrian Arab Republic, the protracted nature of the
conflict has led to an increase in the rate of early marriage and a decrease in the age
of brides, which has taken a heavy toll on Syrian girls, exposing them to domestic
and intimate partner violence, unwanted pregnancies, lost educational and
employment opportunities, isolation and psychological harm. Adolescent girls,
women and girls who are heads of household, widows and divorcees are at greatest
risk of forced marriage, polygamy and serial temp orary marriages.
76. Fear of rape is frequently cited by female refugees as a primary factor inducing
flight, but the risk of sexual violence, exploitation and trafficking remains high in and
around refugee and displaced persons camps, owing to overcrowding, lack of privacy,
financial desperation and lawlessness. Women and girls with disabilities have been
exposed to sexual exploitation, in particular when separated from their caregivers.
The challenge of registering children, whose fathers are missing, including those born
to survivors of rape, places them at risk of statelessness, especially when mothers are
legally unable to confer their nationality upon their children. In addition, the
prohibition on pregnancy outside of wedlock has led to the forcible removal from
some married women of children conceived as a result of rape. Displaced and refugee
women often lack work permits in their own name, placing them at risk of exploitation
by landlords, informal employers and criminal networks, with some having been sold
into prostitution or marriage. Sexual violence, mainly in detention settings, is a
primary reason cited by lesbian, gay, bisexual, transgender and intersex civilians for
fleeing the Syrian Arab Republic; they are also among the most vulnerable re fugees
in the region, in particular in host countries where same -sex relations are
criminalized.
77. During the period under review, continuing hostilities and access restrictions
posed significant challenges with regard to monitoring, in addition to the trauma and
stigma associated with sexual violence deterring survivors from coming forward. The
United Nations verified eight cases of conflict-related sexual violence against girls,
18-04633

23/35

S/2018/250

including rape, forced marriage and sexual slavery, seven of which were at tributed to
ISIL and one to the pro-Government Shu’aytat militias (see A/72/361-S/2017/821).
Accounts were received of ISIL fighters demanding marriage of girls living in areas
under their control. In one verified case, a 14-year-old girl was abducted and gangraped by six ISIL fighters after her family refused marriage. Thousands of Iraqi Yazidi
women and girls, captured since August 2014, continued to be trafficked into and
across the Syrian Arab Republic, where they have been used as sex slaves as part of
the terrorist group’s ongoing campaign of targeting members of minority groups.
Emerging reports indicate that additional women and girls from the Yazidi
community, and other targeted minority groups, have been forcibly transferred to the
Syrian Arab Republic, following military operations in 2017 to liberate areas of Iraq
controlled by ISIL.
78. Both the range and geographical reach of services for survivors of gender-based
violence increased over the past year, however, more than half of all communities
remain in dire need of shelter facilities for women and girls. Barriers to access to
services included distance and lack of transportation, affecting in particular women
from rural areas, family restrictions and fear of stigmatization. The United Nations
has supported the Ministry of Social Affairs and Labour and the Syrian Commission
for Family Affairs and Population in establishing a family protection unit to respond
to sexual and gender-based violence. The unit began providing psychosocial support,
case management, medical care and legal counselling in August. UNFPA supports a
number of safe spaces for women and girls in the Syrian Arab Republic, as well as in
refugee settings in Jordan, Lebanon and Turkey. With regard to the peace process led
by the Syrian Arab Republic, my Special Envoy for Syria continued to work with the
women’s advisory board and established a civil society support room, through which
more than 500 civil society organizations have been consulted, with women
comprising approximately 40 per cent of participants (see S/2017/861). Despite
extensive documentation of patterns of conflict-related sexual violence, not a single
perpetrator has faced prosecution, either in the Syrian Arab Republic or abroad.
However, an encouraging development is that the international, impartial and
independent mechanism to support prosecution for the most serious crimes committed
in the Syrian Arab Republic includes staff with dedicated expertise in addressing
sexual violence.
Recommendation
79. I call upon all parties to immediately end the use of sexual violence as a tactic
of war, torture or terrorism and to ensure protection for those who are most
vulnerable, including displaced civilians and detainees. I further call for crimes of
sexual violence to be addressed in ceasefire agreements, political negotiations, peace
talks and accountability initiatives, which will require the direct parti cipation of
women, and for the rights of women to be central in the constitution drafting process.
I commend the countries hosting Syrian refugees and encourage them to protect and
assist those who have suffered sexual violence or may be at risk of exploit ation.
Yemen
80. Conflict, militarization and the ensuing humanitarian crisis in Yemen have had
a devastating impact on the physical and financial security of women and girls. Six
months after the eruption of the conflict, incidents of sexual and gend er-based
violence had increased by 60 per cent, with an estimated three million women and
girls of reproductive age deemed to be at risk (see S/2017/627). Massive internal
displacement, and the attendant economic and security challenges, has given rise to
negative coping strategies, such as child marriage, forced prostitution and “survival
sex”, in both the displaced and host communities. In 2017, OHCHR verified cases of
24/35

18-04633

S/2018/250

parents marrying off children as young as 13 years of age. Concerns have also been
raised about the linkages between migration, trafficking and sexual violence
perpetrated by armed and extremist groups, following a case involving the sexual
assault of 13 Ethiopian girls by traffickers in the southern governorate. The
proliferation of checkpoints in areas controlled by armed groups is another risk factor
for sexual violence. However, such issues are chronically underreported owing to
shame and stigma, fear of retaliation, including “honour crimes”, poor service
coverage and the requirement that responders refer cases of sexual violence to the
police. Few survivors are able to access services within 72 hours, owing to collapsed
infrastructure and the prohibitive cost of transportation from remote, ru ral areas. The
dangers of disclosure are aggravated by the fact that perpetrators are often affiliated
with political or armed groups, including the national security apparatus. The United
Nations has provided multisectoral assistance to 10,700 survivors o f gender-based
violence, rehabilitated safe houses for women, supported a network of lawyers to
assist survivors, trained health service providers on the clinical management of rape
and promoted safe livelihood options for women and girls who are heads of
household. United Nations agencies have also worked with religious and tribal leaders
to challenge harmful norms, including social acceptance of violence against women
and victim-blaming.
Recommendation
81. I urge the authorities to address sexual violence by providing services and
material assistance to displaced women and girls who are heads of household. I
encourage enhanced monitoring and reporting, in particular on the nexus between
displacement, trafficking and sexual violence and exploitation, and request donors to
prioritize funding for the response.

IV. Addressing crimes of sexual violence in post-conflict settings
Bosnia and Herzegovina
82. A quarter of a century since the advent of war in Bosnia and Herzegovina, many
survivors of rape and sexual slavery continue to suffer stigma, trauma and
socioeconomic exclusion. Conflict-related sexual violence has left a profound imprint
on survivors and society alike. Owing to the absence of adequate s upport, the passage
of time has compounded, rather than alleviated, their plight. There is still no
comprehensive compensation scheme, and survivors are only eligible for a disability
pension, which is a form of welfare rather than reparation. The burden o f service
delivery is borne primarily by non-governmental organizations, rather than the State,
a lack of official redress that has served to reinforce stigma by implying that sexual
violence is a private matter, rather than a social problem that requires a sustained
public sector response. Because entitlements vary across the entities, access to
benefits remains uneven, inhibiting the return of displaced survivors to their areas of
origin.
83. The Government and the United Nations continue to implement a joint
programme on seeking care, support and justice for survivors of conflict -related
sexual violence, which aims at addressing the legacy of those crimes through access
to justice, health care and psychosocial support, economic empowerment and efforts
to offset stigma and by strengthening the capacity of service providers. In 2017, 21
additional survivors of conflict-related sexual violence were granted official status as
civilian victims of war, following determinations made by new commissions on status
recognition. The pace of justice at the national level has accelerated in recent years;
between 2004 and 2017, 116 cases of conflict-related sexual violence were

18-04633

25/35

S/2018/250

adjudicated, 58 cases opened and 128 investigated, although those figures may be
incomplete, given that cases against men tend to be qualified as inhumane treatment
rather than sexual violence. Concerted efforts are needed to safeguard victims and
witnesses from intimidation in connection with war crimes trials. In 2017, five women
who testified as witnesses received threats. With regard to stigma prevention, on
19 June, to mark the International Day for the Elimination of Sexual Violence in
Conflict, the Interreligious Council, which comprises leaders of the Serbian
Orthodox, Islamic, Jewish and Catholic communities, issued an interfaith declaration
denouncing the stigmatization of survivors of sexual violence and calling for
enhanced efforts to elevate their social status. On 4 October, Bosnia and Herzegovina
became the first country to adopt a national plan to alleviate stigma. My Special
Representative visited Sarajevo to participate in its launch, alongside government
officials, survivors and children (who are now adults) who had been conceived as a
result of rape. Following her visit, the United Nations initiated new research into the
plight of children conceived through rape in wartime, to inform future programming.
Recommendation
84. I urge the authorities to uphold the right of survivors to reparations, including
services, housing and education, to strengthen safeguards for victims and witnesses
participating in war crimes trials and to foster social acceptance of those who were
conceived as a result of rape in wartime.
Côte d’Ivoire
85. In 2017, the Forces armées de Côte d’Ivoire, as a result of the cessation of
patterns of sexual violence and the adoption of all reasonable measures to meet the
requirements of Security Council resolution 2106 (2013), were removed from the list.
During the period under review, the United Nations did not receive any allegations of
sexual violence committed by members of the national armed or security forces. The
Team of Experts worked closely with the United Nations country team to continue to
build the capacity of defence and police personnel. In 2017, a United Nations training
programme was delivered to over 100 peer educators on effective techniques to raise
awareness of sexual violence and involved members of the military and police who
would serve as focal points on the policy of zero tolerance of such violence in their
units. Subsequently, 150 such focal points were deployed to high -risk regions. An
awareness-raising campaign on conflict-related sexual violence commenced in 2017,
targeting 5,000 members of the security sector. The work of the Team of Experts has
been critical in supporting the national committee for the fight against conflict -related
sexual violence and monitoring implementation of its action plan. In 2017, a
collective commitment to prevent, denounce and sanction any act of sexual violence
was signed by the Chief of Staff of the Forces armées de Côte d ’Ivoire, the Superior
Commander of the Gendarmerie nationale, the directors general of key ministries, the
Prosecutor of the Military Tribunal and the Prosecutor of the First Instance Tribunal
of Abidjan, signalling their determination to prevent any recurrence of the widespread
sexual violence that characterized previous waves of civil war and political unrest.
However, to date, none of the 196 cases of sexual violence perpetrated during the
post-electoral crisis, as documented in the report of the Commission nationale
d’enquête, have been adjudicated. Furthermore, none of the 43 cases of conflict related sexual violence under investigation by the Cellule spéciale d’enquête et
d’instruction have progressed to trial. A number of victims have received general
compensation from the Government as part of its transitional justice framework, but
no specific reparations have been awarded in cases of sexual violence.

26/35

18-04633

S/2018/250

Recommendation
86. I encourage the continued implementation of action plans to ensure that past
perpetrators are held accountable and survivors receive services, justice and
reparations, as stipulated in the conditions for delisting. In accordance with the
transfer plan of the United Nations Operation in Côte d ’Ivoire, it is critical to
consolidate gains in monitoring and investigating sexual violence by providing
adequate resources to enable the national human rights commis sion and its partners
to assume those functions.
Nepal
87. Eleven years after the signing of the Comprehensive Peace Agreement,
survivors of conflict-era sexual violence continue to face barriers in gaining access to
services, justice and reparations, notwithstanding the overall progress in the
consolidation of peace. Many maintain their silence for fear of stigmatization and
rejection. The Government has taken positive steps to recognize the rights of
survivors of sexual violence through its second national action plan on Security
Council resolutions 1820 (2008) and 1325 (2000). The plan includes special
provisions to address the urgent needs of survivors of conflict-related sexual violence,
as well as children conceived as a result of rapes committed during the war. The Truth
and Reconciliation Commission has received over 61,000 complaints of human rights
violations. Of those, approximately 300 are reports of conflict-related sexual
violence, raising concerns that many survivors were unwilling or unable to register.
As at December 2017, the Commission had not reported the completion of
investigation into any registered cases, and its tenure was extended to February 2019.
The United Nations continues to advocate for the recognition of survivors of conflict related sexual violence as victims of war, which would entitle them to redress. United
Nations agencies have organized peer-learning exchanges with survivors of sexual
violence from Cambodia, focusing on empowering victims to become advocates. The
United Nations trust fund in support of actions to eliminate violence against women
supported the training of conflict survivors to become “justice reporters” who helped
to collect and document the stories of 500 women survivors of the war, many of whom
shared their accounts of rape, in an important contribution to the historical record and
collective memory.
Recommendation
88. I urge the Government to formally recognize victims of sexual violence
perpetrated in wartime as victims of war, enabling them to benefit on an equal basis
from national relief and recovery programmes, transitional justice and reparations,
thereby helping to reduce the stigma attached to such crimes, and request the
Government to ensure that its second national action plan is endorsed, fully resourced
and implemented.
Sri Lanka
89. Eight years since the cessation of hostilities between the Liberation Ti gers of
Tamil Eelam and the Government, Sri Lanka has yet to benefit from a comprehensive
transitional justice process to address the crimes committed during three decades of
brutal civil war, including crimes of conflict-related sexual violence. In its resolution
30/1 of 1 October 2015, the Human Rights Council outlined the elements of a
transitional justice system, also highlighting issues of sexual violence, torture and
abduction and the climate of intimidation for human rights defenders, which are part
of the legacy of war. Efforts continued in 2017 to advance implementation of the
resolution through national consultations on the design of transitional justice

18-04633

27/35

S/2018/250

mechanisms, which incorporated the voices of survivors of sexual violence. The issue
of conflict-related sexual violence featured prominently in the resulting report
(A/HRC/34/20). Sri Lanka faces major challenges in ensuring accountability for
crimes of sexual violence, including the lack of protection for victims and witnesses
and the backlog of cases, with rape cases taking on average more than five years to
resolve. The latest annual Grave Crimes Abstract of the Sri Lankan Police recorded
2,036 complaints of rape and no convictions. Since the passage of the Witnesses and
Victims Protection Act (2015), a division has been established within the police to
safeguard the rights of those reporting violent crimes. However, more female officers
are needed (currently, 9 per cent) to improve outreach to women and rates of reporting
of and response to sexual violence. With the support of the United Nations, the
Government launched a national action plan to address sexual and gender-based
violence, in 2016, and a plan on the promotion of human rights, in 2017, which
includes specific measures to expedite the handling of cases of sexual violence. The
Cabinet approved a series of proposals to support women heads of household,
including those in the heavily militarized provinces of the north and east. Strategic
interventions are also needed to tackle the stigma experienced by survivors of sexual
violence, which is often compounded by the cultural stigma attached to widowhood,
and the plight of children conceived through rape in wartime. Survivors of conflictrelated sexual violence come from all of the three largest population groups, with
Tamil women in the northeast the most affected, as well as Muslim and Sinhala
women. Stigma manifests differently in each community, req uiring a tailored
response. Patterns of sexual violence against men and boys by members of the
security forces continue to be underreported, owing to cultural taboos and fear of
being penalized in a context where all same-sex relations, consensual or otherwise,
are criminalized. Reports continue to surface of rape, gang rape and sexual torture
perpetrated by police and military intelligence operatives, in the absence of rigorous
accountability and oversight.
Recommendation
90. I call for cases of conflict-related sexual violence to be systematically
documented pursuant to the proposed transitional justice mechanism, in order to
provide an evidence base for prosecutions. Transitional justice mechanisms should
include sexual violence against women, girls, men and boys from all ethnic groups in
their subject-matter jurisdiction to ensure full accountability, including for security
sector actors. I further encourage sustained political resolve and resourcing for the
implementation of national plans to combat sexual and gender-based violence and to
support women and girls who are heads of household.

V. Other situations of concern
Burundi
91. The onset of the political crisis in 2015 exacerbated the risk of sexual violence
in Burundi. From May to December 2015, OHCHR documented 19 cases of sexual
violence against women by members of the security forces, most of which occurred
in the context of search and arrest operations that took place primarily in opposition
strongholds. The pattern was similar in all cases, with security forces allegedly
entering the victims’ homes, separating women from their male family members, and
raping or gang-raping them. Similar allegations were received in 2016 and 2017,
although those could not be verified, owing to the decision of the Government to
suspend its cooperation with OHCHR in October 2016. One report received in
October 2017 concerned the rape of a woman in Ruyigi province by two members of
the Imbonerakure, the youth league of the ruling party. Although the victim filed a
28/35

18-04633

S/2018/250

complaint, no investigation was conducted, because the authorities protected the
perpetrators on account of their political affiliation. Similarly, in November 2017, two
women were reportedly taken to a youth centre and raped by a gang of Imbonerakure
in Ngozi province. Two of the perpetrators were apprehended, but escaped with the
collusion of local officials. In April, May and June of 2 017, the Imbonerakure hosted
gatherings during which slogans inciting sexual violence were chanted, including
calls to forcibly impregnate women and girls associated with the opposition “so they
can give birth to Imbonerakure”. The experts conducting the independent
investigation on Burundi carried out pursuant to Human Rights Council resolution
S-24/1 received allegations that many women fleeing the country were subjected to
sexual violence by members of the Imbonerakure, unidentified armed men and border
guards, including as a form of punishment for leaving “while there was no war”. The
experts also obtained credible information that many Burundian women and girls
related to men perceived to be political dissidents were targeted for sexual assault by
elements of the security forces. The Commission of Inquiry on Burundi received
similar testimonies of sexual violence committed against the female relatives of
Government opponents. In 2017, the United Nations reported a climate of
intimidation for survivors and service providers alike, as well as increased rates of
recourse to negative coping mechanisms, such as transactional sex and/or “survival
sex”, linked with economic insecurity.
Recommendation
92. I call upon the authorities to facilitate human rights monitoring by resuming
cooperation with OHCHR, to enable humanitarian service providers to deliver
assistance to survivors of sexual violence, including displaced persons and returnees,
to condemn statements inciting violence and to ensure that perpetrators of sexual
violence are held accountable.
Nigeria
93. As the conflict in Nigeria entered its ninth year, an increase in reported incidents
of sexual violence in the northeast was observed, with 997 cases reported in 2017,
compared with 644 in 2016. Those cases included rape, sexual slavery and forced
marriage by Boko Haram insurgents. Women and girls who were abducted, raped and
forcibly married in captivity face acute social stigmatization upon their return,
because they are often suspected of being sympathizers. Those who return pregnant
or with children conceived through rape are frequently rejected or forced to choose
between their babies and their families. The use of abducted women and girls as
suicide bombers also increased. In the prevailing climate of economic desperation,
many women and girls have been forced to exchange sex for food or freedom of
movement.
94. In 2017, the Government secured the release of 82 girls abducted from Chibok
in 2014, but 112 remain missing. The United Nations supported 337,342 civilians,
mostly women and girls, providing them with medical care, clinical management
services for survivors of rape and psychosocial counselling. Over 5,600 women
benefited from livelihood support, and 15 “women-friendly safe spaces” were
established in areas newly liberated from Boko Haram control. During the reporting
period, 605 girls and 577 women who survived conflict-related sexual violence
received socioeconomic reintegration assistance in Borno state. In July 2017, my
Special Representative participated in a high-level visit to Nigeria focused on the
empowerment and protection of women, which highlighted the imperative of
accountability, oversight and training of the security forces, the need to provide
support to all survivors of abduction and abuse, the importance of addressing the rise
in early marriage and sexual exploitation in displacement settings and the need to
18-04633

29/35

S/2018/250

support the political participation of women. Ongoing dialo gue between the
Government and the United Nations has shed light on counter-terrorism measures that
have infringed on women’s rights and freedoms, such as the practice of detaining
those released from Boko Haram captivity as their affiliates or intelligence assets.
Recommendation
95. I urge the authorities to ensure accountability for crimes of sexual violence,
improve service delivery and enhance protection and preventive measures both in
conflict-affected communities and displaced persons camps. Socioeconomic
reintegration support should be provided to displaced women and girls returning to
their places of origin, in particular survivors of Boko Haram captivity, who should be
considered as victims of terrorism, not affiliates.

VI. Recommendations
96. The following recommendations reflect an urgent need for the international
community to support those struggling to protect survivors and to prevent women,
girls, men and boys from falling victim to such heinous crimes. This requires, in
particular, support to local non-governmental organizations and United Nations
entities. A concerted effort to enhance prevention, early warning and swift responses
will require dedicated human and financial resources commensurate with the scale of
the challenge.
97.

I urge the Security Council:

(a) To include sexual violence as part of the designation criteria for
sanctions, to ensure that dedicated expertise on gender and conflict-related
sexual violence informs the work of sanctions committees and monitoring entities
and to continue to invite my Special Representative on Sexual Violence in
Conflict to share information with sanctions committees, as appropriate; in the
context of the Security Council Committee pursuant to resolutions 1267 (1999),
1989 (2011) and 2253 (2015) concerning Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant
(Da’esh), Al-Qaida and associated individuals, groups, undertakings and
entities, to ensure that any person or entity who sells or transfers funds to ISIL
or other terrorist groups directly or indirectly in connection with sexual violence
or exploitation would be eligible for listing;
(b) To continue to address the nexus between trafficking in persons and
conflict-related sexual violence, further to resolutions 2331 (2016) and 2388
(2017);
(c) To support engagement with State and non-State parties to conflict for
specific commitments on conflict-related sexual violence, in line with resolution
2106 (2013), and to monitor their compliance, including through the Informal
Expert Group on Women and Peace and Security;
(d) To employ all means at its disposal to influence State and non-State
parties to conflict to comply with international law, including by referring to the
Prosecutor of the International Criminal Court situations in which one or more
crimes under the Rome Statute appear to have been committed; referrals should
address situations in which sexual violence has been committed, commanded or
condoned, through the failure to prevent or punish such acts;
(e) To give due consideration to the early warning signs of sexual violence
in its monitoring of conflict situations, especially in relation to periods of rising
violent extremism, political instability, elections and mass population movements,

30/35

18-04633

S/2018/250

and to take appropriate action, including condemning any incitement to sexual
violence;
(f) To use its periodic field visits to focus attention on concerns regarding
sexual violence, soliciting the views of affected communities and survivors’
associations, and to consider visiting proposed sites of return of internally
displaced persons and refugees to assess the safety conditions and availability of
services;
(g) To support the accelerated deployment of women’s protection
advisers, in order to facilitate the implementation of resolutions on sexual
violence in conflict, and to support the inclusion of those posts in regular budgets.
98. I encourage Member States, donors, regional and intergovernmental
organizations:
(a) To ensure that victims of sexual violence perpetrated by armed and/or
terrorist groups are recognized as legitimate victims of conflict and/or terrorism,
in order to benefit from reparations and redress, including through the revision
of national legal and policy frameworks, whenever necessary;
(b) To put into place constitutional, legislative and institutional
arrangements to comprehensively address conflict-related sexual violence and
prevent its recurrence, paying particular attention to ethnic and religious
minority groups, women in rural or remote areas, displaced populations, persons
with disabilities, male survivors, women and children associated with armed
groups, women and children released from situations of captivity, forced
marriage, sexual slavery and trafficking by armed groups and lesbian, gay,
bisexual, transgender and intersex persons;
(c) To integrate legal support with medical and psychosocial care and
extend the reach of these services to rural areas;
(d) To give due consideration to recognizing conflict-related sexual
violence as a form of persecution that may serve as grounds for asylum or refugee
status and to consider resettlement support for survivors, such as through
“special quota projects”, which provide temporary protection through the
evacuation and humanitarian admission of vulnerable women and children to
third countries, and to ensure that refugee-receiving countries adopt measures
to mitigate the risk of sexual violence, to make services available to survivors
and to provide them with the option to document their cases for future
accountability processes;
(e) To give consideration to clarifying the legal status of undocumented
refugee children, including children conceived as a result of rape, avoiding
prejudicial practices in birth registration and securing the right of mothers to
confer their nationality upon their children;
(f) To support safe and sustainable returns of displaced and refugee
communities to their places of origin or choice, by providing conditions of safety
and dignity that include the provision of services, the recovery of property and
possessions and accountability for perpetrators, including of crimes of sexual
violence;
(g) To support community mobilization campaigns to help to shift the
stigma of sexual violence from the victims to the perpetrators, including by
engaging with religious and traditional leaders, as well as local journalists and
human rights defenders;

18-04633

31/35

S/2018/250

(h) To increase the representation of women in national police services
and to establish specialized units within the police;
(i) To ensure that signed ceasefire and peace agreements contain
provisions that, at a minimum, stipulate sexual violence as a prohibited act in the
definition of ceasefire, to ensure that expertise on gender issues and conflictrelated sexual violence is included in ceasefire monitoring and verification
arrangements and teams and to call upon mediators to include such expertise as
part of mediation support teams;
(j) To ensure that efforts to document and investigate international
crimes prioritize sexual violence and that those efforts are survivor-centred,
well-coordinated, conducted by qualified individuals and guided by the
principles of security, confidentiality, anonymity and informed consent;
(k) To enhance cooperation in terms of information-sharing and
documentation, assistance to victims of trafficking, the training of security
forces, extradition and legal assistance and the exchange of good practices in
combatting sexual violence;
(l) To train peacekeeping personnel on preventing sexual exploitation and
abuse, on ways to address conflict-related sexual violence, and on identifying and
responding to indicators of conflict-related trafficking in persons, as a
mandatory component of pre-deployment training;
(m) To ensure that the national forces listed in the annex to the present
report, or those listed for grave violations against children, are not deployed to
peacekeeping operations;
(n) To address funding shortfalls for programming on combating sexual
and gender-based violence and for sexual and reproductive health care in
conflict-affected settings and to draw upon the expertise of the United Nations
system in the areas of justice and rule of law, service delivery and coordination,
including by supporting the Team of Experts on the Rule of Law and Sexual
Violence in Conflict and the United Nations Action against Sexual Violence in
Conflict network, in particular, ensuring sustainable and regular funding for
their work.

32/35

18-04633

S/2018/250

Annex
List of parties credibly suspected of committing or being
responsible for patterns of rape or other forms of sexual
violence in situations of armed conflict on the agenda of the
Security Council
The following list does not purport to be comprehensive, but rather includes
parties for which credible information is available. It should be noted that the names
of countries appear only to indicate the locations where those parties are susp ected of
committing violations.
Parties in the Central African Republic
Non-State actors:
(a)

Lord’s Resistance Army;

(b)

Ex-Séléka factions: Union pour la paix en centrafrique, Mouvement
patriotique pour la centrafrique, Front populaire pour la renaissance de la
centrafrique — Gula faction, Front populaire pour la renaissance de la
Centrafrique — Abdoulaye Hussein faction, Rassemblement patriotique
pour le renouveau de la Centrafrique;

(c)

Front démocratique du peuple centrafricain — Abdoulaye Miskine;

(d)

Révolution et justice;

(e)

Retour, réclamation et réhabilitation — General Sidiki;

(f)

Anti-balaka groups.

Parties in the Democratic Republic of the Congo
1.

Non-State actors:
(a)

Alliance des patriotes pour un Congo libre et souverain;

(b)

Allied Democratic Forces;

(c)

Forces pour la défense du Congo;

(d)

Bana Mura militias;

(e)

Forces démocratiques de libération du Rwanda;

(f)

Force de résistance patriotique de l’Ituri;

(g)

Kamuina Nsapu;

(h)

Lord’s Resistance Army;

(i)

Nduma défence du Congo;

(j)

Mai-Mai Kifuafua;

(k)

All Mai-Mai Simba factions;

(l)

Nyatura;

(m) Nduma défence du Congo-Renové;

18-04633

(n)

Mai-Mai Raia Mutomboki;

(o)

All Twa militia.

33/35

S/2018/250

2.

State actors:
(a)

Forces armées de la République démocratique du Congo ;*

(b)

Police nationale congolaise.*

Parties in Iraq
Non-State actors:
(a)

Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant.

Parties in Mali
Non-State actors:
(a)

Mouvement national de libération de l’Azawad;

(b)

Ansar Eddine;

(c)

Mouvement pour l’unification et le jihad en Afrique de l’ouest;

(d)

Al-Qaida in the Islamic Maghreb;

(e)

Groupe d’autodéfense des Touaregs Imghad et leurs alliés.

Parties in Myanmar
State actors:
(a)

Myanmar Armed Forces (Tatmadaw).

Parties in Somalia
1.

Non-State actors:
(a)

2.

Al-Shabaab.

State actors:
(a)

Somali National Army;*

(b)

Somali Police Force* (and allied militia);

(c)

Puntland military.

Parties in the Sudan
1.

Non-State actors:
(a)

2.

Justice and Equality Movement.

State actors:
(a)

Sudanese Armed Forces;

(b)

Rapid Support Forces.

Parties in South Sudan
1.

Non-State actors:
(a)

Lord’s Resistance Army;

(b)

Justice and Equality Movement;

* Indicates that the party has committed to adopting measures to address conflict -related sexual
violence.
34/35

18-04633

S/2018/250

2.

(c)

Sudan People’s Liberation Army-in-Opposition — pro-Machar;*

(d)

Sudan People’s Liberation Army-in-Opposition — pro-Taban Deng.

State actors:
(a)

Sudan People’s Liberation Army;*

(b)

South Sudan National Police Service.*

Parties in the Syrian Arab Republic
1.

2.

Non-State actors:
(a)

Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant;

(b)

Hay'at Tahrir al-Sham (formerly Nusrah Front);

(c)

Army of Islam;

(d)

Ahrar al-Sham;

(e)

Pro-Government forces, including the National Defence Forces militia.

State actors:
(a)

Syrian armed forces;

(b)

Intelligence services.

Other parties of concern on the agenda of the Security Council
Non-State actors:
(a)

18-04633

Boko Haram.

35/35
