A/65/PV.86

United Nations

General Assembly

Official Records
:

Sixty-fifth session

86

th plenary meeting
Monday, 18 April 2011, 10. a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Deiss . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (Switzerland)

In the absence of the President, Mr. Ntwaagae
(Botswana), Vice-President, took the Chair.
The meeting was called to order at 10.10 a.m.
Agenda item 51 (continued)
United Nations Relief and Works Agency for
Palestine Refugees in the Near East
Report of the Special Political and
Decolonization Committee (Fourth Committee)
(A/65/422/Add.1)
The Acting President: I give the floor to the
Rapporteur of the Special Political and Decolonization
Committee (Fourth Committee), Mr. Mohammad Wali
Naeemi of Afghanistan, to introduce the report of the
Committee.
Mr. Naeemi (Afghanistan): I have the honour to
introduce to the General Assembly the report of the
Special Political and Decolonization Committee
(Fourth Committee) submitted under agenda item 51,
entitled “United Nations Relief and Works Agency for
Palestine Refugees in the Near East”, as contained in
document A/65/422/Add.1.
During the main part of the Assembly’s sixty-fifth
session, the Committee decided to defer its
consideration of the report of the Secretary-General
(A/65/705) on strengthening the management capacity
of the United Nations Relief and Works Agency for
Palestine Refugees in the Near East until 2011. The
Committee considered that report at its 25th meeting
on 24 March.

The draft resolution submitted under this agenda
item is contained in paragraph 9 of the report of the
Fourth Committee that is before the Assembly. The
Committee recommends to the General Assembly the
adoption of that draft resolution.
The Acting President: If there is no proposal
under rule 66 of the rules of procedure, I shall take it
that the General Assembly decides not to discuss the
report of the Special Political and Decolonization
Committee (Fourth Committee) that is before the
Assembly this morning.
It was so decided.
The Acting President: We will now take a
decision on the draft resolution recommended by the
Fourth Committee in paragraph 9 of its report, which is
entitled “Report of the Secretary-General on the
strengthening of the management capacity of the
United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine
Refugees in the Near East”. A recorded vote has been
requested.
A recorded vote was taken.
In favour:
Afghanistan,
Albania,
Algeria,
Andorra,
Argentina, Australia, Austria, Azerbaijan,
Bahrain, Bangladesh, Belarus, Belgium, Bosnia
and Herzegovina, Botswana, Brazil, Brunei
Darussalam, Bulgaria, Burkina Faso, Cambodia,
Canada, Central African Republic, Chile, China,
Colombia, Congo, Costa Rica, Croatia, Cuba,
Cyprus, Czech Republic, Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea, Denmark, Djibouti,
Dominican Republic, Ecuador, Egypt, El

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. Corrections should be submitted to the original
languages only. They should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature
of a member of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room
U-506. Corrections will be issued after the end of the session in a consolidated corrigendum.

11-30249 (E)

*1130249*

A/65/PV.86

Salvador, Estonia, Finland, France, Gabon,
Germany, Ghana, Greece, Guatemala, Guinea,
Haiti, Honduras, Hungary, Iceland, India,
Indonesia, Iran (Islamic Republic of), Italy,
Jamaica, Japan, Kazakhstan, Kuwait, Lao
People’s Democratic Republic, Latvia, Lebanon,
Lesotho, Liberia, Liechtenstein, Lithuania,
Luxembourg, Malaysia, Mali, Malta, Mauritius,
Mexico, Monaco, Mongolia, Montenegro,
Morocco,
Myanmar,
Namibia,
Nepal,
Netherlands, New Zealand, Nicaragua, Norway,
Oman, Pakistan, Panama, Peru, Philippines,
Poland, Portugal, Qatar, Republic of Moldova,
Romania, Russian Federation, Saint Vincent and
the Grenadines, San Marino, Saudi Arabia,
Serbia, Singapore, Slovakia, Slovenia, South
Africa, Sri Lanka, Sudan, Suriname, Sweden,
Switzerland, Syrian Arab Republic, Tajikistan,
Thailand, the former Yugoslav Republic of
Macedonia, Trinidad and Tobago, Tunisia,
Turkey, Ukraine, United Arab Emirates, United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland,
United Republic of Tanzania, Uruguay, Vanuatu,
Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of), Viet Nam,
Yemen, Zimbabwe
Against:
Israel
The draft resolution was adopted by 123 votes to
1 (resolution 65/272).
[Subsequently, the delegations of Armenia,
Comoros, Eritrea, Ethiopia, Guyana, Iraq,
Ireland, Jordan, Mauritania, Spain, Swaziland and
the United States of America advised the
Secretariat that they had intended to vote in
favour.]
The Acting President: May I take it that it is the
wish of the General Assembly to conclude its
consideration of agenda item 51?
It was so decided.
Agenda item 10 (continued)
Implementation of the Declaration of Commitment
on HIV/AIDS and the Political Declaration on
HIV/AIDS
Conference Room Paper (A/65/CRP.4)
Draft decision (A/65/L.71)
The Acting President: Members will recall that,
in its resolution 65/180, of 20 December 2010, adopted

2

under this item, the General Assembly requested the
President, following appropriate consultations with
Member States, to draw up a list of relevant civil
society representatives, other than those already
included in the resolution, and to submit that list to
Member States for consideration on a no-objection
basis for a final decision by the Assembly.
After the necessary consultations, the General
Assembly now has before it a conference room paper
that has been circulated as document A/65/CRP.4,
which contains the list of civil society representatives
invited to participate in the high-level meeting,
including panel discussions. In that connection, the
General Assembly also has before it a draft decision
issued as document A/65/L.71.
The Assembly will now take action on the draft
decision, entitled “Participation of civil society
representatives in the high-level meeting on a
comprehensive review of the progress achieved in
realizing the Declaration of Commitment on
HIV/AIDS and the Political Declaration on HIV/AIDS,
to be convened from 8 to 10 June 2011”.
May I take it that the Assembly wishes to adopt
the draft decision?
The draft decision was adopted.
The Acting President: The Assembly has thus
concluded this stage of its consideration of agenda item
10.
Agenda item 12 (continued)
2001-2010: Decade to Roll Back Malaria in
Developing Countries, Particularly in Africa
Draft resolution A/65/L.70
The Acting President: Members will recall that
the General Assembly held the debate on agenda item
12 jointly with agenda item 62 and its sub-items (a)
and (b) at the 30th and 31st plenary meetings, which
were held on 14 October 2010.
I give the floor to the representative of the United
Republic of Tanzania to introduce draft resolution
A/65/L.70.
Ms. Maduhu (United Republic of Tanzania): On
behalf of the African Group, I have the honour to
introduce, under agenda item 12, the draft resolution
entitled “Consolidating gains and accelerating efforts
to control and eliminate malaria in developing

11-30249

A/65/PV.86

countries, particularly in Africa, by 2015”, as contained
in document A/65/L.70.
The draft resolution seeks to acknowledge the
progress we have made together in fighting malaria,
which is one of the greatest health and economic
challenges facing developing countries, particularly in
Africa, which continues to carry the heaviest burden.
The draft resolution seeks to consolidate those gains
and to renew political support for significantly
increasing global efforts to control and eventually to
eliminate malaria by the original target date of 2015.
The World Malaria Report 2010 of the World
Health Organization (WHO) provides evidence that
where there is political will, it is possible to contain,
and to eventually eliminate, malaria. The report shows
that funding for malaria in 2010 reached the
unprecedented level of $1.8 billion. We welcome that
development, although we appreciate that the target for
that year was actually $6 billion. So, yes, we have
made some progress, but we need consolidation and
significant expansion.
The increased funding was the key to improving
access to insecticide-treated mosquito nets over the
past three years. Between 2008 and 2010,
approximately 289 million nets were delivered across
sub-Saharan Africa, with an estimated 42 per cent of
African households owning at least one net in 2010 and
35 per cent of children under five years of age sleeping
under a net. That is progress, but our shared goal is
universal coverage, so we still have a long way to go.
We should also bear in mind that we must make
provision for replacing those nets that are reaching the
end of their effective lifespan, which is three years.
The increased funding also made possible
significant expansion in indoor residual spraying, with
the number of people thus protected in sub-Saharan
Africa increasing from 13 million in 2005 to 75 million
in 2009. That too is progress, but it covers only 10 per
cent of the population at risk. We have more work to
do.
As the incidence of malaria decreases, it becomes
even more important to have the capability for rapid
diagnosis to differentiate malaria from non-malaria
fevers. Thanks to increased funding, the number of
malaria cases confirmed by diagnostic test has risen
from less than 5 per cent at the beginning of the past
decade to 35 per cent in 2009. It is certainly progress,
but we need to consolidate and expand that capacity as
too many malaria cases are still not properly
diagnosed.

11-30249

In 2005, only five countries could provide
sufficient courses of artemisinin-based combination
therapies to cover more than 50 per cent of patients
treated in the public sector. Thanks to policy changes
within countries and increased funding, 11 African
countries were already providing coverage to 100 per
cent of malaria cases seen in the public sector by the
end of 2009, with a further eight African countries
providing sufficient courses to treat between 50 and
100 per cent of cases. That is progress, but much more
needs to be done before all cases can be covered.
All such intervention has resulted in a significant
reduction in the global malaria caseload and malariarelated deaths. In my own country, for instance,
malaria has almost been eliminated in Zanzibar, which
gives us the momentum to roll out the same effort
throughout the entire United Republic of Tanzania. At
least 11 African countries and 32 malaria-endemic
countries outside Africa saw a decrease of more than
50 per cent of confirmed malaria cases between 2000
and 2009.
Again, that is welcome progress, but we must
bear in mind the goal established by the World Health
Assembly in 2005 to reduce the number of malaria
cases and deaths recorded in 2000 by 50 per cent, or
more, in all countries by the end of 2010 and by 75 per
cent, or more, by 2015. We should also bear in mind
the importance of improving the health statistics of
developing countries, and intensify efforts to improve
the capacity for monitoring and surveillance to ensure
that we respond promptly to the resurgence of malaria
and resistance to anti-malaria medicines.
This year’s draft resolution has been updated
from last year’s resolution 64/79. While the draft
resolution maintains last year’s language, it has been
technically updated and new developments have been
recognized. The new elements in the draft resolution
are as follows.
The year 2010 marked the end of the Decade to
Roll Back Malaria. In that regard, we changed the title
of the draft resolution.
The draft resolution welcomes the leadership
provided by the African Leaders Malaria Alliance and
their continued commitment to the 2015 targets. It also
encourages them to continue to provide political
leadership at the highest level in the fight against
malaria in Africa. The draft resolution also welcomes
the Secretary-General’s Global Strategy for Women’s
and Children’s Health, which aims to reduce maternal,

3

A/65/PV.86

newborn and under-five child mortality, including from
malaria.

It is our expectation that, as in previous years, the
draft resolution will be adopted by consensus.

The draft resolution acknowledges that, despite
the increased global and national investments in
malaria control having decreased the burden of malaria
in some countries, with a few even moving towards the
elimination of malaria, many countries continue to
have unacceptably high burdens of malaria, most of
them in Africa. It also emphasizes the importance of
strengthening health systems to effectively support
malaria control and elimination.

The Acting President: The Assembly will now
take a decision on draft resolution A/65/L.70, entitled
“Consolidating gains and accelerating efforts to control
and eliminate malaria in developing countries,
particularly in Africa, by 2015”, as orally revised.

The draft resolution urges the international
community, the United Nations and all other
stakeholders to participate in the funding and
implementation of the Global Malaria Action Plan. It
calls for scaling up malaria prevention, control and
treatment in order to meet internationally agreed
malaria goals.
Lastly, the draft resolution requests the SecretaryGeneral, in close collaboration with the DirectorGeneral of the World Health Organization and in
consultation with Member States, to report on the
implementation of the present resolution at the sixtysixth session of the General Assembly and on progress
to achieve the 2015 Abuja Declaration targets and
those of the Global Malaria Action Plan and
Millennium Development Goal 6.
The consultations on the draft resolution have
been extremely open and transparent. We thank all the
delegations that participated in the consultations for
their constructive engagement, which made consensus
possible. We especially thank all the delegations that
sponsored the draft resolution, and we request others to
join the sponsorship today. We thank the Secretariat,
our partners at the WHO and the Roll Back Malaria
project, the Office of the Secretary-General’s Special
Envoy for Malaria and all others who provided
valuable support.
Before we take action on the draft resolution, I
would like to propose the following revision to
paragraph 9. In that connection, the word “supports” in
the final clause of the paragraph should be deleted. The
clause should therefore read as follows: “takes note of
the work of the Leading Group on Innovative
Financing for Development and its special Task Force
on Innovative Financing for Health, which has been
recently set up.”

4

We shall now proceed to take action on the draft
resolution.
I give the floor to the representative of the
Secretariat.
Mr. Botnaru (Department for General Assembly
and Conference Management): I should like to
announce that, since the submission of draft resolution
A/65/L.70, the following countries have also become
sponsors of the draft: Australia, Austria, Belgium,
Canada, Croatia, Finland, Hungary, Ireland, Israel,
Italy, Luxembourg, Monaco, Montenegro, Portugal,
Slovenia, Spain, Suriname, the United Kingdom of
Great Britain and Northern Ireland and the United
States of America.
The Acting President: May I take it that the
Assembly decides to adopt draft resolution A/65/L.70,
as orally revised?
Draft resolution A/65/L.70, as orally revised, was
adopted (resolution 65/273).
The Acting President: May I take it that it is the
wish of the General Assembly to conclude its
consideration of agenda item 12?
It was so decided.
Agenda item 122 (continued)
Cooperation between the United Nations and
regional and other organizations
(a) Cooperation between the United Nations and
the African Union
Draft resolution (A/65/L.68)
The Acting President: Members will recall that
the General Assembly held a debate on sub-item (a) of
agenda 122 at its 83rd plenary meeting, on 28 March.
I now give the floor to the representative of
Mauritius to introduce draft resolution A/65/L.68.

11-30249

A/65/PV.86

Mr. Meetarbhan (Mauritius): It gives me great
pleasure to introduce, on behalf of the African Union
and the African Group, the draft resolution entitled
“Cooperation between the United Nations and the
African Union”, which is contained in document
A/65/L.68. At the outset, I would like to express our
sincere appreciation to all delegations and partners for
their constructive contributions in formulating this
draft resolution.
Cooperation at different levels, whether
subregional, regional or international, represents the
key to unlocking opportunities for sustainable growth
and development. The Constitutive Act of the African
Union attaches great importance to the transformation
of Africa into a stable and developed continent where
the younger generation can confidently envisage a
bright future. Although significant strides have been
made in that direction, we still have a long way to go.
Today’s draft resolution, which I have the honour to
present, seeks to promote the spirit of cooperation
between the African Union and the larger international
community, represented by the United Nations,
towards the further realization of this goal.
Both the African Union and the United Nations
have as their founding principles holistic development,
and thus the two organizations are called upon to work
concurrently and complementarily. We in Africa are
happy to note that cooperation between the United
Nations and the African Union has intensified in recent
years, as demonstrated by the numerous collaborative
efforts made in a whole range of areas. This strategic
relationship between the two organizations needs to be
enhanced so as to promote a more effective partnership
that embodies the principle of mutual respect when
addressing mutual concern and challenges. The
challenges are many; I will list three of them.
First is the issue of peace and security. Though
much progress has been achieved in some parts of the
continent, the issue of peace and security remains a
challenge in certain other parts. Peace is a prerequisite
for human, social and effective economic development,
which are critical to the achievement by Africa of
national, regional and international goals such as the
Millennium Development Goals (MDGs). In this
regard, the draft resolution stresses the need for the
two organizations to cooperate closely to address the
problems posed by landmines, illicit trafficking in
small arms and light weapons, terrorism and
transnational organized crime. We welcome the launch
in September 2010 of the Joint Task Force on Peace
and Security of the United Nations and the African

11-30249

Union. This will act as an important framework for
furthering the strategic partnership on peace and
security between the United Nations Secretariat and the
African Union Commission.
Secondly, with respect to the issue of
development, although Africa is rich in both human
and natural resources, it has yet to realize its full
potential. Many factors are responsible for
underdevelopment, many of which are external. In this
regard, the draft resolution calls upon the United
Nations system to continue its support for the African
Union and its member States in their efforts to
implement the MDGs. It is also crucial for the
international community, in order to promote the
economic and social development of the continent, to
ensure the effective, coordinated and integrated
implementation of the Doha Development Agenda, the
Monterrey Consensus of the International Conference
on Financing for Development, the Doha Declaration
on Financing for Development, the Plan of
Implementation of the World Summit on Sustainable
Development and the 2005 World Summit Outcome.
Furthermore, we would like to underscore once again
the urgent need for the successful and timely
completion of the Doha round of trade negotiations,
including
negotiations
aimed
at
substantial
improvements in areas such as trade-related measures,
including market access, to promote a sustained growth
path in Africa.
Thirdly, I should like to touch on the issue of
institutional development. To achieve sustained growth
in Africa, there is an urgent need for the promotion and
strengthening of the institutional structure and
framework for good governance and for the effective
implementation of development initiatives. The
continent welcomes the pivotal role that subregional
groups are playing in institution-building to promote
the socio-economic and political development of their
respective regions. However, the lack of expertise and
resources in many areas brings to the fore the need for
greater cooperation between the United Nations and
the African Union in reinforcing institutions. We
therefore appreciate the various initiatives taken by the
United Nations and its agencies in that regard.
Furthermore, the African Group commends the
Secretary-General for undertaking the review of the
2006 declaration for the 10-year capacity-building
programme for the African Union, and welcomes the
recommendations regarding the acceleration of the
implementation of the programme.

5

A/65/PV.86

We are also confident that the establishment and
reinforcement of the United Nations Office to the
African Union in Addis Ababa would lead to more
intense interaction and substantially improve
coordination, in the context of more proactive
engagement by the United Nations in existing and
emerging areas of cooperation with the African Union.
The draft resolution acknowledges the close
cooperation between the two organizations and
highlights the vital issues to which both the United
Nations and the African Union should give priority and
attention, namely, peace and security, in particular with
regard
to
conflict
prevention,
peacekeeping,
peacemaking,
post-conflict
reconstruction
and
peacebuilding; support for the democratization process
and good governance; and development and
humanitarian issues.
The draft resolution on cooperation between the
United Nations and the African Union is presented for
consideration by the General Assembly and it is our
sincere hope that it will be adopted by consensus.
The Acting President: The Assembly will now
proceed to take a decision on draft resolution
A/65/L.68.

6

I now give the floor to the representative of the
Secretariat.
Mr. Botnaru (Department for General Assembly
and Conference Management): I should like to
announce that, since the submission of draft resolution
A/65/L.68, the following countries have joined as
sponsors: Austria, Croatia, Cyprus, Lithuania, Malta,
Montenegro, New Zealand, Poland, the Republic of
Moldova, Romania and the United Kingdom of Great
Britain and Northern Ireland.
The Acting President: May I take it that the
General Assembly decides to adopt draft resolution
A/65/L.68?
Draft resolution A/65/L.68
(resolution 65/274).

was

adopted

The Acting President: May I take it that it is the
wish of the General Assembly to conclude its
consideration of sub-item (a) of agenda item 122?
It was so decided.
The meeting rose at 10.55 a.m.

11-30249
