General Assembly -

50

Ninth Session

a convention for the reduction or elimination of future
statelessness as soon as at least twenty States have
communicated to the Secretary-General their willingness to co-operate in such a conference;
3. Requests the Secretary-General:
(a) To communicate, together with the present resolution, the revised draft Conventions to Member States
and to each non-member State which is or hereafter
becomes a member of one or more of the specialized
agencies of the United Nations or which is or hereafter becomes a Party to the Statute of the International
Court of Justice ;
(b) To fix the exact time and place for the conference, to issue invitations to those States to which
the revised draft Conventions have been communicated
and to take all other measures for the convening of the
conference and for its operation in case the condition
stated in paragraph 2 above is met;
( c) To report on the matter to the General Assembly
at its eleventh session;
4. Requests Governments of States to which reference is made in paragraph 3, sub-paragraph (a) above,
to give early consideration to the merits of a multilateral
convention on the elimination or reduction of future
statelessness.
504th plenary meeting,
4 December 1954.

Considering that the General Assembly has estahlished9 a new Special Committee on the question of
defining aggression to submit to the General Assembly at its eleventh session a detailed report with
a draft definition of aggressicn, and that it ha~ also
postponed'° consi<leration of the draft Code until the
Special Committee has submitted ib report, so that
the question of the draft Code will also be included
in the provisional agenr1a of the eleventh session,
Considering that. after the General Assembly has
examined the Special Committee's report and the draft
Code, an interval should be allowed before it resumes
consideration of the question of an international
criminal jurisdiction in order to give Governments
sufficient time duly to consider the influence and effect
of the first two questions in relation to the question of
an international criminal jurisdiction,
1. Thanks the 1953 Committee on International
Criminal Jurisdiction for the efforts it has made in
carrying out its terms of reference;
2. Decides to postpone consideration of the question of an international criminal jurisdiction until
the General Assembly has taken up the report of the
Special Committee on the question of defining aggression and has taken up again the draft Code of Offences against the Peace and Security uf Mankind.
512th plenary meeting,
14 December 1954.

897 (IX). Draft Code of Offences against the
Peace and Security of Mankind

899 (IX). Draft articles on the continental shelf

The General Assembly,
Considering that the draft Code of Offences against
the Peace and Security of Mankind, as formulated
in chapter III of the report 7 of the International Law
Commission on the work of its sixth session, raises
problems closely related to that of the definition of
aggression,
Considering that, by its resolution 895 (IX) of 4
December 1954, the General Assembly decided to entrust to a Special Committee of ninet('en Member
States the task of preparing and submitting to the
General Assembly at its eleventh session a detailed
report on the question of defining aggression and a
draft definition of aggression,
Decides to postpone further consideration of the
draft Code of Offences against the Peace and Security
of Mankind until the Special Committee on the question of defining aggression has submitted its report.
504th plenary meeting,
4 December 1954.

898 (IX). International criminal jurisdiction

The General Assembly,
Having received the report8 of the 1953 Committee
on International Criminal Jurisdiction to which a
revised draft statute for an international criminal court
is annexed,
Considering the connexion between the question of
defining aggression, the draft Code of Offences against
the Peace and Security of Mankind, and the question
of an international criminal jurisdiction,
1
8

Ibid.
Ibid., Supplement No. 12.

The General Assembly,
Considering that the International Law Commission
in its report 11 on the work of its fifth session submitted
for the consideration of the General Assembly draft
articles on the continental shelf,
Believing that consideration by the General Assembly
of the regime of the high sras, the regime of territorial
waters and all related problems should be undertaken
without undue delay,
Recalling that, in resolution 798 (VIII) of 7 December 1953, the General Assembly, having regard to the
fact that the problems relating to the high seas, territorial waters, contiguous zones, the continental shelf
and the superjacent waters were closely linked together
juridically as well as physically, decided not to deal
with any aspect of those matters until all the problems
involved had be~n studie<l by the International Law
Commission and reported upon by it to the General
Assembly,
1. Requests the international Law Commission to
devote the necessary time to the study of the regime
of the high seas, the regime of territorial waters and
all related problems in order to complete its work on
these topics and submit its final report in time for the
General Assembly to consider them as a whole, in
accordance with resolution 798 (VIII), at its eleventh
session;
2. Drcides to include the final report of the International Law Commission on these topics in the provisiona! ::tgenda for the eleventh session of the General
Assembly.
512th plenary meeting,
14 December 1954.
• See resolution 895 (IX), p. 49.
10 See resolution 897 (IX), above.
11 See Official Records of the General Assembly, Eighth
Session, Supplement No. 9, chapter Ill.
