A/59/49 (Vol. III)

Resolutions
and
Decisions
adopted by the General Assembly
during its fifty-ninth session
Volume III

24 December 2004 – 13 September 2005

General Assembly
Official Records  Fifty-ninth Session
Supplement No. 49 (A/59/49)

United Nations  New York, 2006

NOTE
The resolutions and decisions of the General Assembly are identified as follows:
Regular sessions
Until the thirtieth regular session, the resolutions of the General Assembly were
identified by an arabic numeral followed by a roman numeral in parentheses
indicating the session (for example: resolution 3363 (XXX)). When several
resolutions were adopted under the same number, each of them was identified by a
capital letter placed between the two numerals (for example: resolution
3367 A (XXX), resolutions 3411 A and B (XXX), resolutions 3419 A to D (XXX)).
The decisions were not numbered.
Since the thirty-first session, as part of the new system adopted for symbols of
General Assembly documents, resolutions and decisions have been identified by an
arabic numeral, indicating the session, followed by an oblique stroke and another
arabic numeral (for example: resolution 31/1, decision 31/301). When several
resolutions or decisions were adopted under the same number, each of them has been
identified by a capital letter placed after the two numerals (for example: resolution
31/16 A, resolutions 31/6 A and B, decisions 31/406 A to E).
Special sessions
Until the seventh special session, the resolutions of the General Assembly were
identified by an arabic numeral followed, in parentheses, by the letter “S” and a
roman numeral indicating the session (for example: resolution 3362 (S-VII)). The
decisions were not numbered.
Since the eighth special session, resolutions and decisions have been identified
by the letter “S” and an arabic numeral indicating the session, followed by an oblique
stroke and another arabic numeral (for example: resolution S-8/1, decision S-8/11).
Emergency special sessions
Until the fifth emergency special session, the resolutions of the General
Assembly were identified by an arabic numeral followed, in parentheses, by the
letters “ES” and a roman numeral indicating the session (for example: resolution
2252 (ES-V)). The decisions were not numbered.
Since the sixth emergency special session, resolutions and decisions have been
identified by the letters “ES” and an arabic numeral indicating the session, followed
by an oblique stroke and another arabic numeral (for example: resolution ES-6/1,
decision ES-6/11).
In each of the series described above, the numbering follows the order of adoption.
*
*

*

The present volume contains the resolutions and decisions adopted by the General
Assembly from 24 December 2004 to 13 September 2005. Resolutions adopted by the
Assembly from 14 September to 23 December 2004 appear in volume I. Volume II
contains the decisions adopted by the Assembly during that period.

ISSN 0252-7014

Contents
Section

Page

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee...........................................................1
II. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Special Political and Decolonization Committee
(Fourth Committee)...........................................................................................................................47
III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee .................................................................... 51
IV. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Sixth Committee.........................................................................113
V. Decisions .......................................................................................................................................115
A. Elections and appointments.....................................................................................................117
B. Other decisions .......................................................................................................................122
1.

Decisions adopted without reference to a Main Committee.........................................................122

2.

Decisions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee.............................................................125
Annexes

I. Allocation of agenda items............................................................................................................129
II. Checklist of resolutions and decisions ..........................................................................................131

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee
Contents
Resolution
No.

59/113.

Title

Page

World Programme for Human Rights Education ........................................................................................................ 2
Resolution B ............................................................................................................................................................ 2

59/279.

Strengthening emergency relief, rehabilitation, reconstruction and prevention in the aftermath of the Indian
Ocean tsunami disaster.............................................................................................................................................. 2

59/290.

International Convention for the Suppression of Acts of Nuclear Terrorism.................................................................. 4

59/291.

Preparation for and organization of the High-level Plenary Meeting of the General Assembly ..................................... 11

59/293.

Modalities for the High-level Dialogue on Financing for Development...................................................................... 15

59/309.

Multilingualism...................................................................................................................................................... 16

59/310.

Cooperation between the United Nations and the Economic Community of Central African States.............................. 17

59/311.

International Meeting to Review the Implementation of the Programme of Action for the Sustainable
Development of Small Island Developing States....................................................................................................... 19

59/312.

Requests for exemption under Article 19 of the Charter of the United Nations............................................................ 21

59/313.

A strengthened and revitalized General Assembly .................................................................................................... 22

59/314.

Draft outcome document of the High-level Plenary Meeting of the General Assembly of September 2005................... 24

1

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

RESOLUTION 59/113 B
Adopted at the 113th plenary meeting, on 14 July 2005, without a vote, on the
basis of draft resolution A/59/L.65 and Add.1, sponsored by: Andorra, Argentina,
Armenia, Australia, Austria, Belarus, Belgium, Canada, Chile, Costa Rica,
Croatia, Cyprus, Czech Republic, Denmark, Finland, France, Germany, Greece,
Haiti, Hungary, Iceland, Ireland, Italy, Japan, Kazakhstan, Liechtenstein,
Lithuania, Luxembourg, Mali, Malta, Mexico, Monaco, Netherlands, Norway,
Panama, Poland, Portugal, Republic of Korea, Republic of Moldova, Romania,
Russian Federation, San Marino, Serbia and Montenegro, Slovakia, Slovenia,
Spain, Switzerland, Thailand, the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia,
Turkey, United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, Uruguay

59/113. World Programme for Human Rights Education
B1
The General Assembly,
Recalling the relevant resolutions adopted by the General
Assembly and the Commission on Human Rights concerning
the United Nations Decade for Human Rights Education,
1995–2004,
Convinced that human rights education is a long-term and
lifelong process through which everyone learns tolerance and
respect for the dignity of others and the means and methods of
ensuring that respect in all societies,
Believing that human rights education is essential to the
realization of human rights and fundamental freedoms and
contributes significantly to promoting equality, preventing
conflict and human rights violations and enhancing participation
and democratic processes, with a view to developing societies
in which all human beings are valued and respected,
Welcoming the proclamation by the General Assembly on
10 December 2004 of the World Programme for Human Rights
Education, structured in consecutive phases, which began on
1 January 2005,
1. Adopts the revised draft plan of action for the first
phase (2005–2007) of the World Programme for Human Rights
Education,2 which focuses on primary and secondary school
systems;
2. Encourages all States to develop initiatives within
the World Programme and, in particular, to implement, within
their capabilities, the plan of action;
3. Requests the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Human Rights, in close cooperation with the
United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization,
to promote the national implementation of the plan of action,
_______________
1

Resolution 59/113, in section I of the Official Records of the General
Assembly, Fifty-ninth Session, Supplement No. 49 and corrigendum
(A/59/49 and A/59/49 (Vol. I)/Corr. 1), vol. I, becomes resolution 59/113 A.
2
A/59/525/Rev.1.

2

provide relevant technical assistance when requested and
coordinate related international efforts;
4. Appeals to relevant organs, bodies or agencies of the
United Nations system, as well as all other international and
regional intergovernmental and non-governmental organizations,
within their respective mandates, to promote and technically
assist, when requested, the national implementation of the plan
of action;
5. Calls upon all existing national human rights
institutions to assist in the implementation of human rights
education programmes consistent with the plan of action;
6. Requests the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Human Rights and the United Nations
Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization to widely
disseminate the plan of action among States and intergovernmental and non-governmental organizations.
RESOLUTION 59/279
Adopted at the 79th plenary meeting, on 19 January 2005, without a vote, on the
basis of draft resolution A/59/L.58 and Add.1, as orally revised, sponsored by:
Albania, Algeria, Andorra, Argentina, Armenia, Australia, Austria, Azerbaijan,
Bangladesh, Belarus, Belgium, Bolivia, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Brazil, Brunei
Darussalam, Bulgaria, Cambodia, Cameroon, Canada, Central African
Republic, Chile, China, Croatia, Cuba, Cyprus, Czech Republic, Denmark,
Djibouti, Egypt, El Salvador, Estonia, Ethiopia, Finland, France, Gabon, Gambia,
Germany, Ghana, Greece, Grenada, Guatemala, Guinea, Guyana, Haiti,
Hungary, Iceland, India, Indonesia, Iran (Islamic Republic of), Ireland, Israel,
Italy, Jamaica, Japan, Kazakhstan, Kenya, Kuwait, Kyrgyzstan, Lao People’s
Democratic Republic, Latvia, Lesotho, Liberia, Libyan Arab Jamahiriya,
Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Madagascar, Malaysia, Maldives, Mali,
Malta, Mauritius, Mexico, Monaco, Mongolia, Morocco, Mozambique, Myanmar,
Namibia, Nauru, Nepal, Netherlands, New Zealand, Nicaragua, Nigeria,
Norway, Pakistan, Peru, Philippines, Poland, Portugal, Qatar, Republic of Korea,
Republic of Moldova, Romania, Russian Federation, Samoa, San Marino, Saudi
Arabia, Senegal, Serbia and Montenegro, Singapore, Slovakia, Slovenia,
Somalia, South Africa, Spain, Sri Lanka, Sudan, Sweden, Switzerland, Syrian
Arab Republic, Tajikistan, Thailand, the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia,
Timor-Leste, Togo, Trinidad and Tobago, Tunisia, Turkey, Turkmenistan,
Ukraine, United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United States of
America, Uruguay, Uzbekistan, Vanuatu, Viet Nam, Yemen

59/279. Strengthening emergency relief, rehabilitation,
reconstruction and prevention in the aftermath of
the Indian Ocean tsunami disaster
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 46/182 of 19 December 1991,
57/152 of 16 December 2002, 57/256 of 20 December 2002,
58/25 of 5 December 2003, 58/214 and 58/215 of 23 December
2003, 59/212 of 20 December 2004, and 59/231 and 59/233 of
22 December 2004,
Expressing sincere condolences and deep sympathy to the
victims, their families, the Governments and the peoples of
those States that suffered huge losses of life and socio-economic

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

and environmental damage from the unprecedented tsunami
disaster that struck the Indian Ocean and Southeast Asian
regions on 26 December 2004,
Commending the prompt response, support, generous
contributions to and assistance of the international community,
by Governments, civil society, the private sector and individuals,
in the relief, rehabilitation and reconstruction efforts, which
reflect the spirit of international solidarity and cooperation to
address the disaster,
Commending also the leading role of the affected States
and the role of the United Nations in addressing the disaster, and
recognizing the importance of cooperation for effective
mobilization, coordination and delivery of international assistance
in the emergency relief phase,
Welcoming the Declaration on Action to Strengthen
Emergency Relief, Rehabilitation, Reconstruction and Prevention
in the Aftermath of the Earthquake and Tsunami Disaster of
26 December 2004,3 adopted at the special meeting of leaders
of the Association of Southeast Asian Nations, held in Jakarta
on 6 January 2005 in the aftermath of the earthquake and
tsunami, and the pledges made by donor countries and
international financial institutions for the affected countries,
Welcoming also the launching of the Indian Ocean
earthquake-tsunami 2005 flash appeal by the Secretary-General
to respond to the urgent and immediate needs of communities
severely affected by the earthquake and tsunami 4 and the
outcome of the Ministerial-level Meeting on Humanitarian
Assistance to Tsunami-affected Communities, held in Geneva
on 11 January 2005,
Welcoming further the recent announcement by the Paris
Club creditors that they will not expect debt payments from
affected countries that request such forebearance until the World
Bank and the International Monetary Fund have made a full
assessment of their reconstruction and financing needs as well
as specific initiatives from countries on this issue,
Welcoming the appointment by the Secretary-General of a
Special Coordinator to coordinate international emergency relief
operations in support of national emergency programmes of
countries affected by the tsunami disaster and covered by the
flash appeal,
Expressing concern over the medium- and long-term
social, economic and environmental impacts of the disaster on
the affected States,
Stressing the need to develop and implement riskreduction strategies and to integrate them, where appropriate,
into national development plans, in particular through the
_______________
3

A/59/669, annex.
4
Indonesia, Maldives, Myanmar, Seychelles, Somalia, Sri Lanka.

implementation of the International Strategy for Disaster
Reduction, so as to enhance the resilience of populations in
disasters and reduce risks to them, their livelihoods, the social
and economic infrastructure and environmental resources,
Recognizing that the development of stronger institutions,
mechanisms and capacities, including at the community level,
that can systematically build resilience to hazards and disasters
is essential to reducing the risks and the vulnerability of
populations to disasters, including disaster preparedness,
mitigation and early warning systems at all levels,
Recalling the need for continued commitment to assist the
affected countries and their peoples, particularly the most
vulnerable groups, to fully recover from the catastrophic and
traumatic effects of the disaster, including in their medium- and
long-term rehabilitation and reconstruction efforts, and
welcoming Government and international assistance measures
in this regard,
Emphasizing that disaster reduction, including reducing
vulnerability to natural disasters, is an important element that
contributes to the achievement of sustainable development,
Welcoming the convening of the World Conference on
Disaster Reduction in Kobe, Japan, from 18 to 22 January 2005,
with a view to updating the guiding framework on disaster
reduction for the twenty-first century,
Noting the outcome of the International Meeting to
Review the Implementation of the Programme of Action for the
Sustainable Development of Small Island Developing States,
held in Mauritius from 10 to 14 January 2005,
Stressing the importance of advancing the implementation
of the Plan of Implementation of the World Summit on
Sustainable Development (“Johannesburg Plan of
Implementation”)5 and its relevant provisions on vulnerability,
risk assessment and disaster management,
Emphasizing the importance of establishing a partnership,
upon the request and with the leadership of the country
concerned, involving donor countries and regional and
international financial institutions as well as the private sector
and civil society, to support the respective national rehabilitation
and reconstruction programmes of the affected countries,
Emphasizing also the importance of international
cooperation in support of the efforts of the affected States in
dealing with natural disasters in all phases, including prevention,
preparedness, mitigation, recovery and reconstruction, as well as
in strengthening the response capacity of affected countries,

_______________
5

Report of the World Summit on Sustainable Development, Johannesburg,
South Africa, 26 August–4 September 2002 (United Nations publication,
Sales No. E.03.II.A.1 and corrigendum), chap. I, resolution 2, annex.

3

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

1. Expresses its deep concern at the number and scale
of natural disasters and their increasing impact within recent
years, which have resulted in a massive loss of life and longterm negative social, economic and environmental consequences
for vulnerable societies throughout the world, in particular in
developing countries;
2. Emphasizes the need for the international
community to maintain its focus beyond the present emergency
relief, in order to sustain the political will to support the
medium- and long-term rehabilitation, reconstruction and risk
reduction efforts led by the Governments of the affected
countries at all levels;
3. Welcomes the effective cooperation between the
affected States, relevant bodies in the United Nations system,
donor countries, regional and international financial institutions
and civil society in the coordination and delivery of emergency
relief, and stresses the need to continue such cooperation and
delivery throughout the ongoing relief operations and
rehabilitation and reconstruction efforts, in a manner that
reduces vulnerability to future natural hazards;
4. Encourages the international community, particularly
donor countries, international financial institutions and relevant
international organizations, as well as the private sector and civil
society, to deliver swiftly on their pledges and to continue to
provide the necessary funds and assistance to support the
rehabilitation and reconstruction efforts;
5. Welcomes the increasing efforts to further enhance
transparency and accountability with respect to the channelling
and utilization of resources;
6. Requests the Secretary-General to appoint a special
representative in order to, inter alia, sustain the political will of
the international community to support medium- and long-term
rehabilitation, reconstruction and risk reduction efforts led by
the Governments of affected countries at all levels;
7. Also requests the Secretary-General to explore ways
to further strengthen the rapid response capacities for immediate
humanitarian relief efforts of the international community,
building on the existing arrangements and ongoing initiatives,
including the consideration of “standby arrangements” under
the auspices of the United Nations;
8. Invites the World Bank and the Asian Development
Bank, in collaboration with other international and regional
financial institutions and the United Nations, to convene
members of the international community, including affected
countries, to address the medium- and long-term rehabilitation
and reconstruction needs of the affected countries;
9. Recognizes the importance of the decision by the
Association of Southeast Asian Nations to establish regional
mechanisms on disaster prevention, preparedness and mitigation,
encourages regional cooperation in this regard, and urges donor
countries and regional and international organizations as well as
4

other relevant institutions to provide, where appropriate,
financial and technical assistance;
10. Also recognizes the importance of the promotion of
public education, awareness and community participation in
disaster prevention and preparedness, particularly at the local
level, as well as the pressing need to develop and promote
national and regional capacity and access to technology and
knowledge in building and managing a regional early warning
system and in disaster management, through national and
regional efforts as well as through international cooperation and
partnership;
11. Emphasizes the urgent need for the establishment of
a regional early warning system, particularly for tsunamis, in the
Indian Ocean and Southeast Asian regions, and notes the interest
expressed by some Governments, bodies and organizations,
including the Asian Disaster Preparedness Centre, to support the
establishment of this system;
12. Welcomes the proposed convening of a regional
ministerial meeting on regional cooperation with regard to a
tsunami early warning system, to be held in Thailand on
28 January 2005;
13. Also welcomes the proposal of Germany to host a
third international early warning conference, covering the
complete range of natural hazards, with a focus on the urgent
implementation of early warning systems for hydrometeorological and geological hazards on a global scale;
14. Further welcomes the fact that the World
Conference on Disaster Reduction will discuss the issue of a
global and regional tsunami early warning system as part of its
agenda;
15. Requests the Secretary-General to report to the
General Assembly at its sixtieth session on the implementation
of the present resolution under the item entitled “Strengthening
of the coordination of humanitarian and disaster relief assistance
of the United Nations, including special economic assistance”
and to report to the Economic and Social Council at its
substantive session in 2005.
RESOLUTION 59/290
Adopted at the 91st plenary meeting, on 13 April 2005, without a vote, on the
basis of the report of the Ad Hoc Committee established by General Assembly
resolution 51/210 of 17 December 1996 (A/59/766)

59/290. International Convention for the Suppression of
Acts of Nuclear Terrorism
The General Assembly,
Having considered the text of the draft international
convention for the suppression of acts of nuclear terrorism
elaborated by the Ad Hoc Committee established by General

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

Assembly resolution 51/210 of 17 December 1996 and the
Working Group of the Sixth Committee,
1. Adopts the International Convention for the
Suppression of Acts of Nuclear Terrorism annexed to the
present resolution, and requests the Secretary-General to open
the Convention for signature at United Nations Headquarters in
New York from 14 September 2005 to 31 December 2006;
2. Calls upon all States to sign and ratify, accept,
approve or accede to the Convention.
Annex
International Convention for the Suppression of Acts of
Nuclear Terrorism
The States Parties to this Convention,
Having in mind the purposes and principles of the Charter
of the United Nations concerning the maintenance of
international peace and security and the promotion of goodneighbourliness and friendly relations and cooperation among
States,
Recalling the Declaration on the Occasion of the Fiftieth
Anniversary of the United Nations of 24 October 1995,
Recognizing the right of all States to develop and apply
nuclear energy for peaceful purposes and their legitimate
interests in the potential benefits to be derived from the peaceful
application of nuclear energy,
Bearing in mind the Convention on the Physical
Protection of Nuclear Material of 1980,
Deeply concerned about the worldwide escalation of acts
of terrorism in all its forms and manifestations,
Recalling the Declaration on Measures to Eliminate
International Terrorism annexed to General Assembly resolution
49/60 of 9 December 1994, in which, inter alia, the States
Members of the United Nations solemnly reaffirm their
unequivocal condemnation of all acts, methods and practices of
terrorism as criminal and unjustifiable, wherever and by
whomever committed, including those which jeopardize the
friendly relations among States and peoples and threaten the
territorial integrity and security of States,
Noting that the Declaration also encouraged States to
review urgently the scope of the existing international legal
provisions on the prevention, repression and elimination of
terrorism in all its forms and manifestations, with the aim of
ensuring that there is a comprehensive legal framework covering
all aspects of the matter,
Recalling General Assembly resolution 51/210 of
17 December 1996 and the Declaration to Supplement the 1994
Declaration on Measures to Eliminate International Terrorism
annexed thereto,

Recalling also that, pursuant to General Assembly
resolution 51/210, an ad hoc committee was established to
elaborate, inter alia, an international convention for the
suppression of acts of nuclear terrorism to supplement related
existing international instruments,
Noting that acts of nuclear terrorism may result in the
gravest consequences and may pose a threat to international
peace and security,
Noting also that existing multilateral legal provisions do
not adequately address those attacks,
Being convinced of the urgent need to enhance
international cooperation between States in devising and
adopting effective and practical measures for the prevention of
such acts of terrorism and for the prosecution and punishment
of their perpetrators,
Noting that the activities of military forces of States are
governed by rules of international law outside of the framework
of this Convention and that the exclusion of certain actions from
the coverage of this Convention does not condone or make
lawful otherwise unlawful acts, or preclude prosecution under
other laws,
Have agreed as follows:
Article 1
For the purposes of this Convention:
1. “Radioactive material” means nuclear material and other
radioactive substances which contain nuclides which undergo
spontaneous disintegration (a process accompanied by emission
of one or more types of ionizing radiation, such as alpha-, beta-,
neutron particles and gamma rays) and which may, owing to
their radiological or fissile properties, cause death, serious
bodily injury or substantial damage to property or to the
environment.
2. “Nuclear material” means plutonium, except that with
isotopic concentration exceeding 80 per cent in plutonium-238;
uranium-233; uranium enriched in the isotope 235 or 233;
uranium containing the mixture of isotopes as occurring in
nature other than in the form of ore or ore residue; or any
material containing one or more of the foregoing;
Whereby “uranium enriched in the isotope 235 or 233”
means uranium containing the isotope 235 or 233 or both in an
amount such that the abundance ratio of the sum of these
isotopes to the isotope 238 is greater than the ratio of the isotope
235 to the isotope 238 occurring in nature.
3.

“Nuclear facility” means:

(a) Any nuclear reactor, including reactors installed on
vessels, vehicles, aircraft or space objects for use as an energy
source in order to propel such vessels, vehicles, aircraft or space
objects or for any other purpose;
5

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

(b) Any plant or conveyance being used for the
production, storage, processing or transport of radioactive
material.
4.

“Device” means:
(a)

Any nuclear explosive device; or

circumstances which indicate the credibility of the threat, or by
use of force.
3. Any person also commits an offence if that person
attempts to commit an offence as set forth in paragraph 1 of the
present article.

(b) Any radioactive material dispersal or radiationemitting device which may, owing to its radiological properties,
cause death, serious bodily injury or substantial damage to
property or to the environment.

4.

5. “State or government facility” includes any permanent or
temporary facility or conveyance that is used or occupied by
representatives of a State, members of a Government, the
legislature or the judiciary or by officials or employees of a
State or any other public authority or entity or by employees or
officials of an intergovernmental organization in connection
with their official duties.

(b) Organizes or directs others to commit an offence as
set forth in paragraph 1, 2 or 3 of the present article; or

6. “Military forces of a State” means the armed forces of a
State which are organized, trained and equipped under its
internal law for the primary purpose of national defence or
security and persons acting in support of those armed forces
who are under their formal command, control and responsibility.
Article 2
1. Any person commits an offence within the meaning of
this Convention if that person unlawfully and intentionally:
(a) Possesses radioactive material or makes or
possesses a device:
(i) With the intent to cause death or serious bodily
injury; or
(ii) With the intent to cause substantial damage to
property or to the environment;
(b) Uses in any way radioactive material or a device, or
uses or damages a nuclear facility in a manner which releases or
risks the release of radioactive material:
(i) With the intent to cause death or serious bodily
injury; or
(ii) With the intent to cause substantial damage to
property or to the environment; or
(iii) With the intent to compel a natural or legal person,
an international organization or a State to do or refrain
from doing an act.
2.

Any person also commits an offence if that person:

(a) Threatens, under circumstances which indicate the
credibility of the threat, to commit an offence as set forth in
paragraph 1 (b) of the present article; or
(b) Demands unlawfully and intentionally radioactive
material, a device or a nuclear facility by threat, under
6

Any person also commits an offence if that person:

(a) Participates as an accomplice in an offence as set
forth in paragraph 1, 2 or 3 of the present article; or

(c) In any other way contributes to the commission of
one or more offences as set forth in paragraph 1, 2 or 3 of the
present article by a group of persons acting with a common
purpose; such contribution shall be intentional and either be made
with the aim of furthering the general criminal activity or purpose
of the group or be made in the knowledge of the intention of the
group to commit the offence or offences concerned.
Article 3
This Convention shall not apply where the offence is
committed within a single State, the alleged offender and the
victims are nationals of that State, the alleged offender is found
in the territory of that State and no other State has a basis under
article 9, paragraph 1 or 2, to exercise jurisdiction, except that
the provisions of articles 7, 12, 14, 15, 16 and 17 shall, as
appropriate, apply in those cases.
Article 4
1. Nothing in this Convention shall affect other rights,
obligations and responsibilities of States and individuals under
international law, in particular the purposes and principles of the
Charter of the United Nations and international humanitarian
law.
2. The activities of armed forces during an armed conflict, as
those terms are understood under international humanitarian
law, which are governed by that law are not governed by this
Convention, and the activities undertaken by military forces of a
State in the exercise of their official duties, inasmuch as they are
governed by other rules of international law, are not governed
by this Convention.
3. The provisions of paragraph 2 of the present article shall
not be interpreted as condoning or making lawful otherwise
unlawful acts, or precluding prosecution under other laws.
4. This Convention does not address, nor can it be
interpreted as addressing, in any way, the issue of the legality of
the use or threat of use of nuclear weapons by States.

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

Article 5
Each State Party shall adopt such measures as may be
necessary:
(a) To establish as criminal offences under its national
law the offences set forth in article 2;
(b) To make those offences punishable by appropriate
penalties which take into account the grave nature of these
offences.
Article 6
Each State Party shall adopt such measures as may be
necessary, including, where appropriate, domestic legislation, to
ensure that criminal acts within the scope of this Convention, in
particular where they are intended or calculated to provoke a
state of terror in the general public or in a group of persons or
particular persons, are under no circumstances justifiable by
considerations of a political, philosophical, ideological, racial,
ethnic, religious or other similar nature and are punished by
penalties consistent with their grave nature.
Article 7
1.

States Parties shall cooperate by:

(a) Taking all practicable measures, including, if
necessary, adapting their national law, to prevent and counter
preparations in their respective territories for the commission
within or outside their territories of the offences set forth in
article 2, including measures to prohibit in their territories illegal
activities of persons, groups and organizations that encourage,
instigate, organize, knowingly finance or knowingly provide
technical assistance or information or engage in the perpetration
of those offences;
(b) Exchanging accurate and verified information in
accordance with their national law and in the manner and
subject to the conditions specified herein, and coordinating
administrative and other measures taken as appropriate to
detect, prevent, suppress and investigate the offences set forth in
article 2 and also in order to institute criminal proceedings
against persons alleged to have committed those crimes. In
particular, a State Party shall take appropriate measures in order
to inform without delay the other States referred to in article 9 in
respect of the commission of the offences set forth in article 2 as
well as preparations to commit such offences about which it has
learned, and also to inform, where appropriate, international
organizations.
2. States Parties shall take appropriate measures consistent
with their national law to protect the confidentiality of any
information which they receive in confidence by virtue of the
provisions of this Convention from another State Party or
through participation in an activity carried out for the
implementation of this Convention. If States Parties provide
information to international organizations in confidence, steps

shall be taken to ensure that the confidentiality of such
information is protected.
3. States Parties shall not be required by this Convention to
provide any information which they are not permitted to
communicate pursuant to national law or which would
jeopardize the security of the State concerned or the physical
protection of nuclear material.
4. States Parties shall inform the Secretary-General of the
United Nations of their competent authorities and liaison points
responsible for sending and receiving the information referred
to in the present article. The Secretary-General of the United
Nations shall communicate such information regarding
competent authorities and liaison points to all States Parties and
the International Atomic Energy Agency. Such authorities and
liaison points must be accessible on a continuous basis.
Article 8
For purposes of preventing offences under this
Convention, States Parties shall make every effort to adopt
appropriate measures to ensure the protection of radioactive
material, taking into account relevant recommendations and
functions of the International Atomic Energy Agency.
Article 9
1. Each State Party shall take such measures as may be
necessary to establish its jurisdiction over the offences set forth
in article 2 when:
(a)
State; or

The offence is committed in the territory of that

(b) The offence is committed on board a vessel flying
the flag of that State or an aircraft which is registered under the
laws of that State at the time the offence is committed; or
(c)

The offence is committed by a national of that State.

2. A State Party may also establish its jurisdiction over any
such offence when:
(a)
State; or

The offence is committed against a national of that

(b) The offence is committed against a State or
government facility of that State abroad, including an embassy
or other diplomatic or consular premises of that State; or
(c) The offence is committed by a stateless person who
has his or her habitual residence in the territory of that State; or
(d) The offence is committed in an attempt to compel
that State to do or abstain from doing any act; or
(e) The offence is committed on board an aircraft which
is operated by the Government of that State.
3. Upon ratifying, accepting, approving or acceding to this
Convention, each State Party shall notify the Secretary-General
7

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

of the United Nations of the jurisdiction it has established under
its national law in accordance with paragraph 2 of the present
article. Should any change take place, the State Party concerned
shall immediately notify the Secretary-General.
4. Each State Party shall likewise take such measures as may
be necessary to establish its jurisdiction over the offences set
forth in article 2 in cases where the alleged offender is present in
its territory and it does not extradite that person to any of the
States Parties which have established their jurisdiction in
accordance with paragraph 1 or 2 of the present article.
5. This Convention does not exclude the exercise of any
criminal jurisdiction established by a State Party in accordance
with its national law.
Article 10
1. Upon receiving information that an offence set forth in
article 2 has been committed or is being committed in the
territory of a State Party or that a person who has committed or
who is alleged to have committed such an offence may be
present in its territory, the State Party concerned shall take such
measures as may be necessary under its national law to
investigate the facts contained in the information.
2. Upon being satisfied that the circumstances so warrant,
the State Party in whose territory the offender or alleged
offender is present shall take the appropriate measures under its
national law so as to ensure that person’s presence for the
purpose of prosecution or extradition.
3. Any person regarding whom the measures referred to in
paragraph 2 of the present article are being taken shall be
entitled:
(a) To communicate without delay with the nearest
appropriate representative of the State of which that person is a
national or which is otherwise entitled to protect that person’s
rights or, if that person is a stateless person, the State in the
territory of which that person habitually resides;
(b)

To be visited by a representative of that State;

(c) To be informed of that person’s rights under
subparagraphs (a) and (b).
4. The rights referred to in paragraph 3 of the present article
shall be exercised in conformity with the laws and regulations
of the State in the territory of which the offender or alleged
offender is present, subject to the provision that the said laws
and regulations must enable full effect to be given to the
purposes for which the rights accorded under paragraph 3 are
intended.
5. The provisions of paragraphs 3 and 4 of the present article
shall be without prejudice to the right of any State Party having
a claim to jurisdiction in accordance with article 9, paragraph 1 (c)
or 2 (c), to invite the International Committee of the Red Cross
to communicate with and visit the alleged offender.
8

6. When a State Party, pursuant to the present article, has
taken a person into custody, it shall immediately notify, directly
or through the Secretary-General of the United Nations, the
States Parties which have established jurisdiction in accordance
with article 9, paragraphs 1 and 2, and, if it considers it
advisable, any other interested States Parties, of the fact that that
person is in custody and of the circumstances which warrant
that person’s detention. The State which makes the investigation
contemplated in paragraph 1 of the present article shall
promptly inform the said States Parties of its findings and shall
indicate whether it intends to exercise jurisdiction.
Article 11
1. The State Party in the territory of which the alleged
offender is present shall, in cases to which article 9 applies, if it
does not extradite that person, be obliged, without exception
whatsoever and whether or not the offence was committed in its
territory, to submit the case without undue delay to its
competent authorities for the purpose of prosecution, through
proceedings in accordance with the laws of that State. Those
authorities shall take their decision in the same manner as in the
case of any other offence of a grave nature under the law of that
State.
2. Whenever a State Party is permitted under its national law
to extradite or otherwise surrender one of its nationals only upon
the condition that the person will be returned to that State to
serve the sentence imposed as a result of the trial or proceeding
for which the extradition or surrender of the person was sought,
and this State and the State seeking the extradition of the person
agree with this option and other terms they may deem
appropriate, such a conditional extradition or surrender shall be
sufficient to discharge the obligation set forth in paragraph 1 of
the present article.
Article 12
Any person who is taken into custody or regarding whom
any other measures are taken or proceedings are carried out
pursuant to this Convention shall be guaranteed fair treatment,
including enjoyment of all rights and guarantees in conformity
with the law of the State in the territory of which that person is
present and applicable provisions of international law, including
international law of human rights.
Article 13
1. The offences set forth in article 2 shall be deemed to be
included as extraditable offences in any extradition treaty
existing between any of the States Parties before the entry into
force of this Convention. States Parties undertake to include
such offences as extraditable offences in every extradition treaty
to be subsequently concluded between them.
2. When a State Party which makes extradition conditional
on the existence of a treaty receives a request for extradition

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

from another State Party with which it has no extradition treaty,
the requested State Party may, at its option, consider this
Convention as a legal basis for extradition in respect of the
offences set forth in article 2. Extradition shall be subject to the
other conditions provided by the law of the requested State.
3. States Parties which do not make extradition conditional
on the existence of a treaty shall recognize the offences set forth
in article 2 as extraditable offences between themselves, subject
to the conditions provided by the law of the requested State.
4. If necessary, the offences set forth in article 2 shall be
treated, for the purposes of extradition between States Parties, as
if they had been committed not only in the place in which they
occurred but also in the territory of the States that have
established jurisdiction in accordance with article 9, paragraphs 1
and 2.
5. The provisions of all extradition treaties and arrangements
between States Parties with regard to offences set forth in
article 2 shall be deemed to be modified as between States
Parties to the extent that they are incompatible with this
Convention.
Article 14
1. States Parties shall afford one another the greatest measure
of assistance in connection with investigations or criminal or
extradition proceedings brought in respect of the offences set
forth in article 2, including assistance in obtaining evidence at
their disposal necessary for the proceedings.
2. States Parties shall carry out their obligations under
paragraph 1 of the present article in conformity with any treaties
or other arrangements on mutual legal assistance that may exist
between them. In the absence of such treaties or arrangements,
States Parties shall afford one another assistance in accordance
with their national law.
Article 15
None of the offences set forth in article 2 shall be
regarded, for the purposes of extradition or mutual legal
assistance, as a political offence or as an offence connected with
a political offence or as an offence inspired by political motives.
Accordingly, a request for extradition or for mutual legal
assistance based on such an offence may not be refused on the
sole ground that it concerns a political offence or an offence
connected with a political offence or an offence inspired by
political motives.
Article 16
Nothing in this Convention shall be interpreted as
imposing an obligation to extradite or to afford mutual legal
assistance if the requested State Party has substantial grounds
for believing that the request for extradition for offences set
forth in article 2 or for mutual legal assistance with respect to

such offences has been made for the purpose of prosecuting or
punishing a person on account of that person’s race, religion,
nationality, ethnic origin or political opinion or that compliance
with the request would cause prejudice to that person’s position
for any of these reasons.
Article 17
1. A person who is being detained or is serving a sentence in
the territory of one State Party whose presence in another State
Party is requested for purposes of testimony, identification or
otherwise providing assistance in obtaining evidence for the
investigation or prosecution of offences under this Convention
may be transferred if the following conditions are met:
(a)

The person freely gives his or her informed consent;

and
(b) The competent authorities of both States agree,
subject to such conditions as those States may deem
appropriate.
2.

For the purposes of the present article:

(a) The State to which the person is transferred shall
have the authority and obligation to keep the person transferred
in custody, unless otherwise requested or authorized by the State
from which the person was transferred;
(b) The State to which the person is transferred shall
without delay implement its obligation to return the person to
the custody of the State from which the person was transferred
as agreed beforehand, or as otherwise agreed, by the competent
authorities of both States;
(c) The State to which the person is transferred shall not
require the State from which the person was transferred to
initiate extradition proceedings for the return of the person;
(d) The person transferred shall receive credit for
service of the sentence being served in the State from which he
or she was transferred for time spent in the custody of the State
to which he or she was transferred.
3. Unless the State Party from which a person is to be
transferred in accordance with the present article so agrees, that
person, whatever his or her nationality, shall not be prosecuted
or detained or subjected to any other restriction of his or her
personal liberty in the territory of the State to which that person
is transferred in respect of acts or convictions anterior to his or
her departure from the territory of the State from which such
person was transferred.
Article 18
1. Upon seizing or otherwise taking control of radioactive
material, devices or nuclear facilities, following the commission
of an offence set forth in article 2, the State Party in possession
of such items shall:
9

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

(a) Take steps to render harmless the radioactive
material, device or nuclear facility;
(b) Ensure that any nuclear material is held in
accordance with applicable International Atomic Energy Agency
safeguards; and
(c) Have regard to physical protection recommendations
and health and safety standards published by the International
Atomic Energy Agency.
2. Upon the completion of any proceedings connected with
an offence set forth in article 2, or sooner if required by
international law, any radioactive material, device or nuclear
facility shall be returned, after consultations (in particular,
regarding modalities of return and storage) with the States
Parties concerned to the State Party to which it belongs, to the
State Party of which the natural or legal person owning such
radioactive material, device or facility is a national or resident,
or to the State Party from whose territory it was stolen or
otherwise unlawfully obtained.
3. (a) Where a State Party is prohibited by national or
international law from returning or accepting such radioactive
material, device or nuclear facility or where the States Parties
concerned so agree, subject to paragraph 3 (b) of the present
article, the State Party in possession of the radioactive material,
devices or nuclear facilities shall continue to take the steps
described in paragraph 1 of the present article; such radioactive
material, devices or nuclear facilities shall be used only for
peaceful purposes;
(b) Where it is not lawful for the State Party in
possession of the radioactive material, devices or nuclear
facilities to possess them, that State shall ensure that they are
placed as soon as possible in the possession of a State for which
such possession is lawful and which, where appropriate, has
provided assurances consistent with the requirements of
paragraph 1 of the present article in consultation with that State,
for the purpose of rendering it harmless; such radioactive
material, devices or nuclear facilities shall be used only for
peaceful purposes.
4. If the radioactive material, devices or nuclear facilities
referred to in paragraphs 1 and 2 of the present article do not
belong to any of the States Parties or to a national or resident of
a State Party or was not stolen or otherwise unlawfully obtained
from the territory of a State Party, or if no State is willing to
receive such items pursuant to paragraph 3 of the present article,
a separate decision concerning its disposition shall, subject to
paragraph 3 (b) of the present article, be taken after consultations
between the States concerned and any relevant international
organizations.
5. For the purposes of paragraphs 1, 2, 3 and 4 of the present
article, the State Party in possession of the radioactive material,
device or nuclear facility may request the assistance and
cooperation of other States Parties, in particular the States
Parties concerned, and any relevant international organizations,
10

in particular the International Atomic Energy Agency. States
Parties and the relevant international organizations are
encouraged to provide assistance pursuant to this paragraph to
the maximum extent possible.
6. The States Parties involved in the disposition or retention
of the radioactive material, device or nuclear facility pursuant to
the present article shall inform the Director General of the
International Atomic Energy Agency of the manner in which
such an item was disposed of or retained. The Director General
of the International Atomic Energy Agency shall transmit the
information to the other States Parties.
7. In the event of any dissemination in connection with an
offence set forth in article 2, nothing in the present article shall
affect in any way the rules of international law governing
liability for nuclear damage, or other rules of international law.
Article 19
The State Party where the alleged offender is prosecuted
shall, in accordance with its national law or applicable
procedures, communicate the final outcome of the proceedings
to the Secretary-General of the United Nations, who shall
transmit the information to the other States Parties.
Article 20
States Parties shall conduct consultations with one another
directly or through the Secretary-General of the United Nations,
with the assistance of international organizations as necessary,
to ensure effective implementation of this Convention.
Article 21
The States Parties shall carry out their obligations under
this Convention in a manner consistent with the principles of
sovereign equality and territorial integrity of States and that of
non-intervention in the domestic affairs of other States.
Article 22
Nothing in this Convention entitles a State Party to
undertake in the territory of another State Party the exercise of
jurisdiction and performance of functions which are exclusively
reserved for the authorities of that other State Party by its
national law.
Article 23
1. Any dispute between two or more States Parties
concerning the interpretation or application of this Convention
which cannot be settled through negotiation within a reasonable
time shall, at the request of one of them, be submitted to
arbitration. If, within six months of the date of the request for
arbitration, the parties are unable to agree on the organization of
the arbitration, any one of those parties may refer the dispute to

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

the International Court of Justice, by application, in conformity
with the Statute of the Court.

shall be promptly circulated by the depositary to all States
Parties.

2. Each State may, at the time of signature, ratification,
acceptance or approval of this Convention or accession thereto,
declare that it does not consider itself bound by paragraph 1 of
the present article. The other States Parties shall not be bound by
paragraph 1 with respect to any State Party which has made
such a reservation.

4. The amendment adopted pursuant to paragraph 3 of the
present article shall enter into force for each State Party that
deposits its instrument of ratification, acceptance, accession or
approval of the amendment on the thirtieth day after the date on
which two thirds of the States Parties have deposited their
relevant instrument. Thereafter, the amendment shall enter into
force for any State Party on the thirtieth day after the date on
which that State deposits its relevant instrument.

3. Any State which has made a reservation in accordance
with paragraph 2 of the present article may at any time
withdraw that reservation by notification to the SecretaryGeneral of the United Nations.
Article 24
1. This Convention shall be open for signature by all States
from 14 September 2005 until 31 December 2006 at United
Nations Headquarters in New York.
2. This Convention is subject to ratification, acceptance or
approval. The instruments of ratification, acceptance or approval
shall be deposited with the Secretary-General of the United
Nations.
3. This Convention shall be open to accession by any State.
The instruments of accession shall be deposited with the
Secretary-General of the United Nations.
Article 25
1. This Convention shall enter into force on the thirtieth day
following the date of the deposit of the twenty-second
instrument of ratification, acceptance, approval or accession
with the Secretary-General of the United Nations.
2. For each State ratifying, accepting, approving or acceding
to the Convention after the deposit of the twenty-second
instrument of ratification, acceptance, approval or accession, the
Convention shall enter into force on the thirtieth day after
deposit by such State of its instrument of ratification, acceptance,
approval or accession.
Article 26
1. A State Party may propose an amendment to this
Convention. The proposed amendment shall be submitted to the
depositary, who circulates it immediately to all States Parties.

Article 27
1. Any State Party may denounce this Convention by written
notification to the Secretary-General of the United Nations.
2. Denunciation shall take effect one year following the date
on which notification is received by the Secretary-General of
the United Nations.
Article 28
The original of this Convention, of which the Arabic,
Chinese, English, French, Russian and Spanish texts are equally
authentic, shall be deposited with the Secretary-General of the
United Nations, who shall send certified copies thereof to all
States.
IN WITNESS WHEREOF, the undersigned, being duly
authorized thereto by their respective Governments, have signed
this Convention, opened for signature at United Nations
Headquarters in New York on 14 September 2005.
RESOLUTION 59/291
Adopted at the 92nd plenary meeting, on 15 April 2005, without a vote, on the
basis of draft resolution A/59/L.60, as orally revised, submitted by the President
of the General Assembly

59/291. Preparation for and organization of the High-level
Plenary Meeting of the General Assembly
The General Assembly,

2. If the majority of the States Parties request the depositary
to convene a conference to consider the proposed amendments,
the depositary shall invite all States Parties to attend such a
conference to begin no sooner than three months after the
invitations are issued.

Recalling its resolution 58/291 of 6 May 2004 in which it,
inter alia, decided to convene in New York in 2005, at the
commencement of the sixtieth session of the General Assembly,
a high-level plenary meeting of the Assembly with the
participation of Heads of State and Government, on dates to be
decided by the Assembly at its fifty-ninth session,

3. The conference shall make every effort to ensure
amendments are adopted by consensus. Should this not be
possible, amendments shall be adopted by a two-thirds majority
of all States Parties. Any amendment adopted at the conference

Recalling also its resolution 59/145 of 17 December 2004,
in which it welcomed the report of the Secretary-General
entitled “Modalities, format and organization of the high-level
plenary meeting of the sixtieth session of the General
11

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

Assembly”6 requested in its resolution 58/291, and following
informal consultations convened by the President of the General
Assembly and being convinced that the High-level Plenary
Meeting would constitute a significant event,
1. Expresses satisfaction with the open, inclusive and
transparent manner in which the President of the General
Assembly is conducting the preparatory process for the Highlevel Plenary Meeting, which should lead to the adoption of a
balanced document;
2. Welcomes the submission by the Secretary-General
on 21 March 2005 of the comprehensive report entitled “In
larger freedom: towards development, security and human
rights for all”;7
3. Invites, owing to the importance of the High-level
Plenary Meeting, the Head of State of the country of the
President of the General Assembly at its fifty-ninth session and
the Head of State or Government of the country of the President
of the General Assembly at its sixtieth session to jointly preside
over the High-level Plenary Meeting;
4. Decides that the Holy See, in its capacity as
observer State, and Palestine, in its capacity as observer, shall
participate in the High-level Plenary Meeting;
5. Decides also that the plenary meetings shall be
organized in accordance with the modalities set forth in annex I
to the present resolution and that the list of speakers for the
plenary meetings shall be established in accordance with the
procedure set forth in that annex;
6. Decides further that the round-table sessions shall be
organized in accordance with the modalities set forth in annex II
to the present resolution;
7. Decides that the separate meeting on Financing for
Development to be held within the framework of the High-level
Plenary Meeting shall be held on 14 September 2005,
immediately following the adjournment of the opening plenary
meeting;
8. Decides also that the President of the General
Assembly shall preside over the informal interactive hearings to
be held on 23 and 24 June 2005 with representatives of nongovernmental organizations, civil society organizations and the
private sector, and that the hearings shall be organized in
accordance with the modalities set forth in annex III to the
present resolution, and requests the President of the Assembly to
prepare a summary of the hearings to be issued as an Assembly
document prior to the High-level Plenary Meeting in September
2005;

_______________
6
7

A/59/545.
A/59/2005.

12

9. Requests the Secretary-General to establish a trust
fund to enhance the participation in the hearings of
representatives of non-governmental organizations and civil
society organizations from developing countries, and calls upon
Member States and others to support the trust fund generously
and speedily;
10. Encourages Member States to attend the hearings at
the ambassadorial level to facilitate interaction between the
Member States and the representatives of non-governmental
organizations, civil society organizations and the private sector;
11. Requests the President of the General Assembly to
continue to hold open, inclusive and transparent consultations
with all Member States with a view to reaching the broadest
possible agreement on all major issues relating to the High-level
Plenary Meeting, taking into account the views expressed by
Member States.
Annex I
Organization of the plenary meetings and establishment of
the list of speakers for the High-level Plenary Meeting of the
General Assembly
1. The High-level Plenary Meeting will consist of a total of
six meetings, on the basis of two meetings a day, as follows:
Wednesday, 14 September 2005, from 9 a.m. to 10 a.m.
and from 3 p.m. to 7 p.m.;
Thursday, 15 September 2005, from 9 a.m. to 1 p.m. and
from 3 p.m. to 7 p.m.;
Friday, 16 September 2005, from 9 a.m. to 1 p.m. and
from 3 p.m. to 7 p.m.
2. The podium in the General Assembly Hall will have three
seats to accommodate the two Co-Chairpersons and the
Secretary-General. In the absence of the Head of State of the
country of the President of the General Assembly at its fiftyninth session or the Head of State or Government of the country
of the President of the General Assembly at its sixtieth session,
the President of the Assembly at its fifty-ninth session or the
President of the Assembly at its sixtieth session will sit instead.
3. At the opening plenary meeting, on Wednesday morning,
14 September 2005, the speakers will be the two CoChairpersons, the Secretary-General and the head of the
delegation of the host country of the Organization.
4. The separate meeting on Financing for Development will
be held from 10 a.m. to 1 p.m. immediately following the
adjournment of the opening plenary meeting. Statements will be
made by the head of the delegation of the host country of the
International Conference on Financing for Development, major
institutional stakeholders, individual delegations, in particular
delegations that are proposing key initiatives in the Financing
for Development process, one representative from civil society

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

and one representative from the private sector, in consultation
with the President of the General Assembly.
5. The list of speakers for the High-level Plenary Meeting
will therefore be established on the basis of five meetings. The
afternoon meeting on Wednesday, 14 September 2005, the
morning and afternoon meetings on Thursday, 15 September
2005, and the morning meeting on Friday, 16 September 2005,
will each have 40 speaking slots. The Friday afternoon meeting
will have 32 speaking slots since the last hour will be devoted to
the closing of the High-level Plenary Meeting.
6. The list of speakers for the High-level Plenary Meeting
will be established initially as follows:
(a) The representative of the Secretary-General will
draw one name from a first box containing the names of all
Member States that will be represented by Heads of State,
Heads of Government, vice-presidents, crown princes/princesses,
and of the Holy See, in its capacity as observer State, and
Palestine, in its capacity as observer, should they be represented
by their highest-ranking officials. This procedure will be
repeated until all names have been drawn from the box, thus
establishing the order in which participants will be invited to
choose their meetings and select their speaking slots. The
representative of the Secretary-General will then draw from a
second box the names of those not contained in the first box in
accordance with the same procedure;
(b) Five boxes will be prepared, each one representing a
meeting and each one containing numbers corresponding to
speaking slots at that meeting;
(c) Once the name of a Member State, the Holy See, in
its capacity as observer State, or Palestine, in its capacity as
observer, has been drawn by the representative of the SecretaryGeneral, that Member State, the Holy See, in its capacity as
observer State, or Palestine, in its capacity as observer, will be
invited first to choose a meeting and then to draw from the
appropriate box the number indicating the speaking slot in the
meeting.
7. The initial list of speakers for the High-level Plenary
Meeting as outlined in paragraph 6 above will be established at
a meeting to be scheduled as soon as possible in the month of
May 2005.
8. Subsequently, when each category of speakers is
organized following the order resulting from the selection
process outlined in paragraph 6 above, the list of speakers for
each meeting will be rearranged in accordance with the
established practice of the General Assembly:
(a) Heads of State will thus be accorded first priority,
followed by Heads of Government; vice-presidents, crown
princes/princesses; the highest-ranking official of the Holy See,
in its capacity as observer State, and of Palestine, in its capacity
as observer; ministers; and permanent representatives;

(b) In the event that the level at which a statement is to
be made is subsequently changed, the speaker will be moved to
the next available speaking slot in the appropriate category at
the same meeting;
(c) Participants may arrange to exchange their speaking
slots in accordance with the established practice of the General
Assembly;
(d) Speakers who are not present when their speaking
turn comes will be automatically moved to the next available
speaking slot within their category.
9. In order to accommodate all speakers at the High-level
Plenary Meeting, statements will be limited to five minutes, on
the understanding that this will not preclude the distribution of
more extensive texts.
10. Without prejudice to other organizations which have
observer status in the General Assembly, a representative of
each of the following may also be included in the list of
speakers for the plenary meetings of the High-level Plenary
Meeting:
League of Arab States
African Union
European Community
Organization of the Islamic Conference
World Conference of Speakers of Parliament of the InterParliamentary Union.
11. Representatives of non-governmental organizations in
consultative status with the Economic and Social Council, civil
society organizations and the private sector, one from each
grouping, selected during the informal interactive hearings of
June 2005, may also be included in the list of speakers for the
plenary meetings of the High-level Plenary Meeting in
consultation with the President of the General Assembly, time
permitting.
12. Other than for Member States, the list of speakers for the
plenary meetings of the High-level Plenary Meeting will be
closed on Monday, 1 August 2005.
13. The arrangements set out above shall in no way create a
precedent.
Annex II
Organization of the interactive round-table sessions for the
High-level Plenary Meeting of the General Assembly
1. The High-level Plenary Meeting will hold four interactive
round-table sessions, as follows:
Wednesday, 14 September 2005, from 3 p.m. to 6 p.m.;
Thursday, 15 September 2005, from 10 a.m. to 1 p.m. and
from 3 p.m. to 6 p.m.;
13

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

Friday, 16 September 2005, from 10 a.m. to 1 p.m.
2. The four round-table sessions will have at least 40 seats
each and will be chaired by a Head of State or Government.
3. The chairpersons of the four round-table sessions will be
from the African States, the Asian States, the Eastern European
States and the Latin American and Caribbean States. Those four
chairpersons will be selected by their respective regional groups
in consultation with the President of the General Assembly.
4. Following the selection of the chairpersons of the roundtable sessions, each regional group will determine which of its
members will participate in each round-table session, ensuring
that equitable geographical distribution will be maintained,
allowing for some flexibility. The chairpersons of the regional
groups will communicate to the President of the General
Assembly the list of countries from their respective regions that
will participate in each round-table session. Member States are
encouraged to be represented at the round tables at the level of
Head of State or Government.
5. All four round-table sessions will cover the entire agenda
of the High-level Plenary Meeting.
6. Each Head of State or Head of Government or head
of delegation attending the round-table sessions may be
accompanied by two advisers.
7. The composition of the four round-table sessions will be
subject to the principle of equitable geographical distribution.
Thus, for each regional group, the distribution of its members
for participation in each round-table session will be as follows:
(a)

African States: fifteen Member States;

(b)

Asian States: fifteen Member States;

(c)

Eastern European States: seven Member States;

(d)
States;

Latin American and Caribbean States: ten Member

(e)
States.

Western European and other States: nine Member

8. A Member State that is not a member of any of the
regional groups may participate in a round-table session to be
determined in consultation with the President of the General
Assembly. The Holy See, in its capacity as observer State, and
Palestine, in its capacity as observer, as well as the organizations
listed in paragraph 10 of annex I to the present resolution, may
also participate in different round-table sessions to be
determined also in consultation with the President of the
Assembly.
9. Heads of entities of the United Nations system may also
participate in the round-table sessions, in consultation with the
President of the General Assembly.
14

10. The list of participants in each round-table session will be
made available in due course.
11. The round-table sessions will be closed to the media and
the general public. Accredited delegates and observers will be
able to follow the proceedings of the round-table sessions via a
closed-circuit television in the overflow room.
12. Summaries of the deliberations of the four round-table
sessions will be presented orally by the chairpersons of the
round-table sessions during the concluding plenary meeting of
the High-level Plenary Meeting.
Annex III
Organization of the informal interactive hearings
1. The President of the General Assembly will preside over
the informal interactive hearings to be held on 23 and 24 June
2005. The hearings shall consist of a brief opening plenary
meeting followed by four sequential sessions of the hearings on
the basis of two sessions a day, from 10 a.m. to 1 p.m., and from
3 p.m. to 6 p.m. Each session will consist of presentations by
invited participants from non-governmental organizations in
consultative status with the Economic and Social Council, civil
society organizations and the private sector and an exchange of
views with Member States.
2. The hearings will be attended by representatives of nongovernmental organizations in consultative status with the
Economic and Social Council, civil society organizations, the
private sector, Member States and observers.
3. The President of the General Assembly will determine the
list of invited participants and the exact format and organization
of the hearings, in consultation with Member States and
representatives of non-governmental organizations in consultative
status with the Economic and Social Council, civil society
organizations and the private sector.
4. The themes for the hearings will be based on the
comprehensive report of the Secretary-General of 21 March
20057 and the clusters defined therein.
5. The President of the General Assembly will consult with
representatives of non-governmental organizations in consultative
status with the Economic and Social Council, civil society
organizations and the private sector, and with Member States, as
appropriate, on the list of representatives of non-governmental
organizations, civil society organizations and the private sector
that may participate in the plenary meetings of the High-level
Plenary Meeting of September 2005.

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

RESOLUTION 59/293

Chairman of the United Nations Development Group, will be
invited to make statements;

Adopted at the 98th plenary meeting, on 27 May 2005, without a vote, on the
basis of draft resolution A/59/L.61, submitted by the President of the General
Assembly

(b) The second day will be devoted to six interactive
multi-stakeholder round tables, divided into two sessions, each
comprising three round tables, followed by an interactive
dialogue in the form of an informal meeting with the participation
of all relevant stakeholders, which will focus on the
implementation of the results of the International Conference
on Financing for Development and the link between financing
for development and the achievement of the internationally
agreed development goals, including those contained in the
United Nations Millennium Declaration;8 the heads of relevant
organizations of the United Nations system, the heads of regional
and international intergovernmental organs that participated in
the International Conference, as well as representatives of
regional development banks, civil society and the business
sector, will all be able to intervene, on the understanding that the
principle of precedence will be strictly applied, to allow
participation at the ministerial level;

59/293. Modalities for the High-level Dialogue on
Financing for Development
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 57/250 of 20 December 2002,
Recalling also its resolution 59/145 of 17 December 2004,
in which it decided to hold the High-level Dialogue on
Financing for Development on 27 and 28 June 2005 in
New York, and resolution 59/225 of 22 December 2004, in
which it decided to consider, by the first part of 2005, the
appropriate modalities for holding the High-level Dialogue,
taking into account developments in the preparation for the
High-level Plenary Meeting of the General Assembly to be held
from 14 to 16 September 2005,
Recalling further its resolution 59/291 of 15 April 2005,
Bearing in mind that the results of the High-level Dialogue
will be an input to the preparatory process for the High-level
Plenary Meeting,

5. Decides further that the central themes of the round
tables will be based on sections of one chapter of the Monterrey
Consensus adopted at the International Conference on Financing
for Development,9 as follows:
Round table 1: Mobilizing domestic financial resources
for development;

1. Reiterates that the High-level Dialogue on Financing
for Development to be held on 27 and 28 June 2005 will be held
at the ministerial level;

Round table 2: Mobilizing international resources for
development - foreign direct investment and other private
flows;

2. Reaffirms that the High-level Dialogue constitutes
the intergovernmental focal point for the general follow-up to
the International Conference on Financing for Development,
held at Monterrey, Mexico, from 18 to 22 March 2002;

Round table 3: International trade as an engine for
development;

3. Decides that the overall theme of the High-level
Dialogue will be “The Monterrey Consensus: status of
implementation and tasks ahead”;

Round table 5: External debt;

4. Decides also that the High-level Dialogue will
consist of a series of formal and informal meetings to constitute
a policy dialogue and six interactive multi-stakeholder round
tables to be held as follows:
(a) The first day will consist of a formal meeting
chaired by the President of the General Assembly, at which the
ministers and high-level officials attending the Dialogue will be
able to make formal statements, on the understanding that the
principle of precedence will be strictly applied, to allow
participation at the ministerial level; the Secretary-General, the
President of the Economic and Social Council, the President of
the World Bank, the Managing Director of the International
Monetary Fund, the Director-General of the World Trade
Organization, the Secretary-General of the United Nations
Conference on Trade and Development and the Administrator
of the United Nations Development Programme, as the

Round table 4: Increasing international financial and
technical cooperation for development;
Round table 6: Addressing systemic issues - enhancing the
coherence and consistency of the international monetary,
financial and trading systems in support of development;
6. Reiterates its invitation to all Governments to
enhance coordination among ministries of foreign affairs,
finance, development cooperation and trade, as well as central
banks and all other national stakeholders for the preparations for
the High-level Dialogue;
7. Invites the Bretton Woods institutions, the World
Trade Organization and relevant organizations of the United
Nations system to participate in the High-level Dialogue,
_______________
8

See resolution 55/2.
Report of the International Conference on Financing for Development,
Monterrey, Mexico, 18–22 March 2002 (United Nations publication, Sales
No. E.02.II.A.7), chap. I, resolution 1, annex.
9

15

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

including in the preparatory phase, and invites the President of
the Economic and Social Council, the President of the World
Bank, the Managing Director of the International Monetary
Fund, the Director-General of the World Trade Organization
and the heads of other relevant regional and international
intergovernmental organs to participate actively in the Dialogue;
8. Invites non-governmental organizations and business
sector entities to participate at the interactive round tables and
informal meetings of the High-level Dialogue, in accordance
with the rules of procedure of the General Assembly, and
decides that:
(a) Accreditation will be open to all non-governmental
organizations that are in consultative status with the Economic
and Social Council and to all non-governmental organizations
and business sector entities accredited to the International
Conference on Financing for Development or to its follow-up
process;
(b) Interested non-governmental organizations and
business sector entities that are not in consultative status with
the Economic and Social Council or were not accredited to the
International Conference on Financing for Development shall
apply to the General Assembly for accreditation following the
accreditation procedure established during the International
Conference;
(c) The above arrangements concerning participation of
non-governmental organizations and business sector entities in
the High-level Dialogue will in no way create a precedent for
other meetings of the General Assembly;
9. Decides that all issues regarding financing for
development will be discussed during the informal interactive
hearings, to be held on 23 and 24 June 2005, with representatives
of non-governmental organizations, civil society organizations
and the private sector, and requests the Secretariat to issue a
summary of the hearings related to financing for development
as an input to the High-level Dialogue;
10. Requests the Secretary-General to submit a report on
the implementation of commitments and agreements reached at
the International Conference on Financing for Development, to
be prepared in full collaboration with the major institutional
stakeholders, as an input to the High-level Dialogue ;
11. Also requests the Secretary-General to prepare a
note on the organization of work of the High-level Dialogue;
12. Further requests the Secretary-General to seek from
the regional commissions their inputs on the regional and
interregional aspects of the follow-up to the International
Conference on Financing for Development and to report
thereon to the High-level Dialogue;
13. Requests the Secretary-General to make available at
the High-level Dialogue relevant inputs related to financing for
development from all stakeholders, including the documents of
16

the Economic and Social Council covering its 2005 special
high-level meeting with the Bretton Woods institutions, the
World Trade Organization and the United Nations Conference
on Trade and Development;
14. Reiterates its invitation to countries to report by
2005, inter alia, through existing reporting mechanisms, on their
efforts to implement the Monterrey Consensus, bearing in mind
the need to achieve the internationally agreed development
goals, including those contained in the Millennium Declaration;
15. Decides that the High-level Dialogue will result in a
summary by the President of the General Assembly that will
provide an input on financing for development to the
preparatory process of the High-level Plenary Meeting of the
General Assembly of September 2005.
RESOLUTION 59/309
Adopted at the 104th plenary meeting, on 22 June 2005, without a vote, on the
basis of draft resolution A/59/L.62 and Add.1, sponsored by: Afghanistan,
Albania, Andorra, Angola, Argentina, Armenia, Austria, Azerbaijan, Bangladesh,
Belarus, Belgium, Benin, Bolivia, Brazil, Bulgaria, Burkina Faso, Burundi,
Cameroon, Canada, Cape Verde, Central African Republic, Chad, Chile, China,
Colombia, Comoros, Congo, Costa Rica, Côte d’Ivoire, Croatia, Cyprus,
Democratic Republic of the Congo, Djibouti, Dominican Republic, Egypt, El
Salvador, France, Gabon, Georgia, Germany, Greece, Guatemala, Guinea,
Guinea-Bissau, Guyana, Haiti, Honduras, Hungary, Ireland, Lao People’s
Democratic Republic, Latvia, Lebanon, Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg,
Madagascar, Malawi, Mali, Mauritania, Mauritius, Mexico, Monaco, Morocco,
Nicaragua, Niger, Nigeria, Oman, Panama, Paraguay, Peru, Poland, Portugal,
Republic of Moldova, Romania, Russian Federation, Rwanda, Saint Lucia, San
Marino, Sao Tome and Principe, Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Serbia and
Montenegro, Seychelles, Slovakia, Slovenia, Somalia, South Africa, Spain, Sri
Lanka, Sudan, Switzerland, Syrian Arab Republic, the former Yugoslav Republic
of Macedonia, Timor-Leste, Togo, Tunisia, Ukraine, United Arab Emirates,
Uruguay, Uzbekistan, Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of), Viet Nam

59/309. Multilingualism
The General Assembly,
Recognizing that the United Nations pursues
multilingualism as a means of promoting, protecting and
preserving diversity of languages and cultures globally,
Also recognizing that genuine multilingualism promotes
unity in diversity and international understanding,
Recalling its resolution 47/135 of 18 December 1992, by
which it adopted the Declaration on the Rights of Persons
Belonging to National or Ethnic, Religious and Linguistic
Minorities, and the International Covenant on Civil and Political
Rights, 10 in particular its article 27 concerning the rights of
persons belonging to ethnic, religious or linguistic minorities,

_______________
10

See resolution 2200 A (XXI), annex.

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

Also recalling its resolutions 2 (I) of 1 February 1946,
2480 B (XXIII) of 21 December 1968, 42/207 C of
11 December 1987, 50/11 of 2 November 1995, 52/23 of
25 November 1997, 54/64 of 6 December 1999, 56/262 of
15 February 2002, 59/126 B of 10 December 2004 and 59/265
and 59/266 of 23 December 2004,
1. Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General11
and the report of the Joint Inspection Unit;12
2. Also takes note of the appointment of a new
coordinator for multilingualism;
3. Underlines the need for full implementation of the
resolutions establishing language arrangements for the official
languages of the United Nations and the working languages of
the Secretariat;
4. Emphasizes the paramount importance of the
equality of the six official languages of the United Nations;
5. Requests the Secretary-General to continue to
ensure, through the provision of documentation services and
meeting and publishing services under conference management,
including high-quality translation and interpretation, effective
multilingual communication among representatives of Member
States in intergovernmental organs and members of expert
bodies of the United Nations equally in all the official languages
of the United Nations;
6. Notes with satisfaction the willingness of the
Secretariat to encourage staff members, in formal meetings with
interpretation services, to use any of the six official languages of
which they have a command;
7. Recalls its resolution 59/266, in which it reaffirmed
the need to respect the equality of each of the two working
languages of the Secretariat, reaffirms the use of additional
working languages in specific duty stations as mandated, and in
this regard requests the Secretary-General to ensure that
vacancy announcements specify the need for either of the
working languages of the Secretariat, unless the functions of the
post require a specific working language;
8. Also recalls that in its resolution 59/266 it requested
the Secretary-General to continue to take the steps necessary to
ensure that the Galaxy e-staffing system was available in both
of the working languages of the Organization;
9. Encourages United Nations staff members to
continue to use actively existing training facilities to acquire and
enhance their proficiency in one or more of the official
languages of the United Nations;

10. Recalls its resolution 59/265, in which it reaffirmed
the provisions relating to conference services of its resolutions
on multilingualism;
11. Also recalls its resolution 59/126 B, and emphasizes
the importance of multilingualism in United Nations public
relations and information activities;
12. Reaffirms the need to achieve full parity among the
six official languages on the United Nations website;
13. Takes note with appreciation of the work done by
the United Nations information centres, including the regional
United Nations information centres, in favour of the publication
of United Nations information materials and the translation of
important documents into languages other than the official
languages of the United Nations, with a view to reaching the
widest possible spectrum of audiences and extending the United
Nations message to all the corners of the world in order to
strengthen international support for the activities of the
Organization;
14. Welcomes the decision by the General Conference
of the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural
Organization on 17 November 1999 that 21 February should be
proclaimed “International Mother Language Day”, and calls
upon Member States and the Secretariat to promote the
preservation and protection of all languages used by peoples of
the world;
15. Requests the Secretary-General to report to it at its
sixty-first session on the measures that can be taken by
international organizations within the United Nations system in
order to strengthen the protection, promotion and preservation
of all languages, in particular languages spoken by persons
belonging to linguistic minorities and languages facing extinction;
16. Also requests the Secretary-General to submit to it at
its sixty-first session a comprehensive report on the
implementation of its resolutions on multilingualism, including
the implications of the present resolution;
17. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its
sixty-first session the item entitled “Multilingualism”.
RESOLUTION 59/310
Adopted at the 113th plenary meeting, on 14 July 2005, without a vote, on the
basis of draft resolution A/59/L.16/Rev.1, sponsored by: Angola, Burundi,
Cameroon, Central African Republic, Chad, Congo, Democratic Republic of the
Congo, Equatorial Guinea, Gabon, Rwanda, Sao Tome and Principe

59/310. Cooperation between the United Nations and the
Economic Community of Central African States
_______________
11
12

A/58/363.
See A/58/93.

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 55/22 of 10 November 2000,
55/161 of 12 December 2000, 56/39 of 7 December 2001 and
17

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

57/40 of 21 November 2002 on cooperation between the United
Nations and the Economic Community of Central African
States,
Bearing in mind the treaty establishing the Economic
Community of Central African States, by which the Central
African countries have agreed to work for the economic
development of their subregion, to promote economic
cooperation and to establish a Common Market of Central
Africa,
Recalling the United Nations Millennium Declaration,
adopted on 8 September 2000 by the Heads of State and
Government at the Millennium Summit of the United Nations,13
and especially section VII thereof,
Noting that, at the ninth regular session of the Economic
Community of Central African States, held at Malabo on
24 June 1999, the Heads of State and Government of the
member States decided to resume the activities of the
Community, in particular by incorporating a collective security
component, and by providing it with sufficient financial and
human resources to enable it to become a real tool for the
integration of their economies and to foster the development of
cooperation between their peoples, with the ultimate aim of
making it one of the five pillars of the African community and
of helping Central Africa to meet the challenges of
globalization,
Bearing in mind the report of the Secretary-General on the
causes of conflict and the promotion of durable peace and
sustainable development in Africa,14
Welcoming the establishment of the Council for Peace and
Security in Central Africa with a view to creating a climate of
peace and security in the subregion and strengthening the rule of
law essential to its development,
Welcoming also the efforts made by the Central African
States, both on their own initiative and with the support of the
international community, to focus on the difficulties afflicting
this key region of Africa,
Noting the understanding of the States members of the
Economic Community of Central African States regarding their
undertaking to strengthen arrangements for cooperation within
the Community,
Noting with deep concern that despite its enormous
potential, which could make it one of the poles of development
of the continent, Central Africa has yet to achieve the stability
that would enable it to utilize its resources to the maximum
benefit of its population in an equitable manner,

Welcoming the contribution made by the United Nations
system to the efforts made at the national and subregional levels
with a view to promoting the process of democratization,
recovery and development in Central Africa,
Welcoming also the public meeting of the Security Council
on 22 October 2002 devoted to strengthening cooperation
between the United Nations system and the Central African
region,15
Recognizing the role that the private sector can play in the
socio-economic development of Central African countries and
their integration into the world economy, and stressing the
importance of fostering a favourable environment for private
investment and entrepreneurship,
Aware of the opportunities and challenges which
globalization and liberalization can create for the economies of
the countries of the subregion,
Noting with satisfaction that, as a result of the positive
efforts of regional and subregional organizations, the subregion
is gradually emerging from the conflicts that affect it, which
offers an opportunity to build peace that must be seized by all
parties and requires the mobilization of significant funds and
increased resources to support demobilization, disarmament and
reintegration programmes,
Welcoming the achievements of the Subregional Centre
for Human Rights and Democracy in Central Africa,
Noting the positive measures taken by the Economic
Community of Central African States to combat HIV/AIDS,
Noting also the important contribution of women to the
development process,
Emphasizing the urgency of reaching an appropriate
solution to the problem of refugees and internally displaced
persons in Central Africa,
1. Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General on
cooperation between the United Nations and the Economic
Community of Central African States;16
2. Welcomes the ongoing efforts of the SecretaryGeneral to support the role of the subregional institutions, in
particular his decision to dispatch, in June 2003, at the request
of the Security Council, 17 a multidisciplinary assessment
mission to the Central African subregion with the task of
implementing a global, holistic approach to the problems of
peace, security and development in the subregion;18
_______________
15

_______________
13
14

See resolution 55/2.
A/52/871-S/1998/318.

18

See S/PV.4630.
A/59/303, part one, sect. VI.
17
S/PRST/2002/31; see Resolutions and Decisions of the Security Council,
1 August 2002–31 July 2003.
18
See S/2003/653.
16

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

3. Also welcomes the efforts of States Members of the
United Nations and United Nations organs, organizations and
agencies which have maintained or strengthened their
cooperation with the Economic Community of Central African
States or have begun to cooperate with it with a view to
achieving peace, security and development;
4. Invites the States Members of the United Nations
and United Nations organs, organizations and agencies which
have not yet established contact or relations with the Economic
Community of Central African States to consider doing so in
order to help the Community to strengthen its capacities in
the area of the maintenance of peace and security and
reconstruction;
5. Commends the international community for the
financial, technical and material support given to the Economic
Community of Central African States;
6. Emphasizes the importance of close cooperation
between the United Nations system, including the Bretton
Woods institutions, and the Economic Community of Central
African States;
7. Welcomes the reforms undertaken by the Economic
Community of Central African States, including the execution
of its programme of action, in order to be better able to tackle
the problems of cooperation and regional integration;
8. Urges all Member States and the international
community to contribute to the efforts of the Economic
Community of Central African States to achieve economic
integration and development, promote democracy and human
rights and consolidate peace and security in Central Africa and
to implement the goals, targets and commitments of the United
Nations conferences and the United Nations Millennium
Declaration,13 in particular, to strengthen the role of women in
the development process;
9. Urges the international community and the United
Nations agencies to continue to provide those countries of the
Economic Community of Central African States in which a
process of national reconstruction is taking place with
appropriate assistance to consolidate their efforts towards
democratization and the consolidation of the rule of law and to
support their national development programmes;
10. Invites the United Nations and the international
community to coordinate their efforts to assist the Central
African States in establishing demobilization, disarmament and
reintegration programmes;
11. Declares itself convinced of the importance to
conflict resolution of the implementation of global, integrated
and concerted strategies on questions relating to peace, security
and development, and aware of the value of international
cooperation and efforts to restore and maintain peace, and
emphasizes that the international community should continue to
help those countries which receive refugees to meet the

resulting economic, social, humanitarian and environmental
challenges;
12. Urges the United Nations and the international
community as a whole to help to strengthen the means existing
in the region to ensure that the Economic Community of
Central African States has the necessary capacity with regard to
prevention, monitoring, early warning and peacekeeping
operations;
13. Encourages the countries of the Economic
Community of Central African States to implement policies that
promote sustained economic growth and sustainable
development, including by promoting competition, regulatory
reform, respect for property rights and expeditious contract
enforcement;
14. Stresses the need to focus international assistance to
countries of the Economic Community of Central African States
in the areas of socio-economic growth and sustainable
development, implementation of market-oriented reforms and
the meeting of internationally agreed development goals,
including those contained in the Millennium Declaration, and
encourages the countries of the Community to improve
governance and institutional capabilities in order to use aid more
effectively;
15. Requests the Secretary-General to continue to
enhance contacts with the Economic Community of Central
African States with a view to strengthening cooperation between
the United Nations system and the Community;
16. Also requests the Secretary-General to report to it at
its sixty-first session on the implementation of the present
resolution.
RESOLUTION 59/311
Adopted at the 113th plenary meeting, on 14 July 2005, without a vote, on the
basis of draft resolution A/59/L.63 and Add.1, sponsored by: Austria, Belgium,
Croatia, Denmark, Finland, France, Germany, Greece, Ireland, Italy, Jamaica
(on behalf of the States Members of the United Nations that are members of the
Group of 77 and China), Lithuania, Luxembourg, Netherlands, New Zealand,
Norway, Portugal, Turkey, Tuvalu, United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern
Ireland

59/311. International Meeting to Review the
Implementation of the Programme of Action for
the Sustainable Development of Small Island
Developing States
The General Assembly,
Reaffirming the Declaration of Barbados 19 and the
Programme of Action for the Sustainable Development of
_______________
19

Report of the Global Conference on the Sustainable Development of
Small Island Developing States, Bridgetown, Barbados, 25 April–6 May
1994 (United Nations publication, Sales No. E.94.I.18 and corrigenda),
chap. I, resolution 1, annex I.

19

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

Small Island Developing States, 20 adopted by the Global
Conference on the Sustainable Development of Small Island
Developing States, and recalling its resolution 49/122 of
19 December 1994 on the Global Conference,
Recalling Agenda 21,21 the Johannesburg Declaration on
Sustainable Development22 and the Plan of Implementation of
the World Summit on Sustainable Development (“Johannesburg
Plan of Implementation”),23 in particular the emphasis given
to small island developing States in chapter VII of the
Johannesburg Plan of Implementation, as well as the references
to the specific needs of small island developing States contained
in the United Nations Millennium Declaration 24 and the
Monterrey Consensus of the International Conference on
Financing for Development,25
Welcoming the adoption by the International Meeting to
Review the Implementation of the Programme of Action for the
Sustainable Development of Small Island Developing States,
held in Port Louis from 10 to 14 January 2005, of the Mauritius
Declaration 26 and the Mauritius Strategy for the Further
Implementation of the Programme of Action for the Sustainable
Development of Small Island Developing States (“Mauritius
Strategy for Implementation”)27 on 14 January 2005,
Expressing its satisfaction that the International Meeting
and its preparatory process provided for the active participation
of all States Members of the United Nations and members of the
specialized agencies, observers and various intergovernmental
organizations, including the funds, programmes and specialized
agencies of the United Nations system, as well as the major
groups representing all the regions of the world,
Noting with interest the partnership initiatives announced
by some Governments, international organizations and major
groups at the International Meeting, as well as those already
undertaken,
_______________
20

Ibid., annex II.
Report of the United Nations Conference on Environment and
Development, Rio de Janeiro, 3–14 June 1992 (United Nations publication,
Sales No. E.93.I.8 and corrigenda), vol. I: Resolutions adopted by the
Conference, resolution 1, annex II.
22
Report of the World Summit on Sustainable Development, Johannesburg,
South Africa, 26 August–4 September 2002 (United Nations publication,
Sales No. E.03.II.A.1 and corrigendum), chap. I, resolution 1, annex.
23
Ibid., resolution 2, annex.
24
See resolution 55/2.
25
Report of the International Conference on Financing for Development,
Monterrey, Mexico, 18–22 March 2002 (United Nations publication, Sales
No. E.02.II.A.7), chap. I, resolution 1, annex.
26
Report of the International Meeting to Review the Implementation of the
Programme of Action for the Sustainable Development of Small Island
Developing States, Port Louis, Mauritius, 10–14 January 2005 (United
Nations publication, Sales No. E.05.II.A.4 and corrigendum), chap. I,
resolution 1, annex I.
27
Ibid., annex II.
21

20

Welcoming the decision taken by the Commission on
Sustainable Development at its thirteenth session28 to devote
one day of the review sessions of the Commission to the review
of the implementation of the Mauritius Strategy for
Implementation, focusing on that year’s thematic cluster, as well
as on any new developments in the sustainable development
efforts of small island developing States using existing
modalities, and to request the Secretary-General to submit a
report to the Commission at its review session on progress and
obstacles to sustainable development in small island developing
States, including recommendations to enhance the
implementation of the Mauritius Strategy,
Recognizing that it is crucial to mobilize resources from
all sources for the effective implementation of the Mauritius
Strategy for Implementation,
Expressing its profound gratitude to the Government and
the people of Mauritius for the excellent arrangements made for
hosting the International Meeting, for the hospitality extended to
the participants and for the facilities, staff and services placed at
their disposal,
Expressing its appreciation to the Secretariat of the United
Nations, including the Secretary-General of the International
Meeting, the specialized agencies, the United Nations regional
commissions, funds and programmes, and donor countries as
well as those countries that contributed to the Trust Fund for
Small Island Developing States, for their contribution to the
success of the International Meeting,
Also expressing its appreciation to the Facilitator of the
outcomes of the International Meeting,
Having considered the report of the International
Meeting,29
1. Takes note of the note by the Secretary-General
transmitting the report of the International Meeting to Review
the Implementation of the Programme of Action for the
Sustainable Development of Small Island Developing States;30
2. Endorses the Mauritius Declaration26 and the
Mauritius Strategy for the Further Implementation of the
Programme of Action for the Sustainable Development of
Small Island Developing States;27
3. Welcomes the renewed commitment of the
international community to the implementation of the

_______________
28

See Official Records of the Economic and Social Council, 2005,
Supplement No. 9 (E/2005/29), resolution 13/1.
29
Report of the International Meeting to Review the Implementation of the
Programme of Action for the Sustainable Development of Small Island
Developing States, Port Louis, Mauritius, 10–14 January 2005 (United
Nations publication, Sales No. E.05.II.A.4 and corrigendum).
30
A/59/872.

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

Programme of Action for the Sustainable Development of
Small Island Developing States;20
4. Urges Governments and all relevant international
and regional organizations, United Nations funds and
programmes, the specialized agencies, regional economic
commissions, international financial institutions, the Global
Environment Facility, as well as other intergovernmental
organizations and major groups, to take timely actions to ensure
the effective implementation of and follow-up to the Mauritius
Declaration and the Mauritius Strategy for Implementation;
5. Calls for the full and effective implementation of the
commitments, programmes and targets adopted at the
International Meeting and, to this end, for fulfilment of the
provisions for the means of implementation, as contained in the
Mauritius Strategy for Implementation;
6. Encourages the implementation of partnership
initiatives, within the framework of the Mauritius Strategy for
Implementation, in support of the sustainable development of
small island developing States;
7. Recommends that the outcomes of the International
Meeting be taken into consideration at the High-level Plenary
Meeting of the General Assembly, to be held from 14 to
16 September 2005, and in its preparatory process;
8. Requests the Secretary-General, through the
Department of Economic and Social Affairs of the Secretariat,
to articulate a plan with recommendations for action and
proposed activities for the coordinated and coherent
implementation of the Mauritius Strategy for Implementation
by the relevant United Nations bodies, the specialized agencies,
regional commissions and other organizations of the United
Nations system within their respective mandates, and to report
thereon to the General Assembly at its sixtieth session;
9. Supports the convening by the Department of
Economic and Social Affairs of regional meetings of small
island developing States in 2005 or 2006, in partnership with
relevant regional organizations and stakeholders, for the followup to the implementation of the Mauritius Strategy for
Implementation, funded from voluntary contributions, and in
this regard encourages Member States to contribute to the Trust
Fund for Small Island Developing States;
10. Reiterates its request to the Secretary-General to
strengthen the Small Island Developing States Unit of the
Department of Economic and Social Affairs, as called for in
its resolutions 57/262 of 20 December 2002, 58/213 A of
23 December 2003 and 59/229 of 22 December 2004 and
taking into account paragraph 7 of the present resolution, and
urges the Secretary-General to ensure that the Unit is
sufficiently and sustainably staffed without delay to undertake
its broad range of mandated functions with a view to facilitating
the full and effective implementation of the Mauritius Strategy
for Implementation, within existing resources, including by
redeploying resources;

11. Requests the relevant agencies of the United Nations
system, within their respective mandates, to mainstream the
Mauritius Strategy for Implementation further in their work
programmes and to establish a focal point for small island
developing States within their respective secretariats;
12. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its
sixtieth session under the item entitled “Sustainable
development”, a sub-item entitled “Follow-up to and
implementation of the Mauritius Strategy for the Further
Implementation of the Programme of Action for the Sustainable
Development of Small Island Developing States”.31
RESOLUTION 59/312
Adopted at the 113th plenary meeting, on 14 July 2005, without a vote, on the
basis of draft resolution A/59/L.66 and Add.1, as orally revised, sponsored by:
Central African Republic, Comoros, Georgia, Guinea-Bissau, Liberia, Niger,
Sao Tome and Principe, Somalia, Tajikistan

59/312. Requests for exemption under Article 19 of the
Charter of the United Nations
The General Assembly,
Having considered the letter dated 24 June 2005 from the
Chairman of the Committee on Contributions addressed to
the President of the General Assembly regarding the
recommendations of the Committee on Contributions on requests
for exemption under Article 19 of the Charter of the United
Nations,32
Reaffirming the obligation of Member States under
Article 17 of the Charter to bear the expenses of the
Organization as apportioned by the General Assembly,
1. Reaffirms its role in accordance with the provisions
of Article 19 of the Charter of the United Nations and the
advisory role of the Committee on Contributions in accordance
with rule 160 of the rules of procedure of the General
Assembly;
2. Also reaffirms
23 December 1999;

its

resolution

54/237 C

of

3. Agrees that the failure of the Central African
Republic, the Comoros, Georgia, Guinea-Bissau, Somalia and
Tajikistan to pay the full minimum amount necessary to avoid
the application of Article 19 of the Charter was due to
conditions beyond their control;
_______________
31
This replaces the sub-item entitled “Further implementation of the
outcome of the Global Conference on the Sustainable Development of
Small Island Developing States and follow-up to the outcomes of the
International Meeting to Review the Implementation of the Barbados
Programme of Action”, which the General Assembly had decided, in its
resolution 59/229 of 22 December 2004, to include in the provisional agenda
of its sixtieth session.
32
A/59/864.

21

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

4. Decides that the Central African Republic, the
Comoros, Georgia, Guinea-Bissau, Somalia and Tajikistan
should be permitted to vote in the General Assembly until the
Assembly takes a final decision during the main part of its
sixtieth session;
5. Takes note of the information provided by Liberia,
the Niger and Sao Tome and Principe;33
6. Agrees that the failure of Liberia, the Niger and Sao
Tome and Principe to pay the full minimum amount necessary
to avoid the application of Article 19 of the Charter was due to
conditions beyond their control, and invites Liberia, the Niger
and Sao Tome and Principe to submit appropriate information
to the Committee on Contributions if similar circumstances
prevail in the future;
7. Decides that Liberia, the Niger and Sao Tome and
Principe should be permitted to vote in the General Assembly
until the Assembly takes a final decision during the main part of
its sixtieth session.
RESOLUTION 59/313

Recognizing further that, in order to be fully utilized, the
General Assembly must fully play its role as set out in the
Charter,
Stressing the need to strengthen the role and authority of
the General Assembly,
Reaffirming the role and authority of the General
Assembly on global matters of concern to the international
community, as set out in the Charter,
Reaffirming also the role and authority of the General
Assembly in encouraging the progressive development of
international law and its codification in accordance with
Article 13 of the Charter,
Stressing the need fully to respect and maintain the
balance between the principal organs of the United Nations
within their respective purviews and mandates, in accordance
with the Charter,
Reaffirming that the plenary meetings of the General
Assembly should constitute a forum for high-level policy
statements, as well as for the consideration, inter alia, of agenda
items of special political importance and/or urgency,

Adopted at the 117th plenary meeting, on 12 September 2005, without a vote,
on the basis of draft resolution A/59/L.69/Rev.1, submitted by the President of
the General Assembly

Underscoring the importance of providing adequate
resources for the implementation of mandated programmes and
activities,

59/313. A strengthened and revitalized General Assembly

Reaffirming its authority in the consideration of all
budgetary issues, as stipulated in the Charter,

The General Assembly,
Reaffirming the central position of the General Assembly
as the chief deliberative, policymaking and representative organ
of the United Nations,
Recalling its previous resolutions relating to the
revitalization of its work,34
Recognizing that the current interdependent international
environment requires the strengthening of the multilateral
system in accordance with the purposes and principles of the
Charter of the United Nations and the principles of international
law,
Recognizing also that the General Assembly is the
universal and representative forum comprising all Members of
the United Nations,

_______________
33

A/59/868, A/59/869 and A/59/871.
Resolutions 46/77 of 12 December 1991, 47/233 of 17 August 1993,
48/264 of 29 July 1994, 51/193 of 17 December 1996, 51/241 of 31 July
1997, 52/163 of 15 December 1997, 55/14 of 3 November 2000, 55/285 of
7 September 2001, 56/509 of 8 July 2002, 57/300 of 20 December 2002,
57/301 of 13 March 2003, 58/126 of 19 December 2003, 58/316 of 1 July
2004 and 59/95 of 3 December 2004.

34

22

Role and authority of the General Assembly
1. Stresses the need to demonstrate political will to
ensure the effective implementation of the resolutions adopted
by the General Assembly;
2. Decides, in the context of further strengthening the
role and authority of the General Assembly as set out in the
Charter of the United Nations:
(a) To convene and organize major thematic debates in
order to establish broad international understanding on current
substantive issues of importance to Member States;
(b) To discuss issues pertaining to the maintenance of
international peace and security in accordance with Articles 10,
11, 12, 14 and 35 of the Charter, where appropriate using the
procedures set forth in rules 7, 8, 9 and 10 of the rules of
procedure of the General Assembly, which enable swift and
urgent action by the Assembly, bearing in mind that the Security
Council has primary responsibility for the maintenance of
international peace and security in accordance with Article 24 of
the Charter;
(c) To consider the annual reports as well as special
reports of the Security Council, in accordance with Article 15,
paragraph 1, and Article 24, paragraph 3, of the Charter, through
substantive and interactive debates;

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

(d) To invite the Security Council to submit periodically,
in accordance with Article 24 of the Charter, special subjectoriented reports to the General Assembly for its consideration
on issues of current international concern;

7. Encourages the Main Committees to implement in
full the provisions contained in paragraph 3 of the annex to
resolution 58/316 of 1 July 2004, building upon the results of
relevant discussions in each Committee;

(e) To also invite the Security Council to update the
General Assembly on a regular basis on the steps it has taken or
is contemplating with respect to improving its reporting to the
Assembly;

8. Encourages the bureaux of the Main Committees to
enhance their cooperation and to learn from each other’s best
practices;

(f) To hold interactive debates on other reports
submitted to the General Assembly in accordance with
Article 15, paragraph 2, of the Charter;
President of the General Assembly
3. Decides to strengthen the role and leadership of the
President of the General Assembly by:
(a) Authorizing the President of the General Assembly
to propose interactive debates on current issues on the agenda of
the Assembly, in consultation with Member States;
(b) Augmenting the resources available to the Office of
the President of the General Assembly from within existing
resources, subject to consideration by the Assembly of the
proposed programme budget for the biennium 2006–2007, to
provide for two further additional posts at management and
senior levels to be filled on an annual basis following
consultations with the incoming President, beginning at the
sixtieth session of the Assembly;
(c) Making available to the President of the General
Assembly adequate office and conference space with a view to
enabling the President to carry out his/her functions in a manner
commensurate with the dignity and stature of the Office;
(d) Requesting the Secretary-General to ensure that the
President of the General Assembly is provided with proper
protocol services at Headquarters and at other United Nations
duty stations;
Agenda and working methods of the plenary Assembly and
the Main Committees
4. Decides to establish an ad hoc working group open
to all Member States to identify ways to further enhance the
role, authority, effectiveness and efficiency of the General
Assembly, inter alia, by building on relevant Assembly
resolutions and reviewing the agenda and working methods of
the Assembly;
5. Decides also that the ad hoc working group shall
submit a report with specific recommendations to the General
Assembly at its sixtieth session;
6. Requests the Secretary-General to provide the
ad hoc working group with the necessary services;

9. Requests the Chairpersons of the Main Committees,
at the end of their terms of office, to provide a short report on
their observations and “lessons learned” to their immediate
successors;
10. Decides that time limits on speeches in the plenary
Assembly and in the Main Committees shall be applied in
accordance with rules 72 and 114 of the rules of procedure of
the General Assembly;
11. Strongly urges all officers presiding over meetings
of the General Assembly to start such meetings on time;
12. Encourages the holding of interactive debates with a
view to contributing to intergovernmental decision-making;
13. Invites Member States that are aligned with
statements already made by the chair of a group of Member
States, where possible, to focus additional interventions that
they make in their national capacity on points that have not
already been adequately addressed in the statements of the
group in question, bearing in mind the sovereign right of each
Member State to express its national position;
14. Requests the Secretary-General to issue the rules of
procedure of the General Assembly in a consolidated version in
all official languages, in print and online;
15. Recommends consideration of the use of optical
scanners as a means of expediting the counting of votes cast
through secret ballots during elections, taking due account of the
security requirements in this regard and the credibility,
reliability and confidentiality of such means, and requests the
Secretary-General to report on the modalities thereof to the
General Assembly through the Committee on Conferences;
Documentation
16. Requests the Secretary-General to implement further
the measures set out in paragraph 20 of resolution 57/300 of
20 December 2002 on the consolidation of reports and in
paragraph 6 of the annex to resolution 58/316, on
documentation;
17. Encourages Member States, when seeking
additional information, to request that they be provided with the
information either orally or, if in writing, in the form of
information sheets, annexes, tables and the like, and encourages
the wider use of this practice;
23

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

18. Requests the Secretary-General to ensure that
documentation and reports are issued well in advance, in
keeping with the six-week rule for the issuance of
documentation simultaneously in all official languages, as set
out in resolution 49/221 B of 23 December 1994 and in
resolution 59/309 of 22 June 2005 on multilingualism;
19. Also requests the Secretary-General to submit a
status report to the General Assembly at its sixtieth session on
the implementation of all resolutions regarding the revitalization
of its work, including resolutions 58/126 of 19 December 2003
and 58/316 and the present resolution.
RESOLUTION 59/314
Adopted at the 118th plenary meeting, on 13 September 2005, without a vote,
on the basis of draft resolution A/59/L.70, submitted by the President of the
General Assembly

59/314. Draft outcome document of the High-level Plenary
Meeting of the General Assembly of September
2005
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 58/291 of 6 May 2004, 59/145 of
17 December 2004, 59/291 of 15 April 2005 and 59/293 of
27 May 2005,
Decides to refer the annexed draft outcome document to
the High-level Plenary Meeting of the General Assembly, to be
held from 14 to 16 September 2005, for its consideration.
Annex
Draft outcome document of the High-level Plenary Meeting
of the General Assembly of September 2005
I.

Values and principles

1. We, Heads of State and Government, have gathered at
United Nations Headquarters in New York from 14 to
16 September 2005.
2. We reaffirm our faith in the United Nations and our
commitment to the purposes and principles of the Charter of the
United Nations and international law, which are indispensable
foundations of a more peaceful, prosperous and just world, and
reiterate our determination to foster strict respect for them.
3. We reaffirm the United Nations Millennium
Declaration,35 which we adopted at the dawn of the twenty-first
century. We recognize the valuable role of the major United
Nations conferences and summits in the economic, social and
related fields, including the Millennium Summit, in mobilizing
_______________
35

See resolution 55/2.

24

the international community at the local, national, regional and
global levels and in guiding the work of the United Nations.
4. We reaffirm that our common fundamental values,
including freedom, equality, solidarity, tolerance, respect for all
human rights, respect for nature and shared responsibility, are
essential to international relations.
5. We are determined to establish a just and lasting peace all
over the world in accordance with the purposes and principles
of the Charter. We rededicate ourselves to support all efforts to
uphold the sovereign equality of all States, respect their
territorial integrity and political independence, to refrain in our
international relations from the threat or use of force in any
manner inconsistent with the purposes and principles of the
United Nations, to uphold resolution of disputes by peaceful
means and in conformity with the principles of justice and
international law, the right to self-determination of peoples
which remain under colonial domination and foreign
occupation, non-interference in the internal affairs of States,
respect for human rights and fundamental freedoms, respect for
the equal rights of all without distinction as to race, sex,
language or religion, international cooperation in solving
international problems of an economic, social, cultural or
humanitarian character and the fulfilment in good faith of the
obligations assumed in accordance with the Charter.
6. We reaffirm the vital importance of an effective
multilateral system, in accordance with international law, in
order to better address the multifaceted and interconnected
challenges and threats confronting our world and to achieve
progress in the areas of peace and security, development and
human rights, underlining the central role of the United Nations,
and commit ourselves to promoting and strengthening the
effectiveness of the Organization through the implementation of
its decisions and resolutions.
7. We believe that today, more than ever before, we live in a
global and interdependent world. No State can stand wholly
alone. We acknowledge that collective security depends on
effective cooperation, in accordance with international law,
against transnational threats.
8. We recognize that current developments and circumstances
require that we urgently build consensus on major threats and
challenges. We commit ourselves to translating that consensus
into concrete action, including addressing the root causes of
those threats and challenges with resolve and determination.
9. We acknowledge that peace and security, development
and human rights are the pillars of the United Nations system
and the foundations for collective security and well-being. We
recognize that development, peace and security and human
rights are interlinked and mutually reinforcing.
10. We reaffirm that development is a central goal in itself and
that sustainable development in its economic, social and
environmental aspects constitutes a key element of the
overarching framework of United Nations activities.

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

11. We acknowledge that good governance and the rule of
law at the national and international levels are essential for
sustained economic growth, sustainable development and the
eradication of poverty and hunger.
12. We reaffirm that gender equality and the promotion and
protection of the full enjoyment of all human rights and
fundamental freedoms for all are essential to advance
development and peace and security. We are committed to
creating a world fit for future generations, which takes into
account the best interests of the child.
13. We reaffirm the universality, indivisibility, interdependence
and interrelatedness of all human rights.
14. Acknowledging the diversity of the world, we recognize
that all cultures and civilizations contribute to the enrichment of
humankind. We acknowledge the importance of respect and
understanding for religious and cultural diversity throughout the
world. In order to promote international peace and security, we
commit ourselves to advancing human welfare, freedom and
progress everywhere, as well as to encouraging tolerance,
respect, dialogue and cooperation among different cultures,
civilizations and peoples.
15. We pledge to enhance the relevance, effectiveness,
efficiency, accountability and credibility of the United Nations
system. This is our shared responsibility and interest.
16. We therefore resolve to create a more peaceful,
prosperous and democratic world and to undertake concrete
measures to continue finding ways to implement the outcome of
the Millennium Summit and the other major United Nations
conferences and summits so as to provide multilateral solutions
to problems in the four following areas:

II.

•

Development

•

Peace and collective security

•

Human rights and the rule of law

•

Strengthening of the United Nations

Development

17. We strongly reiterate our determination to ensure the
timely and full realization of the development goals and
objectives agreed at the major United Nations conferences and
summits, including those agreed at the Millennium Summit that
are described as the Millennium Development Goals, which
have helped to galvanize efforts towards poverty eradication.
18. We emphasize the vital role played by the major United
Nations conferences and summits in the economic, social and
related fields in shaping a broad development vision and in
identifying commonly agreed objectives, which have
contributed to improving human life in different parts of the
world.

19. We reaffirm our commitment to eradicate poverty and
promote sustained economic growth, sustainable development
and global prosperity for all. We are encouraged by reductions
in poverty in some countries in the recent past and are
determined to reinforce and extend this trend to benefit people
worldwide. We remain concerned, however, about the slow and
uneven progress towards poverty eradication and the realization
of other development goals in some regions. We commit
ourselves to promoting the development of the productive
sectors in developing countries to enable them to participate
more effectively in and benefit from the process of
globalization. We underline the need for urgent action on all
sides, including more ambitious national development strategies
and efforts backed by increased international support.
Global partnership for development
20. We reaffirm our commitment to the global partnership for
development set out in the Millennium Declaration,35 the
Monterrey Consensus 36 and the Johannesburg Plan of
Implementation.37
21. We further reaffirm our commitment to sound policies,
good governance at all levels and the rule of law, and to
mobilize domestic resources, attract international flows,
promote international trade as an engine for development and
increase international financial and technical cooperation for
development, sustainable debt financing and external debt relief
and to enhance the coherence and consistency of the
international monetary, financial and trading systems.
22. We reaffirm that each country must take primary
responsibility for its own development and that the role of
national policies and development strategies cannot be
overemphasized in the achievement of sustainable development.
We also recognize that national efforts should be complemented
by supportive global programmes, measures and policies aimed
at expanding the development opportunities of developing
countries, while taking into account national conditions and
ensuring respect for national ownership, strategies and
sovereignty. To this end, we resolve:
(a) To adopt, by 2006, and implement comprehensive
national development strategies to achieve the internationally
agreed development goals and objectives, including the
Millennium Development Goals;

_______________
36

Monterrey Consensus of the International Conference on Financing for
Development (Report of the International Conference on Financing for
Development, Monterrey, Mexico, 18–22 March 2002 (United Nations
publication, Sales No. E.02.II.A.7), chap. I, resolution 1, annex).
37
Plan of Implementation of the World Summit on Sustainable
Development (Report of the World Summit on Sustainable Development,
Johannesburg, South Africa, 26 August–4 September 2002 (United Nations
publication, Sales No. E.03.II. A.1 and corrigendum), chap I, resolution 2,
annex).

25

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

(b) To manage public finances effectively to achieve
and maintain macroeconomic stability and long-term growth
and to make effective and transparent use of public funds and
ensure that development assistance is used to build national
capacities;
(c) To support efforts by developing countries to adopt
and implement national development policies and strategies
through increased development assistance, the promotion of
international trade as an engine for development, the transfer of
technology on mutually agreed terms, increased investment
flows and wider and deeper debt relief, and to support
developing countries by providing a substantial increase in aid
of sufficient quality and arriving in a timely manner to assist
them in achieving the internationally agreed development goals,
including the Millennium Development Goals;
(d) That the increasing interdependence of national
economies in a globalizing world and the emergence of rulebased regimes for international economic relations have meant
that the space for national economic policy, that is, the scope for
domestic policies, especially in the areas of trade, investment
and industrial development, is now often framed by
international disciplines, commitments and global market
considerations. It is for each Government to evaluate the tradeoff between the benefits of accepting international rules and
commitments and the constraints posed by the loss of policy
space. It is particularly important for developing countries,
bearing in mind development goals and objectives, that all
countries take into account the need for appropriate balance
between national policy space and international disciplines and
commitments;
(e) To enhance the contribution of non-governmental
organizations, civil society, the private sector and other
stakeholders in national development efforts, as well as in the
promotion of the global partnership for development;
(f) To ensure that the United Nations funds and
programmes and the specialized agencies support the efforts of
developing countries through the common country assessment
and United Nations Development Assistance Framework
process, enhancing their support for capacity-building;
(g) To protect our natural resource base in support of
development.
Financing for development
23. We reaffirm the Monterrey Consensus36 and recognize
that mobilizing financial resources for development and the
effective use of those resources in developing countries and
countries with economies in transition are central to a global
partnership for development in support of the achievement of
the internationally agreed development goals, including the
Millennium Development Goals. In this regard:
26

(a) We are encouraged by recent commitments to
substantial increases in official development assistance and the
Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development
estimate that official development assistance to all developing
countries will now increase by around 50 billion United States
dollars a year by 2010, while recognizing that a substantial
increase in such assistance is required to achieve the
internationally agreed goals, including the Millennium
Development Goals, within their respective time frames;
(b) We welcome the increased resources that will
become available as a result of the establishment of timetables
by many developed countries to achieve the target of 0.7 per
cent of gross national product for official development
assistance by 2015 and to reach at least 0.5 per cent of gross
national product for official development assistance by 2010 as
well as, pursuant to the Brussels Programme of Action for the
Least Developed Countries for the Decade 2001–2010,38 0.15
per cent to 0.20 per cent for the least developed countries no
later than 2010, and urge those developed countries that have
not yet done so to make concrete efforts in this regard in
accordance with their commitments;
(c) We further welcome recent efforts and initiatives to
enhance the quality of aid and to increase its impact, including
the Paris Declaration on Aid Effectiveness, and resolve to take
concrete, effective and timely action in implementing all agreed
commitments on aid effectiveness, with clear monitoring and
deadlines, including through further aligning assistance with
countries’ strategies, building institutional capacities, reducing
transaction costs and eliminating bureaucratic procedures,
making progress on untying aid, enhancing the absorptive
capacity and financial management of recipient countries and
strengthening the focus on development results;
(d) We recognize the value of developing innovative
sources of financing, provided those sources do not unduly
burden developing countries. In that regard, we take note with
interest of the international efforts, contributions and
discussions, such as the Action against Hunger and Poverty,
aimed at identifying innovative and additional sources of
financing for development on a public, private, domestic or
external basis to increase and supplement traditional sources of
financing. Some countries will implement the International
Finance Facility. Some countries have launched the
International Finance Facility for immunization. Some countries
will implement in the near future, utilizing their national
authorities, a contribution on airline tickets to enable the
financing of development projects, in particular in the health
sector, directly or through financing of the International Finance
Facility. Other countries are considering whether and to what
extent they will participate in these initiatives;

_______________
38

A/CONF.191/13, chap. II.

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

(e) We acknowledge the vital role the private sector can
play in generating new investments, employment and financing
for development;
(f) We resolve to address the development needs of
low-income developing countries by working in competent
multilateral and international forums, to help them meet, inter
alia, their financial, technical and technological requirements;
(g) We resolve to continue to support the development
efforts of middle-income developing countries by working, in
competent multilateral and international forums and also
through bilateral arrangements, on measures to help them meet,
inter alia, their financial, technical and technological
requirements;
(h) We resolve to operationalize the World Solidarity
Fund established by the General Assembly and invite those
countries in a position to do so to make voluntary contributions
to the Fund;
(i) We recognize the need for access to financial
services, in particular for the poor, including through
microfinance and microcredit.
Domestic resource mobilization
24. In our common pursuit of growth, poverty eradication and
sustainable development, a critical challenge is to ensure the
necessary internal conditions for mobilizing domestic savings,
both public and private, sustaining adequate levels of productive
investment, increasing human capacity, reducing capital flight,
curbing the illicit transfer of funds and enhancing international
cooperation for creating an enabling domestic environment. We
undertake to support the efforts of developing countries to create
a domestic enabling environment for mobilizing domestic
resources. To this end, we therefore resolve:
(a) To pursue good governance and sound macroeconomic policies at all levels and support developing countries
in their efforts to put in place the policies and investments to
drive sustained economic growth, promote small and mediumsized enterprises, promote employment generation and
stimulate the private sector;
(b) To reaffirm that good governance is essential for
sustainable development; that sound economic policies, solid
democratic institutions responsive to the needs of the people and
improved infrastructure are the basis for sustained economic
growth, poverty eradication and employment creation; and that
freedom, peace and security, domestic stability, respect for
human rights, including the right to development, the rule of
law, gender equality and market-oriented policies and an overall
commitment to just and democratic societies are also essential
and mutually reinforcing;
(c) To make the fight against corruption a priority at all
levels and we welcome all actions taken in this regard at the
national and international levels, including the adoption of

policies that emphasize accountability, transparent public sector
management and corporate responsibility and accountability,
including efforts to return assets transferred through corruption,
consistent with the United Nations Convention against
Corruption. 39 We urge all States that have not done so to
consider signing, ratifying and implementing the Convention;
(d) To channel private capabilities and resources into
stimulating the private sector in developing countries through
actions in the public, public/private and private spheres to create
an enabling environment for partnership and innovation that
contributes to accelerated economic development and hunger
and poverty eradication;
(e) To support efforts to reduce capital flight and
measures to curb the illicit transfer of funds.
Investment
25. We resolve to encourage greater direct investment,
including foreign investment, in developing countries and
countries with economies in transition to support their
development activities and to enhance the benefits they can
derive from such investments. In this regard:
(a) We continue to support efforts by developing
countries and countries with economies in transition to create a
domestic environment conducive to attracting investments
through, inter alia, achieving a transparent, stable and predictable
investment climate with proper contract enforcement and respect
for property rights and the rule of law and pursuing appropriate
policy and regulatory frameworks that encourage business
formation;
(b) We will put into place policies to ensure adequate
investment in a sustainable manner in health, clean water and
sanitation, housing and education and in the provision of public
goods and social safety nets to protect vulnerable and
disadvantaged sectors of society;
(c) We invite national Governments seeking to develop
infrastructure projects and generate foreign direct investment to
pursue strategies with the involvement of both the public and
private sectors and, where appropriate, international donors;
(d) We call upon international financial and banking
institutions to consider enhancing the transparency of risk rating
mechanisms. Sovereign risk assessments, made by the private
sector should maximize the use of strict, objective and
transparent parameters, which can be facilitated by high-quality
data and analysis;
(e) We underscore the need to sustain sufficient and
stable private financial flows to developing countries and
countries with economies in transition. It is important to
_______________
39

Resolution 58/4, annex.

27

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

promote measures in source and destination countries to
improve transparency and the information about financial flows
to developing countries, particularly countries in Africa, the
least developed countries, small island developing States and
landlocked developing countries. Measures that mitigate the
impact of excessive volatility of short-term capital flows are
important and must be considered.
Debt
26. We emphasize the high importance of a timely, effective,
comprehensive and durable solution to the debt problems of
developing countries, since debt financing and relief can be an
important source of capital for development. To this end:
(a) We welcome the recent proposals of the Group of
Eight to cancel 100 per cent of the outstanding debt of eligible
heavily indebted poor countries owed to the International
Monetary Fund, the International Development Association and
African Development Fund and to provide additional resources
to ensure that the financing capacity of the international
financial institutions is not reduced;

worldwide, benefiting countries at all stages of development. In
that regard, we reaffirm our commitment to trade liberalization
and to ensure that trade plays its full part in promoting
economic growth, employment and development for all.
28. We are committed to efforts designed to ensure that
developing countries, especially the least-developed countries,
participate fully in the world trading system in order to meet
their economic development needs, and reaffirm our commitment
to enhanced and predictable market access for the exports of
developing countries.
29. We will work towards the objective, in accordance with
the Brussels Programme of Action,38 of duty-free and quota-free
market access for all least developed countries’ products to the
markets of developed countries, as well as to the markets of
developing countries in a position to do so, and support their
efforts to overcome their supply-side constraints.
30. We are committed to supporting and promoting increased
aid to build productive and trade capacities of developing
countries and to taking further steps in that regard, while
welcoming the substantial support already provided.

(b) We emphasize that debt sustainability is essential for
underpinning growth and underline the importance of debt
sustainability to the efforts to achieve national development
goals, including the Millennium Development Goals, recognizing
the key role that debt relief can play in liberating resources that
can be directed towards activities consistent with poverty
eradication, sustained economic growth and sustainable
development;

31. We will work to accelerate and facilitate the accession of
developing countries and countries with economies in transition
to the World Trade Organization consistent with its criteria,
recognizing the importance of universal integration in the rulesbased global trading system.

(c) We further stress the need to consider additional
measures and initiatives aimed at ensuring long-term debt
sustainability through increased grant-based financing,
cancellation of 100 per cent of the official multilateral and
bilateral debt of heavily indebted poor countries and, where
appropriate, and on a case-by-case basis, to consider significant
debt relief or restructuring for low- and middle-income
developing countries with an unsustainable debt burden that are
not part of the Heavily Indebted Poor Countries Initiative, as
well as the exploration of mechanisms to comprehensively
address the debt problems of those countries. Such mechanisms
may include debt for sustainable development swaps or
multicreditor debt swap arrangements, as appropriate. These
initiatives could include further efforts by the International
Monetary Fund and the World Bank to develop the debt
sustainability framework for low-income countries. This should
be achieved in a fashion that does not detract from official
development assistance resources, while maintaining the
financial integrity of the multilateral financial institutions.

Commodities

32. We will work expeditiously towards implementing the
development dimensions of the Doha work programme.40

33. We emphasize the need to address the impact of weak and
volatile commodity prices and support the efforts of commoditydependent countries to restructure, diversify and strengthen the
competitiveness of their commodity sectors.
Quick-impact initiatives
34. Given the need to accelerate progress immediately in
countries where current trends make the achievement of the
internationally agreed development goals unlikely, we resolve to
urgently identify and implement country-led initiatives with
adequate international support, consistent with long-term
national development strategies, that promise immediate and
durable improvements in the lives of people and renewed hope
for the achievement of the development goals. In this regard, we
will take such actions as the distribution of malaria bed nets,
including free distribution, where appropriate, and effective
anti-malarial treatments, the expansion of local school meal
programmes, using home-grown foods where possible, and the

Trade
27. A universal, rule-based, open, non-discriminatory and
equitable multilateral trading system, as well as meaningful
trade liberalization, can substantially stimulate development
28

_______________
40

See A/C.2/56/7, annex.

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

elimination of user fees for primary education and, where
appropriate, health-care services.
Systemic issues and global economic decision-making
35. We reaffirm the commitment to broaden and strengthen
the participation of developing countries and countries with
economies in transition in international economic decisionmaking and norm-setting, and to that end stress the importance
of continuing efforts to reform the international financial
architecture, noting that enhancing the voice and participation of
developing countries and countries with economies in transition
in the Bretton Woods institutions remains a continuous concern.
36. We reaffirm our commitment to governance, equity and
transparency in the financial, monetary and trading systems. We
are also committed to open, equitable, rule-based, predictable
and non-discriminatory multilateral trading and financial
systems.
37. We also underscore our commitment to sound domestic
financial sectors, which make a vital contribution to national
development efforts, as an important component of an
international financial architecture that is supportive of
development.
38. We further reaffirm the need for the United Nations to
play a fundamental role in the promotion of international
cooperation for development and the coherence, coordination
and implementation of development goals and actions agreed
upon by the international community, and we resolve to
strengthen coordination within the United Nations system in
close cooperation with all other multilateral financial, trade and
development institutions in order to support sustained economic
growth, poverty eradication and sustainable development.
39. Good governance at the international level is fundamental
for achieving sustainable development. In order to ensure a
dynamic and enabling international economic environment, it is
important to promote global economic governance through
addressing the international finance, trade, technology and
investment patterns that have an impact on the development
prospects of developing countries. To this effect, the international
community should take all necessary and appropriate measures,
including ensuring support for structural and macroeconomic
reform, a comprehensive solution to the external debt problem
and increasing the market access of developing countries.
South-South cooperation
40. We recognize the achievements and great potential of
South-South cooperation and encourage the promotion of such
cooperation, which complements North-South cooperation as
an effective contribution to development and as a means to
share best practices and provide enhanced technical

cooperation. In this context, we note the recent decision of the
leaders of the South, adopted at the Second South Summit and
contained in the Doha Declaration 41 and the Doha Plan of
Action,42 to intensify their efforts at South-South cooperation,
including through the establishment of the New Asian-African
Strategic Partnership and other regional cooperation mechanisms,
and encourage the international community, including the
international financial institutions, to support the efforts of
developing countries, inter alia, through triangular cooperation.
We also take note with appreciation of the launching of the third
round of negotiations on the Global System of Trade
Preferences among Developing Countries as an important
instrument to stimulate South-South cooperation.
41. We welcome the work of the United Nations High-Level
Committee on South-South Cooperation and invite countries to
consider supporting the Special Unit for South-South
Cooperation within the United Nations Development
Programme in order to respond effectively to the development
needs of developing countries.
42. We recognize the considerable contribution of
arrangements such as the Organization of Petroleum Exporting
Countries Fund initiated by a group of developing countries, as
well as the potential contribution of the South Fund for
Development and Humanitarian Assistance, to development
activities in developing countries.
Education
43. We emphasize the critical role of both formal and
informal education in the achievement of poverty eradication
and other development goals as envisaged in the Millennium
Declaration,35 in particular basic education and training for
eradicating illiteracy, and strive for expanded secondary and
higher education as well as vocational education and technical
training, especially for girls and women, the creation of human
resources and infrastructure capabilities and the empowerment
of those living in poverty. In this context, we reaffirm the Dakar
Framework for Action adopted at the World Education Forum
in 200043 and recognize the importance of the United Nations
Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization strategy for
the eradication of poverty, especially extreme poverty, in
supporting the Education for All programmes as a tool to
achieve the millennium development goal of universal primary
education by 2015.
44. We reaffirm our commitment to support developing
country efforts to ensure that all children have access to and
complete free and compulsory primary education of good
_______________
41

See A/60/111, annex I.
Ibid., annex II.
43
See United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization,
Final Report of the World Education Forum, Dakar, Senegal, 26–28 April
2000 (Paris, 2000).
42

29

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

quality, to eliminate gender inequality and imbalance and to
renew efforts to improve girls’ education. We also commit
ourselves to continuing to support the efforts of developing
countries in the implementation of the Education for All
initiative, including with enhanced resources of all types
through the Education for All fast-track initiative in support of
country-led national education plans.
45. We commit ourselves to promoting education for peace
and human development.
Rural and agricultural development
46. We reaffirm that food security and rural and agricultural
development must be adequately and urgently addressed in the
context of national development and response strategies and, in
this context, will enhance the contributions of indigenous and
local communities, as appropriate. We are convinced that the
eradication of poverty, hunger and malnutrition, particularly as
they affect children, is crucial for the achievement of the
Millennium Development Goals. Rural and agricultural
development should be an integral part of national and
international development policies. We deem it necessary to
increase productive investment in rural and agricultural
development to achieve food security. We commit ourselves to
increasing support for agricultural development and trade
capacity-building in the agricultural sector in developing
countries. Support for commodity development projects,
especially market-based projects, and for their preparation under
the Second Account of the Common Fund for Commodities
should be encouraged.
Employment
47. We strongly support fair globalization and resolve to make
the goals of full and productive employment and decent work
for all, including for women and young people, a central
objective of our relevant national and international policies as
well as our national development strategies, including poverty
reduction strategies, as part of our efforts to achieve the
Millennium Development Goals. These measures should also
encompass the elimination of the worst forms of child labour, as
defined in International Labour Organization Convention
No. 182, and forced labour. We also resolve to ensure full
respect for the fundamental principles and rights at work.
Sustainable development: managing and protecting our
common environment
48. We reaffirm our commitment to achieve the goal of
sustainable development, including through the implementation
of Agenda 2144 and the Johannesburg Plan of Implementation.37
_______________
44

Report of the United Nations Conference on Environment and
Development, Rio de Janeiro, 3–14 June 1992 (United Nations publication,
Sales No. E.93.I.8 and corrigenda), vol. I: Resolutions adopted by the
Conference, resolution 1, annex II.

30

To this end, we commit ourselves to undertaking concrete
actions and measures at all levels and to enhancing international
cooperation, taking into account the Rio principles. 45 These
efforts will also promote the integration of the three components
of sustainable development – economic development, social
development and environmental protection – as interdependent
and mutually reinforcing pillars. Poverty eradication, changing
unsustainable patterns of production and consumption and
protecting and managing the natural resource base of economic
and social development are overarching objectives of and
essential requirements for sustainable development.
49. We will promote sustainable consumption and production
patterns, with the developed countries taking the lead and all
countries benefiting from the process, as called for in the
Johannesburg Plan of Implementation. In that context, we
support developing countries in their efforts to promote a
recycling economy.
50. We face serious and multiple challenges in tackling
climate change, promoting clean energy, meeting energy needs
and achieving sustainable development, and we will act with
resolve and urgency in this regard.
51. We recognize that climate change is a serious and longterm challenge that has the potential to affect every part of the
globe. We emphasize the need to meet all the commitments and
obligations we have undertaken in the United Nations
Framework Convention on Climate Change 46 and other
relevant international agreements, including, for many of us, the
Kyoto Protocol.47 The Convention is the appropriate framework
for addressing future action on climate change at the global
level.
52. We reaffirm our commitment to the ultimate objective of
the Convention: to stabilize greenhouse gas concentrations in
the atmosphere at a level that prevents dangerous anthropogenic
interference with the climate system.
53. We acknowledge that the global nature of climate change
calls for the widest possible cooperation and participation in an
effective and appropriate international response, in accordance
with the principles of the Convention. We are committed to
moving forward the global discussion on long-term cooperative
action to address climate change, in accordance with these
principles. We stress the importance of the eleventh session of
the Conference of the Parties to the Convention, to be held in
Montreal in November 2005.
54. We acknowledge various partnerships that are under way
to advance action on clean energy and climate change,
including bilateral, regional and multilateral initiatives.
_______________
45

Ibid., annex I.
United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 1771, No. 30822.
47
FCCC/CP/1997/7/Add.1, decision 1/CP.3, annex.
46

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

55. We are committed to taking further action through
practical international cooperation, inter alia:
(a) To promote innovation, clean energy and energy
efficiency and conservation; improve policy, regulatory and
financing frameworks; and accelerate the deployment of cleaner
technologies;
(b) To enhance private investment, transfer of
technologies and capacity-building to developing countries, as
called for in the Johannesburg Plan of Implementation, taking
into account their own energy needs and priorities;
(c) To assist developing countries to improve their
resilience and integrate adaptation goals into their sustainable
development strategies, given that adaptation to the effects of
climate change due to both natural and human factors is a high
priority for all nations, particularly those most vulnerable,
namely, those referred to in article 4.8 of the Convention;
(d) To continue to assist developing countries, in
particular small island developing States, least developed
countries and African countries, including those that are
particularly vulnerable to climate change, in addressing their
adaptation needs relating to the adverse effects of climate
change.
56. In pursuance of our commitment to achieve sustainable
development, we further resolve:
(a) To promote the United Nations Decade of
Education for Sustainable Development and the International
Decade for Action, “Water for Life”;
(b) To support and strengthen the implementation of the
United Nations Convention to Combat Desertification in Those
Countries Experiencing Serious Drought and/or Desertification,
Particularly in Africa,48 to address causes of desertification and
land degradation, as well as poverty resulting from land
degradation, through, inter alia, the mobilization of adequate
and predictable financial resources, the transfer of technology
and capacity-building at all levels;
(c) That the States parties to the Convention on
Biological Diversity 49 and the Cartagena Protocol on
Biosafety 50 should support the implementation of the
Convention and the Protocol, as well as other biodiversityrelated agreements and the Johannesburg commitment for a
significant reduction in the rate of loss of biodiversity by 2010.
The States parties will continue to negotiate within the
framework of the Convention on Biological Diversity, bearing
in mind the Bonn Guidelines, 51 an international regime to
_______________
48

United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 1954, No. 33480.
49
Ibid., vol. 1760, No. 30619.
50
UNEP/CBD/ExCOP/1/3 and Corr.1, part two, annex.
51
UNEP/CBD/COP/6/20, annex I, decision VI/24A.

promote and safeguard the fair and equitable sharing of benefits
arising out of the utilization of genetic resources. All States will
fulfil commitments and significantly reduce the rate of loss of
biodiversity by 2010 and continue ongoing efforts towards
elaborating and negotiating an international regime on access to
genetic resources and benefit-sharing;
(d) To recognize that the sustainable development of
indigenous peoples and their communities is crucial in our fight
against hunger and poverty;
(e) To reaffirm our commitment, subject to national
legislation, to respect, preserve and maintain the knowledge,
innovations and practices of indigenous and local communities
embodying traditional lifestyles relevant to the conservation and
sustainable use of biological diversity, promote their wider
application with the approval and involvement of the holders of
such knowledge, innovations and practices and encourage the
equitable sharing of the benefits arising from their utilization;
(f) To work expeditiously towards the establishment of
a worldwide early warning system for all natural hazards with
regional nodes, building on existing national and regional
capacity such as the newly established Indian Ocean Tsunami
Warning and Mitigation System;
(g) To fully implement the Hyogo Declaration52 and the
Hyogo Framework for Action 2005–2015 53 adopted at the
World Conference on Disaster Reduction, in particular those
commitments related to assistance for developing countries that
are prone to natural disasters and disaster-stricken States in the
transition phase towards sustainable physical, social and
economic recovery, for risk-reduction activities in post-disaster
recovery and for rehabilitation processes;
(h) To assist developing countries’ efforts to prepare
integrated water resources management and water efficiency
plans as part of their national development strategies and to
provide access to safe drinking water and basic sanitation in
accordance with the Millennium Declaration35 and the
Johannesburg Plan of Implementation,37 including halving by
2015 the proportion of people who are unable to reach or afford
safe drinking water and who do not have access to basic
sanitation;
(i) To accelerate the development and dissemination of
affordable and cleaner energy efficiency and energy
conservation technologies, as well as the transfer of such
technologies, in particular to developing countries, on
favourable terms, including on concessional and preferential
terms, as mutually agreed, bearing in mind that access to energy
facilitates the eradication of poverty;
_______________
52

A/CONF.206/6 and Corr.1, chap. I, resolution 1.
Hyogo Framework for Action 2005–2015: Building the Resilience of
Nations and Communities to Disasters (A/CONF.206/6 and Corr.1, chap. I,
resolution 2).
53

31

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

(j) To strengthen the conservation, sustainable
management and development of all types of forests for the
benefit of current and future generations, including through
enhanced international cooperation, so that trees and forests
may contribute fully to the achievement of the internationally
agreed development goals, including those contained in the
Millennium Declaration, taking full account of the linkages
between the forest sector and other sectors. We look forward to
the discussions at the sixth session of the United Nations Forum
on Forests;
(k) To promote the sound management of chemicals
and hazardous wastes throughout their life cycle, in accordance
with Agenda 21 and the Johannesburg Plan of Implementation,
aiming to achieve that by 2020 chemicals are used and
produced in ways that lead to the minimization of significant
adverse effects on human health and the environment using
transparent and science-based risk assessment and risk
management procedures, by adopting and implementing a
voluntary strategic approach to international management of
chemicals, and to support developing countries in strengthening
their capacity for the sound management of chemicals and
hazardous wastes by providing technical and financial
assistance, as appropriate;
(l) To improve cooperation and coordination at all
levels in order to address issues related to oceans and seas in an
integrated manner and promote integrated management and
sustainable development of the oceans and seas;
(m) To achieve significant improvement in the lives of at
least 100 million slum-dwellers by 2020, recognizing the urgent
need for the provision of increased resources for affordable
housing and housing-related infrastructure, prioritizing slum
prevention and slum upgrading, and to encourage support for
the United Nations Habitat and Human Settlements Foundation
and its Slum Upgrading Facility;
(n) To acknowledge the invaluable role of the Global
Environment Facility in facilitating cooperation with developing
countries; we look forward to a successful replenishment this
year along with the successful conclusion of all outstanding
commitments from the third replenishment;
(o) To note that cessation of the transport of radioactive
materials through the regions of small island developing States
is an ultimate desired goal of small island developing States and
some other countries and recognize the right of freedom of
navigation in accordance with international law. States should
maintain dialogue and consultation, in particular under the aegis
of the International Atomic Energy Agency and the
International Maritime Organization, with the aim of improved
mutual understanding, confidence-building and enhanced
communication in relation to the safe maritime transport of
radioactive materials. States involved in the transport of such
materials are urged to continue to engage in dialogue with small
island developing States and other States to address their
concerns. These concerns include the further development and
32

strengthening, within the appropriate forums, of international
regulatory regimes to enhance safety, disclosure, liability,
security and compensation in relation to such transport.
HIV/AIDS, malaria, tuberculosis and other health issues
57. We recognize that HIV/AIDS, malaria, tuberculosis and
other infectious diseases pose severe risks for the entire world
and serious challenges to the achievement of development
goals. We acknowledge the substantial efforts and financial
contributions made by the international community, while
recognizing that these diseases and other emerging health
challenges require a sustained international response. To this
end, we commit ourselves to:
(a) Increasing investment, building on existing
mechanisms and through partnership, to improve health systems
in developing countries and those with economies in transition
with the aim of providing sufficient health workers, infrastructure,
management systems and supplies to achieve the health-related
Millennium Development Goals by 2015;
(b) Implementing measures to increase the capacity of
adults and adolescents to protect themselves from the risk of
HIV infection;
(c) Fully implementing all commitments established by
the Declaration of Commitment on HIV/AIDS 54 through
stronger leadership, the scaling up of a comprehensive response
to achieve broad multisectoral coverage for prevention, care,
treatment and support, the mobilization of additional resources
from national, bilateral, multilateral and private sources and the
substantial funding of the Global Fund to Fight AIDS,
Tuberculosis and Malaria as well as of the HIV/AIDS component
of the work programmes of the United Nations system agencies
and programmes engaged in the fight against HIV/AIDS;
(d) Developing and implementing a package for HIV
prevention, treatment and care with the aim of coming as close
as possible to the goal of universal access to treatment by 2010
for all those who need it, including through increased resources,
and working towards the elimination of stigma and
discrimination, enhanced access to affordable medicines and the
reduction of vulnerability of persons affected by HIV/AIDS and
other health issues, in particular orphaned and vulnerable
children and older persons;
(e) Ensuring the full implementation of our obligations
under the International Health Regulations adopted by the fiftyeighth World Health Assembly in May 2005,55 including the
need to support the Global Outbreak Alert and Response
Network of the World Health Organization;
_______________
54

Resolution S-26/2, annex.
World Health Organization, Fifty-eighth World Health Assembly, Geneva,
16–25 May 2005, Resolutions and Decisions, Annex (WHA58/2005/REC/1),
resolution WHA58.3.
55

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

(f) Working actively to implement the “Three Ones”
principles in all countries, including by ensuring that multiple
institutions and international partners all work under one agreed
HIV/AIDS framework that provides the basis for coordinating
the work of all partners, with one national AIDS coordinating
authority having a broad-based multisectoral mandate, and
under one agreed country-level monitoring and evaluation
system. We welcome and support the important
recommendations of the Global Task Team on Improving AIDS
Coordination among Multilateral Institutions and International
Donors;
(g) Achieving universal access to reproductive health
by 2015, as set out at the International Conference on
Population and Development, integrating this goal in strategies
to attain the internationally agreed development goals, including
those contained in the Millennium Declaration, aimed at
reducing maternal mortality, improving maternal health,
reducing child mortality, promoting gender equality, combating
HIV/AIDS and eradicating poverty;
(h) Promoting long-term funding, including publicprivate partnerships where appropriate, for academic and
industrial research as well as for the development of new
vaccines and microbicides, diagnostic kits, drugs and treatments
to address major pandemics, tropical diseases and other
diseases, such as avian flu and severe acute respiratory
syndrome, and taking forward work on market incentives,
where appropriate through such mechanisms as advance
purchase commitments;
(i) Stressing the need to urgently address malaria and
tuberculosis, in particular in the most affected countries, and
welcoming the scaling up, in this regard, of bilateral and
multilateral initiatives.
Gender equality and empowerment of women
58. We remain convinced that progress for women is progress
for all. We reaffirm that the full and effective implementation of
the goals and objectives of the Beijing Declaration and Platform
for Action56 and the outcome of the twenty-third special session
of the General Assembly is an essential contribution to achieving
the internationally agreed development goals, including those
contained in the Millennium Declaration, and we resolve to
promote gender equality and eliminate pervasive gender
discrimination by:
(a) Eliminating gender inequalities in primary and
secondary education by the earliest possible date and at all
educational levels by 2015;

_______________
56

Report of the Fourth World Conference on Women, Beijing,
4–15 September 1995 (United Nations publication, Sales No. E.96.IV.13),
chap. I, resolution 1, annexes I and II.

(b) Guaranteeing the free and equal right of women to
own and inherit property and ensuring secure tenure of property
and housing by women;
(c)

Ensuring equal access to reproductive health;

(d) Promoting women’s equal access to labour markets,
sustainable employment and adequate labour protection;
(e) Ensuring equal access of women to productive
assets and resources, including land, credit and technology;
(f) Eliminating all forms of discrimination and violence
against women and the girl child, including by ending impunity
and by ensuring the protection of civilians, in particular women
and the girl child, during and after armed conflicts in accordance
with the obligations of States under international humanitarian
law and international human rights law;
(g) Promoting increased representation of women in
Government decision-making bodies, including through
ensuring their equal opportunity to participate fully in the
political process.
59. We recognize the importance of gender mainstreaming as
a tool for achieving gender equality. To that end, we undertake
to actively promote the mainstreaming of a gender perspective
in the design, implementation, monitoring and evaluation of
policies and programmes in all political, economic and social
spheres, and further undertake to strengthen the capabilities of
the United Nations system in the area of gender.
Science and technology for development
60. We recognize that science and technology, including
information and communication technology, are vital for the
achievement of the development goals and that international
support can help developing countries to benefit from
technological advancements and enhance their productive
capacity. We therefore commit ourselves to:
(a) Strengthening and enhancing existing mechanisms
and supporting initiatives for research and development,
including through voluntary partnerships between the public
and private sectors, to address the special needs of developing
countries in the areas of health, agriculture, conservation,
sustainable use of natural resources and environmental
management, energy, forestry and the impact of climate change;
(b) Promoting and facilitating, as appropriate, access to
and the development, transfer and diffusion of technologies,
including environmentally sound technologies and corresponding
know-how, to developing countries;
(c) Assisting developing countries in their efforts to
promote and develop national strategies for human resources
and science and technology, which are primary drivers of
national capacity-building for development;
33

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

(d) Promoting and supporting greater efforts to develop
renewable sources of energy, such as solar, wind and
geothermal;
(e) Implementing policies at the national and
international levels to attract both public and private investment,
domestic and foreign, that enhances knowledge, transfers
technology on mutually agreed terms and raises productivity;
(f) Supporting the efforts of developing countries,
individually and collectively, to harness new agricultural
technologies in order to increase agricultural productivity
through environmentally sustainable means;
(g) Building a people-centred and inclusive information
society so as to enhance digital opportunities for all people in
order to help bridge the digital divide, putting the potential of
information and communication technologies at the service of
development and addressing new challenges of the information
society by implementing the outcomes of the Geneva phase of
the World Summit on the Information Society and ensuring the
success of the second phase of the Summit, to be held in Tunis
in November 2005; in this regard, we welcome the
establishment of the Digital Solidarity Fund and encourage
voluntary contributions to its financing.
Migration and development
61. We acknowledge the important nexus between
international migration and development and the need to deal
with the challenges and opportunities that migration presents to
countries of origin, destination and transit. We recognize that
international migration brings benefits as well as challenges to
the global community. We look forward to the high-level
dialogue of the General Assembly on international migration
and development to be held in 2006, which will offer an
opportunity to discuss the multidimensional aspects of
international migration and development in order to identify
appropriate ways and means to maximize their development
benefits and minimize their negative impacts.
62. We reaffirm our resolve to take measures to ensure respect
for and protection of the human rights of migrants, migrant
workers and members of their families.
63. We reaffirm the need to adopt policies and undertake
measures to reduce the cost of transferring migrant remittances
to developing countries and welcome efforts by Governments
and stakeholders in this regard.
Countries with special needs
64. We reaffirm our commitment to address the special needs
of the least developed countries and urge all countries and all
relevant organizations of the United Nations system, including
the Bretton Woods institutions, to make concerted efforts and
adopt speedy measures for meeting in a timely manner the goals
34

and targets of the Brussels Programme of Action for the Least
Developed Countries for the Decade 2001–2010.38
65. We recognize the special needs of and challenges faced by
landlocked developing countries and therefore reaffirm our
commitment to urgently address those needs and challenges
through the full, timely and effective implementation of the
Almaty Programme of Action: Addressing the Special Needs of
Landlocked Developing Countries within a New Global
Framework for Transit Transport Cooperation for Landlocked
and Transit Developing Countries 57 and the São Paulo
Consensus adopted at the eleventh session of the United
Nations Conference on Trade and Development. 58 We
encourage the work undertaken by United Nations regional
commissions and organizations towards establishing a time-cost
methodology for indicators to measure the progress in
implementation of the Almaty Programme of Action. We also
recognize the special difficulties and concerns of landlocked
developing countries in their efforts to integrate their economies
into the multilateral trading system. In this regard, priority
should be given to the full and timely implementation of the
Almaty Declaration59 and the Almaty Programme of Action.57
66. We recognize the special needs and vulnerabilities of
small island developing States and reaffirm our commitment to
take urgent and concrete action to address those needs and
vulnerabilities through the full and effective implementation of
the Mauritius Strategy adopted by the International Meeting to
Review the Implementation of the Programme of Action for the
Sustainable Development of Small Island Developing States,60
the Barbados Programme of Action61 and the outcome of the
twenty-second special session of the General Assembly.62 We
further undertake to promote greater international cooperation
and partnership for the implementation of the Mauritius
Strategy through, inter alia, the mobilization of domestic and
international resources, the promotion of international trade as

_______________
57
Report of the International Ministerial Conference of Landlocked and
Transit Developing Countries and Donor Countries and International
Financial and Development Institutions on Transit Transport Cooperation,
Almaty, Kazakhstan, 28 and 29 August 2003 (A/CONF.202/3), annex I.
58
TD/412, part II.
59
Report of the International Ministerial Conference of Landlocked and
Transit Developing Countries and Donor Countries and International
Financial and Development Institutions on Transit Transport Cooperation,
Almaty, Kazakhstan, 28 and 29 August 2003 (A/CONF.202/3), annex II.
60
Report of the International Meeting to Review the Implementation of the
Programme of Action for the Sustainable Development of Small Island
Developing States, Port Louis, Mauritius, 10–14 January 2005 (United
Nations publication, Sales No. E.05.II.A.4 and corrigendum), chap. I,
resolution 1, annex II.
61
Report of the Global Conference on the Sustainable Development of
Small Island Developing States, Bridgetown, Barbados, 25 April–6 May
1994 (United Nations publication, Sales No. E.94.I.18 and corrigenda),
chap. I, resolution 1, annex I.
62
Resolution S-22/2, annex.

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

an engine for development and increased international financial
and technical cooperation.
67. We emphasize the need for continued, coordinated and
effective international support for achieving the development
goals in countries emerging from conflict and in those recovering
from natural disasters.
Meeting the special needs of Africa
68. We welcome the substantial progress made by the African
countries in fulfilling their commitments and emphasize the
need to carry forward the implementation of the New
Partnership for Africa’s Development63 to promote sustainable
growth and development and deepen democracy, human rights,
good governance and sound economic management and gender
equality and encourage African countries, with the participation
of civil society and the private sector, to continue their efforts in
this regard by developing and strengthening institutions for
governance and the development of the region, and also
welcome the recent decisions taken by Africa’s partners,
including the Group of Eight and the European Union, in
support of Africa’s development efforts, including commitments
that will lead to an increase in official development assistance to
Africa of 25 billion dollars per year by 2010. We reaffirm our
commitment to address the special needs of Africa, which is the
only continent not on track to meet any of the goals of the
Millennium Declaration by 2015, to enable it to enter the
mainstream of the world economy, and resolve:
(a) To strengthen cooperation with the New Partnership
for Africa’s Development by providing coherent support for the
programmes drawn up by African leaders within that framework,
including by mobilizing internal and external financial resources
and facilitating approval of such programmes by the multilateral
financial institutions;
(b) To support the African commitment to ensure that
by 2015 all children have access to complete, free and
compulsory primary education of good quality, as well as to
basic health care;
(c) To support the building of an international
infrastructure consortium involving the African Union, the
World Bank and the African Development Bank, with the New
Partnership for Africa’s Development as the main framework, to
facilitate public and private infrastructure investment in Africa;
(d) To promote a comprehensive and durable solution to
the external debt problems of African countries, including
through the cancellation of 100 per cent of multilateral debt
consistent with the recent Group of Eight proposal for the
heavily indebted poor countries, and, on a case-by-case basis,
where appropriate, significant debt relief, including, inter alia,
_______________
63

A/57/304, annex.

cancellation or restructuring for heavily indebted African
countries not part of the Heavily Indebted Poor Countries
Initiative that have unsustainable debt burdens;
(e) To make efforts to fully integrate African countries
in the international trading system, including through targeted
trade capacity-building programmes;
(f) To support the efforts of commodity-dependent
African countries to restructure, diversify and strengthen the
competitiveness of their commodity sectors and decide to work
towards market-based arrangements with the participation of
the private sector for commodity price-risk management;
(g) To supplement the efforts of African countries,
individually and collectively, to increase agricultural productivity,
in a sustainable way, as set out in the Comprehensive Africa
Agriculture Development Programme of the New Partnership
for Africa’s Development as part of an African “Green
Revolution”;
(h) To encourage and support the initiatives of the
African Union and subregional organizations to prevent,
mediate and resolve conflicts with the assistance of the United
Nations, and in this regard welcomes the proposals from the
Group of Eight countries to provide support for African
peacekeeping;
(i) To provide, with the aim of an AIDS-, malaria- and
tuberculosis-free generation in Africa, assistance for prevention
and care and to come as close as possible to achieving the goal
of universal access by 2010 to HIV/AIDS treatment in African
countries, to encourage pharmaceutical companies to make
drugs, including antiretroviral drugs, affordable and accessible
in Africa and to ensure increased bilateral and multilateral
assistance, where possible on a grant basis, to combat malaria,
tuberculosis and other infectious diseases in Africa through the
strengthening of health systems.
III. Peace and collective security
69. We recognize that we are facing a whole range of threats
that require our urgent, collective and more determined
response.
70. We also recognize that, in accordance with the Charter,
addressing such threats requires cooperation among all the
principal organs of the United Nations within their respective
mandates.
71. We acknowledge that we are living in an interdependent
and global world and that many of today’s threats recognize no
national boundaries, are interlinked and must be tackled at the
global, regional and national levels in accordance with the
Charter and international law.
72. We therefore reaffirm our commitment to work towards a
security consensus based on the recognition that many threats
are interlinked, that development, peace, security and human
35

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

rights are mutually reinforcing, that no State can best protect
itself by acting entirely alone and that all States need an
effective and efficient collective security system pursuant to the
purposes and principles of the Charter.
Pacific settlement of disputes
73. We emphasize the obligation of States to settle their
disputes by peaceful means in accordance with Chapter VI of
the Charter, including, when appropriate, by the use of the
International Court of Justice. All States should act in
accordance with the Declaration on Principles of International
Law concerning Friendly Relations and Cooperation among
States in accordance with the Charter of the United Nations.64
74. We stress the importance of prevention of armed conflict
in accordance with the purposes and principles of the Charter
and solemnly renew our commitment to promote a culture of
prevention of armed conflict as a means of effectively
addressing the interconnected security and development
challenges faced by peoples throughout the world, as well as to
strengthen the capacity of the United Nations for the prevention
of armed conflict.
75. We further stress the importance of a coherent and
integrated approach to the prevention of armed conflicts and the
settlement of disputes and the need for the Security Council, the
General Assembly, the Economic and Social Council and the
Secretary-General to coordinate their activities within their
respective Charter mandates.
76. Recognizing the important role of the good offices of the
Secretary-General, including in the mediation of disputes, we
support the Secretary-General’s efforts to strengthen his
capacity in this area.
Use of force under the Charter of the United Nations
77. We reiterate the obligation of all Member States to refrain
in their international relations from the threat or use of force in
any manner inconsistent with the Charter. We reaffirm that the
purposes and principles guiding the United Nations are, inter
alia, to maintain international peace and security, to develop
friendly relations among nations based on respect for the
principles of equal rights and self-determination of peoples and
to take other appropriate measures to strengthen universal
peace, and to that end we are determined to take effective
collective measures for the prevention and removal of threats to
the peace and for the suppression of acts of aggression or other
breaches of the peace, and to bring about by peaceful means, in
conformity with the principles of justice and international law,
the adjustment or settlement of international disputes or
situations that might lead to a breach of the peace.

_______________
64

Resolution 2625 (XXV), annex.

36

78. We reiterate the importance of promoting and
strengthening the multilateral process and of addressing
international challenges and problems by strictly abiding by the
Charter and the principles of international law, and further stress
our commitment to multilateralism.
79. We reaffirm that the relevant provisions of the Charter are
sufficient to address the full range of threats to international
peace and security. We further reaffirm the authority of the
Security Council to mandate coercive action to maintain and
restore international peace and security. We stress the
importance of acting in accordance with the purposes and
principles of the Charter.
80. We also reaffirm that the Security Council has primary
responsibility in the maintenance of international peace and
security. We also note the role of the General Assembly relating
to the maintenance of international peace and security in
accordance with the relevant provisions of the Charter.
Terrorism
81. We strongly condemn terrorism in all its forms and
manifestations, committed by whomever, wherever and for
whatever purposes, as it constitutes one of the most serious
threats to international peace and security.
82. We welcome the Secretary-General’s identification of
elements of a counter-terrorism strategy. These elements should
be developed by the General Assembly without delay with a
view to adopting and implementing a strategy to promote
comprehensive, coordinated and consistent responses, at the
national, regional and international levels, to counter terrorism,
which also takes into account the conditions conducive to the
spread of terrorism. In this context, we commend the various
initiatives to promote dialogue, tolerance and understanding
among civilizations.
83. We stress the need to make every effort to reach an
agreement on and conclude a comprehensive convention on
international terrorism during the sixtieth session of the General
Assembly.
84. We acknowledge that the question of convening a highlevel conference under the auspices of the United Nations to
formulate an international response to terrorism in all its forms
and manifestations could be considered.
85. We recognize that international cooperation to fight
terrorism must be conducted in conformity with international
law, including the Charter and relevant international conventions
and protocols. States must ensure that any measures taken to
combat terrorism comply with their obligations under
international law, in particular human rights law, refugee law
and international humanitarian law.
86. We reiterate our call upon States to refrain from
organizing, financing, encouraging, providing training for or
otherwise supporting terrorist activities and to take appropriate

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

measures to ensure that their territories are not used for such
activities.

United Nations peacekeeping missions and to assist existing
missions through the provision of advice and expertise.

87. We acknowledge the important role played by the United
Nations in combating terrorism and also stress the vital
contribution of regional and bilateral cooperation, particularly at
the practical level of law enforcement cooperation and technical
exchange.

93. Recognizing the important contribution to peace and
security by regional organizations as provided for under
Chapter VIII of the Charter and the importance of forging
predictable partnerships and arrangements between the United
Nations and regional organizations, and noting in particular,
given the special needs of Africa, the importance of a strong
African Union:

88. We urge the international community, including the
United Nations, to assist States in building national and regional
capacity to combat terrorism. We invite the Secretary-General to
submit proposals to the General Assembly and the Security
Council, within their respective mandates, to strengthen the
capacity of the United Nations system to assist States in
combating terrorism and to enhance the coordination of United
Nations activities in this regard.
89. We stress the importance of assisting victims of terrorism
and of providing them and their families with support to cope
with their loss and their grief.
90. We encourage the Security Council to consider ways
to strengthen its monitoring and enforcement role in counterterrorism, including by consolidating State reporting
requirements, taking into account and respecting the different
mandates of its counter-terrorism subsidiary bodies. We are
committed to cooperating fully with the three competent
subsidiary bodies in the fulfilment of their tasks, recognizing
that many States continue to require assistance in implementing
relevant Security Council resolutions.
91. We support efforts for the early entry into force of the
International Convention for the Suppression of Acts of Nuclear
Terrorism65 and strongly encourage States to consider becoming
parties to it expeditiously and acceding without delay to the
twelve other international conventions and protocols against
terrorism and implementing them.
Peacekeeping
92. Recognizing that United Nations peacekeeping plays a
vital role in helping parties to conflict end hostilities and
commending the contribution of United Nations peacekeepers
in that regard, noting improvements made in recent years in
United Nations peacekeeping, including the deployment of
integrated missions in complex situations, and stressing the
need to mount operations with adequate capacity to counter
hostilities and fulfil effectively their mandates, we urge further
development of proposals for enhanced rapidly deployable
capacities to reinforce peacekeeping operations in crises. We
endorse the creation of an initial operating capability for a
standing police capacity to provide coherent, effective and
responsive start-up capability for the policing component of the
_______________
65

Resolution 59/290, annex.

(a) We support the efforts of the European Union and
other regional entities to develop capacities such as for rapid
deployment, standby and bridging arrangements;
(b) We support the development and implementation of
a ten-year plan for capacity-building with the African Union.
94. We support implementation of the 2001 Programme of
Action to Prevent, Combat and Eradicate the Illicit Trade in
Small Arms and Light Weapons in All Its Aspects.66
95. We urge States parties to the Anti-Personnel Mine Ban
Convention67 and Amended Protocol II to the Convention on
Certain Conventional Weapons 68 to fully implement their
respective obligations. We call upon States in a position to do so
to provide greater technical assistance to mine-affected States.
96. We underscore the importance of the recommendations of
the Adviser to the Secretary-General on Sexual Exploitation and
Abuse by United Nations Peacekeeping Personnel,69 and urge
that those measures adopted in the relevant General Assembly
resolutions based upon the recommendations be fully
implemented without delay.
Peacebuilding
97. Emphasizing the need for a coordinated, coherent and
integrated approach to post-conflict peacebuilding and
reconciliation with a view to achieving sustainable peace,
recognizing the need for a dedicated institutional mechanism to
address the special needs of countries emerging from conflict
towards recovery, reintegration and reconstruction and to assist
them in laying the foundation for sustainable development, and
recognizing the vital role of the United Nations in that regard,

_______________
66

See Report of the United Nations Conference on the Illicit Trade in Small
Arms and Light Weapons in All Its Aspects, New York, 9–20 July 2001
(A/CONF.192/15), chap. IV, para. 24.
67
Convention on the Prohibition of the Use, Stockpiling, Production and
Transfer of Anti-personnel Mines and on Their Destruction (United Nations,
Treaty Series, vol. 2056, No. 35597).
68
Amended Protocol II to the Convention on Prohibitions or Restrictions on
the Use of Certain Conventional Weapons Which May Be Deemed to Be
Excessively Injurious or to Have Indiscriminate Effects (CCW/CONF.I/16
(Part I), annex B).
69
A/59/710, paras. 68–93.

37

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

we decide to establish a Peacebuilding Commission as an
intergovernmental advisory body.
98. The main purpose of the Peacebuilding Commission is to
bring together all relevant actors to marshal resources and to
advise on and propose integrated strategies for post-conflict
peacebuilding and recovery. The Commission should focus
attention on the reconstruction and institution-building efforts
necessary for recovery from conflict and support the
development of integrated strategies in order to lay the
foundation for sustainable development. In addition, it should
provide recommendations and information to improve the
coordination of all relevant actors within and outside the United
Nations, develop best practices, help to ensure predictable
financing for early recovery activities and extend the period of
attention by the international community to post-conflict
recovery. The Commission should act in all matters on the basis
of consensus of its members.
99. The Peacebuilding Commission should make the outcome
of its discussions and recommendations publicly available as
United Nations documents to all relevant bodies and actors,
including the international financial institutions. The
Peacebuilding Commission should submit an annual report to
the General Assembly.
100. The Peacebuilding Commission should meet in various
configurations. Country-specific meetings of the Commission,
upon invitation of the Organizational Committee referred to in
paragraph 101 below, should include as members, in addition to
members of the Organizational Committee, representatives
from:
(a)

The country under consideration;

(b) Countries in the region engaged in the post-conflict
process and other countries that are involved in relief efforts
and/or political dialogue, as well as relevant regional and
subregional organizations;
(c) The major financial, troop and civilian police
contributors involved in the recovery effort;
(d) The senior United Nations representative in the field
and other relevant United Nations representatives;
(e) Such regional and international financial institutions
as may be relevant.
101. The Peacebuilding Commission should have a standing
Organizational Committee, responsible for developing its
procedures and organizational matters, comprising:
(a) Members of the Security Council, including
permanent members;
(b) Members of the Economic and Social Council,
elected from regional groups, giving due consideration to those
countries that have experienced post-conflict recovery;
38

(c) Top providers of assessed contributions to the
United Nations budgets and voluntary contributions to the
United Nations funds, programmes and agencies, including the
standing Peacebuilding Fund, that are not among those selected
in (a) or (b) above;
(d) Top providers of military personnel and civilian
police to United Nations missions that are not among those
selected in (a), (b) or (c) above.
102. Representatives from the World Bank, the International
Monetary Fund and other institutional donors should be invited
to participate in all meetings of the Peacebuilding Commission
in a manner suitable to their governing arrangements, in
addition to a representative of the Secretary-General.
103. We request the Secretary-General to establish a multi-year
standing Peacebuilding Fund for post-conflict peacebuilding,
funded by voluntary contributions and taking due account of
existing instruments. The objectives of the Peacebuilding Fund
will include ensuring the immediate release of resources needed
to launch peacebuilding activities and the availability of
appropriate financing for recovery.
104. We also request the Secretary-General to establish, within
the Secretariat and from within existing resources, a small
peacebuilding support office staffed by qualified experts to
assist and support the Peacebuilding Commission. The office
should draw on the best expertise available.
105. The Peacebuilding Commission should begin its work no
later than 31 December 2005.
Sanctions
106. We underscore that sanctions remain an important tool
under the Charter in our efforts to maintain international peace
and security without recourse to the use of force, and resolve to
ensure that sanctions are carefully targeted in support of clear
objectives, to comply with sanctions established by the Security
Council and to ensure that sanctions are implemented in ways
that balance effectiveness to achieve the desired results against
the possible adverse consequences, including socio-economic
and humanitarian consequences, for populations and third
States.
107. Sanctions should be implemented and monitored
effectively with clear benchmarks and should be periodically
reviewed, as appropriate, and remain for as limited a period as
necessary to achieve their objectives and should be terminated
once the objectives have been achieved.
108. We call upon the Security Council, with the support of
the Secretary-General, to improve its monitoring of the
implementation and effects of sanctions, to ensure that sanctions
are implemented in an accountable manner, to review regularly
the results of such monitoring and to develop a mechanism to
address special economic problems arising from the application
of sanctions in accordance with the Charter.

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

109. We also call upon the Security Council, with the support
of the Secretary-General, to ensure that fair and clear procedures
exist for placing individuals and entities on sanctions lists and
for removing them, as well as for granting humanitarian
exemptions.
110. We support efforts through the United Nations to
strengthen State capacity to implement sanctions provisions.
Transnational crime
111. We express our grave concern at the negative effects on
development, peace and security and human rights posed by
transnational crime, including the smuggling of and trafficking
in human beings, the world narcotic drug problem and the illicit
trade in small arms and light weapons, and at the increasing
vulnerability of States to such crime. We reaffirm the need to
work collectively to combat transnational crime.
112. We recognize that trafficking in persons continues to pose
a serious challenge to humanity and requires a concerted
international response. To that end, we urge all States to devise,
enforce and strengthen effective measures to combat and
eliminate all forms of trafficking in persons to counter the
demand for trafficked victims and to protect the victims.
113. We urge all States that have not yet done so to consider
becoming parties to the relevant international conventions on
organized crime and corruption and, following their entry into
force, to implement them effectively, including by incorporating
the provisions of those conventions into national legislation and
by strengthening criminal justice systems.
114. We reaffirm our unwavering determination and
commitment to overcome the world narcotic drug problem
through international cooperation and national strategies to
eliminate both the illicit supply of and demand for illicit drugs.
115. We resolve to strengthen the capacity of the United
Nations Office on Drugs and Crime, within its existing
mandates, to provide assistance to Member States in those tasks
upon request.
Women in the prevention and resolution of conflicts
116. We stress the important role of women in the prevention
and resolution of conflicts and in peacebuilding. We reaffirm
our commitment to the full and effective implementation of
Security Council resolution 1325 (2000) of 31 October 2000 on
women and peace and security. We also underline the
importance of integrating a gender perspective and of women
having the opportunity for equal participation and full
involvement in all efforts to maintain and promote peace and
security, as well as the need to increase their role in decisionmaking at all levels. We strongly condemn all violations of the
human rights of women and girls in situations of armed conflict
and the use of sexual exploitation, violence and abuse, and we

commit ourselves to elaborating and implementing strategies to
report on, prevent and punish gender-based violence.
Protecting children in situations of armed conflict
117. We reaffirm our commitment to promote and protect the
rights and welfare of children in armed conflicts. We welcome
the significant advances and innovations that have been
achieved over the past several years. We welcome in particular
the adoption of Security Council resolution 1612 (2005) of
26 July 2005. We call upon States to consider ratifying the
Convention on the Rights of the Child 70 and the Optional
Protocol to the Convention on the Rights of the Child on the
involvement of children in armed conflict.71 We also call upon
States to take effective measures, as appropriate, to prevent the
recruitment and use of children in armed conflict, contrary to
international law, by armed forces and groups, and to prohibit
and criminalize such practices.
118. We therefore call upon all States concerned to take
concrete measures to ensure accountability and compliance by
those responsible for grave abuses against children. We also
reaffirm our commitment to ensure that children in armed
conflicts receive timely and effective humanitarian assistance,
including education, for their rehabilitation and reintegration
into society.
IV. Human rights and the rule of law
119. We recommit ourselves to actively protecting and
promoting all human rights, the rule of law and democracy and
recognize that they are interlinked and mutually reinforcing and
that they belong to the universal and indivisible core values and
principles of the United Nations, and call upon all parts of the
United Nations to promote human rights and fundamental
freedoms in accordance with their mandates.
120. We reaffirm the solemn commitment of our States to fulfil
their obligations to promote universal respect for and the
observance and protection of all human rights and fundamental
freedoms for all in accordance with the Charter, the Universal
Declaration of Human Rights72 and other instruments relating to
human rights and international law. The universal nature of
these rights and freedoms is beyond question.
Human rights
121. We reaffirm that all human rights are universal,
indivisible, interrelated, interdependent and mutually
reinforcing and that all human rights must be treated in a fair
and equal manner, on the same footing and with the same
emphasis. While the significance of national and regional
_______________
70

United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 1577, No. 27531.
Resolution 54/263, annex I.
72
Resolution 217 A (III).
71

39

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

particularities and various historical, cultural and religious
backgrounds must be borne in mind, all States, regardless of
their political, economic and cultural systems, have the duty to
promote and protect all human rights and fundamental
freedoms.
122. We emphasize the responsibilities of all States, in
conformity with the Charter, to respect human rights and
fundamental freedoms for all, without distinction of any kind as
to race, colour, sex, language or religion, political or other
opinion, national or social origin, property, birth or other status.
123. We resolve further to strengthen the United Nations
human rights machinery with the aim of ensuring effective
enjoyment by all of all human rights and civil, political,
economic, social and cultural rights, including the right to
development.
124. We resolve to strengthen the Office of the United Nations
High Commissioner for Human Rights, taking note of the High
Commissioner’s plan of action, to enable it to effectively carry
out its mandate to respond to the broad range of human rights
challenges facing the international community, particularly in
the areas of technical assistance and capacity-building, through
the doubling of its regular budget resources over the next five
years with a view to progressively setting a balance between
regular budget and voluntary contributions to its resources,
keeping in mind other priority programmes for developing
countries and the recruitment of highly competent staff on a
broad geographical basis and with gender balance, under the
regular budget, and we support its closer cooperation with all
relevant United Nations bodies, including the General
Assembly, the Economic and Social Council and the Security
Council.
125. We resolve to improve the effectiveness of the human
rights treaty bodies, including through more timely reporting,
improved and streamlined reporting procedures and technical
assistance to States to enhance their reporting capacities and
further enhance the implementation of their recommendations.
126. We resolve to integrate the promotion and protection of
human rights into national policies and to support the further
mainstreaming of human rights throughout the United Nations
system, as well as closer cooperation between the Office of the
United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights and all
relevant United Nations bodies.
127. We reaffirm our commitment to continue making progress
in the advancement of the human rights of the world’s indigenous
peoples at the local, national, regional and international levels,
including through consultation and collaboration with them, and
to present for adoption a final draft United Nations declaration
on the rights of indigenous peoples as soon as possible.
128. We recognize the need to pay special attention to the
human rights of women and children and undertake to advance
them in every possible way, including by bringing gender and
child-protection perspectives into the human rights agenda.
40

129. We recognize the need for persons with disabilities to be
guaranteed full enjoyment of their rights without discrimination.
We also affirm the need to finalize a comprehensive draft
convention on the rights of persons with disabilities.
130. We note that the promotion and protection of the rights of
persons belonging to national or ethnic, religious and linguistic
minorities contribute to political and social stability and peace
and enrich the cultural diversity and heritage of society.
131. We support the promotion of human rights education and
learning at all levels, including through the implementation of
the World Programme for Human Rights Education, as
appropriate, and encourage all States to develop initiatives in
this regard.
Internally displaced persons
132. We recognize the Guiding Principles on Internal
Displacement73 as an important international framework for the
protection of internally displaced persons and resolve to take
effective measures to increase the protection of internally
displaced persons.
Refugee protection and assistance
133. We commit ourselves to safeguarding the principle of
refugee protection and to upholding our responsibility in
resolving the plight of refugees, including through the support
of efforts aimed at addressing the causes of refugee movement,
bringing about the safe and sustainable return of those
populations, finding durable solutions for refugees in protracted
situations and preventing refugee movement from becoming a
source of tension among States. We reaffirm the principle of
solidarity and burden-sharing and resolve to support nations in
assisting refugee populations and their host communities.
Rule of law
134. Recognizing the need for universal adherence to and
implementation of the rule of law at both the national and
international levels, we:
(a) Reaffirm our commitment to the purposes and
principles of the Charter and international law and to an
international order based on the rule of law and international
law, which is essential for peaceful coexistence and cooperation
among States;
(b)

Support the annual treaty event;

(c) Encourage States that have not yet done so to
consider becoming parties to all treaties that relate to the
protection of civilians;

_______________
73

E/CN.4/1998/53/Add.2, annex.

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

(d) Call upon States to continue their efforts to eradicate
policies and practices that discriminate against women and to
adopt laws and promote practices that protect the rights of
women and promote gender equality;
(e) Support the idea of establishing a rule of law
assistance unit within the Secretariat, in accordance with
existing relevant procedures, subject to a report by the
Secretary-General to the General Assembly, so as to strengthen
United Nations activities to promote the rule of law, including
through technical assistance and capacity-building;
(f) Recognize the important role of the International
Court of Justice, the principal judicial organ of the United
Nations, in adjudicating disputes among States and the value of
its work, call upon States that have not yet done so to consider
accepting the jurisdiction of the Court in accordance with its
Statute and consider means of strengthening the Court’s work,
including by supporting the Secretary-General’s Trust Fund to
Assist States in the Settlement of Disputes through the
International Court of Justice on a voluntary basis.
Democracy
135. We reaffirm that democracy is a universal value based on
the freely expressed will of people to determine their own
political, economic, social and cultural systems and their full
participation in all aspects of their lives. We also reaffirm that
while democracies share common features, there is no single
model of democracy, that it does not belong to any country or
region, and reaffirm the necessity of due respect for sovereignty
and the right of self-determination. We stress that democracy,
development and respect for all human rights and fundamental
freedoms are interdependent and mutually reinforcing.
136. We renew our commitment to support democracy by
strengthening countries’ capacity to implement the principles
and practices of democracy and resolve to strengthen the
capacity of the United Nations to assist Member States upon
their request. We welcome the establishment of a Democracy
Fund at the United Nations. We note that the advisory board to
be established should reflect diverse geographical representation.
We invite the Secretary-General to help to ensure that practical
arrangements for the Democracy Fund take proper account of
existing United Nations activity in this field.
137. We invite interested Member States to give serious
consideration to contributing to the Fund.

should, as appropriate, encourage and help States to exercise
this responsibility and support the United Nations in
establishing an early warning capability.
139. The international community, through the United Nations,
also has the responsibility to use appropriate diplomatic,
humanitarian and other peaceful means, in accordance with
Chapters VI and VIII of the Charter, to help to protect
populations from genocide, war crimes, ethnic cleansing and
crimes against humanity. In this context, we are prepared to take
collective action, in a timely and decisive manner, through the
Security Council, in accordance with the Charter, including
Chapter VII, on a case-by-case basis and in cooperation with
relevant regional organizations as appropriate, should peaceful
means be inadequate and national authorities are manifestly
failing to protect their populations from genocide, war crimes,
ethnic cleansing and crimes against humanity. We stress the
need for the General Assembly to continue consideration of the
responsibility to protect populations from genocide, war crimes,
ethnic cleansing and crimes against humanity and its
implications, bearing in mind the principles of the Charter and
international law. We also intend to commit ourselves, as
necessary and appropriate, to helping States build capacity to
protect their populations from genocide, war crimes, ethnic
cleansing and crimes against humanity and to assisting those
which are under stress before crises and conflicts break out.
140. We fully support the mission of the Special Adviser of the
Secretary-General on the Prevention of Genocide.
Children’s rights
141. We express dismay at the increasing number of children
involved in and affected by armed conflict, as well as all other
forms of violence, including domestic violence, sexual abuse
and exploitation and trafficking. We support cooperation
policies aimed at strengthening national capacities to improve
the situation of those children and to assist in their rehabilitation
and reintegration into society.
142. We commit ourselves to respecting and ensuring the rights
of each child without discrimination of any kind, irrespective of
the race, colour, sex, language, religion, political or other
opinion, national, ethnic or social origin, property, disability,
birth or other status of the child or his or her parent(s) or legal
guardian(s). We call upon States to consider as a priority
becoming a party to the Convention on the Rights of the
Child.70

Responsibility to protect populations from genocide, war
crimes, ethnic cleansing and crimes against humanity

Human security

138. Each individual State has the responsibility to protect its
populations from genocide, war crimes, ethnic cleansing and
crimes against humanity. This responsibility entails the
prevention of such crimes, including their incitement, through
appropriate and necessary means. We accept that responsibility
and will act in accordance with it. The international community

143. We stress the right of people to live in freedom and
dignity, free from poverty and despair. We recognize that all
individuals, in particular vulnerable people, are entitled to
freedom from fear and freedom from want, with an equal
opportunity to enjoy all their rights and fully develop their
human potential. To this end, we commit ourselves to
41

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

discussing and defining the notion of human security in the
General Assembly.
Culture of peace and initiatives on dialogue among cultures,
civilizations and religions
144. We reaffirm the Declaration and Programme of Action on
a Culture of Peace74 as well as the Global Agenda for Dialogue
among Civilizations and its Programme of Action75 adopted by
the General Assembly and the value of different initiatives on
dialogue among cultures and civilizations, including the
dialogue on interfaith cooperation. We commit ourselves to
taking action to promote a culture of peace and dialogue at the
local, national, regional and international levels and request the
Secretary-General to explore enhancing implementation
mechanisms and to follow up on those initiatives. In this regard,
we also welcome the Alliance of Civilizations initiative
announced by the Secretary-General on 14 July 2005.
145. We underline that sports can foster peace and
development and can contribute to an atmosphere of tolerance
and understanding, and we encourage discussions in the
General Assembly for proposals leading to a plan of action on
sport and development.
V.

Strengthening the United Nations

146. We reaffirm our commitment to strengthen the United
Nations with a view to enhancing its authority and efficiency, as
well as its capacity to address effectively, and in accordance
with the purposes and principles of the Charter, the full range of
challenges of our time. We are determined to reinvigorate the
intergovernmental organs of the United Nations and to adapt
them to the needs of the twenty-first century.
147. We stress that, in order to efficiently perform their
respective mandates as provided under the Charter, United
Nations bodies should develop good cooperation and
coordination in the common endeavour of building a more
effective United Nations.
148. We emphasize the need to provide the United Nations
with adequate and timely resources with a view to enabling it to
carry out its mandates. A reformed United Nations must be
responsive to the entire membership, faithful to its founding
principles and adapted to carrying out its mandate.
General Assembly
149. We reaffirm the central position of the General Assembly
as the chief deliberative, policymaking and representative organ
of the United Nations, as well as the role of the Assembly in the

_______________
74
75

Resolutions 53/243 A and B.
See resolution 56/6.

42

process of standard-setting and the codification of international
law.
150. We welcome the measures adopted by the General
Assembly with a view to strengthening its role and authority
and the role and leadership of the President of the Assembly
and, to that end, we call for their full and speedy
implementation.
151. We call for strengthening the relationship between the
General Assembly and the other principal organs to ensure
better coordination on topical issues that require coordinated
action by the United Nations, in accordance with their
respective mandates.
Security Council
152. We reaffirm that Member States have conferred on the
Security Council primary responsibility for the maintenance of
international peace and security, acting on their behalf, as
provided for by the Charter.
153. We support early reform of the Security Council – an
essential element of our overall effort to reform the United
Nations – in order to make it more broadly representative,
efficient and transparent and thus to further enhance its
effectiveness and the legitimacy and implementation of its
decisions. We commit ourselves to continuing our efforts to
achieve a decision to this end and request the General Assembly
to review progress on the reform set out above by the end of
2005.
154. We recommend that the Security Council continue to
adapt its working methods so as to increase the involvement of
States not members of the Council in its work, as appropriate,
enhance its accountability to the membership and increase the
transparency of its work.
Economic and Social Council
155. We reaffirm the role that the Charter and the General
Assembly have vested in the Economic and Social Council and
recognize the need for a more effective Economic and Social
Council as a principal body for coordination, policy review,
policy dialogue and recommendations on issues of economic
and social development, as well as for implementation of the
international development goals agreed at the major United
Nations conferences and summits, including the Millennium
Development Goals. To achieve these objectives, the Council
should:
(a) Promote global dialogue and partnership on global
policies and trends in the economic, social, environmental and
humanitarian fields. For this purpose, the Council should serve
as a quality platform for high-level engagement among Member
States and with the international financial institutions, the
private sector and civil society on emerging global trends,
policies and action and develop its ability to respond better and

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

more rapidly to developments in the international economic,
environmental and social fields;
(b) Hold a biennial high-level Development Cooperation
Forum to review trends in international development cooperation,
including strategies, policies and financing, promote greater
coherence among the development activities of different
development partners and strengthen the links between the
normative and operational work of the United Nations;
(c) Ensure follow-up of the outcomes of the major
United Nations conferences and summits, including the
internationally agreed development goals, and hold annual
ministerial-level substantive reviews to assess progress, drawing
on its functional and regional commissions and other
international institutions, in accordance with their respective
mandates;
(d) Support and complement international efforts aimed
at addressing humanitarian emergencies, including natural
disasters, in order to promote an improved, coordinated
response from the United Nations;
(e) Play a major role in the overall coordination of
funds, programmes and agencies, ensuring coherence among
them and avoiding duplication of mandates and activities.
156. We stress that in order to fully perform the above
functions, the organization of work, the agenda and the current
methods of work of the Economic and Social Council should be
adapted.
Human Rights Council
157. Pursuant to our commitment to further strengthen the
United Nations human rights machinery, we resolve to create a
Human Rights Council.
158. The Council will be responsible for promoting universal
respect for the protection of all human rights and fundamental
freedoms for all, without distinction of any kind and in a fair
and equal manner.
159. The Council should address situations of violations of
human rights, including gross and systematic violations, and
make recommendations thereon. It should also promote
effective coordination and the mainstreaming of human rights
within the United Nations system.
160. We request the President of the General Assembly to
conduct open, transparent and inclusive negotiations, to be
completed as soon as possible during the sixtieth session, with
the aim of establishing the mandate, modalities, functions, size,
composition, membership, working methods and procedures of
the Council.
Secretariat and management reform
161. We recognize that in order to effectively comply with the
principles and objectives of the Charter, we need an efficient,

effective and accountable Secretariat. Its staff shall act in
accordance with Article 100 of the Charter, in a culture of
organizational accountability, transparency and integrity.
Consequently we:
(a) Recognize the ongoing reform measures carried out
by the Secretary-General to strengthen accountability and
oversight, improve management performance and transparency
and reinforce ethical conduct, and invite him to report to the
General Assembly on the progress made in their implementation;
(b) Emphasize the importance of establishing effective
and efficient mechanisms for responsibility and accountability
of the Secretariat;
(c) Urge the Secretary-General to ensure that the
highest standards of efficiency, competence, and integrity shall
be the paramount consideration in the employment of the staff,
with due regard to the principle of equitable geographical
distribution, in accordance with Article 101 of the Charter;
(d) Welcome the Secretary-General’s efforts to ensure
ethical conduct, more extensive financial disclosure for United
Nations officials and enhanced protection for those who reveal
wrongdoing within the Organization. We urge the SecretaryGeneral to scrupulously apply the existing standards of conduct
and develop a system-wide code of ethics for all United Nations
personnel. In this regard, we request the Secretary-General to
submit details on an ethics office with independent status, which
he intends to create, to the General Assembly at its sixtieth
session;
(e) Pledge to provide the United Nations with adequate
resources, on a timely basis, to enable the Organization to
implement its mandates and achieve its objectives, having
regard to the priorities agreed by the General Assembly and the
need to respect budget discipline. We stress that all Member
States should meet their obligations with regard to the expenses
of the Organization;
(f) Strongly urge the Secretary-General to make the
best and most efficient use of resources in accordance with clear
rules and procedures agreed by the General Assembly, in the
interest of all Member States, by adopting the best management
practices, including effective use of information and
communication technologies, with a view to increasing efficiency
and enhancing organizational capacity, concentrating on those
tasks that reflect the agreed priorities of the Organization.
162. We reaffirm the role of the Secretary-General as the chief
administrative officer of the Organization, in accordance with
Article 97 of the Charter. We request the Secretary-General to
make proposals to the General Assembly for its consideration
on the conditions and measures necessary for him to carry out
his managerial responsibilities effectively.
163. We commend the Secretary-General’s previous and
ongoing efforts to enhance the effective management of the
United Nations and his commitment to update the Organization.
43

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

Bearing in mind our responsibility as Member States, we
emphasize the need to decide on additional reforms in order to
make more efficient use of the financial and human resources
available to the Organization and thus better comply with its
principles, objectives and mandates. We call on the SecretaryGeneral to submit proposals for implementing management
reforms to the General Assembly for consideration and decision
in the first quarter of 2006, which will include the following
elements:
(a) We will ensure that the United Nations budgetary,
financial and human resource policies, regulations and rules
respond to the current needs of the Organization and enable the
efficient and effective conduct of its work, and request the
Secretary-General to provide an assessment and
recommendations to the General Assembly for decision during
the first quarter of 2006. The assessment and recommendations
of the Secretary-General should take account of the measures
already under way for the reform of human resources
management and the budget process;
(b) We resolve to strengthen and update the programme
of work of the United Nations so that it responds to the
contemporary requirements of Member States. To this end, the
General Assembly and other relevant organs will review all
mandates older than five years originating from resolutions of
the General Assembly and other organs, which would be
complementary to the existing periodic reviews of activities.
The General Assembly and the other organs should complete
and take the necessary decisions arising from this review during
2006. We request the Secretary-General to facilitate this review
with analysis and recommendations, including on the
opportunities for programmatic shifts that could be considered
for early General Assembly consideration;
(c) A detailed proposal on the framework for a one-time
staff buyout to improve personnel structure and quality,
including an indication of costs involved and mechanisms to
ensure that it achieves its intended purpose.
164. We recognize the urgent need to substantially improve the
United Nations oversight and management processes. We
emphasize the importance of ensuring the operational
independence of the Office of Internal Oversight Services.
Therefore:
(a) The expertise, capacity and resources of the Office
of Internal Oversight Services in respect of audit and
investigations will be significantly strengthened as a matter of
urgency;
(b) We request the Secretary-General to submit an
independent external evaluation of the auditing and oversight
system of the United Nations, including the specialized agencies,
including the roles and responsibilities of management, with due
regard to the nature of the auditing and oversight bodies in
question. This evaluation will take place within the context of
the comprehensive review of the governance arrangements. We
44

ask the General Assembly to adopt measures during its sixtieth
session at the earliest possible stage, based on the consideration
of recommendations of the evaluation and those made by the
Secretary-General;
(c) We recognize that additional measures are needed to
enhance the independence of the oversight structures. We
therefore request the Secretary-General to submit detailed
proposals to the General Assembly at its sixtieth session for its
early consideration on the creation of an independent oversight
advisory committee, including its mandate, composition,
selection process and qualification of experts;
(d) We authorize the Office of Internal Oversight
Services to examine the feasibility of expanding its services to
provide internal oversight to United Nations agencies that
request such services in such a way as to ensure that the
provision of internal oversight services to the Secretariat will
not be compromised.
165. We insist on the highest standards of behaviour from all
United Nations personnel and support the considerable efforts
under way with respect to the implementation of the SecretaryGeneral’s policy of zero tolerance regarding sexual exploitation
and abuse by United Nations personnel, both at Headquarters
and in the field. We encourage the Secretary-General to submit
proposals to the General Assembly leading to a comprehensive
approach to victims’ assistance by 31 December 2005.
166. We encourage the Secretary-General and all decisionmaking bodies to take further steps in mainstreaming a gender
perspective in the policies and decisions of the Organization.
167. We strongly condemn all attacks against the safety and
security of personnel engaged in United Nations activities. We
call upon States to consider becoming parties to the Convention
on the Safety of United Nations and Associated Personnel76 and
stress the need to conclude negotiations on a protocol expanding
the scope of legal protection during the sixtieth session of the
General Assembly.
System-wide coherence
168. We recognize that the United Nations brings together a
unique wealth of expertise and resources on global issues. We
commend the extensive experience and expertise of the various
development-related organizations, agencies, funds and
programmes of the United Nations system in their diverse and
complementary fields of activity and their important contributions
to the achievement of the Millennium Development Goals and
the other development objectives established by various United
Nations conferences.
169. We support stronger system-wide coherence by
implementing the following measures:
_______________
76

United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 2051, No. 35457.

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

•

Policy
•

Strengthening linkages between the normative work
of the United Nations system and its operational
activities

•

Coordinating our representation on the governing
boards of the various development and humanitarian
agencies so as to ensure that they pursue a coherent
policy in assigning mandates and allocating
resources throughout the system

•

Ensuring that the main horizontal policy themes,
such as sustainable development, human rights and
gender, are taken into account in decision-making
throughout the United Nations

Operational activities
•

•

Implementing current reforms aimed at a more
effective, efficient, coherent, coordinated and betterperforming United Nations country presence with a
strengthened role for the senior resident official,
whether special representative, resident coordinator
or humanitarian coordinator, including appropriate
authority, resources and accountability, and a
common management, programming and
monitoring framework
Inviting the Secretary-General to launch work to
further strengthen the management and coordination
of United Nations operational activities so that they
can make an even more effective contribution to the
achievement of the internationally agreed
development goals, including the Millennium
Development Goals, including proposals for
consideration by Member States for more tightly
managed entities in the fields of development,
humanitarian assistance and the environment

Humanitarian assistance
•

Upholding and respecting the humanitarian
principles of humanity, neutrality, impartiality and
independence and ensuring that humanitarian actors
have safe and unhindered access to populations in
need in conformity with the relevant provisions of
international law and national laws

•

Supporting the efforts of countries, in particular
developing countries, to strengthen their capacities
at all levels in order to prepare for and respond
rapidly to natural disasters and mitigate their impact

•

Strengthening the effectiveness of the United
Nations humanitarian response, inter alia, by
improving the timeliness and predictability of
humanitarian funding, in part by improving the
Central Emergency Revolving Fund

Further developing and improving, as required,
mechanisms for the use of emergency standby
capacities, under the auspices of the United Nations,
for a timely response to humanitarian emergencies

Environmental activities
•

Recognizing the need for more efficient
environmental activities in the United Nations
system, with enhanced coordination, improved
policy advice and guidance, strengthened scientific
knowledge, assessment and cooperation, better
treaty compliance, while respecting the legal
autonomy of the treaties, and better integration of
environmental activities in the broader sustainable
development framework at the operational level,
including through capacity-building, we agree to
explore the possibility of a more coherent
institutional framework to address this need,
including a more integrated structure, building on
existing institutions and internationally agreed
instruments, as well as the treaty bodies and the
specialized agencies

Regional organizations
170. We support a stronger relationship between the United
Nations and regional and subregional organizations, pursuant to
Chapter VIII of the Charter, and therefore resolve:
(a) To expand consultation and cooperation between the
United Nations and regional and subregional organizations
through formalized agreements between the respective
secretariats and, as appropriate, involvement of regional
organizations in the work of the Security Council;
(b) To ensure that regional organizations that have a
capacity for the prevention of armed conflict or peacekeeping
consider the option of placing such capacity in the framework of
the United Nations Standby Arrangements System;
(c) To strengthen cooperation in the economic, social
and cultural fields.
Cooperation between the United Nations and parliaments
171. We call for strengthened cooperation between the United
Nations and national and regional parliaments, in particular
through the Inter-Parliamentary Union, with a view to
furthering all aspects of the Millennium Declaration in all fields
of the work of the United Nations and ensuring the effective
implementation of United Nations reform.
Participation of local authorities, the private sector and civil
society, including non-governmental organizations
172. We welcome the positive contributions of the private
sector and civil society, including non-governmental
45

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

organizations, in the promotion and implementation of
development and human rights programmes and stress the
importance of their continued engagement with Governments,
the United Nations and other international organizations in these
key areas.
173. We welcome the dialogue between those organizations
and Member States, as reflected in the first informal interactive
hearings of the General Assembly with representatives of nongovernmental organizations, civil society and the private sector.
174. We underline the important role of local authorities in
contributing to the achievement of the internationally agreed
development goals, including the Millennium Development
Goals.
175. We encourage responsible business practices, such as
those promoted by the Global Compact.

46

Charter of the United Nations
176. Considering that the Trusteeship Council no longer meets
and has no remaining functions, we should delete Chapter XIII
of the Charter and references to the Council in Chapter XII.
177. Taking into account General Assembly resolution 50/52 of
11 December 1995 and recalling the related discussions
conducted in the General Assembly, bearing in mind the
profound cause for the founding of the United Nations and
looking to our common future, we resolve to delete references
to “enemy States” in Articles 53, 77 and 107 of the Charter.
178. We request the Security Council to consider the
composition, mandate and working methods of the Military
Staff Committee.

II. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Special Political
and Decolonization Committee (Fourth Committee)
Contents
Resolution
No.

Title

Page

59/281.

Comprehensive review of the whole question of peacekeeping operations in all their aspects ...................................... 48

59/300.

Comprehensive review of a strategy to eliminate future sexual exploitation and abuse in United Nations
peacekeeping operations ......................................................................................................................................... 48

47

II. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Special Political and Decolonization Committee (Fourth Committee)

RESOLUTION 59/281
Adopted at the 84th plenary meeting, on 29 March 2005, without a vote, on the
1
recommendation of the Committee (A/59/472/Add.1, para. 7)

59/281. Comprehensive review of the whole question of
peacekeeping operations in all their aspects
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 2006 (XIX) of 18 February 1965
and all other relevant resolutions,
Recalling in particular its resolution 58/315 of 1 July
2004,
Affirming that the efforts of the United Nations in the
peaceful settlement of disputes, including through its
peacekeeping operations, are indispensable,
Convinced of the need for the United Nations to continue
to improve its capabilities in the field of peacekeeping and
to enhance the effective and efficient deployment of its
peacekeeping operations,
Considering the contribution that all States Members of
the United Nations make to peacekeeping,
Noting the widespread interest in contributing to the work
of the Special Committee on Peacekeeping Operations
expressed by Member States, in particular troop-contributing
countries,
Bearing in mind the continuous necessity of preserving
the efficiency and strengthening the effectiveness of the work of
the Special Committee,
1. Welcomes the report of the Special Committee on
Peacekeeping Operations;2
2. Endorses the proposals, recommendations and
conclusions of the Special Committee, contained in
paragraphs 22 to 154 of its report;
3. Urges Member States, the Secretariat and relevant
organs of the United Nations to take all necessary steps to
implement the proposals, recommendations and conclusions of
the Special Committee;
4. Reiterates that those Member States that become
personnel contributors to the United Nations peacekeeping
operations in years to come or participate in the future in the
Special Committee for three consecutive years as observers
shall, upon request in writing to the Chairman of the Special

Committee, become members at the following session of the
Special Committee;
5. Decides that the Special Committee, in accordance
with its mandate, shall continue its efforts for a comprehensive
review of the whole question of peacekeeping operations in all
their aspects and shall review the implementation of its previous
proposals and consider any new proposals so as to enhance the
capacity of the United Nations to fulfil its responsibilities in this
field;
6. Requests the Special Committee to submit a report
on its work to the General Assembly at its sixtieth session;
7. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its
sixtieth session the item entitled “Comprehensive review of the
whole question of peacekeeping operations in all their aspects”.
RESOLUTION 59/300
Adopted at the 104th plenary meeting, on 22 June 2005, without a vote, on the
3
recommendation of the Committee (A/59/472/Add.2, para. 7)

59/300. Comprehensive review of a strategy to eliminate
future sexual exploitation and abuse in United
Nations peacekeeping operations
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 2006 (XIX) of 18 February 1965
and all other relevant resolutions,
Recalling in particular its resolution 58/315 of 1 July
2004,
Recalling its resolution 59/281 of 29 March 2005, in
which it endorsed the recommendation in paragraph 56 of the
report of the Special Committee on Peacekeeping Operations4
that the Secretary-General make available to the United Nations
membership, no later than the first week of April 2005, a
comprehensive report on the issue of sexual exploitation and
abuse by military, civilian police and civilian personnel in
United Nations peacekeeping operations,
Noting that the Secretary-General, on 24 March 2005,
transmitted to the President of the General Assembly a report of
his Adviser concerning sexual exploitation and abuse by United
Nations peacekeeping personnel,5
Affirming the need for the Organization to adopt without
delay a comprehensive strategy to eliminate future sexual
exploitation and abuse in United Nations peacekeeping
_______________

_______________
1

The draft resolution recommended in the report was sponsored in the
Committee by: Argentina, Canada, Egypt, Japan, Nigeria and Poland.
2
Official Records of the General Assembly, Fifty-ninth Session, Supplement
No. 19 (A/59/19/Rev.1).

48

3

The draft resolution recommended in the report was sponsored in the
Committee by: Argentina, Canada, Egypt, Japan, Nigeria and Poland.
4
See Official Records of the General Assembly, Fifty-ninth Session,
Supplement No. 19 (A/59/19/Rev.1), part one, chap. III, sect. D.
5
See A/59/710.

II. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Special Political and Decolonization Committee (Fourth Committee)

operations as recommended by the Special Committee and the
Adviser to the Secretary-General,
Convinced of the need for the United Nations to take
strong and effective steps in this regard,
1. Welcomes the report of the Adviser to the SecretaryGeneral;5
2. Endorses the proposals, recommendations and
conclusions of the Special Committee on Peacekeeping
Operations, contained in chapter II of the report on its 2005
resumed session;6

3. Urges Member States, the Secretariat and the
relevant organs of the United Nations to take all necessary steps
to implement the proposals, recommendations and conclusions
of the Special Committee, and supports the request of the
Special Committee to the Secretary-General that he provide a
progress report on the implementation of the recommendations
of the Special Committee at its next regular session;
4. Requests the Special Committee to include this issue
in its report to the General Assembly at its sixtieth session.

_______________
6
See Official Records of the General Assembly, Fifty-ninth Session,
Supplement No. 19 (A/59/19/Rev.1), part two.

49

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee
Contents
Resolution
No.

59/13.

Title

Page

Financing of the United Nations Mission of Support in East Timor............................................................................ 53
Resolution B .......................................................................................................................................................... 53

59/14.

Financing of the United Nations Mission in Sierra Leone.......................................................................................... 54
Resolution B .......................................................................................................................................................... 54

59/15.

Financing of the United Nations Operation in Burundi.............................................................................................. 56
Resolution B .......................................................................................................................................................... 56

59/16.

Financing of the United Nations Operation in Côte d’Ivoire ...................................................................................... 58
Resolution B .......................................................................................................................................................... 58

59/17.

Financing of the United Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti .................................................................................. 60
Resolution B .......................................................................................................................................................... 60

59/264.

Financial reports and audited financial statements, and reports of the Board of Auditors.............................................. 62
Resolution B .......................................................................................................................................................... 62

59/282.

Special subjects relating to the programme budget for the biennium 2004–2005......................................................... 63

59/283.

Administration of justice at the United Nations......................................................................................................... 65

59/284.

Financing of the United Nations Peacekeeping Force in Cyprus ................................................................................ 69
Resolution A .......................................................................................................................................................... 69
Resolution B .......................................................................................................................................................... 70

59/285.

Financing of the United Nations Organization Mission in the Democratic Republic of the Congo................................ 73
Resolution A .......................................................................................................................................................... 73
Resolution B .......................................................................................................................................................... 74

59/286.

Financing of the United Nations Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo .............................................................. 76
Resolution A .......................................................................................................................................................... 76
Resolution B .......................................................................................................................................................... 77

59/287.

Report of the Office of Internal Oversight Services on strengthening the investigation functions
in the United Nations .............................................................................................................................................. 79

59/288.

Procurement reform................................................................................................................................................ 80

59/289.

Outsourcing practices.............................................................................................................................................. 82

59/292.

Financing of the United Nations Mission in the Sudan .............................................................................................. 83

59/294.

Special subjects and questions relating to the programme budget for the biennium 2004–2005.................................... 84

59/295.

Capital master plan ................................................................................................................................................. 85

59/296.

Administrative and budgetary aspects of the financing of the United Nations peacekeeping operations:
cross-cutting issues ................................................................................................................................................. 86

59/297.

Peacekeeping Reserve Fund.................................................................................................................................... 95

51

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee
Resolution
No.

Title

Page

59/298.

Reformed procedures for determining reimbursement to Member States for contingent-owned equipment................... 95

59/299.

Financing of the United Nations Logistics Base at Brindisi, Italy ............................................................................... 96

59/301.

Support account for peacekeeping operations ........................................................................................................... 97

59/302.

Financing of the United Nations Mission in Bosnia and Herzegovina......................................................................... 99

59/303.

Financing of the United Nations Mission in Ethiopia and Eritrea ............................................................................... 99

59/304.

Financing of the United Nations Observer Mission in Georgia................................................................................. 101

59/305.

Financing of the United Nations Mission in Liberia ................................................................................................ 103

59/306.

Financing of the United Nations Disengagement Observer Force............................................................................. 105

59/307.

Financing of the United Nations Interim Force in Lebanon...................................................................................... 107

59/308.

Financing of the United Nations Mission for the Referendum in Western Sahara...................................................... 109

52

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

RESOLUTION 59/13 B
Adopted at the 104th plenary meeting, on 22 June 2005, without a vote, on the
recommendation of the Committee (A/59/531/Add.1, para. 6)1

59/13.

Financing of the United Nations Mission of
Support in East Timor
B2

The General Assembly,
Having considered the reports of the Secretary-General on
the financing of the United Nations Mission of Support in East
Timor3 and the related reports of the Advisory Committee on
Administrative and Budgetary Questions,4
Recalling Security Council resolution 1272 (1999) of
25 October 1999 regarding the establishment of the United
Nations Transitional Administration in East Timor and the
subsequent resolutions by which the Council extended the
mandate of the Transitional Administration, the last of which
was resolution 1392 (2002) of 31 January 2002, by which the
mandate was extended until 20 May 2002,
Recalling also Security Council resolution 1410 (2002) of
17 May 2002, by which the Council established the United
Nations Mission of Support in East Timor as of 20 May 2002
for an initial period of twelve months, and the subsequent
resolutions by which the Council extended the mandate of the
Mission, the last of which was resolution 1573 (2004) of
16 November 2004, by which the Council extended the
mandate of the Mission for a final period of six months until
20 May 2005,
Recalling further its resolution 54/246 A of 23 December
1999 on the financing of the United Nations Transitional
Administration in East Timor and its subsequent resolutions on
the financing of the United Nations Mission of Support in East
Timor, the latest of which was resolution 59/13 A of 29 October
2004,
Reaffirming the general principles underlying the
financing of United Nations peacekeeping operations, as stated
in General Assembly resolutions 1874 (S-IV) of 27 June 1963,
3101 (XXVIII) of 11 December 1973 and 55/235 of
23 December 2000,

Noting with appreciation that voluntary contributions
have been made to the Mission and to the Trust Fund for the
United Nations Transitional Administration in East Timor,
Mindful of the fact that it is essential to provide the
Mission with the necessary financial resources to enable it to
complete its administrative liquidation,
1. Takes note of the status of contributions to the
United Nations Transitional Administration in East Timor and
the United Nations Mission of Support in East Timor as at
15 April 2005, including the contributions outstanding in the
amount of 66.4 million United States dollars, representing some
4 per cent of the total assessed contributions, notes with concern
that only fifty-one Member States have paid their assessed
contributions in full, and urges all other Member States, in
particular those in arrears, to ensure payment of their
outstanding assessed contributions;
2. Expresses its appreciation to those Member States
that have paid their assessed contributions in full, and urges all
other Member States to make every possible effort to ensure
payment of their assessed contributions to the Transitional
Administration and the Mission in full;
3. Expresses concern at the financial situation with
regard to peacekeeping activities, in particular as regards the
reimbursements to troop contributors that bear additional
burdens owing to overdue payments by Member States of their
assessments;
4. Also expresses concern at the delay experienced by
the Secretary-General in deploying and providing adequate
resources to some recent peacekeeping missions, in particular
those in Africa;
5. Emphasizes that all future and existing peacekeeping
missions shall be given equal and non-discriminatory treatment
in respect of financial and administrative arrangements;
6. Also emphasizes that all peacekeeping missions
shall be provided with adequate resources for the effective and
efficient discharge of their respective mandates;
7. Endorses the conclusions and recommendations
contained in the report of the Advisory Committee on
Administrative and Budgetary Questions;5
Financial performance report for the period from 1 July
2003 to 30 June 2004

_______________
1

The draft resolution recommended in the report was submitted by the
Vice-Chairman of the Committee.
2
Resolution 59/13, in section VI of the Official Records of the General
Assembly, Fifty-ninth Session, Supplement No. 49 and corrigendum
(A/59/49 and A/59/49 (Vol. I)/Corr. 1), vol. I, becomes resolution 59/13 A.
3
A/59/637 and A/59/655.
4
A/59/736 and Add.17.

8. Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General on
the financial performance of the Mission for the period from
1 July 2003 to 30 June 2004;6

_______________
5
6

A/59/736/Add.17.
A/59/655.

53

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

Budget estimates for the period from 1 July 2005 to 30 June
2006
9. Decides to appropriate to the Special Account for
the United Nations Mission of Support in East Timor the
amount of 1,757,800 dollars, inclusive of 1,662,200 dollars
for the administrative liquidation of the Mission for the period
from 1 July to 31 October 2005 and 78,200 dollars for the
support account for peacekeeping operations and 17,400 dollars
for the United Nations Logistics Base for the period from 1 July
2005 to 30 June 2006;
Financing of the appropriation
10. Decides also to apportion among Member States
the amount of 1,662,200 dollars for the Mission for the period
from 1 July to 31 October 2005, in accordance with the levels
updated in General Assembly resolution 58/256 of
23 December 2003, and taking into account the scale of
assessments for 2005, as set out in its resolution 58/1 B of
23 December 2003;
11. Decides further that, in accordance with the
provisions of its resolution 973 (X) of 15 December 1955, there
shall be set off against the apportionment among Member
States, as provided for in paragraph 10 above, their respective
share in the Tax Equalization Fund of 119,400 dollars,
representing the estimated staff assessment income approved for
the Mission for the period from 1 July to 31 October 2005;
12. Decides to apportion among Member States the
amount of 78,200 dollars for the support account and the
amount of 17,400 dollars for the United Nations Logistics Base
for the period from 1 July 2005 to 30 June 2006, in accordance
with the levels updated in General Assembly resolution 58/256,
and taking into account the scale of assessments for 2005 and
2006, as set out in its resolution 58/1 B;
13. Decides also that, in accordance with the provisions
of its resolution 973 (X), there shall be set off against the
apportionment among Member States, as provided for in
paragraph 12 above, their respective share in the Tax
Equalization Fund of 12,400 dollars for the period from 1 July
2005 to 30 June 2006, comprising the prorated share of 11,000
dollars of the estimated staff assessment income approved for
the support account and the prorated share of 1,400 dollars of
the estimated staff assessment income approved for the United
Nations Logistics Base;
14. Decides further that for Member States that have
fulfilled their financial obligations to the Mission, there shall be
set off against their apportionment, as provided for in
paragraph 10 above, their respective share of the unencumbered
balance and other income in the amount of 18,065,900 dollars
in respect of the financial period ended 30 June 2004, in
accordance with the levels updated in its resolution 58/256, and
taking into account the scale of assessments for 2004, as set out
in its resolution 58/1 B;
54

15. Decides that for Member States that have not
fulfilled their financial obligations to the Mission, there shall be
set off against their outstanding obligations their respective
share of the unencumbered balance and other income in the
amount of 18,065,900 dollars in respect of the financial period
ended 30 June 2004, in accordance with the scheme set out in
paragraph 14 above;
16. Decides also that the increase of 392,100 dollars in
the estimated staff assessment income in respect of the financial
period ended 30 June 2004 shall be added to the credits from
the amount of 18,065,900 dollars referred to in paragraphs 14
and 15 above;
17. Emphasizes that no peacekeeping mission shall be
financed by borrowing funds from other active peacekeeping
missions;
18. Encourages the Secretary-General to continue to
take additional measures to ensure the safety and security of all
personnel under the auspices of the United Nations participating
in the Mission, bearing in mind paragraphs 5 and 6 of Security
Council resolution 1502 (2003) of 26 August 2003;
19. Invites voluntary contributions to the Mission in
cash and in the form of services and supplies acceptable to the
Secretary-General, to be administered, as appropriate, in
accordance with the procedure and practices established by the
General Assembly;
20. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its
sixtieth session the item entitled “Financing of the United
Nations Mission of Support in East Timor”.
RESOLUTION 59/14 B
Adopted at the 104th plenary meeting, on 22 June 2005, without a vote, on the
recommendation of the Committee (A/59/527/Add.1, para. 7)7

59/14.

Financing of the United Nations Mission in Sierra
Leone
B8

The General Assembly,
Having considered the reports of the Secretary-General on
the financing of the United Nations Mission in Sierra Leone9

_______________
7

The draft resolution recommended in the report was submitted by the
Chairman of the Committee.
8
Resolution 59/14, in section VI of the Official Records of the General
Assembly, Fifty-ninth Session, Supplement No. 49 and corrigendum
(A/59/49 and A/59/49 (Vol. I)/Corr. 1), vol. I, becomes resolution 59/14 A.
9
A/59/635 and Corr.1, A/59/758 and Corr.1 and A/59/759.

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

and the related reports of the Advisory Committee on
Administrative and Budgetary Questions,10

burdens owing to overdue payments by Member States of their
assessments;

Bearing in mind Security Council resolution 1270 (1999)
of 22 October 1999, by which the Council established the
United Nations Mission in Sierra Leone, and the subsequent
resolutions by which the Council revised and extended the
mandate of the Mission, the latest of which was resolution
1562 (2004) of 17 September 2004,

5. Also expresses concern at the delay experienced by
the Secretary-General in deploying and providing adequate
resources to some recent peacekeeping missions, in particular
those in Africa;

Recalling its resolution 53/29 of 20 November 1998 on
the financing of the United Nations Observer Mission in Sierra
Leone and subsequent resolutions on the financing of the
United Nations Mission in Sierra Leone, the latest of which was
resolution 59/14 A of 29 October 2004,
Reaffirming the general principles underlying the
financing of United Nations peacekeeping operations, as stated
in General Assembly resolutions 1874 (S-IV) of 27 June 1963,
3101 (XXVIII) of 11 December 1973 and 55/235 of
23 December 2000,
Noting with appreciation that voluntary contributions
have been made to the Mission,
Mindful of the fact that it is essential to provide the
Mission with the necessary financial resources to enable it to
fulfil its responsibilities under the relevant resolutions of the
Security Council,
1. Requests the Secretary-General to entrust the Head
of Mission with the task of formulating future budget proposals
in full accordance with the provisions of General Assembly
resolution 59/296 of 22 June 2005, as well as other relevant
resolutions;
2. Takes note of the status of contributions to the
United Nations Observer Mission in Sierra Leone and the
United Nations Mission in Sierra Leone as at 15 April 2005,
including the contributions outstanding in the amount of
94.5 million United States dollars, representing some 3 per cent
of the total assessed contributions, notes with concern that only
forty-three Member States have paid their assessed
contributions in full, and urges all other Member States, in
particular those in arrears, to ensure payment of their
outstanding assessed contributions;
3. Expresses its appreciation to those Member States
which have paid their assessed contributions in full, and urges
all other Member States to make every possible effort to ensure
payment of their assessed contributions to the Mission in full;
4. Expresses concern at the financial situation with
regard to peacekeeping activities, in particular as regards the
reimbursements to troop contributors that bear additional

6. Emphasizes that all future and existing peacekeeping
missions shall be given equal and non-discriminatory treatment
in respect of financial and administrative arrangements;
7. Also emphasizes that all peacekeeping missions
shall be provided with adequate resources for the effective and
efficient discharge of their respective mandates;
8. Reiterates its request to the Secretary-General to
make the fullest possible use of facilities and equipment at the
United Nations Logistics Base at Brindisi, Italy, in order to
minimize the costs of procurement for the Mission;
9. Endorses the conclusions and recommendations
contained in the report of the Advisory Committee on
Administrative and Budgetary Questions, 11 and requests the
Secretary-General to ensure their full implementation;
10. Requests the Secretary-General to ensure the full
implementation of the relevant provisions of its resolution
59/296;
11. Also requests the Secretary-General to take all
necessary action to ensure that the Mission is administered with
a maximum of efficiency and economy;
12. Further requests the Secretary-General, in order to
reduce the cost of employing General Service staff, to continue
efforts to recruit local staff for the Mission against General
Service posts, commensurate with the requirements of the
Mission;
Financial performance report for the period from 1 July
2003 to 30 June 2004
13. Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General on
the financial performance of the Mission for the period from
1 July 2003 to 30 June 2004;12
14. Decides to reduce the appropriation authorized for
the Mission for the period from 1 July 2003 to 30 June 2004
under the terms of its resolution 57/291 B of 18 June 2003 from
543,489,900 dollars to 509,436,300 dollars, the amount
apportioned among Member States in respect of the same
period;

_______________
_______________

11

10

12

A/59/736 and Add.9.

A/59/736/Add.9.
A/59/635 and Corr.1.

55

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

Budget estimates for the period from 1 July 2005 to 30 June
2006
15. Decides also to appropriate to the Special Account
for the United Nations Mission in Sierra Leone the amount of
113,216,400 dollars, inclusive of 89,606,400 dollars for the
maintenance of the Mission for the period from 1 July to
31 December 2005, 17,932,900 dollars for the liquidation of the
Mission for the period from 1 January to 30 June 2006,
4,642,100 dollars for the support account for peacekeeping
operations and 1,035,000 dollars for the United Nations
Logistics Base;
Financing of the appropriation
16. Decides further to apportion among Member States
the amount of 113,216,400 dollars at a monthly rate of
9,434,700 dollars, in accordance with the levels updated in
General Assembly resolution 58/256 of 23 December 2003, and
taking into account the scale of assessments for 2005 and 2006,
as set out in its resolution 58/1 B of 23 December 2003, subject
to a decision of the Security Council to extend the mandate of
the Mission;
17. Decides that, in accordance with the provisions of its
resolution 973 (X) of 15 December 1955, there shall be set off
against the apportionment among Member States, as provided
for in paragraph 16 above, their respective share in the Tax
Equalization Fund of 4,047,700 dollars, comprising the
estimated staff assessment income of 3,307,800 dollars
approved for the Mission for the period from 1 July 2005 to
30 June 2006, the prorated share of 656,100 dollars of the
estimated staff assessment income approved for the support
account and the prorated share of 83,800 dollars of the
estimated staff assessment income approved for the United
Nations Logistics Base;
18. Decides also that, for Member States that have
fulfilled their financial obligations to the Mission, there shall be
set off against their apportionment, as provided for in
paragraph 16 above, their respective share of the unencumbered
balance and other income in the amount of 54,054,600 dollars
in respect of the financial period ended 30 June 2004, in
accordance with the levels updated in General Assembly
resolution 58/256, and taking into account the scale of
assessments for 2004, as set out in its resolution 58/1 B;
19. Decides further that, for Member States that have
not fulfilled their financial obligations to the Mission, there shall
be set off against their outstanding obligations their respective
share of the unencumbered balance and other income in the
amount of 54,054,600 dollars in respect of the financial period
ended 30 June 2004, in accordance with the scheme set out in
paragraph 18 above;
20. Decides that the increase of 239,200 dollars in the
estimated staff assessment income in respect of the financial
period ended 30 June 2004 shall be added to the credits from
56

the amount of 54,054,600 dollars referred to in paragraphs 18
and 19 above;
Donation of assets to the Government of Sierra Leone
21. Approves the donation of the assets of the Mission,
with a total inventory value of 8,406,072 dollars and
corresponding residual value of 3,829,178 dollars, to the
Government of Sierra Leone;
22. Emphasizes that no peacekeeping mission shall be
financed by borrowing funds from other active peacekeeping
missions;
23. Encourages the Secretary-General to continue to
take additional measures to ensure the safety and security of all
personnel under the auspices of the United Nations participating
in the Mission, bearing in mind paragraphs 5 and 6 of Security
Council resolution 1502 (2003) of 26 August 2003;
24. Invites voluntary contributions to the Mission in
cash and in the form of services and supplies acceptable to
the Secretary-General, to be administered, as appropriate, in
accordance with the procedure and practices established by the
General Assembly;
25. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its
sixtieth session the item entitled “Financing of the United
Nations Mission in Sierra Leone”.
RESOLUTION 59/15 B
Adopted at the 104th plenary meeting, on 22 June 2005, without a vote, on the
recommendation of the Committee (A/59/528/Add.1, para. 6)13

59/15.

Financing of the United Nations Operation in
Burundi
B14

The General Assembly,
Having considered the report of the Secretary-General on
the financing of the United Nations Operation in Burundi15 and
the related reports of the Advisory Committee on
Administrative and Budgetary Questions,16
Recalling Security Council resolution 1545 (2004) of
21 May 2004, by which the Council authorized, for an initial
period of six months as from 1 June 2004, with the intention to
_______________
13

The draft resolution recommended in the report was submitted by the
Chairman of the Committee.
14
Resolution 59/15, in section VI of the Official Records of the General
Assembly, Fifty-ninth Session, Supplement No. 49 and corrigendum
(A/59/49 and A/59/49 (Vol. I)/Corr. 1), vol. I, becomes resolution 59/15 A.
15
A/59/748.
16
A/59/736 and Add.12.

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

renew it for further periods, the deployment of a peacekeeping
operation called the United Nations Operation in Burundi, and
the subsequent resolution 1577 (2004) of 1 December 2004, by
which the Council extended the mandate of the Operation until
1 June 2005,
Recalling also its resolution 58/312 of 18 June 2004 on
the financing of the Operation and its subsequent resolution
59/15 A of 29 October 2004,
Reaffirming the general principles underlying the
financing of United Nations peacekeeping operations, as stated
in General Assembly resolutions 1874 (S-IV) of 27 June 1963,
3101 (XXVIII) of 11 December 1973 and 55/235 of
23 December 2000,
Mindful of the fact that it is essential to provide the
Operation with the necessary financial resources to enable it to
fulfil its responsibilities under the relevant resolutions of the
Security Council,
1. Requests the Secretary-General to entrust the Head
of Mission with the tasks of formulating future budget proposals
in full accordance with the provisions of General Assembly
resolution 59/296 of 22 June 2005, as well as other relevant
resolutions;
2. Takes note of the status of contributions to the
United Nations Operation in Burundi as at 15 April 2005,
including the contributions outstanding in the amount of
88.7 million United States dollars, representing some
25 per cent of the total assessed contributions, notes with
concern that only forty-three Member States have paid their
assessed contributions in full, and urges all other Member
States, in particular those in arrears, to ensure payment of their
outstanding assessed contributions;
3. Expresses its appreciation to those Member States
which have paid their assessed contributions in full, and urges
all other Member States to make every possible effort to ensure
payment of their assessed contributions to the Operation in full;
4. Expresses concern at the financial situation with
regard to peacekeeping activities, in particular as regards the
reimbursements to troop contributors that bear additional
burdens owing to overdue payments by Member States of their
assessments;
5. Also expresses concern at the delay experienced by
the Secretary-General in deploying and providing adequate
resources to some recent peacekeeping missions, in particular
those in Africa;

8. Reiterates its request to the Secretary-General to
make the fullest possible use of facilities and equipment at the
United Nations Logistics Base at Brindisi, Italy, in order to
minimize the costs of procurement for the Operation;
9. Endorses the conclusions and recommendations
contained in the report of the Advisory Committee on
Administrative and Budgetary Questions,17 and requests the
Secretary-General to ensure their full implementation;
10. Requests the Secretary-General to ensure the full
implementation of the relevant provisions of its resolution
59/296;
11. Notes with concern that the Status of Forces
Agreement remains unsigned, and requests that this be finalized
as a matter of urgency;
12. Requests the Secretary-General to take all necessary
action to ensure that the Operation is administered with a
maximum of efficiency and economy;
13. Also requests the Secretary-General, in order to
reduce the cost of employing General Service staff, to continue
efforts to recruit local staff for the Operation against General
Service posts, commensurate with the requirements of the
Operation;
Expenditure report for the period from 21 April to 30 June
2004
14. Takes note of the expenditure report for the
Operation for the period from 21 April to 30 June 2004;18
15. Decides to appropriate to the Special Account for
the United Nations Operation in Burundi the amount of
49,709,300 dollars previously authorized and apportioned for
the establishment of the Operation for the period from 21 April
to 30 June 2004 under the terms of its resolution 58/312;
Budget estimates for the period from 1 July 2005 to 30 June
2006
16. Decides also to appropriate to the Special Account
for the United Nations Operation in Burundi the amount of
307,693,100 dollars for the period from 1 July 2005 to 30 June
2006, inclusive of 292,272,400 dollars for the maintenance of
the Operation, 12,609,400 dollars for the support account for
peacekeeping operations and 2,811,300 dollars for the United
Nations Logistics Base;
Financing of the appropriation

6. Emphasizes that all future and existing peacekeeping
missions shall be given equal and non-discriminatory treatment
in respect of financial and administrative arrangements;

17. Decides further to apportion among Member States
the amount of 307,693,100 dollars at a monthly rate of

7. Also emphasizes that all peacekeeping missions
shall be provided with adequate resources for the effective and
efficient discharge of their respective mandates;

_______________
17
18

A/59/736/Add.12.
A/59/748, sect. IV.

57

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

25,641,091 dollars, in accordance with the levels updated in
General Assembly resolution 58/256 of 23 December 2003 and
taking into account the scale of assessments for 2005 and 2006,
as set out in its resolution 58/1 B of 23 December 2003, subject
to a decision of the Security Council to extend the mandate of
the Operation;

25. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its
sixtieth session the item entitled “Financing of the United
Nations Operation in Burundi”.

18. Decides that, in accordance with the provisions of its
resolution 973 (X) of 15 December 1955, there shall be set off
against the apportionment among Member States, as provided
for in paragraph 17 above, their respective share in the Tax
Equalization Fund of 10,306,800 dollars, comprising the
estimated staff assessment income of 8,297,100 dollars
approved for the Operation for the period from 1 July 2005 to
30 June 2006, the prorated share of 1,782,300 dollars of the
estimated staff assessment income approved for the support
account and the prorated share of 227,400 dollars of the
estimated staff assessment income approved for the United
Nations Logistics Base;

Adopted at the 104th plenary meeting, on 22 June 2005, without a vote, on the
recommendation of the Committee (A/59/529/Add.1, para. 6)19

19. Decides also that, for Member States that have
fulfilled their financial obligations to the Operation, there shall
be set off against their apportionment, as provided for in
paragraph 17 above, their respective share of the unencumbered
balance and interest income in the amount of 9,470,200 dollars
in respect of the financial period ended 30 June 2004, in
accordance with the levels updated in its resolution 58/256, and
taking into account the scale of assessments for 2004, as set out
in its resolution 58/1 B;
20. Decides further that, for Member States that have
not fulfilled their financial obligations to the Operation, there
shall be set off against their outstanding obligations their
respective share of the unencumbered balance and interest
income in the amount of 9,470,200 dollars in respect of the
financial period ended 30 June 2004, in accordance with the
scheme set out in paragraph 19 above;
21. Decides that the decrease of 33,900 dollars in the
estimated staff assessment income in respect of the financial
period ended 30 June 2004 shall be set off against the credits
from the amount of 9,470,200 dollars referred to in
paragraphs 19 and 20 above;
22. Emphasizes that no peacekeeping mission shall be
financed by borrowing funds from other active peacekeeping
missions;
23. Encourages the Secretary-General to continue to
take additional measures to ensure the safety and security of all
personnel under the auspices of the United Nations participating
in the Operation, bearing in mind paragraphs 5 and 6 of
Security Council resolution 1502 (2003) of 26 August 2003;
24. Invites voluntary contributions to the Operation in
cash and in the form of services and supplies acceptable to the
Secretary-General, to be administered, as appropriate, in
accordance with the procedure and practices established by the
General Assembly;
58

RESOLUTION 59/16 B

59/16.

Financing of the United Nations Operation in Côte
d’Ivoire
B20

The General Assembly,
Having considered the report of the Secretary-General on
the financing of the United Nations Operation in Côte d’Ivoire21
and the related reports of the Advisory Committee on
Administrative and Budgetary Questions,22
Recalling Security Council resolution 1528 (2004) of
27 February 2004, by which the Council established the United
Nations Operation in Côte d’Ivoire for an initial period of
twelve months as from 4 April 2004, and the subsequent
resolutions by which the Council extended the mandate of the
Operation, the latest of which was resolution 1600 (2005) of
4 May 2005,
Recalling also its resolution 58/310 of 18 June 2004 on
the financing of the Operation and its subsequent resolution
59/16 A of 29 October 2004,
Reaffirming the general principles underlying the
financing of United Nations peacekeeping operations, as stated
in General Assembly resolutions 1874 (S-IV) of 27 June 1963,
3101 (XXVIII) of 11 December 1973 and 55/235 of
23 December 2000,
Mindful of the fact that it is essential to provide the
Operation with the necessary financial resources to enable it to
fulfil its responsibilities under the relevant resolutions of the
Security Council,
1. Requests the Secretary-General to entrust the Head
of Mission with the task of formulating future budget proposals
in full accordance with the provisions of General Assembly
resolution 59/296 of 22 June 2005, as well as other relevant
resolutions;
_______________
19

The draft resolution recommended in the report was submitted by the
Vice-Chairman of the Committee.
20
Resolution 59/16, in section VI of the Official Records of the General
Assembly, Fifty-ninth Session, Supplement No. 49 and corrigendum
(A/59/49 and A/59/49 (Vol. I)/Corr. 1), vol. I, becomes resolution 59/16 A.
21
A/59/750.
22
A/59/736 and Add.15.

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

2. Takes note of the status of contributions to the
United Nations Operation in Côte d’Ivoire as at 15 April 2005,
including the contributions outstanding in the amount of
43.8 million United States dollars, representing some
11 per cent of the total assessed contributions, notes with
concern that only fifty-three Member States have paid their
assessed contributions in full, and urges all other Member
States, in particular those in arrears, to ensure payment of their
outstanding assessed contributions;
3. Expresses its appreciation to those Member States
which have paid their assessed contributions in full, and urges
all other Member States to make every possible effort to ensure
payment of their assessed contributions to the Operation in full;
4. Expresses concern at the financial situation with
regard to peacekeeping activities, in particular as regards the
reimbursements to troop contributors that bear additional
burdens owing to overdue payments by Member States of their
assessments;
5. Also expresses concern at the delay experienced by
the Secretary-General in deploying and providing adequate
resources to some recent peacekeeping missions, in particular
those in Africa;
6. Emphasizes that all future and existing peacekeeping
missions shall be given equal and non-discriminatory treatment
in respect of financial and administrative arrangements;
7. Also emphasizes that all peacekeeping missions
shall be provided with adequate resources for the effective and
efficient discharge of their respective mandates;
8. Reiterates its request to the Secretary-General to
make the fullest possible use of facilities and equipment at the
United Nations Logistics Base at Brindisi, Italy, in order to
minimize the costs of procurement for the Operation;
9. Endorses the conclusions and recommendations
contained in the report of the Advisory Committee on
Administrative and Budgetary Questions,23 and requests the
Secretary-General to ensure their full implementation;
10. Requests the Secretary-General to ensure the full
implementation of the relevant provisions of its resolution
59/296;
11. Also requests the Secretary-General to take all
necessary action to ensure that the Operation is administered
with a maximum of efficiency and economy;
12. Further requests the Secretary-General, in order to
reduce the cost of employing General Service staff, to continue
efforts to recruit local staff for the Operation against General

Service posts, commensurate with the requirements of the
Operation;
Expenditure report for the period from 4 April to 30 June
2004
13. Takes note of the expenditure report for the
Operation for the period from 4 April to 30 June 2004;24
Budget estimates for the period from 1 July 2005 to 30 June
2006
14. Decides to appropriate to the Special Account for
the United Nations Operation in Côte d’Ivoire the amount of
386,892,500 dollars for the period from 1 July 2005 to 30 June
2006, inclusive of 367,501,000 dollars for the maintenance of
the Operation, 15,856,300 dollars for the support account for
peacekeeping operations and 3,535,200 dollars for the United
Nations Logistics Base;
Financing of the appropriation
15. Decides also to apportion among Member States the
amount of 386,892,500 dollars at a monthly rate of 32,241,041
dollars, in accordance with the levels updated in General
Assembly resolution 58/256 of 23 December 2003, and taking
into account the scale of assessments for 2005 and 2006, as set
out in Assembly resolution 58/1 B of 23 December 2003,
subject to a decision of the Security Council to extend the
mandate of the Operation;
16. Decides further that, in accordance with the
provisions of its resolution 973 (X) of 15 December 1955, there
shall be set off against the apportionment among Member
States, as provided for in paragraph 15 above, their respective
share in the Tax Equalization Fund of 10,150,900 dollars,
comprising the estimated staff assessment income of 7,623,600
dollars approved for the Operation for the period from 1 July
2005 to 30 June 2006, the prorated share of 2,241,300 dollars of
the estimated staff assessment income approved for the support
account and the prorated share of 286,000 dollars of the
estimated staff assessment income approved for the United
Nations Logistics Base;
17. Decides that, for Member States that have fulfilled
their financial obligations to the Operation, there shall be set off
against their apportionment, as provided for in paragraph 15
above, their respective share of the unencumbered balance and
other income in the amount of 13,328,900 dollars in respect of
the financial period ended 30 June 2004, in accordance with the
levels updated in its resolution 58/256, and taking into account
the scale of assessments for 2004, as set out in its resolution
58/1 B;

_______________

_______________

23

24

A/59/736/Add.15.

A/59/750, sect. IV.

59

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

18. Decides also that, for Member States that have not
fulfilled their financial obligations to the Operation, there shall
be set off against their outstanding obligations their respective
share of the unencumbered balance and other income in the
amount of 13,328,900 dollars in respect of the financial period
ended 30 June 2004, in accordance with the scheme set out in
paragraph 17 above;
19. Decides further that the decrease of 219,600 dollars
in the estimated staff assessment income in respect of the
financial period ended 30 June 2004 shall be set off against the
credits from the amount of 13,328,900 dollars referred to in
paragraphs 17 and 18 above;
20. Emphasizes that no peacekeeping mission shall be
financed by borrowing funds from other active peacekeeping
missions;
21. Encourages the Secretary-General to continue to
take additional measures to ensure the safety and security of all
personnel under the auspices of the United Nations participating
in the Operation, bearing in mind paragraphs 5 and 6 of
Security Council resolution 1502 (2003) of 26 August 2003;
22. Invites voluntary contributions to the Operation in
cash and in the form of services and supplies acceptable to the
Secretary-General, to be administered, as appropriate, in
accordance with the procedure and practices established by the
General Assembly;
23. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its
sixtieth session the item entitled “Financing of the United
Nations Operation in Côte d’Ivoire”.
RESOLUTION 59/17 B
Adopted at the 104th plenary meeting, on 22 June 2005, without a vote, on the
recommendation of the Committee (A/59/530/Add.1, para. 7)25

59/17.

Financing of the United Nations Stabilization
Mission in Haiti
B26

The General Assembly,
Having considered the report of the Secretary-General on
the financing of the United Nations Stabilization Mission in

_______________

Haiti27 and the related reports of the Advisory Committee on
Administrative and Budgetary Questions,28
Recalling Security Council resolution 1529 (2004) of
29 February 2004, by which the Council declared its readiness
to establish a United Nations stabilization force to support
continuation of a peaceful and constitutional political process
and the maintenance of a secure and stable environment in
Haiti,
Recalling also Security Council resolution 1542 (2004) of
30 April 2004, by which the Council decided to establish the
United Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti for an initial
period of six months, and the subsequent resolution 1576 (2004)
of 29 November 2004, by which the Council extended the
mandate of the Mission until 1 June 2005,
Recalling further its resolution 58/311 of 18 June 2004 on
the financing of the Mission and its subsequent resolution
59/17 A of 29 October 2004,
Reaffirming the general principles underlying the
financing of United Nations peacekeeping operations, as stated
in General Assembly resolutions 1874 (S-IV) of 27 June 1963,
3101 (XXVIII) of 11 December 1973 and 55/235 of
23 December 2000,
Mindful of the fact that it is essential to provide the
Mission with the necessary financial resources to enable it to
fulfil its responsibilities under the relevant resolutions of the
Security Council,
1. Requests the Secretary-General to entrust the Head
of Mission with the task of formulating future budget proposals
in full accordance with the provisions of General Assembly
resolution 59/296 of 22 June 2005, as well as other relevant
resolutions;
2. Takes note of the status of contributions to the
United Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti as at 15 April
2005, including the contributions outstanding in the amount of
80.8 million United States dollars, representing some
35 per cent of the total assessed contributions, notes with
concern that only forty-eight Member States have paid their
assessed contributions in full, and urges all other Member
States, in particular those in arrears, to ensure payment of their
outstanding assessed contributions;
3. Expresses its appreciation to those Member States
which have paid their assessed contributions in full, and urges
all other Member States to make every possible effort to ensure
payment of their assessed contributions to the Mission in full;
4. Expresses concern at the financial situation with
regard to peacekeeping activities, in particular as regards the

25

The draft resolution recommended in the report was submitted by the
Rapporteur of the Committee.
26
Resolution 59/17, in section VI of the Official Records of the General
Assembly, Fifty-ninth Session, Supplement No. 49 and corrigendum
(A/59/49 and A/59/49 (Vol. I)/Corr. 1), vol. I, becomes resolution 59/17 A.

60

_______________
27
28

A/59/745.
A/59/736 and Add.13.

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

reimbursements to troop contributors that bear additional
burdens owing to overdue payments by Member States of their
assessments;
5. Also expresses concern at the delay experienced by
the Secretary-General in deploying and providing adequate
resources to some recent peacekeeping missions, in particular
those in Africa;
6. Emphasizes that all future and existing peacekeeping
missions shall be given equal and non-discriminatory treatment
in respect of financial and administrative arrangements;
7. Also emphasizes that all peacekeeping missions
shall be provided with adequate resources for the effective and
efficient discharge of their respective mandates;
8. Reiterates its request to the Secretary-General to
make the fullest possible use of facilities and equipment at the
United Nations Logistics Base at Brindisi, Italy, in order to
minimize the costs of procurement for the Mission;
9. Endorses the conclusions and recommendations
contained in the report of the Advisory Committee on
Administrative and Budgetary Questions, 29 and requests the
Secretary-General to ensure their full implementation, subject to
the provisions of the present resolution;
10. Requests the Secretary-General to ensure the full
implementation of relevant provisions of its resolution 59/296;
11. Notes paragraph 20 of the report of the Advisory
Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions;29
12. Requests the Secretary-General to address, as a
matter of urgency, structural and management problems that
remain to be thoroughly resolved as previously determined by
the General Assembly;
13. Decides that the protocol functions shall be
absorbed within the existing staff strength of the Mission;
14. Requests the Secretary-General to utilize expertise
existing within the United Nations system that could support the
Mission in carrying out substantive activities mandated by the
Security Council;
15. Also requests the Secretary-General to take all
necessary action to ensure that the Mission is administered with
a maximum of efficiency and economy;

Expenditure report for the period from 1 May to 30 June
2004
17. Takes note of the expenditure report for the Mission
for the period from 1 May to 30 June 2004;30
Budget estimates for the period from 1 July 2005 to 30 June
2006
18. Decides to appropriate to the Special Account for
the United Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti the amount of
494,887,000 dollars for the period from 1 July 2005 to 30 June
2006, inclusive of 470,073,600 dollars for the maintenance of
the Mission, 20,289,800 dollars for the support account for
peacekeeping operations and 4,523,600 dollars for the United
Nations Logistics Base;
Financing of the appropriation
19. Decides also to apportion among Member States the
amount of 494,887,000 dollars at a monthly rate of 41,240,583
dollars, in accordance with the levels updated in General
Assembly resolution 58/256 of 23 December 2003, taking into
account the scale of assessments for 2005 and 2006 as set out in
its resolution 58/1 B of 23 December 2003, subject to a decision
of the Security Council to extend the mandate of the Mission;
20. Decides further that, in accordance with the
provisions of its resolution 973 (X) of 15 December 1955, there
shall be set off against the apportionment among Member
States, as provided for in paragraph 19 above, their respective
share in the Tax Equalization Fund of 13,303,300 dollars,
comprising the estimated staff assessment income of
10,069,500 dollars approved for the Mission, the prorated share
of 2,867,900 dollars of the estimated staff assessment income
approved for the support account and the prorated share of
365,900 dollars of the estimated staff assessment income
approved for the United Nations Logistics Base;
21. Decides that, for Member States that have fulfilled
their financial obligations to the Mission, there shall be set off
against their apportionment, as provided for in paragraph 19
above, their respective share of the unencumbered balance of
14,703,700 dollars in respect of the financial period ended
30 June 2004, in accordance with the levels updated in General
Assembly resolution 58/256, taking into account the scale of
assessments for 2004 as set out in its resolution 58/1 B;

16. Further requests the Secretary-General, in order to
reduce the cost of employing General Service staff, to continue
efforts to recruit local staff for the Mission against General
Service posts, commensurate with the requirements of the
Mission;

22. Decides also that, for Member States that have not
fulfilled their financial obligations to the Mission, there shall be
set off against their outstanding obligations their respective
share of the unencumbered balance of 14,703,700 dollars in
respect of the financial period ended 30 June 2004, in
accordance with the scheme set out in paragraph 21 above;

_______________

_______________

29

30

A/59/736/Add.13.

A/59/745, sect. IV.

61

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

23. Decides further that the decrease of 326,300 dollars
in the estimated staff assessment income in respect of the
financial period ended 30 June 2004 shall be set off against the
credits from the amount of 14,703,700 dollars referred to in
paragraphs 21 and 22 above;
24. Emphasizes that no peacekeeping mission shall be
financed by borrowing funds from other active peacekeeping
missions;
25. Encourages the Secretary-General to continue to
take additional measures to ensure the safety and security of all
personnel under the auspices of the United Nations participating
in the Mission, bearing in mind paragraphs 5 and 6 of Security
Council resolution 1502 (2003) of 26 August 2003;
26. Invites voluntary contributions to the Mission in
cash and in the form of services and supplies acceptable to the
Secretary-General, to be administered, as appropriate, in
accordance with the procedure and practices established by the
General Assembly;
27. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its
sixtieth session the item entitled “Financing of the United
Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti”.
RESOLUTION 59/264 B
Adopted at the 104th plenary meeting, on 22 June 2005, without a vote, on the
recommendation of the Committee (A/59/588/Add.1, para. 6)31

59/264. Financial reports and audited financial statements,
and reports of the Board of Auditors
B32
The General Assembly,
Having considered the financial report and audited
financial statements for the twelve-month period from 1 July
2003 to 30 June 2004 and the report of the Board of Auditors on
United Nations peacekeeping operations,33 the related section of
the report of the Advisory Committee on Administrative and
Budgetary Questions34 and the report of the Secretary-General
on the implementation of the recommendations of the Board of
Auditors concerning United Nations peacekeeping operations in
respect of that period,35

1. Accepts the audited financial statements on the
United Nations peacekeeping operations for the period from
1 July 2003 to 30 June 2004;36
2. Takes note of the observations and endorses the
recommendations contained in the report of the Board of
Auditors;37
3. Also takes note of the observations and endorses the
recommendations contained in the report of the Advisory
Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions34
related to the report of the Board of Auditors,37 subject to the
provisions of the present resolution;
4. Commends the Board of Auditors for the quality of
its report and the streamlined format thereof;
5. Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General on
the implementation of the recommendations of the Board of
Auditors concerning United Nations peacekeeping operations in
respect of the financial period ended 30 June 2004;35
6. Requests the Secretary-General to indicate an
expected time frame for the implementation of the
recommendations of the Board of Auditors as well as the
priorities for their implementation, including the office holders
to be held accountable;
7. Also requests the Secretary-General to report to the
General Assembly at its sixtieth session on measures undertaken
to implement paragraph 6 above;
8. Further requests the Secretary-General to ensure the
full implementation of the recommendations of the Board of
Auditors, including those relating to the issue of the
management of rations in peacekeeping operations as a whole
and the management of air operations, and the related
recommendations of the Advisory Committee in a prompt and
timely manner;
9. Requests the Secretary-General, in implementing the
recommendations referred to in paragraph 81 of the report of the
Board of Auditors,37 to take into account that this relates solely
to the recommendations of the Panel on United Nations Peace
Operations as adopted by the General Assembly which have not
been fully implemented to date.

_______________
31

The draft resolution recommended in the report was submitted by the
Chairman of the Committee.
32
Resolution 59/264, in section VI of the Official Records of the General
Assembly, Fifty-ninth Session, Supplement No. 49 and corrigendum
(A/59/49 and A/59/49 (Vol. I)/Corr. 1), vol. I, becomes resolution 59/264 A.
33
Official Records of the General Assembly, Fifty-ninth Session, Supplement
No. 5 and corrigendum (A/59/5 and A/59/5 (Vol. II)/Corr.1), vol. II.
34
A/59/736, sect. II.
35
A/59/704.

62

_______________
36
Official Records of the General Assembly, Fifty-ninth Session, Supplement
No. 5 and corrigendum (A/59/5 and/59/5 (Vol. II)/Corr.1), vol. II., chap. V.
37
Ibid., chap. II.

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

RESOLUTION 59/282
Adopted at the 91st plenary meeting, on 13 April 2005, without a vote, on the
recommendation of the Committee (A/59/448/Add.3, para. 12)38

59/282. Special subjects relating to the programme budget
for the biennium 2004–2005
The General Assembly,
I
Estimates in respect of special political missions,
good offices and other political initiatives
authorized by the General Assembly and/or the
Security Council
Having considered the report of the Secretary-General on
the estimates in respect of special political missions, good
offices and other political initiatives authorized by the General
Assembly and/or the Security Council39 and the related report
of the Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary
Questions,40
1. Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General on
estimates in respect of special political missions, good offices
and other political initiatives authorized by the General
Assembly and/or the Security Council39 and the related report of
the Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary
Questions;40
2. Endorses the observations and recommendations of
the Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary
Questions contained in its report;
3. Requests the Secretary-General to consider ways
and means of presenting the budgets of large missions in a
manner that is more suitable for their size and complexity;
4. Reiterates that the charging of expenditures against
the appropriation for special political missions is subject to the
extension of the respective mandates;
5. Notes that an additional amount of 82,472,600
United States dollars is requested for the United Nations
Assistance Mission for Iraq for the period from 1 May to
31 December 2005 and an additional amount of 701,800 dollars
is requested for the United Nations Observer Mission in
Bougainville for the period from 16 February to 15 August
2005, including the liquidation period;
6. Approves the budgets of the United Nations
Assistance Mission for Iraq and the United Nations Observer

Mission in Bougainville as set out in table l of the report of the
Secretary-General;
7. Decides to appropriate, in accordance with the
procedure set out in paragraph 11 of annex I to its resolution
41/213 of 19 December 1986, under section 3, Political affairs,
of the programme budget for the biennium 2004–2005, the
amount of 83,174,400 dollars for the United Nations Assistance
Mission for Iraq and the United Nations Observer Mission in
Bougainville;
8. Also decides to appropriate the amount of 4,131,200
dollars under section 34, Staff assessment, to be offset by a
corresponding amount under income section 1, Income from
staff assessment, of the programme budget for the biennium
2004–2005;
II
Information and communication technology
strategy
Recalling its resolutions 57/295 of 20 December 2002,
58/270 of 23 December 2003, 59/126 B of 10 December 2004
and 59/265 of 23 December 2004,
Having considered the report of the Secretary-General on
the information and communication technology strategy41 and
the related report of the Advisory Committee on Administrative
and Budgetary Questions,42
Acknowledging that investment in information and
communication technology is not an end in itself and should be
aimed at improving the quality and timely delivery of mandates
in a cost-effective manner,
1. Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General on
progress in implementing the information and communication
technology strategy41 and the related report of the Advisory
Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions;42
2. Requests the Secretary-General to develop and
implement cost-neutral measures to provide Member States
with secure access to the information currently accessible only
on the Intranet (“iSeek”) of the Secretariat in the working
languages of the United Nations;
3. Takes note of the ongoing efforts in the field of
disaster recovery and security threats in the new Department of
Safety and Security of the Secretariat as well as in the
Information Technology Services Division of the Office of
Central Support Services of the Department of Management,
and encourages all decision-takers involved to elaborate a
comprehensive approach in this matter;

_______________
38

The draft resolution recommended in the report was submitted by the
Chairman of the Committee.
39
A/59/534/Add.3 and Corr.1.
40
A/59/569/Add.3.

_______________
41
42

A/59/265.
A/59/558, paras. 2–18.

63

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

4. Requests a more detailed analysis of the return on
investment and the impact of such investment on the quality and
timeliness of service delivery and of the resource requirements
resulting from information and communication technology
projects, as described in the annex to the report of the SecretaryGeneral,41 in the context of the proposed programme budget for
the biennium 2006–2007 and future budgets;
5. Takes note of the ongoing efforts for the elaboration
of a comprehensive information and communication technology
strategy, and reiterates the need for further integration and
compatibility of administrative platforms of the inter-agency
network and, in this regard, invites the United Nations System
Chief Executives Board for Coordination to pay due attention to
the issue;
6. Recognizes that technological infrastructures and
supportive applications in the United Nations are based on Latin
script, which leads to difficulties in processing non-Latin and
bidirectional scripts, and requests the Secretary-General to
continue his efforts to ensure that technological infrastructures
and supportive applications in the United Nations fully support
Latin, non-Latin and bidirectional scripts so as to enhance the
equality of the official languages of the United Nations;
7. Takes note that some projects listed in the annex to
the report of the Secretary-General are on hold, and requests the
Secretary-General to ensure their implementation, as feasible;

Justice and the judges of the International Tribunal for the
Prosecution of Persons Responsible for Serious Violations of
International Humanitarian Law Committed in the Territory of
the Former Yugoslavia since 1991 and the International
Criminal Tribunal for the Prosecution of Persons Responsible
for Genocide and Other Serious Violations of International Law
Committed in the Territory of Rwanda and Rwandan Citizens
Responsible for Genocide and Other Such Violations Committed
in the Territory of Neighbouring States between 1 January and
31 December 1994,
Having considered the report of the Secretary-General43
and the related report of the Advisory Committee on
Administrative and Budgetary Questions,44
1. Endorses the recommendations of the Advisory
Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions
contained in its report,44 subject to the provisions of the present
resolution;
2. Reaffirms the principle that conditions of service and
compensation for non-Secretariat United Nations officials shall
be separate and distinct from those of officials of the Secretariat;
3. Requests the Secretary-General, in future reports on
the conditions of service of the members of the Court and the
judges of the Tribunals, to present clearly information on annual
salaries payable in both United States dollars and the applicable
local currency, with full information on the actual dollar
requirements for the budget concerned;

8. Recalls of section II, paragraphs 9 and 10, of its
resolution 59/266 of 23 December 2004, takes note of
paragraph 5 of the report of Advisory Committee on
Administrative and Budgetary Questions,42 and requests the
Secretary-General to report on measures to improve the Galaxy
tool;

4. Decides, with retroactive effect from 1 January
2005, to increase the annual salary of the members of the Court
and the judges and ad litem judges of the Tribunals by
6.3 per cent, as an interim measure and pending a decision
based on the report requested in paragraph 8 below;

9. Notes with appreciation that public wireless Internet
(Wi-Fi) hot spots have been made available in the Secretariat
Building, and notes the intention of the Secretary-General to
extend wireless coverage to the entire United Nations
compound;

5. Also decides that, with retroactive effect from
1 January 2005, the annual value of all pensions in payment
shall be increased by 6.3 per cent as an interim measure and
pending a decision based on the report requested in paragraph 8
below;

III

6. Further decides that, in addition to the provisions of
paragraph 2 of its resolution 40/257 C of 18 December 1985,
with retroactive effect from 1 January 2005, those members of
the Court who have taken up and maintained a bona fide
primary residence at The Hague for less than five continuous
years during their service with the Court shall be eligible, upon
the completion of their appointment and resettlement outside
the Netherlands, to receive a lump sum prorated on the basis of
the ceiling of eighteen weeks of annual net base salary that is
payable to members of the Court who have served for five
continuous years, and also decides that those members of the

Conditions of service and compensation for
officials other than Secretariat officials: members
of the International Court of Justice and judges
and ad litem judges of the International Tribunal
for the Former Yugoslavia and the International
Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda
Recalling section VIII of its resolution 53/214 of
18 December 1998, its resolution 56/285 of 27 June 2002 and
its resolution 57/289 of 20 December 2002,
Recalling also Article 32 of the Statute of the International
Court of Justice, as well as relevant General Assembly
resolutions that govern the conditions of service and
compensation for the members of the International Court of
64

_______________
43
44

A/C.5/59/2 and Corr.1.
A/59/557.

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

Court who have similarly taken up and maintained a bona fide
primary residence at The Hague for more than five but less than
nine continuous years shall be eligible upon the completion of
their appointment and resettlement outside the Netherlands for a
lump sum prorated on the basis of the ceiling of twenty-four
weeks of annual net base salary that is payable to members of
the Court who have served for nine continuous years or more;
7. Requests the Secretary-General to report to the
General Assembly on the additional expenditures resulting from
the above decisions in the context of the second performance
report on the programme budget for the biennium 2004–2005
and the second performance reports on the budgets of the
International Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia and the
International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda for the biennium
2004–2005;
8. Also requests the Secretary-General to submit a
comprehensive report to the General Assembly at its sixty-first
session, including proposals for a mechanism of remuneration
based on market exchange rates and local retail price
fluctuations that limits the divergence of such remuneration
from that of comparable positions of seniority within the United
Nations system, on the protection of pensions in payment to
former judges and their survivors as well as on the differences
between the pension benefits of the judges of the International
Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia and the International
Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda on the one hand and the
members of the International Court of Justice on the other;
9. Decides that the conditions of service and
compensation for the members of the International Court of
Justice and the judges and ad litem judges of the International
Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia and the International
Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda shall next be reviewed at its
sixty-first session.
RESOLUTION 59/283
Adopted at the 91st plenary meeting, on 13 April 2005, without a vote, on the
recommendation of the Committee (A/59/773, para. 11)45

59/283. Administration of justice at the United Nations
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 57/307 of 15 April 2003 and
59/266 of 23 December 2004,
Stressing that the system of justice in the United Nations
as a whole should be independent, transparent, effective,
efficient and fair,

_______________
45

The draft resolution recommended in the report was submitted by the
Chairman of the Committee.

Stressing also the importance of increased transparency in
decision-making and increased accountability of managers for
the system,
Noting that the existing system should respect the
principle of due process and provide for appropriate peer
review,
Noting with concern the continuing backlog of appeals in
various parts of the system,
Emphasizing the necessity of informal mechanisms for the
early and swift resolution of disputes in the Secretariat, in
particular through a direct dialogue between managers and staff,
Emphasizing also the importance for the United Nations
to have an efficient and effective system of internal justice so as
to ensure that individuals and the Organization are held
accountable for their actions in accordance with relevant
resolutions and regulations,
Welcoming the increased focus on training for all
participants in the system of administration of justice,
Recognizing that a transparent, impartial and effective
system of administration of justice is a necessary condition for
ensuring fair and just treatment of United Nations staff and
important for the success of human resources reform in the
Organization,
Having considered the reports of the Secretary-General on
the administration of justice in the Secretariat,46 on the role of
the Panels on Discrimination and Other Grievances,47 on the
outcome of the work of the Joint Appeals Board during 2001
and 200248 and on the outcome of the work of the Joint Appeals
Board during 2002 and 2003,49 the comprehensive report of the
United Nations Administrative Tribunal on its activities,50 the
reports of the Secretary-General on the possibility of the
financial independence of the United Nations Administrative
Tribunal from the Office of Legal Affairs51 and on measures to
prevent discrimination on the basis of nationality, race, gender,
religion or language in the United Nations,52 the note by the
Secretary-General transmitting the report of the Office of
Internal Oversight Services on the management review of the
appeals process at the United Nations, 53 the report of the
Secretary-General containing the cost implications of the
recommendations of the Office of Internal Oversight Services

_______________
46

A/59/449.
A/59/414.
48
A/58/300.
49
A/59/70.
50
A/58/680.
51
A/59/78.
52
A/59/211.
53
A/59/408.
47

65

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

following its management review of the appeals process,54 the
note by the Secretary-General transmitting the report of the Joint
Inspection Unit entitled “Administration of justice: harmonization
of the statutes of the United Nations Administrative Tribunal
and the International Labour Organization Administrative
Tribunal”,55 the note by the Secretary-General containing his
comments on the report of the Joint Inspection Unit,56 the note
by the Secretary-General on compensation for members of the
United Nations Administrative Tribunal, 57 the letter dated
18 November 2003 from the President of the United Nations
Administrative Tribunal addressed to the Chairman of the Fifth
Committee58 and the interim report of the Advisory Committee
on Administrative and Budgetary Questions,59
Regretting that the present system of administration of
justice in the Secretariat continues to be slow, cumbersome and
costly,
Regretting also that the related reports were not
introduced at its fifty-eighth session, as requested in its
resolution 57/307, and that, in addition, they were submitted and
issued late at its fifty-ninth session,
1. Notes the importance of having a strong
administration of justice mechanism that avoids duplication and
overlap within the formal processes;
2. Regrets the continued serious delays in the appeals
process, and stresses the need to implement measures to
improve the appeals process to make it more efficient;
I
Cross-cutting issues – general guidelines
3. Takes note of the reports of the Secretary-General on
the administration of justice in the Secretariat,46 on the role of
the Panels on Discrimination and Other Grievances,47 on the
outcome of the work of the Joint Appeals Board during 2001
and 2002,48 on the outcome of the work of the Joint Appeals
Board during 2002 and 2003,49 on the possibility of the financial
independence of the United Nations Administrative Tribunal
from the Office of Legal Affairs,51 on measures to prevent
discrimination on the basis of nationality, race, gender, religion
or language in the United Nations52 and his report containing the
cost implications of the recommendations of the Office of
Internal Oversight Services following its management review of
the appeals process;54

_______________
54

A/59/706.
A/59/280 and Corr.1.
56
A/59/280/Add.1.
57
A/C.5/59/12.
58
A/C.5/58/16.
59
A/59/715.
55

66

4. Takes note with interest of the report of the Office of
Internal Oversight Services on the management review of the
appeals process at the United Nations;53
5. Endorses the conclusions and recommendations of
the Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary
Questions set out in its report,59 subject to the provisions of the
present resolution;
6. Stresses that the administrative law framework of
the Organization should allow all levels of United Nations staff
to obtain due process, regardless of their location, grade or
contractual arrangement;
7. Appreciates the efforts made by staff volunteering
their services in the system of justice of the United Nations, and
stresses the need to provide them with further training;
8. Takes note with interest of the option described in
paragraph 30 of the report of the Secretary-General,46 and
requests the Secretary-General to explore the implications of
this option and to report thereon in the context of his annual
report on the administration of justice in the Secretariat;
9. Affirms that the functions of staff members selected
to serve under the new system are official in nature, and
requests the Secretary-General to ensure that those staff
members are given sufficient time off from their substantive
responsibilities to perform their functions;
10. Recognizes that the system of administration of
justice, being heavily dependent on volunteers, requires frequent
and comprehensive training of participants, and calls upon the
Secretary-General to organize periodic training at each of the
headquarters duty stations for all staff involved in the system of
administration of justice;
11. Stresses the importance of the proper implementation
of a sound performance appraisal system as a potential means of
avoiding conflict;
12. Also stresses the need to provide training in
managerial skills to improve conflict resolution skills of
managers;
13. Further stresses the need to link the ability of
managers to respond in the course of a proceeding with their
own individual performance appraisal;
14. Notes that staff rule 112.3, which relates to the
financial liability of managers, has yet to be implemented, also
notes the issuance of the Secretary-General’s bulletin
ST/SGB/2004/14, and requests the Secretary-General to report
on its implementation to the General Assembly at its sixty-first
session;
15. Requests the Secretary-General to expeditiously
implement the recommendations of the Office of Internal
Oversight Services, subject to the provisions of the present
resolution;

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

16. Decides that the time limits recommended by the
Office of Internal Oversight Services will be mandatory within
the appeals process once adequate capacity is in place, and no
later than 1 January 2006;
17. Also decides that measures should be taken to
eliminate the appearance of conflict of interest, and towards this
end requests the Secretary-General to proceed with the transfer
of the responsibility for formulating decisions on appeals from
the Department of Management of the Secretariat to the Office
of the Secretary-General;
II
The informal mechanism of administration of
justice
Ombudsman
18. Stresses the importance of the Office of the
Ombudsman as the primary means of informal dispute
resolution, and reaffirms General Assembly resolution 56/253
of 24 December 2001 on the establishment of the Office;
19. Requests that the Office of the Ombudsman
continue and expand its outreach activities, in particular to local,
national and General Service staff, in order to facilitate equal
access and awareness-raising, bearing in mind the structure,
activities and operational environment of the Organization;
20. Requests the Secretary-General to submit proposals
for strengthening the Office of the Ombudsman through
improved access to it for staff serving in different locations;
21. Invites the Office of the Ombudsman to reduce all
possible delays in responding to the requests of staff in order to
ensure that staff are encouraged to seek resolution of conflict in
an informal way;

25. Recognizes the need to strengthen the capacities of
the Panels of Counsel by increasing the opportunity for training
on the United Nations Staff Regulations and Rules, policies,
procedures or precedents for staff serving on the Panels, in view
of the urgent need to strengthen legal advice and administrative
support for staff members submitting an appeal;
26. Invites staff representatives to explore the possibility
of establishing a staff-funded scheme in the Organization that
provides legal advice and support to the staff; staff
representatives may consult with the Secretary-General as they
deem appropriate;
27. Invites the Secretary-General to consider appropriate
incentives to be built into the system to encourage staff
members to serve on the Panels;
28. Encourages the Panel of Counsel to increase
outreach activities, and requests the Secretary-General to
consider the inclusion of travel costs in section 28A, Office of
the Under-Secretary-General for Management, of the proposed
programme budget for the biennium 2006–2007, for this
purpose;
Administrative Law Unit
29. Notes that the Administrative Law Unit has the
multiple functions of administrative review, appeals, disciplinary
matters and advisory services;
30. Requests the Secretary-General to submit to the
General Assembly by the end of its fifty-ninth session proposals
to separate the above-mentioned functions, through the
redeployment of resources, in order to avoid conflicts of
interest, taking into account the following needs:
(a)

To ensure the necessary means to collect evidence;

(b)

To advise both the appellant and the respondent;

22. Requests the Secretary-General to submit, in the
context of his annual report on the administration of justice in
the Secretariat, information on the activities of the Ombudsman,
including general statistical information and information on
trends and comments on policies, procedures and practices that
have come to the attention of the Ombudsman;

(d) To ensure appropriate consultation with the Office
of Human Resources Management of the Department of
Management and legal experts;

III

(e) To relay all necessary information to the Office of
Human Resources Management;

The formal mechanisms of administration of
justice
Panel of Counsel
23. Takes note of the role of the Coordinator of the
Panel of Counsel, in preliminary consultations before initiation
of the formal appeals process, to support an informal resolution
at an early stage;
24. Stresses the role of staff representatives in advising
and assisting staff in addressing issues informally and formally;

(c) To ensure the uniform application of administrative
decisions;

31. Stresses that increased accountability by managers
would contribute to the elimination of the backlog of appeals
cases, as stated in the report of the Secretary-General,60 and
decides that as a means to facilitate early consideration of cases,
the following procedures should be adopted:

_______________
60

A/59/449, para. 27.

67

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

(a) Staff members wishing to appeal an administrative
decision should send a copy of their request to the executive
head of their department;
(b) The Administrative Law Unit should clarify with
managers the requirements for the respondent’s reply and the
contributions expected from managers, as well as time limits;
32. Requests the Secretary-General to ensure that
written explanations by managers to the Administrative Law
Unit are submitted within eight weeks with no possibility of
extension, and decides that compliance with this responsibility
shall constitute part of the performance appraisal of managers;
33. Decides to amend staff rule 111.2 (a) to provide that
staff wishing to appeal an administrative decision shall submit
to the executive head of their department, office, fund or
programme a copy of the letter addressed to the SecretaryGeneral requesting a review of the case;
Joint Appeals Board
34. Stresses the particular importance of providing
adequate training to the members of the Joint Appeals Board;

jurisdiction. Only three members shall sit in any particular
case.”;
41. Also decides that the amendment to article 3 will be
applied in the election of new members of the Tribunal with
effect from 1 January 2006;
42. Requests the Secretary-General to submit proposals
on compensation for the members of the Tribunal once all its
members meet the criteria set out in article 3 of the statute as
amended in the present resolution;
43. Notes that the vast majority of appeals against
administrative decisions concern termination of employment or
non-renewal of employment contracts, and decides, with
reference to recommendation 5 of the Office of Internal
Oversight Services,61 to revert to the question of amendment of
article 7 of the statute of the Tribunal following receipt of the
report of the panel as described in section IV of the present
resolution;
44. Also notes the report of the Joint Inspection Unit on
administration of justice;62

United Nations Administrative Tribunal

45. Stresses the importance of the eventual harmonization
of the statutes of the United Nations Administrative Tribunal and
the International Labour Organization Administrative Tribunal;

35. Recalls paragraph 5 of its resolution 57/307, and
regrets that the steps necessary to separate the secretariat of the
United Nations Administrative Tribunal from the Office of
Legal Affairs were not undertaken;

46. Requests the United Nations Administrative
Tribunal to review the rules, practices and procedures of similar
tribunals with a view towards enhanced effective management
of caseloads;

36. Endorses the proposal of the Secretary-General to
transfer the resources of the Tribunal from section 8, Legal
affairs, of the proposed programme budget to section 1, Overall
policy-making, direction and coordination, effective from the
beginning of the biennium 2006–2007;

IV

37. Reaffirms paragraph 5 of its resolution 57/307, and
requests the Secretary-General to guarantee the immediate
independence of the Tribunal, including through ensuring the
provision of administrative and logistical services that are
exclusive to the secretariat of the Tribunal;
38. Recalls the recent amendment to the statute of the
Tribunal, which provides that members shall possess judicial or
other relevant legal experience in the field of administrative law
or its equivalent within their national jurisdiction;
39. Acknowledges the need for the further strengthening
of professionalism in the Tribunal by increasing membership of
professional judges;
40. Decides to amend article 3, paragraph 1, of the
statute of the Tribunal, with effect from 1 January 2006, to read:
“The Tribunal shall be composed of seven members,
no two of whom may be nationals of the same State.
Members shall possess judicial experience in the field of
administrative law or its equivalent within their national
68

Review of the internal justice system
47. Decides that the Secretary-General shall form a
panel of external and independent experts to consider
redesigning the system of administration of justice;
48. Also decides that the panel shall be composed of a
pre-eminent judge or former judge with administrative law
experience, an expert in alternative dispute resolution methods,
a leading legal academic in international law, a person with
senior management and administrative experience in an
international organization and a person with United Nations
field experience;
49. Further decides that the terms of reference of the
redesign panel shall be as follows:
(a) The redesign panel shall propose a model for a new
system for resolving staff grievances in the United Nations that
is independent, transparent, effective, efficient and adequately
resourced and that ensures managerial accountability; the model
_______________
61
62

See A/59/408, para. 65.
See A/59/280 and Corr.1.

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

should involve guiding principles and procedures that clearly
articulate the participation of staff and management within
reasonable time frames and time limits;
(b)

The redesign panel shall:

(i) Consider the relevant resolutions of the General
Assembly;
(ii) Receive and review information from all the
relevant stakeholders regarding existing mechanisms for
the administration of justice in the Organization;
(iii) Consult with United Nations staff, including
individual staff members, the Staff Union and managers,
in order to form an opinion as to how and why some
aspects of the system function effectively while other
aspects do not;
(c)

50. Decides that the panel shall start its functions no
later than 1 February 2006 and shall submit its findings and
recommendations by the end of July 2006;
51. Requests the Secretary-General to transmit the
report and recommendations of the panel to the General
Assembly as a matter of priority;
52. Also requests the Secretary-General to submit his
comments on the recommendations contained in the panel’s
report, along with the estimate of time and resources needed for
their implementation, to the General Assembly at the first part
of its resumed sixty-first session;
53. Decides that activities requested above that would
give rise to additional resource requirements during the
biennium 2004–2005 should be included in the proposed
programme budget for the biennium 2006–2007.

The redesign panel shall, in particular:

(i) Consider alternative systems for resolving staff
grievances by considering other models of organizational
dispute resolution, while acknowledging the uniqueness
of the United Nations system, in particular the immunity
of United Nations staff from national laws and thus the
lack of recourse to national courts;

RESOLUTIONS 59/284 A and B
59/284. Financing of the United Nations Peacekeeping
Force in Cyprus
Resolution A

(ii) In proposing a model, consider the value of creating
an effective system for handling staff complaints that
involves alternative forms of dispute resolution by which
cases can be settled by mutual consent, such as mediation,
conciliation, arbitration and/or an ombudsman;

Adopted at the 91st plenary meeting, on 13 April 2005, without a vote, on the
recommendation of the Committee (A/59/770, para. 7)63

(iii) Consider the peer review;

Having considered the note by the Secretary-General on
the financing arrangements for the United Nations Peacekeeping
Force in Cyprus 64 and the related report of the Advisory
Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions,65

(iv) Identify proactive measures such as education and
training, that the United Nations can implement to
minimize the number of disputes that arise;
(v) Examine the functioning of the Office of the
Ombudsman and, if needed, present models to provide
services tailored to responding to the needs of the
Organization;
(vi) Examine and develop the criteria to be used in the
categorization of cases;
(vii) Review the functioning of the United Nations
Administrative Tribunal and examine the further
harmonization of its statute and that of the International
Labour Organization Administrative Tribunal with a view
to further professionalizing the United Nations
Administrative Tribunal;
(viii) Examine the possibility of an integrated judicial
system with a two-layer structure of first and second
instance, taking into account existing structures;
(ix) Examine the legal representation of the SecretaryGeneral in the system of administration of justice;

A
The General Assembly,

Recalling Security Council resolution 186 (1964) of
4 March 1964, regarding the establishment of the Force, and the
subsequent resolutions by which the Council extended the
mandate of the Force, the latest of which is resolution
1568 (2004) of 22 October 2004,
Recalling also its resolution 47/236 of 14 September 1993
on the financing of the Force for the period beginning 16 June
1993 and its subsequent resolutions and decisions thereon, the
latest of which is resolution 58/301 of 18 June 2004,
Reaffirming the general principles underlying the
financing of United Nations peacekeeping operations as stated
in General Assembly resolutions 1874 (S-IV) of 27 June 1963,
_______________
63

The draft resolution recommended in the report was submitted by the
Chairman of the Committee.
64
A/59/718.
65
A/59/734.

69

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

3101 (XXVIII) of 11 December 1973 and 55/235 of
23 December 2000,
Noting with appreciation that voluntary contributions
have been made to the Force by certain Governments,
Noting that voluntary contributions were insufficient to
cover all the costs of the Force, including those incurred by
troop-contributing Governments prior to 16 June 1993, and
regretting the absence of an adequate response to appeals for
voluntary contributions, including that contained in the letter
dated 17 May 1994 from the Secretary-General to all Member
States,66
Mindful of the fact that it is essential to provide the Force
with the necessary financial resources to enable it to fulfil its
responsibilities under the relevant resolutions of the Security
Council,
1. Takes note of the note by the Secretary-General on
the financing arrangements for the United Nations
Peacekeeping Force in Cyprus64 and the related report of the
Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary
Questions;65
2. Also takes note of the status of contributions to the
Force as at 28 February 2005, including the contributions
outstanding in the amount of 24.1 million United States dollars,
representing some 10 per cent of the total assessed
contributions, notes with concern that only forty-one Member
States have paid their assessed contributions in full, and urges
all other Member States, in particular those in arrears, to ensure
payment of their outstanding assessed contributions;
3. Expresses its appreciation to those Member States
which have paid their assessed contributions in full, and urges
all other Member States to make every possible effort to ensure
payment of their assessed contributions to the Force in full;
4. Expresses concern at the financial situation with
regard to peacekeeping activities, in particular as regards the
reimbursements to troop contributors that bear additional
burdens owing to overdue payments by Member States of their
assessments;
5. Also expresses concern at the delay experienced by
the Secretary-General in deploying and providing adequate
resources to some recent peacekeeping missions, in particular
those in Africa;

8. Reiterates its request to the Secretary-General to
make the fullest possible use of facilities and equipment at the
United Nations Logistics Base at Brindisi, Italy, in order to
minimize the costs of procurement for the Force;
9. Endorses the observations and recommendations of
the Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary
Questions,65 and requests the Secretary-General to ensure their
full implementation;
10. Requests the Secretary-General to expedite
negotiations with the host Government on issues surrounding
the relocation of military contingent personnel as well as other
personnel of the Force, in accordance with the provisions of the
March 1964 Agreement between the United Nations and the
Government of Cyprus;
11. Also requests the Secretary-General to take all
necessary action to ensure that the Force is administered with a
maximum of efficiency and economy;
12. Further requests the Secretary-General, in order to
reduce the cost of employing General Service staff, to continue
efforts to recruit local staff for the Force against General Service
posts, commensurate with the requirements of the Force;
13. Decides to continue to maintain as separate the
account established for the Force for the period prior to 16 June
1993, invites Member States to make voluntary contributions to
that account, and requests the Secretary-General to continue his
efforts in appealing for voluntary contributions to the account;
14. Emphasizes that no peacekeeping mission shall be
financed by borrowing funds from other active peacekeeping
missions;
15. Encourages the Secretary-General to continue to
take additional measures to ensure the safety and security of all
personnel under the auspices of the United Nations participating
in the Force;
16. Invites voluntary contributions to the Force in cash
and in the form of services and supplies acceptable to the
Secretary-General, to be administered, as appropriate, in
accordance with the procedure and practices established by the
General Assembly;
17. Decides to keep under review during its fifty-ninth
session the item entitled “Financing of the United Nations
Peacekeeping Force in Cyprus”.

6. Emphasizes that all future and existing peacekeeping
missions shall be given equal and non-discriminatory treatment
in respect of financial and administrative arrangements;
7. Also emphasizes that all peacekeeping missions
shall be provided with adequate resources for the effective and
efficient discharge of their respective mandates;
_______________
66

S/1994/647.

70

Resolution B
Adopted at the 104th plenary meeting, on 22 June 2005, without a vote, on the
recommendation of the Committee (A/59/770/Add.1, para. 6)67

_______________
67

The draft resolution recommended in the report was submitted by the
Chairman of the Committee.

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

B
The General Assembly,
Having considered the reports of the Secretary-General on
the financing of the United Nations Peacekeeping Force in
Cyprus68 and the related reports of the Advisory Committee on
Administrative and Budgetary Questions,69
Recalling Security Council resolution 186 (1964) of
4 March 1964 regarding the establishment of the Force and the
subsequent resolutions by which the Council extended the
mandate of the Force, the latest of which was resolution
1568 (2004) of 22 October 2004,
Recalling also its resolution 47/236 of 14 September 1993
on the financing of the Force for the period beginning 16 June
1993 and its subsequent resolutions and decisions thereon, the
latest of which were resolutions 58/301 of 18 June 2004 and
59/284 A of 13 April 2005,
Reaffirming the general principles underlying the
financing of United Nations peacekeeping operations as stated
in General Assembly resolutions 1874 (S-IV) of 27 June 1963,
3101 (XXVIII) of 11 December 1973 and 55/235 of
23 December 2000,
Noting with appreciation that voluntary contributions
have been made to the Force by certain Governments,
Noting that voluntary contributions were insufficient to
cover all the costs of the Force, including those incurred by
troop-contributing Governments prior to 16 June 1993, and
regretting the absence of an adequate response to appeals for
voluntary contributions, including that contained in the letter
dated 17 May 1994 from the Secretary-General to all Member
States,70
Mindful of the fact that it is essential to provide the Force
with the necessary financial resources to enable it to fulfil its
responsibilities under the relevant resolutions of the Security
Council,
1. Requests the Secretary-General to entrust the Head
of Mission with the task of formulating future budget proposals,
in full accordance with the provisions of General Assembly
resolution 59/296 of 22 June 2005, as well as other relevant
resolutions;
2. Takes note of the status of contributions to the
United Nations Peacekeeping Force in Cyprus as at 15 April
2005, including the contributions outstanding in the amount of
14.1 million United States dollars, representing some 6 per cent
of the total assessed contributions, notes with concern that only

fifty-five Member States have paid their assessed contributions
in full, and urges all other Member States, in particular those in
arrears, to ensure payment of their outstanding assessed
contributions;
3. Expresses its appreciation to those Member States
that have paid their assessed contributions in full, and urges all
other Member States to make every possible effort to ensure
payment of their assessed contributions to the Force in full;
4. Expresses concern at the financial situation with
regard to peacekeeping activities, in particular as regards the
reimbursements to troop contributors that bear additional
burdens owing to overdue payments by Member States of their
assessments;
5. Also expresses concern at the delay experienced by
the Secretary-General in deploying and providing adequate
resources to some recent peacekeeping missions, in particular
those in Africa;
6. Emphasizes that all future and existing peacekeeping
missions shall be given equal and non-discriminatory treatment
in respect of financial and administrative arrangements;
7. Also emphasizes that all peacekeeping missions
shall be provided with adequate resources for the effective and
efficient discharge of their respective mandates;
8. Reiterates its request to the Secretary-General to
make the fullest possible use of facilities and equipment at the
United Nations Logistics Base at Brindisi, Italy, in order to
minimize the costs of procurement for the Force;
9. Endorses the observations and recommendations
contained in the report of the Advisory Committee on
Administrative and Budgetary Questions, 71 and requests the
Secretary-General to ensure their full implementation;
10. Requests the Secretary-General to ensure the full
implementation of the relevant provisions of its resolution
59/296;
11. Also requests the Secretary-General to take all
necessary action to ensure that the Force is administered with a
maximum of efficiency and economy;
12. Further requests the Secretary-General, in order to
reduce the cost of employing General Service staff, to continue
efforts to recruit local staff for the Force against General Service
posts, commensurate with the requirements of the Force;

_______________
68

A/59/620 and A/59/656 and Add.1.
A/59/736 and Add.6.
70
S/1994/647.
69

_______________
71

A/59/736/Add.6.

71

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

Financial performance report for the period from 1 July
2003 to 30 June 2004
13. Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General on
the financial performance of the Force for the period from
1 July 2003 to 30 June 2004;72
14. Decides to appropriate to the Special Account for
the United Nations Peacekeeping Force in Cyprus the amount
of 1,665,400 dollars for the maintenance of the Force for the
period from 1 July 2003 to 30 June 2004, in addition to the
amount of 45,772,600 dollars already appropriated for the Force
for the same period under the terms of its resolution 57/332 of
18 June 2003;
Financing of the additional appropriation for the period
from 1 July 2003 to 30 June 2004
15. Notes with appreciation that a one-third share of the
net additional appropriation, equivalent to 500,800 dollars, will
be funded through voluntary contributions from the
Government of Cyprus;
16. Decides, taking into account the amount of
24,705,100 dollars already apportioned under the terms of its
resolution 57/332, to apportion among Member States the
additional amount of 1,164,600 dollars for the maintenance of
the Force for the period from 1 July 2003 to 30 June 2004, in
accordance with the levels updated in General Assembly
resolution 58/256 of 23 December 2003, and taking into
account the scale of assessments for 2004, as set out in its
resolution 58/1 B of 23 December 2003;
17. Decides also that, in accordance with the provisions
of its resolution 973 (X) of 15 December 1955, there shall be set
off against the apportionment among Member States, as
provided for in paragraph 16 above, their respective share in the
Tax Equalization Fund of the amount of 163,000 dollars,
representing the additional staff assessment income for the
Force for the period from 1 July 2003 to 30 June 2004;
18. Decides further that, for Member States that have
fulfilled their financial obligations to the Force, there shall be set
off against their apportionment, as provided for in paragraph 16
above, their respective share of other income in the amount of
701,231 dollars in respect of the financial period ended 30 June
2004, in accordance with the scheme set out in paragraph 16
above;
19. Decides that, for Member States that have not
fulfilled their financial obligations to the Force, there shall be set
off against their outstanding obligations their respective share of
other income in the amount of 701,231 dollars in respect of the
financial period ended 30 June 2004, in accordance with the
scheme set out in paragraph 16 above;
_______________
72

A/59/620.

72

20. Decides also, taking into account its voluntary
contribution for the financial period ended 30 June 2004, that
one third of other income in the amount of 451,300 dollars in
respect of the financial period ended 30 June 2004 shall be
returned to the Government of Cyprus;
21. Decides further, taking into account its voluntary
contribution for the financial period ended 30 June 2004, that
the prorated share of other income in the amount of 201,369
dollars in respect of the financial period ended 30 June 2004
shall be returned to the Government of Greece;
Budget estimates for the period from 1 July 2005 to 30 June
2006
22. Decides to appropriate to the Special Account for
the United Nations Peacekeeping Force in Cyprus the amount
of 46,512,600 dollars for the period from 1 July 2005 to 30 June
2006, inclusive of 44,184,300 dollars for the maintenance of
the Force, 1,903,800 dollars for the support account for
peacekeeping operations and 424,500 dollars for the United
Nations Logistics Base;
Financing of the appropriation for the period from 1 July
2005 to 30 June 2006
23. Notes with appreciation that a one-third share of the
net appropriation, equivalent to 14,699,000 dollars, will be
funded through voluntary contributions from the Government
of Cyprus and the amount of 6.5 million dollars from the
Government of Greece;
24. Decides to apportion among Member States the
amount of 25,313,600 dollars at a monthly rate of 2,109,466
dollars, in accordance with the levels updated in General
Assembly resolution 58/256, and taking into account the scale
of assessments for 2005 and 2006, as set out in its resolution
58/1 B, subject to a decision of the Security Council to extend
the mandate of the Force;
25. Decides also that, in accordance with the provisions
of its resolution 973 (X), there shall be set off against the
apportionment among Member States, as provided for in
paragraph 24 above, their respective share in the Tax
Equalization Fund of 2,415,600 dollars, comprising the
estimated staff assessment income of 2,112,100 dollars
approved for the Force, the prorated share of 269,100 dollars of
the estimated staff assessment income approved for the support
account and the prorated share of 34,400 dollars of the
estimated staff assessment income approved for the United
Nations Logistics Base;
26. Decides further to continue to maintain as separate
the account established for the Force for the period prior to
16 June 1993, invites Member States to make voluntary
contributions to that account and requests the Secretary-General
to continue his efforts in appealing for voluntary contributions
to the account;

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

27. Emphasizes that no peacekeeping mission shall be
financed by borrowing funds from other active peacekeeping
missions;
28. Encourages the Secretary-General to continue to
take additional measures to ensure the safety and security of all
personnel under the auspices of the United Nations participating
in the Force, bearing in mind paragraphs 5 and 6 of Security
Council resolution 1502 (2003) of 26 August 2003;
29. Invites voluntary contributions to the Force in cash
and in the form of services and supplies acceptable to the
Secretary-General, to be administered, as appropriate, in
accordance with the procedure and practices established by the
General Assembly;
30. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its
sixtieth session the item entitled “Financing of the United
Nations Peacekeeping Force in Cyprus”.
RESOLUTIONS 59/285 A and B
59/285. Financing of the United Nations Organization
Mission in the Democratic Republic of the Congo
Resolution A
Adopted at the 91st plenary meeting, on 13 April 2005, without a vote, on the
recommendation of the Committee (A/59/771, para. 8)73

Recalling also its resolution 54/260 A of 7 April 2000 on
the financing of the Mission and its subsequent resolutions
thereon, the latest of which was resolution 58/259 B of 18 June
2004,
Reaffirming the general principles underlying the
financing of United Nations peacekeeping operations, as stated
in General Assembly resolutions 1874 (S-IV) of 27 June 1963,
3101 (XXVIII) of 11 December 1973 and 55/235 of
23 December 2000,
Noting with appreciation that voluntary contributions
have been made to the Mission,
Mindful of the fact that it is essential to provide the
Mission with the financial resources necessary to enable it to
fulfil its responsibilities under the relevant resolutions of the
Security Council,
1. Takes note of the status of contributions to the
United Nations Organization Mission in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo as at 15 March 2005, including the
contributions outstanding in the amount of 309.4 million United
States dollars, representing some 13 per cent of the total
assessed contributions, notes with concern that only forty-five
Member States have paid their assessed contributions in full,
and urges all other Member States, in particular those in arrears,
to ensure payment of their outstanding assessed contributions;

A

2. Expresses its appreciation to those Member States
which have paid their assessed contributions in full, and urges
all other Member States to make every possible effort to ensure
payment of their assessed contributions to the Mission in full;

Having considered the report of the Secretary-General on
the financing of the United Nations Organization Mission in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo74 and the related report of
the Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary
Questions,75

3. Expresses concern at the financial situation with
regard to peacekeeping activities, in particular as regards the
reimbursement of troop contributors, which bear additional
burdens owing to overdue payments by Member States of their
assessments;

Recalling Security Council resolutions 1258 (1999) of
6 August 1999 and 1279 (1999) of 30 November 1999
regarding, respectively, the deployment to the Congo region of
military liaison personnel and the establishment of the United
Nations Organization Mission in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo, and the subsequent resolutions by which the Council
extended the mandate of the Mission, the latest of which was
resolution 1565 (2004) of 1 October 2004, by which the
Council authorized an increase in the Mission’s strength by
5,900 personnel, including up to 341 civilian police,

4. Also expresses concern at the delay experienced by
the Secretary-General in deploying and providing adequate
resources to some recent peacekeeping missions, in particular
those in Africa;

The General Assembly,

_______________
73

The draft resolution recommended in the report was submitted by the
Chairman of the Committee.
74
A/59/707.
75
A/59/735.

5. Emphasizes that all future and existing peacekeeping
missions shall be given equal and non-discriminatory treatment
in respect of financial and administrative arrangements;
6. Also emphasizes that all peacekeeping missions
shall be provided with adequate resources for the effective and
efficient discharge of their respective mandates;
7. Reiterates its request to the Secretary-General to
make the fullest possible use of facilities and equipment at the
United Nations Logistics Base at Brindisi, Italy, in order to
minimize the costs of procurement for the Mission;
8. Endorses the conclusions and recommendations
contained in the report of the Advisory Committee on
73

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

Administrative and Budgetary Questions75 and requests the
Secretary-General to ensure their full implementation;
9. Requests the Secretary-General to include in the
proposed budget for the Mission for the period from 1 July
2005 to 30 June 2006 the resources necessary to ensure the
integration of gender perspectives into the entire electoral
process;

15. Emphasizes that no peacekeeping mission shall be
financed by borrowing funds from other active peacekeeping
missions;
16. Encourages the Secretary-General to continue to
take additional measures to ensure the safety and security of all
personnel under the auspices of the United Nations participating
in the Mission;

10. Also requests the Secretary-General to take all action
necessary to ensure that the Mission is administered with a
maximum of efficiency and economy, particularly with regard
to air transport;

17. Invites voluntary contributions to the Mission in
cash and in the form of services and supplies acceptable to the
Secretary-General, to be administered, as appropriate, in
accordance with the procedure and practices established by the
General Assembly;

11. Further requests the Secretary-General, in order to
reduce the cost of employing General Service staff, to continue
efforts to recruit local staff for the Mission against General
Service posts, commensurate with the requirements of the
Mission;

18. Decides to keep under review during its fifty-ninth
session the item entitled “Financing of the United Nations
Organization Mission in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo”.
Resolution B

Revised budget estimates for the period from 1 July 2004 to
30 June 2005
12. Decides to appropriate to the Special Account for
the United Nations Organization Mission in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo the additional amount of 245,642,900
dollars for the maintenance of the Mission for the period from
1 October 2004 to 30 June 2005, inclusive of the amount of
49,950,000 dollars previously authorized by the Advisory
Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions under
the terms of section IV of General Assembly resolution
49/233 A of 23 December 1994, taking into account the total
amount of 746,072,500 dollars already appropriated and
apportioned for the period from 1 July 2004 to 30 June 2005
under the provisions of its resolution 58/259 B;
Financing of the appropriation
13. Decides also to apportion among Member States the
additional amount of 163,761,932 dollars for the period from
1 October 2004 to 31 March 2005, in accordance with the levels
set out by the General Assembly in its resolution 55/235, as
adjusted by the Assembly in its resolution 55/236 of
23 December 2000 and updated in its resolution 58/256 of
23 December 2003, and taking into account the scale of
assessments for 2004 and 2005, as set out in its resolution
58/1 B of 23 December 2003;
14. Decides further to apportion among Member States
the additional amount of 81,880,968 dollars at a monthly rate of
27,293,656 dollars for the period from 1 April to 30 June 2005,
in accordance with the scheme set out in paragraph 13 above
and taking into account the scale of assessments for 2005, as set
out in General Assembly resolution 58/1 B, subject to the
decision of the Security Council to extend the mandate of the
Mission;
74

Adopted at the 104th plenary meeting, on 22 June 2005, without a vote, on the
recommendation of the Committee (A/59/771/Add.1, para. 6)76

B
The General Assembly,
Having considered the report of the Secretary-General on
the financing of the United Nations Organization Mission in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo77 and the related reports of
the Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary
Questions,78
Recalling Security Council resolutions 1258 (1999) of
6 August 1999 and 1279 (1999) of 30 November 1999
regarding, respectively, the deployment to the Congo region of
military liaison personnel and the establishment of the United
Nations Organization Mission in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo, and the subsequent resolutions by which the Council
extended the mandate of the Mission, the latest of which was
resolution 1592 (2005) of 30 March 2005,
Recalling also its resolution 54/260 A of 7 April 2000 on
the financing of the Mission, and its subsequent resolutions
thereon, the latest of which was resolution 59/285 A of 13 April
2005,
Reaffirming the general principles underlying the
financing of United Nations peacekeeping operations, as stated
in General Assembly resolutions 1874 (S-IV) of 27 June 1963,
_______________
76

The draft resolution recommended in the report was submitted by the
Chairman of the Committee.
77
A/59/779.
78
A/59/736 and Add.16.

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

3101 (XXVIII) of 11 December 1973 and 55/235 of
23 December 2000,

Administrative and Budgetary Questions, 79 and requests the
Secretary-General to ensure their full implementation;

Noting with appreciation that voluntary contributions
have been made to the Mission,

10. Requests the Secretary-General to ensure the full
implementation of the relevant provisions of its resolution
59/296;

Mindful of the fact that it is essential to provide the
Mission with the necessary financial resources to enable it to
fulfil its responsibilities under the relevant resolutions of the
Security Council,
1. Requests the Secretary-General to entrust the Head
of Mission with the task of formulating future budget proposals
in full accordance with the provisions of General Assembly
resolution 59/296 of 22 June 2005, as well as other relevant
resolutions;
2. Takes note of the status of contributions to the
United Nations Organization Mission in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo as at 15 April 2005, including the
contributions outstanding in the amount of 52.7 million United
States dollars, representing some 2 per cent of the total assessed
contributions, notes with concern that only fifty-two Member
States have paid their assessed contributions in full, and urges
all other Member States, in particular those in arrears, to ensure
payment of their outstanding assessed contributions;
3. Expresses its appreciation to those Member States
which have paid their assessed contributions in full, and urges
all other Member States to make every possible effort to ensure
payment of their assessed contributions to the Mission in full;
4. Expresses concern at the financial situation with
regard to peacekeeping activities, in particular as regards the
reimbursements to troop contributors that bear additional
burdens owing to overdue payments by Member States of their
assessments;
5. Also expresses concern at the delay experienced by
the Secretary-General in deploying and providing adequate
resources to some recent peacekeeping missions, in particular
those in Africa;
6. Emphasizes that all future and existing peacekeeping
missions shall be given equal and non-discriminatory treatment
in respect of financial and administrative arrangements;
7. Also emphasizes that all peacekeeping missions
shall be provided with adequate resources for the effective and
efficient discharge of their respective mandates;
8. Reiterates its request to the Secretary-General to
make the fullest possible use of facilities and equipment at the
United Nations Logistics Base at Brindisi, Italy, in order to
minimize the costs of procurement for the Mission;
9. Endorses the conclusions and recommendations
contained in the report of the Advisory Committee on

11. Emphasizes that the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General should be responsible for the implementation
of the policies of the Organization regarding personnel conduct,
and requests the Secretary-General to ensure that the Special
Representative remains fully engaged in all such matters;
12. Requests the Secretary-General to take all necessary
action to ensure that the Mission is administered with a
maximum of efficiency and economy;
13. Also requests the Secretary-General, in order to
reduce the cost of employing General Service staff, to continue
efforts to recruit local staff for the Mission against General
Service posts, commensurate with the requirements of the
Mission;
Budget estimates for the period from 1 July to 31 October
2005
14. Authorizes the Secretary-General to enter into
commitments in an amount not exceeding 383,187,800 dollars
for the maintenance of the Mission for the period from 1 July to
31 October 2005;
Financing of the commitment authority
15. Decides to apportion among Member States the
amount of 265,322,580 dollars for the period from 1 July to
1 October 2005, in accordance with the levels updated in
General Assembly resolution 58/256 of 23 December 2003, and
taking into account the scale of assessments for 2005, as set out
in its resolution 58/1 B of 23 December 2003;
16. Decides also that, in accordance with the provisions
of its resolution 973 (X) of 15 December 1955, there shall be set
off against the apportionment among Member States, as
provided for in paragraph 15 above, their respective share in the
Tax Equalization Fund of 4,235,325 dollars, representing the
estimated staff assessment income approved for the Mission for
the period from 1 July to 1 October 2005;
17. Decides further to apportion among Member States
the amount of 84,677,420 dollars for the period from 2 to
31 October 2005, in accordance with the scheme set out in
paragraph 15 above, subject to a decision of the Security
Council to extend the mandate of the Mission;
18. Decides that, in accordance with the provisions of
its resolution 973 (X), there shall be set off against the
_______________
79

A/59/736/Add.16.

75

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

apportionment among Member States, as provided for in
paragraph 17 above, their respective share in the Tax
Equalization Fund of 1,351,700 dollars, representing the
estimated staff assessment income approved for the Mission for
the period from 2 to 31 October 2005;

RESOLUTIONS 59/286 A and B
59/286. Financing of the United Nations Interim
Administration Mission in Kosovo
Resolution A

Estimates for the support account for peacekeeping
operations and the United Nations Logistics Base for the
period from 1 July 2005 to 30 June 2006
19. Decides also to appropriate to the Special Account
for the United Nations Organization Mission in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo the amount of 20,220,700 dollars for
the period from 1 July 2005 to 30 June 2006, comprising
16,534,400 dollars for the support account for peacekeeping
operations and 3,686,300 dollars for the United Nations
Logistics Base;
Financing of the appropriation
20. Decides further to apportion among Member States
the amount of 20,220,700 dollars, in accordance with the levels
updated in General Assembly resolution 58/256, and taking into
account the scale of assessments for 2005 and 2006, as set out in
its resolution 58/1 B;
21. Decides that, in accordance with the provisions of
its resolution 973 (X), there shall be set off against the
apportionment among Member States, as provided for in
paragraph 20 above, their respective share in the Tax
Equalization Fund of 2,635,300 dollars, comprising the prorated
share of 2,337,100 dollars of the estimated staff assessment
income approved for the support account and the prorated share
of 298,200 dollars of the estimated staff assessment income
approved for the United Nations Logistics Base;
22. Emphasizes that no peacekeeping mission shall be
financed by borrowing funds from other active peacekeeping
missions;
23. Encourages the Secretary-General to continue to
take additional measures to ensure the safety and security of all
personnel under the auspices of the United Nations participating
in the Mission, bearing in mind paragraphs 5 and 6 of Security
Council resolution 1502 (2003) of 26 August 2003;
24. Invites voluntary contributions to the Mission in
cash and in the form of services and supplies acceptable to the
Secretary-General, to be administered, as appropriate, in
accordance with the procedure and practices established by the
General Assembly;
25. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its
sixtieth session the item entitled “Financing of the United
Nations Organization Mission in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo”.
76

Adopted at the 91st plenary meeting, on 13 April 2005, without a vote, on the
recommendation of the Committee (A/59/772, para. 8)80

A
The General Assembly,
Having considered the note by the Secretary-General on
the financing arrangements for the United Nations Interim
Administration Mission in Kosovo for the period from 1 July
2004 to 30 June 200581 and the related report of the Advisory
Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions,82
Recalling Security Council resolution 1244 (1999) of
10 June 1999 regarding the establishment of the United Nations
Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo,
Recalling also its resolution 53/241 of 28 July 1999 on the
financing of the Mission and its subsequent resolutions thereon,
the latest of which is resolution 58/305 of 18 June 2004,
Acknowledging the complexity of the Mission,
Reaffirming the general principles underlying the
financing of United Nations peacekeeping operations, as stated
in General Assembly resolutions 1874 (S-IV) of 27 June 1963,
3101 (XXVIII) of 11 December 1973 and 55/235 of
23 December 2000,
Mindful of the fact that it is essential to provide the
Mission with the necessary financial resources to enable it to
fulfil its responsibilities under the relevant resolution of the
Security Council,
1. Takes note of the status of contributions to the
United Nations Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo as at
28 February 2005, including the contributions outstanding in the
amount of 132.4 million United States dollars, representing
some 7 per cent of the total assessed contributions, notes with
concern that only sixty-eight Member States have paid their
assessed contributions in full, and urges all other Member
States, in particular those in arrears, to ensure payment of their
outstanding assessed contributions;
2. Expresses its appreciation to those Member States
which have paid their assessed contributions in full, and urges
_______________
80

The draft resolution recommended in the report was submitted by the
Chairman of the Committee.
81
A/59/692.
82
A/59/728.

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

all other Member States to make every possible effort to ensure
payment of their assessed contributions to the Mission in full;
3. Expresses concern at the financial situation with
regard to peacekeeping activities, in particular as regards the
reimbursements to troop contributors that bear additional
burdens owing to overdue payments by Member States of their
assessments;
4. Also expresses concern at the delay experienced by
the Secretary-General in deploying and providing adequate
resources to some recent peacekeeping missions, in particular
those in Africa;
5. Emphasizes that all future and existing peacekeeping
missions shall be given equal and non-discriminatory treatment
in respect of financial and administrative arrangements;
6. Also emphasizes that all peacekeeping missions
shall be provided with adequate resources for the effective and
efficient discharge of their respective mandates;
7. Reiterates its request to the Secretary-General to
make the fullest possible use of facilities and equipment at the
United Nations Logistics Base at Brindisi, Italy, in order to
minimize the costs of procurement for the Mission;
8. Endorses the conclusions and recommendations
contained in the report of the Advisory Committee on
Administrative and Budgetary Questions,82 and requests the
Secretary-General to ensure their full implementation;
9. Requests the Secretary-General to take all necessary
action to ensure that the Mission is administered with a
maximum of efficiency and economy;
10. Also requests the Secretary-General, in order to
reduce the cost of employing General Service staff, to continue
efforts to recruit local staff for the Mission against General
Service posts, commensurate with the requirements of the
Mission;

the Assembly in its resolution 55/235, as adjusted in its
resolution 55/236 of 23 December 2000 and updated in its
resolution 58/256 of 23 December 2003, the scale of
assessments for 2004 and 2005, as set out in its resolution
58/1 B of 23 December 2003, to be applied against a portion
thereof, that is, 15 million dollars, which is the amount
pertaining to the period ended 31 December 2004, and to be
applied also against the balance, that is, 15 million dollars for
the period from 1 January to 30 June 2005;
13. Decides further that, in accordance with the
provisions of its resolution 973 (X) of 15 December 1955, there
shall be set off against the apportionment among Member
States, as provided for in paragraph 12 above, their respective
share in the Tax Equalization Fund of the additional amount of
3,850,800 dollars, approved for the Mission for the period from
1 July 2004 to 30 June 2005;
14. Emphasizes that no peacekeeping mission shall be
financed by borrowing funds from other active peacekeeping
missions;
15. Encourages the Secretary-General to continue to
take additional measures to ensure the safety and security of all
personnel under the auspices of the United Nations participating
in the Mission;
16. Invites voluntary contributions to the Mission in
cash and in the form of services and supplies acceptable to the
Secretary-General, to be administered, as appropriate, in
accordance with the procedure and practices established by the
General Assembly;
17. Decides to keep under review during its fifty-ninth
session the item entitled “Financing of the United Nations
Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo”.
Resolution B
Adopted at the 104th plenary meeting, on 22 June 2005, without a vote, on the
recommendation of the Committee (A/59/772/Add.1, para. 7)83

Revised budget estimates for the period from 1 July 2004 to
30 June 2005
11. Decides to appropriate to the Special Account for
the United Nations Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo
the additional amount of 30 million dollars for the maintenance
of the Mission for the period from 1 July 2004 to 30 June 2005,
taking into account the total amount of 278,413,700 dollars
already appropriated for the Mission for the same period under
the provisions of General Assembly resolution 58/305;

B
The General Assembly,
Having considered the reports of the Secretary-General on
the financing of the United Nations Interim Administration
Mission in Kosovo84 and the related reports of the Advisory
Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions,85

Financing of the appropriation
12. Decides also to apportion among Member States the
amount of 30 million dollars, taking into account the amount of
278,413,700 dollars already apportioned by the General
Assembly in its resolution 58/305 for the period from 1 July
2004 to 30 June 2005, in accordance with the levels set out by

_______________
83

The draft resolution recommended in the report was submitted by the
Chairman of the Committee.
84
A/59/623 and Corr.1 and A/59/633.
85
A/59/736 and Add.1.

77

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

Recalling Security Council resolution 1244 (1999) of
10 June 1999 regarding the establishment of the United Nations
Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo,
Recalling also its resolution 53/241 of 28 July 1999 on the
financing of the Mission and its subsequent resolutions thereon,
the latest of which was resolution 59/286 A of 13 April 2005,
Acknowledging the complexity of the Mission,
Reaffirming the general principles underlying the
financing of United Nations peacekeeping operations, as stated
in General Assembly resolutions 1874 (S-IV) of 27 June 1963,
3101 (XXVIII) of 11 December 1973 and 55/235 of
23 December 2000,
Mindful of the fact that it is essential to provide the
Mission with the necessary financial resources to enable it to
fulfil its responsibilities under the relevant resolution of the
Security Council,
1. Requests the Secretary-General to entrust the Head
of Mission with the task of formulating future budget proposals
in full accordance with the provisions of General Assembly
resolution 59/296 of 22 June 2005, as well as other relevant
resolutions;
2. Takes note of the status of contributions to the
United Nations Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo as at
15 April 2005, including the contributions outstanding in the
amount of 82.7 million United States dollars, representing some
4 per cent of the total assessed contributions, notes with concern
that only seventy-four Member States have paid their assessed
contributions in full, and urges all other Member States, in
particular those in arrears, to ensure payment of their
outstanding assessed contributions;
3. Expresses its appreciation to those Member States
which have paid their assessed contributions in full, and urges
all other Member States to make every possible effort to ensure
payment of their assessed contributions to the Mission in full;
4. Expresses concern at the financial situation with
regard to peacekeeping activities, in particular as regards the
reimbursements to troop contributors that bear additional
burdens owing to overdue payments by Member States of their
assessments;
5. Also expresses concern at the delay experienced by
the Secretary-General in deploying and providing adequate
resources to some recent peacekeeping missions, in particular
those in Africa;
6. Emphasizes that all future and existing peacekeeping
missions shall be given equal and non-discriminatory treatment
in respect of financial and administrative arrangements;
7. Also emphasizes that all peacekeeping missions
shall be provided with adequate resources for the effective and
efficient discharge of their respective mandates;
78

8. Reiterates its request to the Secretary-General to
make the fullest possible use of facilities and equipment at
the United Nations Logistics Base at Brindisi, Italy, in order to
minimize the costs of procurement for the Mission;
9. Endorses the conclusions and recommendations
contained in the report of the Advisory Committee on
Administrative and Budgetary Questions, 86 and requests the
Secretary-General to ensure their full implementation;
10. Requests the Secretary-General to ensure the full
implementation of the relevant provisions of its resolution
59/296;
11. Notes, as pointed out by the Advisory Committee on
Administrative and Budgetary Questions in paragraphs 20 and
21 of its report, that the functions of a large number of posts
have been performed by staff at grades lower than the budgeted
levels, and requests the Secretary-General to take appropriate
action;
12. Requests the Secretary-General to take all necessary
action to ensure that the Mission is administered with a
maximum of efficiency and economy;
13. Also requests the Secretary-General, in order to
reduce the cost of employing General Service staff, to continue
efforts to recruit local staff for the Mission against General
Service posts, commensurate with the requirements of the
Mission;
Financial performance report for the period from 1 July
2003 to 30 June 2004
14. Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General on
the financial performance of the Mission for the period from
1 July 2003 to 30 June 2004;87
Budget estimates for the period from 1 July 2005 to 30 June
2006
15. Decides to appropriate to the Special Account for
the United Nations Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo
the amount of 252,551,800 dollars for the period from 1 July
2005 to 30 June 2006, inclusive of 239,889,800 dollars for the
maintenance of the Mission, 10,353,700 dollars for the support
account for peacekeeping operations and 2,308,300 dollars for
the United Nations Logistics Base;
Financing of the appropriation
16. Decides also to apportion among Member States the
amount of 252,551,800 dollars, at a monthly rate of 21,045,983
dollars in accordance with the levels updated in General
_______________
86
87

A/59/736/Add.1.
A/59/623 and Corr.1.

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

Assembly resolution 58/256 of 23 December 2003, and taking
into account the scale of assessments for 2005 and 2006, as set
out in its resolution 58/1 B of 23 December 2003;
17. Decides further that, in accordance with the
provisions of its resolution 973 (X) of 15 December 1955, there
shall be set off against the apportionment among Member
States, as provided for in paragraph 16 above, their respective
share in the Tax Equalization Fund of the amount of 21,704,300
dollars, comprising the estimated staff assessment income of
20,054,100 dollars approved for the Mission, the prorated share
of 1,463,500 dollars of the estimated staff assessment income
approved for the support account and the prorated share of
186,700 dollars of the estimated staff assessment income
approved for the United Nations Logistics Base;
18. Decides that, for Member States that have fulfilled
their financial obligations to the Mission, there shall be set off
against their apportionment, as provided for in paragraph 16
above, their respective share of the unencumbered balance and
other income in the amount of 4,470,000 dollars in respect of
the financial period ended 30 June 2004, in accordance with the
levels updated in General Assembly resolution 58/256, and
taking into account the scale of assessments for 2004, as set out
in its resolution 58/1 B;
19. Decides also that, for Member States that have not
fulfilled their financial obligations to the Mission, there shall be
set off against their outstanding obligations their respective
share of the unencumbered balance and other income in the
amount of 4,470,000 dollars in respect of the financial period
ended 30 June 2004, in accordance with the scheme set out in
paragraph 18 above;

RESOLUTION 59/287
Adopted at the 91st plenary meeting, on 13 April 2005, without a vote, on the
recommendation of the Committee (A/59/652/Add.1, para. 16)88

59/287. Report of the Office of Internal Oversight Services
on strengthening the investigation functions in the
United Nations
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 48/218 B of 29 July 1994, 54/244
of 23 December 1999 and 59/272 of 23 December 2004,
establishing the Office of Internal Oversight Services and its
operational independence,
Recalling also its resolutions 57/282 of 20 December
2002 and 58/268 of 23 December 2003,
Having considered the report of the Office of Internal
Oversight Services on strengthening the investigation functions
in the United Nations,89
Noting that independent investigation is in the best
interests of the Organization,
Noting also that violations of the United Nations Financial
Regulations and Rules and Staff Regulations and Rules and
administrative instructions are considered misconduct and call
for disciplinary action,
1. Takes note of the report of the Office of Internal
Oversight Services on strengthening the investigation functions
in the United Nations;89
2. Re-emphasizes the principle of separation,
impartiality and fairness on the part of those with responsibility
for investigation functions;

20. Decides further that the increase of 3,763,200
dollars in the estimated staff assessment income in respect of the
financial period ended 30 June 2004 shall be added to the
credits from the amount of 4,470,000 dollars referred to in
paragraphs 18 and 19 above;

3. Re-emphasizes also that the Office of Internal
Oversight Services is the internal body entrusted with
investigation in the United Nations;

21. Emphasizes that no peacekeeping mission shall be
financed by borrowing funds from other active peacekeeping
missions;

4. Notes the need to enhance the capacity of the Office
of Internal Oversight Services to conduct its mandated
investigation functions efficiently;

22. Encourages the Secretary-General to continue to
take additional measures to ensure the safety and security of all
personnel under the auspices of the United Nations participating
in the Mission, bearing in mind paragraphs 5 and 6 of Security
Council resolution 1502 (2003) of 26 August 2003;

5. Recognizes that the Office of Internal Oversight
Services has established an efficient mechanism to enable all
staff members and other persons engaged in activities under the
authority of the Organization to convey directly their allegations
to the Office of Internal Oversight Services;

23. Invites voluntary contributions to the Mission in
cash and in the form of services and supplies acceptable to the
Secretary-General, to be administered, as appropriate, in
accordance with the procedure and practices established by the
General Assembly;

6. Stresses that sexual exploitation and abuse constitute
serious misconduct and fall under category I;90

24. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its
sixtieth session the item entitled “Financing of the United
Nations Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo”.

_______________
88

The draft resolution recommended in the report was submitted by the
Rapporteur of the Committee.
89
See A/58/708.
90
Ibid., para. 26.

79

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

7. Notes that sexual harassment constitutes a serious
concern to Member States, and, bearing in mind paragraph 12
of the present resolution, notes that the Office of Human
Resources Management and programme managers may be
entrusted to conduct investigations in this context;
8. Decides that the Office of Internal Oversight
Services may entrust trained programme managers to conduct
investigations on its behalf;
9. Also decides that in cases of serious misconduct
and/or criminal behaviour, investigations should be conducted
by professional investigators;
10. Requests the Secretary-General to implement the
proposals of the Office of Internal Oversight Services to
increase basic investigation training, as appropriate, for the
handling of minor forms of misconduct, to develop written
procedures for the proper conduct of investigations and to
promote the concept of an independent investigation function
within the United Nations;
11. Decides that the results of investigation conducted
by programme managers should be reported to the Office of
Internal Oversight Services;
12. Requests the Secretary-General to establish an
administrative mechanism for the mandatory reporting by
programme managers of allegations of misconduct to the Office
of Internal Oversight Services and to report on the establishment
of such a mechanism to the General Assembly at the resumed
part of its sixtieth session;

with due regard to the protection of the privacy of the staff
member(s) concerned;
18. Requests the Secretary-General to ensure that when
conclusions of the Office of Internal Oversight Services are
disputed by a programme manager, appropriate action will be
taken to resolve the dispute and that information thereon will be
included in the annual report of the Office of Internal Oversight
Services.
RESOLUTION 59/288
Adopted at the 91st plenary meeting, on 13 April 2005, without a vote, on the
recommendation of the Committee (A/59/652/Add.1, para. 16)91

59/288. Procurement reform
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 54/14 of 29 October 1999,
55/247 of 12 April 2001 and 57/279 of 20 December 2002,
Having considered the report of the Secretary-General on
procurement reform, 92 the related report of the Advisory
Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions93 and
the reports of the Office of Internal Oversight Services on the
audit of safeguarding air safety standards while procuring air
services for the United Nations peacekeeping missions94 and on
the audit of the functioning of the Headquarters Committee on
Contracts,95
A.

Report of the Secretary-General on procurement
reform

13. Also requests the Secretary-General to ensure that
the introduction of a mandatory reporting mechanism will not
adversely affect the right of an individual staff member to report
cases of allegations of misconduct directly to the Office of
Internal Oversight Services;

1. Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General92
and the related report of the Advisory Committee on
Administrative and Budgetary Questions;93

14. Further requests the Secretary-General to ensure
that where poor management practice is a contributory factor in
cases of misconduct, appropriate managerial action is taken by
the Office of Human Resources Management;

2. Welcomes the progress achieved in addressing the
concerns expressed in its resolution 57/279 and the recent
significant improvements made by the Secretary-General in
procurement reform at Headquarters and in the field missions;

15. Requests the Secretary-General to ensure that an
appropriate mechanism is in place to protect staff members who
report misconduct within the Secretariat against retaliation;

3. Notes with appreciation the progress achieved in the
harmonization and streamlining of procurement practices;

16. Also requests the Secretary-General to ensure that,
in case of proven misconduct and/or criminal behaviour,
disciplinary action and, where appropriate, legal action in
accordance with the established procedures and regulations will
be taken expeditiously, and requests the Secretary-General to
ensure that Member States are informed on an annual basis
about all actions taken;
17. Further requests the Secretary-General to ensure
that all staff of the Organization are informed of the most
common examples of misconduct and/or criminal behaviour
and their disciplinary consequences, including any legal action,
80

4. Calls upon the executive heads of the funds and
programmes of the United Nations to continue their efforts with
a view to improving the efficiency of procurement by reducing
duplication and harmonizing the procurement procedures in the
_______________
91

The draft resolution recommended in the report was submitted by the
Chairman of the Committee.
92
A/59/216.
93
See A/59/540.
94
See A/59/347.
95
See A/58/294.

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

United Nations system as a whole, in close cooperation with the
Procurement Service of the Office of Central Support Services
of the Secretariat;
5. Requests the Secretary-General to encourage all the
organizations of the United Nations system, consistent with
their respective mandates, to further improve their procurement
practices, inter alia, by participating in the United Nations
Global Marketplace with a view to creating one common
United Nations global procurement web site;
6. Notes the activities of the Inter-Agency Procurement
Working Group and of the Common Services Procurement
Working Group on enhancing the transparency and increasing
the harmonization of procurement practices, and requests the
Secretary-General, in consultation with the executive heads of
the United Nations funds and programmes, to continue work in
this regard;
7. Requests the Secretary-General to continue to
simplify and streamline the vendor registration process and to
share responsibilities among the various United Nations
organizations;
8. Notes the efforts made by the Secretary-General to
increase procurement opportunities for developing countries
and countries with economies in transition, and requests the
Secretary-General:
(a) To continue to simplify the vendor registration
process, taking into account access to the Internet;
(b) To take further steps to sensitize the business
community to procurement opportunities within the United
Nations system, inter alia:
(i)

The holding of additional business seminars;

(ii) Inviting the Inter-Agency Procurement Working
Group to hold more meetings in developing countries;
(iii) Including the issue of “Diversity of sources of
procurement” as an agenda item at the annual meetings
of the Inter-Agency Procurement Working Group;
9. Notes also the recent introduction of the principle of
best value for money in relation to procurement, and requests
the Secretary-General, when applying this principle, to continue
safeguarding the financial interests of the Organization, consider
best practices and ensure that adequate records are kept;
10. Requests the Secretary-General to submit to the
General Assembly an overview and general analysis of the
functioning of the principle of best value for money, within the
framework of his regular reporting on procurement reform;
11. Also requests the Secretary-General to implement
measures to reduce the time line associated with invoice
payment;

12. Further requests the Secretary-General to issue
ethical guidelines without delay for those involved in the
procurement process, requests that those guidelines be shared
with Member States through the procurement web site, and
reiterates its request to the Secretary-General for the early
adoption of a code of conduct for vendors and a declaration of
ethical responsibilities for all staff involved in the procurement
process;
13. Encourages the Inter-Agency Procurement Working
Group to continue its efforts to produce comprehensive and
generally applicable statistics encompassing the procurement
activities of all United Nations entities;
14. Welcomes the training programmes for United
Nations procurement staff that the Procurement Service has
initiated, including in the field, and requests the SecretaryGeneral to support these programmes and to evaluate and
monitor their impact;
15. Notes the promotion by the Procurement Service of
the voluntary principles of the corporate social responsibility
initiative, the Global Compact, within the United Nations
procurement framework, and requests the Secretary-General, as
appropriate, to report to the General Assembly for further
consideration;
16. Requests the Secretary-General, taking into account
the comments and observations of the Board of Auditors and
the Office of Internal Oversight Services, to ensure that
information regarding the accountability factor within the
procurement reform framework is provided in the next report of
the Secretary-General on procurement reform;
17. Also requests the Secretary-General to continue to
ensure that consistent non-compliance and poor performance by
vendors is recorded and that appropriate action is taken with
respect to their inclusion in the list of vendors;
18. Takes note of the agreements made with major
companies, and urges the Secretary-General to continue to
ensure adherence to the rules and procedures governing the
procurement process and to enable more active participation by
all vendors;
19. Notes the increase in the number of ex post facto
cases, and requests the Secretary-General to continue to take
appropriate action in order to minimize that practice to those
cases which fully comply with the criteria of exigency;
20. Requests the Secretary-General, in his next report
on procurement reform, to provide information on the
implementation of the new delegations of authority, including
mechanisms used to strengthen effective monitoring, oversight
and accountability;
21. Notes the Secretary-General’s plan to provide
purchasing cards to departments and offices for the procurement
of low-value items, and requests the Secretariat to develop
81

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

strong internal control mechanisms that will safeguard against
misuse, after consulting with the Office of Internal Oversight
Services and outside organizations experienced in administering
purchase card programmes.
B.

Report of the Office of Internal Oversight Services on
the audit of safeguarding air safety standards while
procuring air services for the United Nations
peacekeeping missions

1. Takes note of the report of the Office of Internal
Oversight Services on the audit of safeguarding air safety
standards while procuring air services for the United Nations
peacekeeping missions;94
2. Requests the Secretary-General, as recommended in
the report of the Office of Internal Oversight, to fully document
the reasons for not following up on the recovery of liquidated
damages for contracts and to apply consistent methods to the
collection of liquidated damages from vendors;
3. Also requests the Secretary-General to continue to
ensure compliance with the standards and recommended
practices of the International Civil Aviation Organization within
the framework of the policy of the Department of Peacekeeping
Operations of the Secretariat regarding the chartering of civilian
registered aircraft, with the objective of ensuring the highest
level of air safety when providing air services to the United
Nations;
4. Notes with concern the delay and difficulties
experienced in recruiting and appointing aviation safety officers
in some peacekeeping operations, and requests the SecretaryGeneral to take all necessary measures to fill the vacancies
expeditiously;
5. Requests the Secretary-General, in view of the
limited number of site visits by aviation experts to operational
bases of air carriers, to ensure that experts are able to conduct
the necessary technical assessment of vendors;
6. Notes with concern that occurrences attributed to
specific vendors were not included in the vendor performance
reports, and requests the Secretary-General to take all necessary
measures to ensure that such occurrences are reflected in the
appropriate vendor performance reports;
7. Requests the Secretary-General to ensure that the
Department of Peacekeeping Operations communicates the
information on vendor performance to all aviation offices
involved and the Procurement Service.
C.

Report of the Office of Internal Oversight Services on
the audit of the functioning of the Headquarters
Committee on Contracts

1. Takes note of the report of the Office of Internal
Oversight Services on the audit of the functioning of the
Headquarters Committee on Contracts;95
82

2. Requests the Secretary-General to review without
delay options to better safeguard the independence of the
Headquarters Committee on Contracts, including the option
identified in recommendation 1 of the report of the Office of
Internal Oversight Services;96
3. Also requests the Secretary-General to examine the
appropriateness of the current threshold for the review of
procurement cases by the Headquarters Committee on Contracts
with a view to improving the effectiveness and efficiency of the
functioning of the Committee, taking into account the
development of the delegation of authority to the field offices as
described in paragraph 11 of the report of the Advisory
Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions,93 and
to report on action taken to the General Assembly in the context
of the next report of the Secretary-General on procurement
reform.
RESOLUTION 59/289
Adopted at the 91st plenary meeting, on 13 April 2005, without a vote, on the
recommendation of the Committee (A/59/652/Add.1, para. 16)97

59/289. Outsourcing practices
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 54/256 of 7 April 2000, 55/232 of
23 December 2000 and 58/276 and 58/277 of 23 December
2003,
Having considered the report of the Secretary-General on
outsourcing practices98 and the related report of the Advisory
Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions,99
1. Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General,98
and endorses the observations and recommendations of the
Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary
Questions related thereto;99
2. Acknowledges that outsourcing should be used in
full compliance with the four criteria set out by the General
Assembly, and requests the Secretary-General to monitor the
quality of activities outsourced;
3. Requests the Secretary-General to continue to
consider outsourcing actively in accordance with the guidance
and goals mentioned in paragraphs 1 to 3 of resolution 55/232
and to ensure that programme managers satisfy all of the
following criteria in their assessment of whether or not an
_______________
96

Ibid., para. 29.
The draft resolution recommended in the report was submitted by the
Chairman of the Committee.
98
A/59/227.
99
A/59/540, paras. 1, 12 and 13.
97

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

activity of the Organization can be fully, or even partially,
outsourced:
(a) Cost-effectiveness and efficiency: this is considered
to be the most basic criterion; unless it can be adequately
demonstrated that an activity can be done significantly more
economically and, at the very least, equally efficiently, by an
external party, outsourcing may not be considered;
(b) Safety and security: activities that could compromise
the safety and security of delegations, staff and visitors may not
be considered for outsourcing;
(c) Maintaining the international character of the
Organization: outsourcing may be considered for activities in
which the international character of the Organization is not
compromised;
(d) Maintaining the integrity of procedures and
processes: outsourcing may not be considered if it will result in
any breach of established procedures and processes.
RESOLUTION 59/292
Adopted at the 93rd plenary meeting, on 21 April 2005, without a vote, on the
recommendation of the Committee (A/59/780, para. 8)100

59/292. Financing of the United Nations Mission in the
Sudan
The General Assembly,
Having considered the report of the Secretary-General on
the financing of the United Nations Mission in the Sudan101 and
the related report of the Advisory Committee on Administrative
and Budgetary Questions,102
Recalling Security Council resolution 1590 (2005) of
24 March 2005, by which the Council established the United
Nations Mission in the Sudan for an initial period of six months
from 24 March 2005,
Recognizing that the costs of the Mission are expenses of
the Organization to be borne by Member States in accordance
with Article 17, paragraph 2, of the Charter of the United
Nations,
Reaffirming the general principles underlying the
financing of United Nations peacekeeping operations, as stated
in its resolutions 1874 (S-IV) of 27 June 1963, 3101 (XXVIII)
of 11 December 1973 and 55/235 of 23 December 2000,

Mindful of the fact that it is essential to provide the
Mission with the necessary financial resources to enable it to
fulfil its responsibilities under the relevant resolution of the
Security Council,
1. Expresses concern about the financial situation with
regard to peacekeeping activities, in particular as regards the
reimbursements to troop contributors that bear additional
burdens owing to overdue payments by Member States of their
assessments;
2. Also expresses concern at the delay experienced by
the Secretary-General in deploying and providing adequate
resources to some recent peacekeeping missions, in particular
those in Africa;
3. Emphasizes that all future and existing peacekeeping
missions shall be given equal and non-discriminatory treatment in
respect of financial and administrative arrangements;
4. Also emphasizes that all peacekeeping missions
shall be provided with adequate resources for the effective and
efficient discharge of their respective mandates;
5. Reiterates its request to the Secretary-General to
make the fullest possible use of facilities and equipment at the
United Nations Logistics Base at Brindisi, Italy, in order to
minimize the costs of procurement for the Mission;
6. Endorses the conclusions and recommendations
contained in the report of the Advisory Committee on
Administrative and Budgetary Questions,102 and requests the
Secretary-General to ensure their full implementation;
7. Notes that the General Assembly has never
pronounced itself on the use of assessed peacekeeping
contributions for the purposes stated in paragraph 15 of the
report of the Advisory Committee,102 and decides to revert to
this issue in the context of its consideration of item 123, entitled
“Administrative and budgetary aspects of the financing of the
United Nations peacekeeping operations”, during the second
part of its resumed fifty-ninth session in the light of the
additional information to be provided thereon by the SecretaryGeneral;
8. Requests the Secretary-General to take all action
necessary to ensure that the Mission is administered with a
maximum of efficiency and economy;
9. Also requests the Secretary-General, in order to
reduce the cost of employing General Service staff, to continue
efforts to recruit local staff for the Mission against General
Service posts, commensurate with the requirements of the
Mission;

_______________
100

The draft resolution recommended in the report was submitted by the
Chairman of the Committee.
101
A/59/756 and Corr.1 and 2.
102
A/59/768.

Budget estimates for the period from 1 July 2004 to
31 October 2005
10. Authorizes the Secretary-General to establish a
special account for the United Nations Mission in the Sudan for
83

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

the purpose of accounting for the income received and
expenditure incurred in respect of the Mission;
11. Also authorizes the Secretary-General to enter into
commitments for the Mission for the period from 1 July 2004 to
31 October 2005 in a total amount not exceeding 595,498,500
United States dollars for the initial establishment of the Mission,
comprising, for the period from 1 July 2004 to 30 June 2005,
the amount of 279,501,300 dollars, inclusive of the amount of
99,999,400 dollars previously authorized by the Advisory
Committee, and, for the period from 1 July to 31 October 2005,
the amount of 315,997,200 dollars, under the terms of
section IV of General Assembly resolution 49/233 A of
23 December 1994;

17. Encourages the Secretary-General to continue to
take additional measures to ensure the safety and security of all
personnel under the auspices of the United Nations participating
in the Mission;
18. Invites voluntary contributions to the Mission in
cash and in the form of services and supplies acceptable to
the Secretary-General, to be administered, as appropriate, in
accordance with the procedure and practices established by the
General Assembly;
19. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its
sixtieth session the item entitled “Financing of the United
Nations Mission in the Sudan”.
RESOLUTION 59/294

Financing of the commitment authority
12. Decides to apportion among Member States the total
amount of 497,873,300 dollars for the period from 1 July 2004
to 23 September 2005, comprising the amount of 279,501,300
dollars for the period from 1 July 2004 to 30 June 2005 and the
amount of 218,372,000 dollars for the period from 1 July to
23 September 2005, in accordance with the levels set out by the
General Assembly in its resolution 55/235, as adjusted by the
Assembly in its resolution 55/236 of 23 December 2000 and
updated in its resolution 58/256 of 23 December 2003, taking
into account the scale of assessments for 2004 and 2005, as set
out in its resolution 58/1 B of 23 December 2003;
13. Decides also that, in accordance with the provisions
of its resolution 973 (X) of 15 December 1955, there shall be set
off against the apportionment among Member States, as
provided for in paragraph 12 above, their respective share in the
Tax Equalization Fund of 1,635,000 dollars, representing the
estimated staff assessment income approved for the Mission for
the period from 1 July 2004 to 30 June 2005, and 2,042,500
dollars, representing the estimated staff assessment income
approved for the Mission for the period from 1 July to
23 September 2005;
14. Decides further to apportion among Member States
the amount of 97,625,200 dollars for the period from
24 September to 31 October 2005, at a monthly rate of
78,999,300 dollars, in accordance with the scheme set out in
paragraph 12 above, taking into account the scale of assessments
for 2005, as set out in its resolution 58/1 B, subject to a decision
of the Security Council to extend the mandate of the Mission;
15. Decides that, in accordance with the provisions of its
resolution 973 (X), there shall be set off against the apportionment
among Member States, as provided for in paragraph 14 above,
their respective share in the Tax Equalization Fund of 913,100
dollars, representing the estimated staff assessment income
approved for the Mission for the period from 24 September to
31 October 2005;
16. Emphasizes that no peacekeeping mission shall be
financed by borrowing funds from other active peacekeeping
missions;
84

Adopted at the 104th plenary meeting, on 22 June 2005, without a vote, on the
recommendation of the Committee (A/59/448/Add.4, para. 8)103

59/294. Special subjects and questions relating to the
programme budget for the biennium 2004–2005
The General Assembly,
I
Strengthened and unified security management
system for the United Nations: standardized
access control
Recalling paragraph 44 of section XI of its resolution
59/276 of 23 December 2004,
Having considered the report of the Secretary-General
entitled “Strengthened and unified security management system
for the United Nations: standardized access control”104 and the
related report of the Advisory Committee on Administrative and
Budgetary Questions,105
Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General104 and
endorses the observations and recommendation contained in the
report of the Advisory Committee on Administrative and
Budgetary Questions;105
II
Estimates in respect of special political missions,
good offices and other political initiatives
authorized by the General Assembly and/or the
Security Council
Recalling its resolution 58/284 of 8 April 2004 and
section VII of its resolution 59/276 of 23 December 2004,
_______________
103

The draft resolution recommended in the report was submitted by the
Chairman of the Committee.
104
A/59/776.
105
A/59/785.

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

Having considered the report of the Secretary-General106
and the related report of the Advisory Committee on
Administrative and Budgetary Questions 107 concerning the
requests of the Secretary-General for additional funding relating
to the expansion of the United Nations Political Office for
Somalia and for the subvention to the Special Court for Sierra
Leone,
1. Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General106
and the related report of the Advisory Committee on
Administrative and Budgetary Questions107 concerning the
requests of the Secretary-General for additional funding relating
to the expansion of the United Nations Political Office for
Somalia and for the subvention to the Special Court for Sierra
Leone;
2. Endorses the observations and recommendations of
the Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary
Questions contained in its report,107 subject to the provisions of
the present resolution;
3. Decides to appropriate under the procedure provided
for in paragraph 11 of annex I to resolution 41/213 of
19 December 1986 an amount of 24,171,700 United States
dollars under section 3, Political affairs, of the programme
budget for the biennium 2004–2005 for the United Nations
Political Office for Somalia and for the subvention to the
Special Court for Sierra Leone;
4. Also decides to appropriate an amount of 377,200
dollars under section 34, Staff assessment, to be offset by a
corresponding amount under income section 1, Income from
staff assessment, of the programme budget for the biennium
2004–2005;
5. Notes that the requirements arising under the regular
budget in connection with the expansion of the United Nations
Political Office for Somalia are estimated at 4,548,900 dollars
gross (4,171,700 dollars net), after taking into account the
unencumbered balance amounting to 845,700 dollars against
the existing appropriation;
6. Approves the budget for the United Nations Political
Office for Somalia in the amount of 5,394,600 dollars gross
(5,017,400 dollars net) for the period from 1 June to
31 December 2005;
7. Notes the financial position of the Special Court for
Sierra Leone as described in the report of the SecretaryGeneral;106

financial resources of the Special Court for Sierra Leone for the
period from 1 July to 31 December 2005;
9. Authorizes the Secretary-General, as an exceptional
measure, to enter into commitments in an amount not to exceed
13 million dollars to supplement the financial resources of the
Special Court for Sierra Leone, for the period from 1 July to
31 December 2005, under special political missions in section 3,
Political affairs, of the programme budget for the biennium
2004–2005, on the understanding that any regular budget funds
appropriated for the Court would be refunded to the United
Nations at the time of liquidation of the Court should sufficient
voluntary contributions be received;
10. Requests the Secretary-General to provide relevant
information regarding the utilization of funds appropriated from
the regular budget for the Special Court for Sierra Leone in the
context of the second performance report on the programme
budget for the biennium 2004–2005;
11. Also requests the Secretary-General to keep the
Member States informed, as appropriate, about the completion
strategy of the Special Court for Sierra Leone;
12. Appeals to Member States, as a matter of urgency, to
contribute voluntary funds in support of the Special Court for
Sierra Leone;
13. Requests the Secretary-General, in concert with the
Management Committee of the Special Court for Sierra Leone,
to redouble efforts to raise voluntary contributions to support the
work of the Court, and to report to the General Assembly at its
sixtieth session on progress made;
14. Also requests the Secretary-General, in concert with
the Registrar of the Special Court for Sierra Leone, to take fully
into account the intentions of donors concerning their voluntary
contributions without prejudice to the provisions of the present
resolution.
RESOLUTION 59/295
Adopted at the 104th plenary meeting, on 22 June 2005, without a vote, on the
recommendation of the Committee (A/59/448/Add.4, para. 8)108

59/295. Capital master plan
The General Assembly,

8. Also notes the request of the Secretary-General for
an additional subvention of 13 million dollars to supplement the

Recalling its resolutions 54/249 of 23 December 1999,
55/238 of 23 December 2000, 56/234 and 56/236 of
24 December 2001 and 56/286 of 27 June 2002, section II of its
resolution 57/292 of 20 December 2002 and its decision 58/566
of 8 April 2004,

_______________

_______________

106

A/59/534/Add.4.
107
A/59/569/Add.4.

108

The draft resolution recommended in the report was submitted by the
Vice-Chairman of the Committee.

85

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

1. Decides to convert 17,802,000 United States dollars
of the existing commitment authority into an appropriation with
assessment for the year 2005 and to renew the existing
commitment authority for the balance of 8,198,000 dollars for
the year 2006 so as to provide for the continuation of design
work and related project management and management of preconstruction services for the baseline scope and scope options of
the capital master plan;

59/296. Administrative and budgetary aspects of the
financing of the United Nations peacekeeping
operations: cross-cutting issues

2. Requests the Secretary-General to report to the
General Assembly at the main part of its sixtieth session on all
aspects of the capital master plan, including:

Having considered the general report of the Advisory
Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions on the
report of the Board of Auditors concerning the administrative
and budgetary aspects of the financing of the United Nations
peacekeeping operations,112

(a) Current estimate of costs and time line for
implementation of the capital master plan;
(b) Viable options for swing space during construction,
including the costs of all such options;
(c)

The status of UNDC-5;

(d) An assessment of the viability of constructing a
permanent building on the North Lawn of the premises of
United Nations Headquarters to be used as a swing and/or
consolidation space;
(e) The range of financing options for the capital master
plan and overall cost and full analysis of such options, taking
into account that direct assessment would be the simplest and
cheapest option for meeting the costs of the capital master plan,
as stated in the report of the Secretary-General109 and the oral
report by the Chairman of the Advisory Committee on
Administrative and Budgetary Questions;110
(f)

The progress of design and pre-construction work;

(g)

Proposals on a working reserve fund;

3. Decides to revert to the issue of the capital master
plan before the end of June 2005, including the relevant
proposals contained in paragraph 39 of the report of the
Secretary-General, not addressed in the present resolution,
pertaining to the offer of the host country on an interest-bearing
loan for the capital master plan.

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 49/233 A of 23 December 1994,
49/233 B 31 March 1995, 51/218 E of 17 June 1997 and
57/290 B of 18 June 2003,

I
1. Appreciates the efforts of all peacekeeping
personnel in dealing with the current unprecedented surge in
peacekeeping operations;
2. Endorses the conclusions and recommendations
contained in the general report of the Advisory Committee on
Administrative and Budgetary Questions,112 subject to the
provisions of the present resolution;
3. Requests the Secretary-General to submit an annual
overview report on the financing of peacekeeping missions,
reporting, inter alia, on trends in the size, composition and
funding of the peacekeeping missions, relevant developments in
peacekeeping operations, efforts to improve the management
and functioning of peacekeeping operations and the
management priorities for the coming year as well as actions
taken to implement the provisions of the present resolution;
4. Also requests the Secretary-General to provide
relevant information in the individual budget submissions of
peacekeeping operations for the financial period 2006/07 on the
efficiencies resulting from the implementation of the applicable
provisions of the present resolution;
II
Results-based budgeting

RESOLUTION 59/296
Adopted at the 104th plenary meeting, on 22 June 2005, without a vote, on the
recommendation of the Committee (A/59/532/Add.1, para. 21)111

_______________

1.
2000;

Reaffirms its resolution 55/231 of 23 December

2. Recognizes the continued progress in the presentation
of the peacekeeping budgets using results-based budgeting
techniques;
3. Decides that the progressive implementation of
results-based budgeting shall be in full compliance with its
resolution 55/231;

109

A/59/441/Add.1.
See Official Records of the General Assembly, Fifty-ninth Session, Fifth
Committee, 54th meeting (A/C.5/59/SR.54), and corrigendum.
111
The draft resolution recommended in the report was submitted by the
Chairman of the Committee.
110

86

_______________
112

A/59/736.

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

4. Recalls that in paragraph 9 of its resolution 55/231,
the General Assembly requested the Secretary-General to
ensure that, in presenting the programme budget, expected
accomplishments and, where possible, indicators of
achievement are included to measure achievements in the
implementation of the programmes of the Organization and not
those of individual Member States;
5. Notes that some indicators of achievement reflected
in the budgets and budget performance reports appear to
measure the performance of Member States, and requests the
Secretary-General to ensure that the purpose of the indicators of
achievement is not to assess the performance of Member States
but, where possible, to reflect the contributions by peacekeeping
missions to the expected accomplishments and objectives in
keeping with their respective mandates;
6. Requests the Secretary-General to submit his future
budget proposals in full compliance with its resolution 55/231;
7. Encourages the Secretary-General to continue to
refine the existing results-based budgeting framework and to
provide clearer financial information on all components of the
missions;
8. Requests the Secretary-General to integrate
operational, logistical and financial aspects fully in the planning
phase of peacekeeping operations by linking results-based
budgeting to the mandate implementation plans of peacekeeping
operations;
III

6. Also requests the Secretary-General to entrust the
Office of Internal Oversight Services of the Secretariat with
conducting a business process review of the preparation of
peacekeeping budget proposals, including the respective roles of
staff in missions and at Headquarters and to submit its findings,
including recommendations to streamline the process, to the
General Assembly in the context of the report requested in
section IV of the present resolution;
7. Decides that, in view of the critical importance of
budgets for the effective functioning of missions, the
submission of budget proposals from missions to Headquarters
should constitute part of the leadership and accountability
functions of the Head of Mission/Special Representative;
8. Reaffirms the necessity to provide peacekeeping
operations with adequate financial resources, especially in their
start-up and expanded phases, to enable the timely, full and
effective implementation of their mandates in accordance with
the relevant resolutions of the Security Council;
9. Affirms that budget submissions should, to the extent
possible, reflect management improvements and efficiency
gains to be achieved and articulate future strategies in this
regard;
10. Requests the Secretary-General to undertake the
review of the functions of the posts as an ongoing exercise and
to determine the level of posts according to changing
operational requirements as well as the actual responsibilities
and functions performed, with a view to ensuring the most costeffective use of resources;

Budget presentation
1.

IV

Reiterates paragraph 5 of its resolution 57/290 B;

2. Notes with concern the unevenness in the quality of
presentation in the documentation submitted, and reiterates its
request to the Secretary-General to provide in the budget
documents the necessary information available that fully
justifies his resource requirements;
3. Reaffirms rule 153 of the rules of procedure of the
General Assembly, and requests the Secretary-General, in the
context of the overview report, to provide detailed information
on major policy changes having an impact on resource levels,
human resources management policies or operational
requirements that require the approval of the Assembly;
4. Welcomes the use, in the proposed budgets for
2005/06, of a new methodology for budgeting international staff
costs;
5. Requests the Secretary-General to ensure that the
Department of Peacekeeping Operations of the Secretariat and
all missions make every effort to introduce strict budgetary
discipline and enforce adequate controls over budget
implementation;

Review of the management structure of all
peacekeeping operations
Recalling its decision 59/507 of 29 October 2004,
Having considered the note by the Secretary-General on
the review of the management structure of all peacekeeping
operations,113
1. Recalls its previous request for several complex
peacekeeping operations to review their structures, bearing in
mind the complexities, mandates and specificities of each, and
notes that some operations have undertaken the revision, and
requests the Secretary-General to ensure that the remaining
complex operations conduct the requested review and
streamline their structures and to report thereon in the context of
the relevant budget submissions;
2. Requests the Secretary-General to monitor the
evolution of structures in individual peacekeeping operations to
avoid the duplication of functions and an excessive proportion
_______________
113

A/59/794.

87

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

of higher-grade posts, bearing in mind the mandates,
complexities and specificities of each mission;
3. Recalls, in this context, its resolution 59/272 of
23 December 2004;
4. Requests the Secretary-General, as a matter of
priority, to entrust the Office of Internal Oversight Services with
a comprehensive management audit to review the practices of
the Department of Peacekeeping Operations and to identify
risks and exposures to duplication, fraud and abuse of authority
in the following operational areas: finance, including budget
preparation; procurement; human resources, including
recruitment and training; and information technology, and to
report thereon to the General Assembly at its sixtieth session;
5. Also requests the Secretary-General to entrust the
Office of Internal Oversight Services, in the light of the
increasing demands with which the Department of
Peacekeeping Operations is faced and the burden this is putting
on its functioning, with carrying out a review of the
management structures of the Department, while taking into
account the Security Council mandates and existing
recommendations formulated on previous occasions by the
Office of Internal Oversight Services 114 and the Board of
Auditors and paying specific attention to the interaction,
coordination and cooperation of the Department with other
Secretariat departments and offices, including but not limited to
the Department of Political Affairs, the Department of Public
Information, the Office of Programme Planning, Budget and
Accounts and the Department of Management, as well as the
relevant funds and programmes, and to report thereon to the
General Assembly at its sixty-first session;
6. Urges the Secretary-General to review, streamline
and simplify procedures, on a continuing basis, as well as to
recommend changes to regulations and rules, as appropriate, in
order to support more effective and efficient administrative
processes, with a view to achieving economies in requirements
for human and other resources;
7. Notes the observation of the Advisory Committee on
Administrative and Budgetary Questions regarding the need for
the full and timely implementation of recommendations of all
oversight bodies, and urges the Secretary-General to expedite
the establishment of the high-level follow-up mechanism and to
report thereon to the General Assembly at its sixtieth session;

rules and administrative issuances are fully complied with by all
missions and that appropriate disciplinary actions are taken in
all cases of non-compliance;
10. Also requests the Secretary-General to finalize the
process for the establishment of guidelines for the enforcement
of basic standards of conduct and behaviour for all United
Nations system personnel;
11. Encourages the Secretary-General to take additional
measures to ensure the safety and security of all personnel under
the auspices of the United Nations participating in peacekeeping
missions, bearing in mind paragraphs 5 and 6 of Security
Council resolution 1502 (2003) of 26 August 2003;
12. Requests the Secretary-General to review the level
and functions of the protocol officers, bearing in mind the
relevant observations of the Advisory Committee, and to report
thereon in the context of the relevant budget submissions;
V
Shared funding of posts of Deputy Special
Representatives of the Secretary-General
1. Takes note of paragraph 62 of the report of the
Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary
Questions,112 and in this regard decides that the position of the
Deputy Special Representative of the Secretary-General, who
heads the humanitarian pillar and serves as Resident
Coordinator, will be funded through a cost-sharing arrangement
with the United Nations Development Programme;
2. Requests the Secretary-General to report, in the
context of the overview report, on the outcome of the exchange
of letters, specifying agreed generic job profiles, organizational
structure and cost-sharing arrangements with the United
Nations Development Programme;
3. Also requests the Secretary-General to report the
necessary reimbursement for the transition period, reflecting the
effective start date of the cost-sharing arrangements, in the
context of the budget performance reports;
VI
Disarmament, demobilization (including
reinsertion) and reintegration
1.

Takes note of the note by the Secretary-General;115

8. Stresses the need to improve the cooperation and
coordination between the peacekeeping missions and
Headquarters with regard to lessons learned and areas of
common interest that could be used by all missions;

2. Notes that reinsertion activities are part of the
disarmament and demobilization process, as outlined in the note
by the Secretary-General;

9. Requests the Secretary-General to ensure that all
relevant financial regulations and rules, staff regulations and

3. Emphasizes that disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration programmes are a critical part of peace processes

_______________

_______________

114

115

88

Including those contained in its report in document A/58/746.

A/C.5/59/31.

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

and integrated peacekeeping operations, as mandated by the
Security Council, and supports strengthening the coordination
of those programmes in an integrated approach;
4. Stresses the importance of a clear description of
respective roles of peacekeeping missions and all other relevant
actors;
5. Also stresses the need for strengthened cooperation
and coordination between the various actors within and outside
the United Nations system to ensure effective use of resources
and coherence on the ground in implementing disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration programmes;
6. Requests the Secretary-General, when submitting
future budget proposals containing mandated resource
requirements for disarmament, demobilization and reinsertion,
to provide clear information on these components and
associated post and non-post costs;
7. Notes that the components used by the SecretaryGeneral for budgeting for disarmament, demobilization and
reinsertion activities are set out in the note by the SecretaryGeneral, recognizing ongoing discussions on these concepts;
8. Notes also the intention of the Secretary-General
to submit integrated disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration standards to the General Assembly at its sixtieth
session;
VII
Quick-impact projects
Requests the Secretary-General to streamline the process
of implementation of quick-impact projects and to ensure that
they are fully implemented within the planned time frames;

measures to expedite recruitment for field missions, taking into
account the delegation of recruitment authority to field
missions, including the use of fair and transparent recruitment
procedures and monitoring mechanisms, 120 on measures that
would better streamline the policy guidelines related to the
temporary duty assignment of staff in peacekeeping missions,121
on the status of the civilian rapid deployment roster,122 on the
staffing of field missions, including the use of 300- and
100-series appointments123 and the relevant section of the report
of the Advisory Committee,124
Having further considered the notes by the SecretaryGeneral transmitting the reports of the Office of Internal
Oversight Services on the audit of the policies and procedures
for recruiting Department of Peacekeeping Operations staff125
and on the follow-up audit of the policies and procedures of the
Department of Peacekeeping Operations for recruiting
international civilian staff for field missions,126
1. Emphasizes the importance of finalizing the
comprehensive training strategy, and decides to restrict training
away from mission headquarters of civilian staff to training
specific to the implementation of the mandate of the mission,
the effective functioning of the mission, the function of a post
or, where it is cost-effective, until the finalization of the strategy;
2. Requests the Secretary-General to report on the
finalization and implementation of the comprehensive training
strategy along with the framework of the evaluation of training
to the General Assembly at its sixtieth session in the context of
his overview report;
3. Also requests the Secretary-General to ensure that
the comprehensive training strategy includes the training needs
of national staff for the purpose of capacity-building in the
mission area;

Training, recruitment and staff in the field

4. Further requests the Secretary-General to ensure
that staff in all United Nations peacekeeping operations have
access to relevant training opportunities;

Recalling its resolutions 56/293 of 27 June 2002 and
57/318 of 18 June 2003,

5. Requests the Secretary-General to make greater use
of national staff;

Having considered the report of the Secretary-General on
the training policy and evaluation system of the Department of
Peacekeeping Operations,116 and the relevant paragraphs of the
report of the Advisory Committee on Administrative and
Budgetary Questions,117

6. Recalls section X, paragraph 7, of its resolution
59/266 of 23 December 2004, decides to establish an overall
target of no more than 5 per cent of authorized General
Service/Field Service posts across missions, with the exception
of those missions in a start-up phase, and other exceptional

Having also considered the reports of the SecretaryGeneral on the criteria used for recruitment to support account
posts,118 on greater use of national staff in field missions,119 on

_______________

VIII

120

A/58/764.
A/57/787.
122
A/59/763.
123
A/59/762.
124
A/59/736, paras. 123–144.
125
A/58/704.
126
A/59/152.
121

_______________
116

A/58/753.
A/59/736, paras. 73–79 and 117.
118
A/58/767.
119
A/58/765.
117

89

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

circumstances, to be filled by staff on assignment from
Headquarters, and requests the Secretary-General to report on
the progress towards reaching this target;
7. Affirms that locally recruited mission staff may be
recruited as international staff only through the normal
recruitment process in which they compete for international
posts in another mission along with other external candidates;
8. Requests the Secretary-General to ensure that the
highest standards of efficiency, competence and integrity serve
as the paramount consideration in the employment of staff, with
due regard for the principle of equitable geographical
distribution, in accordance with Article 101, paragraph 3, of the
Charter of the United Nations;
9. Reiterates its request to the Secretary-General to
make every effort to fill vacant posts in peacekeeping operations
expeditiously;
10. Decides that generic vacancy announcements posted
in Galaxy shall be accompanied by information on the location
of current specific vacancies and that this would apply to all
international vacancies in peacekeeping missions;
11. Notes with concern the observations of the Advisory
Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions, in
paragraphs 55 and 56 of its report,112 regarding the practice of
hiring individual contractors or individuals on procurement
contracts to perform functions of a continuing nature, and
requests the Secretary-General to revert to the General
Assembly for its consideration of the creation of a post if the
function is ongoing and is so warranted;
12. Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General on
criteria used for recruitment to support account posts,118 and
requests the Secretary-General to update the information and to
submit a report thereon to the General Assembly at its sixty-first
session for its consideration in the context of human resources
management;
13. Recalls section X of its resolution 59/266;
14. Regrets that the report of the Secretary-General on
the staffing of field missions, including the use of 300- and
100-series appointments,123 did not fully provide the
information requested in section X, paragraphs 2 and 3, of
resolution 59/266, and in this context reiterates its request to the
Secretary-General in section X, paragraph 3, of its resolution
59/266;
15. Decides to continue to suspend the application of the
four-year maximum limit for appointments of limited duration
under the 300 series of the Staff Rules in peacekeeping
operations until 30 June 2006;
16. Authorizes the Secretary-General, bearing in mind
paragraph 15 above, to reappoint under the 100 series of the
Staff Rules those mission staff whose service under 300-series
contracts has reached the four-year limit by 30 June 2006,
90

provided that their functions have been reviewed and found
necessary and their performance has been confirmed as fully
satisfactory, and requests the Secretary-General to report
thereon to the General Assembly at the second part of its
resumed sixtieth session;
17. Notes the fact that 278 of 346 eligible staff were
judged to have performed “fully satisfactorily”, and requests the
Secretary-General to apply rigorously the criteria set out in its
resolution 59/266;
18. Requests the Secretary-General to continue the
practice of using 300-series contracts as the primary instrument
for the appointment of new mission staff;
IX
Conditions of service
1. Recalls section X, paragraphs 5 and 6, of its
resolution 59/266, in which the General Assembly requested the
International Civil Service Commission and the SecretaryGeneral to review conditions of service in the field and to report
to the Assembly at its sixty-first session;
2. Decides to limit conversion of General Service posts
to the Field Service category pending receipt of that review;
3. Also decides that the review of the field service is
the appropriate mechanism for possible recognition of hardship,
if warranted;
X
Mission subsistence allowance
Recalling its resolution 58/258 of 23 December 2003,
Having considered the report of the Office of Internal
Oversight Services on the audit of mission subsistence
allowance policies and procedures 127 and the note by the
Secretary-General transmitting his comments thereon,128
1. Requests the Secretary-General to ensure that the
Office of Internal Oversight Services continues to audit the
mission subsistence allowance rates to ensure their
reasonableness in comparison with the actual subsistence costs
in the various mission areas and with the daily subsistence
allowance set by the International Civil Service Commission in
the same areas;
2. Decides to revert to the question of mission
subsistence allowance rates and the recommendations of the
Office of Internal Oversight Services in the context of the
review of conditions of service in the field, requested by the

_______________
127
128

A/59/698.
A/59/698/Add.1.

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

General Assembly in section X, paragraphs 5 and 6, of its
resolution 59/266;
3. Also decides that specific guidelines and criteria for
the setting of miscellaneous or incidental costs as a component
of the mission subsistence allowance should be developed,
taking into account that mission subsistence allowance rates
should not, as a general principle, exceed those of the daily
subsistence allowance in the same locality;
XI
Participation of United Nations Volunteers
Recalling its resolution 54/245 A of 23 December 1999,
Having considered the report of the Secretary-General on
the participation of United Nations Volunteers in peacekeeping
operations, 129 the report of the Joint Inspection Unit on the
evaluation of the United Nations Volunteers Programme130 and
the note by the Secretary-General transmitting his comments
thereon,131 and the related reports of the Advisory Committee
on Administrative and Budgetary Questions,132
1. Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General on
the participation of United Nations Volunteers in peacekeeping
operations,129 the report of the Joint Inspection Unit on the
evaluation of the United Nations Volunteers Programme130 and
the note by the Secretary-General transmitting his comments
thereon,131 and endorses the observations and recommendations
of the Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary
Questions, as contained in paragraphs 70 to 72 of its report;112
2. Acknowledges the valuable contribution of United
Nations Volunteers in the United Nations system;

6. Also requests the Secretary-General to take into
account greater use of national staff in peacekeeping operations,
when feasible;
XII
Military component
1. Requests the Secretary-General to make every effort
to reimburse Member States that have provided troops and
equipment to United Nations peacekeeping operations in a
timely manner;
2. Also requests the Secretary-General to ensure that
the deployment of troops and contingent-owned equipment is
well coordinated so that troops are not deployed without their
equipment;
XIII
Regional investigators
Having considered the note by the Secretary-General
transmitting the report of the Office of Internal Oversight
Services on the first year of experience of regional investigators
in two hubs, Vienna and Nairobi,133
Takes note of the findings and recommendations
contained in the report of the Office of Internal Oversight
Services on the first year of experience of regional investigators
in two hubs, Vienna and Nairobi, and emphasizes in particular
the utilization of resident investigators to do investigations in the
large peacekeeping missions and regional investigators to do
investigations in the other missions and to provide support for
complex cases in the large missions;

3. Recognizes that Volunteers should not be used as a
substitute for staff to be recruited against authorized posts for
the implementation of mandated programmes and activities and
should not be sought for financial reasons;
4. Takes note of paragraph 25 of the report of the
Secretary-General and the intention of the Department of
Peacekeeping Operations to continue its efforts to exploit the
potential for increased use of United Nations Volunteers in
peacekeeping operations in those functions or skills which are
not normally available in the Secretariat or which are limited;
5. Requests the Secretary-General to continue to
ensure that Volunteers are subject to the same obligations and
responsibilities, including standards of conduct, that the United
Nations staff are subject to;

XIV
Sexual exploitation and abuse
Recalling its resolution 59/300 of 22 June 2005,
Reaffirming its resolutions 48/218 B of 29 July 1994,
54/244 of 23 December 1999, 59/272 of 23 December 2004 and
59/287 of 13 April 2005,
Having considered the report of the Secretary-General on
special measures for protection from sexual exploitation and
sexual abuse134 and the report on the investigation by the Office
of Internal Oversight Services into allegations of sexual
exploitation and abuse in the United Nations Organization
Mission in the Democratic Republic of the Congo,135

_______________
129

_______________

130

133

A/55/697.
See A/59/68.
131
A/59/68/Add.1.
132
A/55/874, paras. 41–45 and A/59/736, paras. 70–72.

A/59/546.
A/59/782.
135
A/59/661.
134

91

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

1. Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General on
special measures for protection from sexual exploitation and
sexual abuse134 and the report on the investigation by the Office
of Internal Oversight Services into allegations of sexual
exploitation and abuse in the United Nations Organization
Mission in the Democratic Republic of the Congo;135
2. Emphasizes the need for the development of a
comprehensive, well-defined and coherent policy, taking into
account also the relevant provisions of resolution 59/300,
addressing, inter alia, the various managerial aspects of
preventing and addressing allegations of sexual exploitation and
abuse in all United Nations activities;
3. Affirms that the implementation of a zero-tolerance
policy and procedures towards acts of sexual exploitation and
abuse should be clearly defined as a core management function,
in particular also addressing clear lines of responsibility and
accountability relating to the non-implementation and
non-enforcement of codes of conduct, policies and preventive
measures, and should ensure that adequate mechanisms are in
place in this regard;
4. Requests the Secretary-General to submit to the
General Assembly at its sixtieth session a comprehensive report
based on a thorough analysis of the aspects referred to
paragraphs 2 and 3 of the present section, as well as addressing
the following:
(a) Systematic consideration of the full continuum of
personnel conduct issues, including policy development, training,
community relations, compliance supervision, accountability,
discipline and investigation;
(b) Clear demonstration that existing expertise and
resources in the Organization, both at Headquarters and in the
field, including on child protection, gender, public information
and other components within their specific roles and mandates,
as well as human resources management and training, are fully
utilized, and that relevant resource requests avoid duplication of
resources and functions and enhance coordination among
relevant departments and offices, while ensuring the effective
implementation of the mandates of the missions;
(c) Clear reporting lines and proposals for the
placement of the proposed capacity dealing with personnel
conduct issues, bearing in mind that the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General is ultimately accountable;
(d) Full justification of resource requirements, both at
Headquarters and in the field, taking into account the specificities
of each mission and based on empirical data on the actual number
of allegations and cases of sexual exploitation and abuse;

92

XV
Global audit of field security management
Having considered the report of the Office of Internal
Oversight Services on the global audit of field security
management,136
Decides to defer until its sixtieth session consideration of
the report of the Office of Internal Oversight Services in the
context of its consideration of a strengthened and unified
security management system for the United Nations;
XVI
Procurement
Recalling its resolutions 57/290 B of 18 June 2003,
58/297 of 18 June 2004 and section A of its resolution 59/288 of
13 April 2005,
Having considered the reports of the Secretary-General on
procurement and contract management for peacekeeping
operations137 and the related report of the Advisory Committee
on Administrative and Budgetary Questions,138
Having also considered the reports of the SecretaryGeneral on the analysis of establishing a global procurement
hub for all peacekeeping missions at Brindisi, Italy,139 and on
the implementation of the strategic deployment stocks,
including the functioning of the existing mechanisms and the
award of contracts for procurement,140 and the related reports of
the Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary
Questions,141
Having further considered the note by the SecretaryGeneral transmitting the report of the Office of Internal
Oversight Services on the procurement of goods and services
through letters of assist,142
1. Requests the Secretary-General, in order to improve
the transparency and efficiency of procurement in peacekeeping
operations, to ensure implementation of and compliance with
the mechanisms aimed at facilitating the compilation by all
missions of an assessment of progress and final performance of
vendors and its immediate transmission to the United Nations
Procurement Service at Headquarters;
2. Notes progress towards the harmonization of
Headquarters and mission procurement databases, and in this
_______________
136

A/59/702.
A/58/761 and A/59/688.
138
A/59/722.
139
A/59/703.
140
A/59/701.
141
A/59/736/Add.2 and A/59/736, paras. 114–116.
142
A/57/718.
137

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

regard welcomes the continued efforts towards improved
transparency and accountability of a comprehensive procurement
system, including the availability of peacekeeping procurement
data for Member States, as currently displayed on the United
Nations Procurement Service web site;

3. Also requests the Secretary-General to ensure that
formal written agreements are in place, which include elements
such as financial reimbursement and liability, with other United
Nations bodies before loaning out to them resources belonging
to a peacekeeping operation;

3. Requests the Secretary-General to continue to
improve reporting procurement data to Member States and to
consider procurement system processes utilized in the
government and private sectors;

4. Commends the ongoing efforts to increase
cooperation between missions, particularly those in the same
region, and stresses that any agreement on the loan or sharing of
mission assets should be clearly understood and documented by
the missions involved, bearing in mind that individual
operations should remain responsible for preparing and
overseeing their own budgets as well as for controlling their
own assets and logistical operations;

4. Notes the efforts made by the Secretary-General to
increase procurement opportunities for developing countries
and countries with economies in transition, and requests the
Secretary-General:
(a) To continue to simplify the vendor registration
process, taking into account access to the Internet;
(b) To take further steps to sensitize the business
community to procurement opportunities within the United
Nations system, including:
(i)

The holding of additional business seminars;

(ii) Inviting the Inter-Agency Procurement Working
Group to hold more meetings in developing countries;
(iii) Including the issue of diversity of sources of
procurement as an agenda item at the annual meetings of
the Inter-Agency Procurement Working Group;
5. Requests the Secretary-General to ensure that all
peacekeeping missions operate with reference to their
procurement plans in order to realize the benefits offered by
proper procurement planning;
6. Encourages the Secretary-General to continue to
monitor and address causes of excessive procurement lead
times at peacekeeping missions;
7. Also encourages the Secretary-General to continue
to ensure that all peacekeeping missions formally identify the
training needs of all procurement officers and communicate
these needs to Headquarters in order to ensure that training
follows proper planning and evaluation of its effectiveness;

XVIII
Information technology
Having considered the reports of the Secretary-General on
the functional requirements of field missions for communication
and information technology 143 and on the information and
communications technology strategy: arrangements for the
Galaxy system144 and the relevant section of the report of the
Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary
Questions,145
1. Requests the Secretary-General to take fully into
account the return on investment for information and
communication technology and to report on its impact on the
resource requirements for the support account for peacekeeping
operations;
2. Also requests the Secretary-General to ensure the
full implementation of the information and communications
technology strategy adopted by the General Assembly in order
to avoid unnecessary redundancies;
3. Further requests the Secretary-General to implement
the Galileo system in all peacekeeping operations in order to
unify peacekeeping operations inventory;
XIX
Air operations
Recalling section B of its resolution 59/288,

XVII
Asset management
1. Reiterates that the Department of Peacekeeping
Operations should ensure that all missions implement an assets
replacement programme in a cost-effective manner and in strict
compliance with the guidelines on the life expectancy of assets;
2. Requests the Secretary-General to ensure that the
heads of the peacekeeping operations take effective measures to
ensure inventory control, replenishment of stocks and
reasonable write-off procedures for the disposal of assets no
longer required or useful;

1. Requests the Secretary-General to take all necessary
actions to ensure that staff members involved in air operations
are adequately trained, as specified in the Air Operations
Manual;

_______________
143

A/58/740.
A/59/265/Add.1.
145
See A/59/736, sect. III.E.
144

93

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

2. Also requests the Secretary-General to continue to
conduct aviation quality inspections and aviation assessments at
missions to confirm that established standards are being fully
complied with;
3. Further requests the Secretary-General to improve
the formulation of resource requirements for air operations in
budget submissions to make them more reflective of actual
operations, bearing in mind the overbudgeting of air
transportation requirements in some peacekeeping operations;
4. Requests the Secretary-General to undertake an
analysis of the impact of the new costing structure relating to air
operations, bearing in mind the relevant observations and
recommendations of the Advisory Committee on Administrative
and Budgetary Questions and the Board of Auditors, and to
report thereon in the context of his next overview report;
XX
Ground transportation
1. Requests the Secretary-General to provide the
General Assembly with a cost-benefit analysis on the issue of
the transfer of vehicles with high mileage to the United Nations
Logistics Base at Brindisi, Italy, to other missions and to
upcoming missions, taking into account the cost of freight, and
to report thereon to the Assembly at its sixtieth session;
2. Also requests the Secretary-General, in the context
of his overview report, to provide detailed information on the
implementation of the vehicle policy, as requested in
paragraph 86 of the report of the Advisory Committee on
Administrative and Budgetary Questions;112
3. Further requests the Secretary-General to develop a
standard policy with regard to the purchase and assignment of
standard civilian and specially equipped armoured vehicles, as
well as representational vehicles;
XXI
Ratios of vehicles and information technology
equipment to staff
1. Notes with concern the lack of information on the
implementation of ratios of vehicles to staff and discrepancies in
the implementation of standard ratios;
2. Requests the Secretary-General to ensure that
peacekeeping operations adhere to the standard ratios, bearing
in mind the mandate, complexities and size of individual
peacekeeping operations;
3. Also requests the Secretary-General to ensure that in
all missions the actual ratio of heavy/medium vehicles is no
greater than the established standard ratio of 1:1 and to justify
any departure from this standard ratio;
94

4. Further requests the Secretary-General to review the
policies on standard ratios of vehicles to staff and to provide the
General Assembly, in the context of the overview report, with
information on the outcome of the review and efforts to ensure
that individual peacekeeping operations adhere to the standard
ratios, while bearing in mind the mandate, complexity and size
of individual operations;
5. Requests the Secretary-General to apply greater
economies in the provision of 4x4 vehicles for civilian staff in
missions, in particular but not limited to senior staff at the D-1
level and above, bearing in mind that the existing ratio for 4x4
vehicles must not be exceeded, and to report on the
implementation thereof to the General Assembly at its sixtieth
session in the context of the overview report;
6. Encourages the Secretary-General progressively to
reduce the allocation of one printer per work station and to
implement, with immediate effect, where it is cost-effective and
feasible, the ratio of printers to desktop computers of 1:4 for all
work stations in peacekeeping missions, at Headquarters and in
the field;
7. Decides to defer consideration of new provisions for
desktop computers, printers and laptops at Headquarters and in
the field with the exception of new missions and those missions
undergoing expansion according to Security Council mandates
as well as for replacement purposes in strict compliance with
the General Assembly resolution, pending the report of the
Office of Internal Oversight Services on the comprehensive
management audit to review the practices of the Department of
Peacekeeping Operations, mentioned in section IV, paragraph 4,
of the present resolution;
XXII
Rations contracts
1. Requests the Secretary-General to undertake a costbenefit analysis of the delivery of food rations by air assets,
without prejudice to the delivery of food to the troops, and to
implement the most viable and cost-effective option in each
peacekeeping operation;
2. Also requests the Secretary-General to ensure that all
missions monitor and evaluate the quality management systems
of rations contractors to ensure that food quality and hygienic
conditions are in accordance with established standards;
3. Further requests the Secretary-General to undertake
a cost-benefit analysis of the use of an independent inspection
mechanism to verify the fulfilment by contractors and vendors
of all contract specifications regarding quality, hygiene and
delivery plans.

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

RESOLUTION 59/297
Adopted at the 104th plenary meeting, on 22 June 2005, without a vote, on the
recommendation of the Committee (A/59/532/Add.1, para. 21)146

59/297. Peacekeeping Reserve Fund
The General Assembly,
Having considered the reports of the Secretary-General on
the Peacekeeping Reserve Fund147 and the related reports of
the Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary
Questions,148
Recalling its resolution 47/217 of 23 December 1992 on
the establishment of the Peacekeeping Reserve Fund and its
resolutions 49/233 A of 23 December 1994 and 51/218 E of
17 June 1997,
Reaffirming the general principles underlying the
financing of United Nations peacekeeping operations, as stated
in General Assembly resolutions 1874 (S-IV) of 27 June 1963,
3101 (XXVIII) of 11 December 1973 and 55/235 of
23 December 2000,
1. Takes note of the status of contributions to the
Peacekeeping Reserve Fund as at 31 December 2004;149
2. Also takes note of the reports of the Advisory
Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions;148
3. Decides that the excess balance of 13,790,000
United States dollars in respect of the financial period ended
30 June 2004 shall be applied to meet the financing of the
support account for peacekeeping operations for the period from
1 July 2005 to 30 June 2006.
RESOLUTION 59/298
Adopted at the 104th plenary meeting, on 22 June 2005, without a vote, on the
recommendation of the Committee (A/59/532/Add.1, para. 21)150

59/298. Reformed procedures for determining
reimbursement to Member States for contingentowned equipment
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 55/274 of 14 June 2001,

_______________
146
The draft resolution recommended in the report was submitted by the
Chairman of the Committee.
147
A/58/724 and A/59/787.
148
A/58/732 and A/59/791.
149
See ST/ADM/SER.B/642, annex XLII.
150
The draft resolution recommended in the report was submitted by the
Chairman of the Committee.

Having considered the report of the Secretary-General on
the reformed procedures for determining reimbursement to
Member States for contingent-owned equipment,151 the letter
dated 12 March 2004 from the Chairman of the 2004 Working
Group on Contingent-Owned Equipment to the Chairman of the
Fifth Committee 152 and the related reports of the Advisory
Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions,153
1. Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General on
the reformed procedures for determining reimbursement to
Member States for contingent-owned equipment,151 the letter
dated 12 March 2004 from the Chairman of the 2004 Working
Group on Contingent-Owned Equipment to the Chairman of the
Fifth Committee152 and the related reports of the Advisory
Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions;153
2. Endorses the conclusions and recommendations
contained in the reports of the Advisory Committee on
Administrative and Budgetary Questions, subject to the
provisions of the present resolution;
3. Regrets that the 2004 Working Group on
Contingent-Owned Equipment was unable to reach consensus
on, inter alia, a review of the rates of reimbursement for
contingent-owned equipment and self-sustainment;
4. Decides to approve the proposal of the SecretaryGeneral that the next Working Group on Contingent-Owned
Equipment, which will meet in 2008, carry out a comprehensive
review of the contingent-owned equipment system, as per the
formats established by the Phase V Working Group, for a period
of not less than fourteen working days;
5. Urges the Secretary-General to explore the
possibility of holding the Working Group meeting earlier than
2008, if feasible;
6. Decides that the next Working Group on
Contingent-Owned Equipment will consider, without prejudice
to the comprehensive review of the contingent-owned
equipment system, in recommending any revision of rates of
reimbursement for contingent-owned equipment and selfsustainment, the fact that there was no revision of such rates for
the period 2004 to 2008 owing to the lack of consensus on an
increase in the rates and on the methodology of the 2004
Working Group;
7. Notes that, in addition to maintaining all existing
components of the current methodology, the Secretary-General
had proposed the inclusion of peacekeeping-related training
costs and post-deployment medical costs in the troop
reimbursement methodology;

_______________
151

A/59/292.
A/C.5/58/37 and Corr.1.
153
A/59/708 and A/59/736.
152

95

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

8. Regrets that the 2004 Working Group on
Contingent-Owned Equipment was unable to reach consensus
on the components for inclusion in the troop-cost reimbursement
methodology;
9. Notes that the report of the Secretary-General on
the rates of reimbursement to the Governments of troopcontributing countries 154 did not address all elements of the
request made in paragraph 8 of General Assembly resolution
55/274;
10. Reiterates its request contained in paragraph 8 of its
resolution 55/274, and requests the Secretary-General to submit
to the General Assembly at its sixtieth session a comprehensive
report thereon, addressing all elements;
11. Notes that the Secretary-General, in preparing the
comprehensive report, may utilize, as appropriate, external
expertise;
12. Decides to review the daily allowance for troops at
its resumed sixtieth session, based on information to be
provided in the context of the comprehensive report referred to
in paragraph 10 above;
13. Also decides to set up a channel of communication
between the Secretariat and the Member States on the
contingent-owned equipment system, strictly for the exchange
of information and for seeking clarification and not for reaching
decisions that are within the mandate of the Working Group on
Contingent-Owned Equipment and relevant intergovernmental
bodies.
RESOLUTION 59/299
Adopted at the 104th plenary meeting, on 22 June 2005, without a vote, on the
recommendation of the Committee (A/59/532/Add.1, para. 21)155

59/299. Financing of the United Nations Logistics Base at
Brindisi, Italy
The General Assembly,
Recalling section XIV of its resolution 49/233 A of
23 December 1994,
Recalling also its decision 50/500 of 17 September 1996
on the financing of the United Nations Logistics Base at
Brindisi, Italy, and its subsequent resolutions and decisions
thereon, the latest of which was resolution 58/297 of 18 June
2004,
Recalling further its resolution 56/292 of 27 June 2002
concerning the establishment of the strategic deployment stocks
_______________
154

A/57/774.
The draft resolution recommended in the report was submitted by the
Chairman of the Committee.
155

96

and its subsequent resolutions 57/315 of 18 June 2003 and
58/297 of 18 June 2004 on the status of the implementation of
the strategic deployment stocks,
Having considered the reports of the Secretary-General on
the financing of the United Nations Logistics Base156 and on the
implementation of the strategic deployment stocks, including
the functioning of the existing mechanisms and the award of
contracts for procurement,157 and the related reports of the
Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary
Questions,158
Reiterating the importance of establishing an accurate
inventory of assets,
1. Notes with appreciation the facilities provided by
the Government of Italy to the United Nations Logistics Base at
Brindisi;
2. Endorses the conclusions and recommendations
contained in the report of the Advisory Committee on
Administrative and Budgetary Questions,159 and requests the
Secretary-General to ensure their full implementation;
3. Notes the proposal of the Secretary-General to
expand the Logistics Base, and requests the Secretary-General
to include in the budget submission for 2006/07 detailed
information on the financial and legal implications, as well as
on the expected benefits that may arise from the expansion;
4. Encourages the Secretary-General to ensure the
active participation of the Department of Peacekeeping
Operations of the Secretariat in the negotiations between the
World Food Programme and the Government of Italy
concerning the release of the San Vito Base;
5. Requests the Secretary-General to ensure the full
implementation of the relevant provisions of General Assembly
resolution 59/296 of 22 June 2005;
6. Also requests the Secretary-General to undertake a
further analysis of how the Logistics Base could best be utilized
to provide efficient and economical communications and
information technology services, as well as other services, for
United Nations peacekeeping and Headquarters clients;
7. Reiterates the need to implement, as a matter of
priority, an effective inventory management standard, especially
in respect of peacekeeping operations involving high inventory
value;

_______________
156

A/59/681 and A/59/691.
A/59/701.
158
A/59/736 and Add.2.
159
A/59/736/Add.2.
157

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

Strategic deployment stocks
8. Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General on
the implementation of the strategic deployment stocks,
including the functioning of the existing mechanisms and the
award of contracts for procurement;157
9. Also takes note of the deficiencies in the contingentowned equipment of rehatted troops, and requests the SecretaryGeneral to review options for the effective rehatting of
contingents and provide recommendations in this regard;
10. Approves the use of savings derived from the
liquidation of prior-period obligations and the unspent balance
of the strategic deployment stocks to cover losses in currency
exchange and the replenishment of the stocks;
11. Also approves the inclusion of strategic deployment
stocks replenishment within the commitment authority
described in section IV, paragraph 1, of General Assembly
resolution 49/233 A;
12. Requests the Secretary-General to ensure the
implementation of the existing policies and procedures relating
to stock control and inventory and replenishment, regarding
strategic deployment;
Financial performance report for the period from 1 July
2003 to 30 June 2004
13. Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General on
the financial performance of the United Nations Logistics Base
for the period from 1 July 2003 to 30 June 2004;160
Budget estimates for the period from 1 July 2005 to 30 June
2006
14. Approves the cost estimates for the United Nations
Logistics Base amounting to 31,513,100 United States dollars
for the period from 1 July 2005 to 30 June 2006;
Financing of the budget estimates
15. Decides that the requirements for the United Nations
Logistics Base for the period from 1 July 2005 to 30 June 2006
shall be financed as follows:
(a) The unencumbered balance and other income in the
total amount of 2,441,000 dollars in respect of the financial
period ended 30 June 2004 to be applied against the resources
required for the period from 1 July 2005 to 30 June 2006;
(b) The balance of 29,072,100 dollars to be prorated
among the budgets of the active peacekeeping operations for the
period from 1 July 2005 to 30 June 2006;

(c) The net estimated staff assessment income of
2,351,700 dollars, comprising the amount of 2,233,100 dollars
for the period from 1 July 2005 to 30 June 2006 and the
increase of 118,600 dollars in respect of the financial period
ended 30 June 2004, to be set off against the balance referred to
in subparagraph (b) above, to be prorated among the budgets of
the individual active peacekeeping operations;
16. Also decides to consider at its sixtieth session the
question of the financing of the United Nations Logistics Base
at Brindisi, Italy.
RESOLUTION 59/301
Adopted at the 104th plenary meeting, on 22 June 2005, without a vote, on the
recommendation of the Committee (A/59/532/Add.1, para. 21)161

59/301. Support account for peacekeeping operations
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 45/258 of 3 May 1991, 47/218 A
of 23 December 1992, 48/226 A of 23 December 1993, 56/241
of 24 December 2001, 56/293 of 27 June 2002, 57/318 of
18 June 2003, 58/298 of 18 June 2004 and 59/287 of
13 April 2005, its decisions 48/489 of 8 July 1994, 49/469 of
23 December 1994 and 50/473 of 23 December 1995 and other
relevant resolutions of the General Assembly,
Having considered the reports of the Secretary-General on
the financing of the support account for peacekeeping
operations162 and the related reports of the Advisory Committee
on Administrative and Budgetary Questions,163
Recognizing the importance of the United Nations being
able to respond and deploy rapidly to a peacekeeping operation
upon adoption of a relevant resolution of the Security Council,
within thirty days for traditional peacekeeping operations and
ninety days for complex peacekeeping operations,
Recognizing also the need for adequate support during all
phases of peacekeeping operations, including the liquidation
and termination phases,
Mindful that the level of the support account should
broadly correspond to the mandate, number, size and
complexity of peacekeeping missions,
1. Takes note of the reports of the Secretary-General on
the financing of the support account for peacekeeping
operations;162

_______________
161

_______________
160

A/59/681.

The draft resolution recommended in the report was submitted by the
Chairman of the Committee.
162
A/59/714 and Add.1 and A/59/730.
163
A/59/736 and A/59/784.

97

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

2. Reaffirms the need for effective and efficient
administration and financial management of peacekeeping
operations, and urges the Secretary-General to continue to
identify measures to increase the productivity and efficiency of
the support account;
3. Also reaffirms the need for adequate funding for the
backstopping of peacekeeping operations, as well as the need
for full justification for that funding in support account budget
submissions;
4. Requests the Secretary-General to ensure the full
implementation of the relevant provisions of General Assembly
resolution 59/296 of 22 June 2005;
5. Endorses the conclusions and recommendations
contained in the relevant report of the Advisory Committee on
Administrative and Budgetary Questions, 164 subject to the
provisions of the present resolution;
6. Requests the Secretary-General to rejustify the need
for the P-5 post in the Executive Office of the Secretary-General
at the sixtieth session;
7. Decides to maintain, for the period from 1 July 2005
to 30 June 2006, the funding mechanism for the support account
used in the current period, from 1 July 2004 to 30 June 2005, as
approved in paragraph 3 of its resolution 50/221 B of
7 June 1996;
8. Reaffirms the need for the Secretary-General to
ensure that delegation of authority to the Department of
Peacekeeping Operations of the Secretariat and field missions is
in strict compliance with relevant resolutions and decisions and
the relevant rules and procedures of the General Assembly on
this matter;
9. Decides to provide general temporary assistance to
implement and monitor the environmental protection
programmes in the field, and requests the Secretary-General to
rejustify this position by providing additional information on the
necessity of the backstopping capacity at Headquarters and on
the ongoing cooperative arrangements with the United Nations
Environment Programme in the area of environmental
protection;
10. Approves the establishment of the post of Police
Generation Officer (P-4) in the Civilian Police Division;
11. Decides to provide general temporary assistance for
the P-3 post for the secretariat of the Fifth Committee;

market prices for these items, and to submit its findings to the
General Assembly at the second part of its resumed sixtieth
session;
13. Decides that all future requests for additional
headquarters capacity linked to new or expanded peacekeeping
or peace support missions must be accompanied by an analysis
of spare capacity created by any downsizing or liquidation of
other missions;
14. Also decides that following the end of mandate of
missions, mission-specific posts in the Office of Operations of
the Department of Peacekeeping Operations should be
disestablished or redeployed and reflected accordingly in the
next support account proposal;
15. Further decides not to provide funds in the amount
of 350,000 United States dollars for the independent review of
the Department of Peacekeeping Operations, as requested in
paragraph 63 of the report of the Secretary-General;165
16. Decides not to provide funds for Enterprise Content
Management and Customer Relationship Management pilot
projects, with the exception of the resources of 149,000 dollars
sought for the Archives and Records Management Section in
paragraph 366 of the report of the Secretary-General;165
17. Notes that as a result of the expanded range of
activities in the Situation Centre, there is a need for a broader
and balanced range of skills and qualifications, including but not
limited to knowledge of operational military and civilian police
issues, among the Situation Centre officers, and in this regard
requests the Secretary-General to ensure that the 11 Operations
Officer (P-3) posts are available for incumbency to all qualified
candidates, including officers seconded from Member States,
keeping in mind the importance of representation of major
troop-contributing countries;
18. Decides to approve the post of Chief of the Unit
(P-5) to strengthen the Criminal Law and Judicial Advisory
Unit;
Financial performance report for the period from 1 July
2003 to 30 June 2004
19. Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General on
the financial performance of the support account for
peacekeeping operations for the period from 1 July 2003 to
30 June 2004;166

12. Requests the Secretary-General to entrust the Office
of Internal Oversight Services to conduct an audit of standard
costs applied to headquarters overheads such as furniture and
rental of premises, providing comparative costs on current
_______________
_______________

165

164

166

98

A/59/784.

A/59/730.
A/59/714 and Add.1.

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

Budget estimates for the period from 1 July 2005 to 30 June
2006

Herzegovina 169 and the related report of the Advisory
Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions,170

20. Approves the support account requirements in the
amount of 146,935,200 dollars167 for the period from 1 July
2005 to 30 June 2006, including 761 continuing and 70 new
temporary posts and their related post and non-post
requirements;

1. Takes note of the proposal of the Secretary-General
contained in paragraph 13 of his report169 and his intention to
report to the General Assembly at its sixtieth session on the
matter;

Financing of the budget estimates
21. Decides that the requirements for the support
account for peacekeeping operations for the period from 1 July
2005 to 30 June 2006 shall be financed as follows:
(a) The unencumbered balance of 874,800 dollars for
the period from 1 July 2003 to 30 June 2004 and other income
of 1,873,000 dollars related to the period ended 30 June 2004,
to be applied to the resources required for the period from
1 July 2005 to 30 June 2006;
(b) The amount of 13,790,000 dollars in excess of the
authorized level of the Peacekeeping Reserve Fund in respect of
the period ended 30 June 2004 to be applied to the resources
required for the period from 1 July 2005 to 30 June 2006;
(c) The balance of 130,397,400 dollars to be prorated
among the budgets of the active peacekeeping operations for the
period from 1 July 2005 to 30 June 2006;
(d) The net estimated staff assessment income of
18,431,600 dollars, comprising the amount of 18,444,600
dollars for the period from 1 July 2005 to 30 June 2006, 26,400
dollars and 400,300 dollars for the requirements presented in the
statements by the Secretary-General167 and the decrease of
439,700 dollars in respect of the financial period ended 30 June
2004, to be set off against the balance referred to in
subparagraph (c) above, to be prorated among the budgets of
the individual active peacekeeping operations.
RESOLUTION 59/302

2. Also takes note of the status of outstanding
contributions to the United Nations Mission in Bosnia and
Herzegovina as at 15 April 2005 in the amount of 27.9 million
United States dollars, representing some 3 per cent of the total
assessed contributions, notes with concern that only one
hundred and fifteen Member States have paid their assessed
contributions in full, and urges all other Member States, in
particular those in arrears, to ensure payment of their
outstanding assessed contributions;
3. Expresses its appreciation to those Member States
that have paid their assessed contributions in full, and urges all
other Member States to make every possible effort to ensure
payment of their assessed contributions to the Mission in full;
4. Endorses the conclusions and recommendation
contained in the report of the Advisory Committee on
Administrative and Budgetary Questions;170
5. Decides to postpone the return of the net cash
balance of 7,182,000 dollars available as at 30 June 2004 in the
Special Account for the United Nations Mission in Bosnia and
Herzegovina;
6. Also decides that updated information on the
financial position of the Mission shall be included in the report
to be considered by the General Assembly at its sixtieth session
on the updated position of closed peacekeeping missions under
the agenda item entitled “Administrative and budgetary aspects
of the financing of the United Nations peacekeeping
operations”;
7. Further decides that the item entitled “Financing of
the United Nations Mission in Bosnia and Herzegovina” shall
be deleted from its agenda.

Adopted at the 104th plenary meeting, on 22 June 2005, without a vote, on the
recommendation of the Committee (A/59/832, para. 6)168

59/302. Financing of the United Nations Mission in Bosnia
and Herzegovina

RESOLUTION 59/303
Adopted at the 104th plenary meeting, on 22 June 2005, without a vote, on the
recommendation of the Committee (A/59/833, para. 6)171

The General Assembly,
Having considered the report of the Secretary-General on
the financing of the United Nations Mission in Bosnia and
_______________
_______________

169

167

170

See A/C.5/59/28 and Add.1 and Add.1/Corr.1 and A/C.5/59/32.
168
The draft resolution recommended in the report was submitted by the
Chairman of the Committee.

A/59/751.
A/59/736/Add.8.
171
The draft resolution recommended in the report was submitted by the
Chairman of the Committee.

99

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

59/303. Financing of the United Nations Mission in
Ethiopia and Eritrea
The General Assembly,
Having considered the reports of the Secretary-General on
the financing of the United Nations Mission in Ethiopia and
Eritrea172 and the related reports of the Advisory Committee on
Administrative and Budgetary Questions,173
Bearing in mind Security Council resolution 1312 (2000)
of 31 July 2000, by which the Council established the United
Nations Mission in Ethiopia and Eritrea, and the subsequent
resolutions by which the Council extended the mandate of the
Mission, the latest of which was resolution 1586 (2005) of
14 March 2005,
Recalling its resolution 55/237 of 23 December 2000 on
the financing of the Mission and its subsequent resolutions
thereon, the latest of which was resolution 58/302 of 18 June
2004,
Reaffirming the general principles underlying the
financing of United Nations peacekeeping operations, as stated
in General Assembly resolutions 1874 (S-IV) of 27 June 1963,
3101 (XXVIII) of 11 December 1973 and 55/235 of
23 December 2000,
Noting with appreciation that voluntary contributions
have been made to the Mission,
Mindful of the fact that it is essential to provide the
Mission with the necessary financial resources to enable it to
fulfil its responsibilities under the relevant resolutions of the
Security Council,
1. Requests the Secretary-General to entrust the Head
of Mission with the task of formulating future budget proposals
in full accordance with the provisions of General Assembly
resolution 59/296 of 22 June 2005, as well as other relevant
resolutions;
2. Takes note of the status of contributions to the
United Nations Mission in Ethiopia and Eritrea as at 15 April
2005, including the contributions outstanding in the amount of
18.9 million United States dollars, representing some 2 per cent
of the total assessed contributions, notes with concern that only
thirty-one Member States have paid their assessed contributions
in full, and urges all other Member States, in particular those in
arrears, to ensure payment of their outstanding assessed
contributions;
3. Expresses its appreciation to those Member States
which have paid their assessed contributions in full, and urges

all other Member States to make every possible effort to ensure
payment of their assessed contributions to the Mission in full;
4. Expresses concern at the financial situation with
regard to peacekeeping activities, in particular as regards the
reimbursements to troop contributors that bear additional
burdens owing to overdue payments by Member States of their
assessments;
5. Also expresses concern at the delay experienced by
the Secretary-General in deploying and providing adequate
resources to some recent peacekeeping missions, in particular
those in Africa;
6. Emphasizes that all future and existing peacekeeping
missions shall be given equal and non-discriminatory treatment
in respect of financial and administrative arrangements;
7. Also emphasizes that all peacekeeping missions
shall be provided with adequate resources for the effective and
efficient discharge of their respective mandates;
8. Reiterates its request to the Secretary-General to
make the fullest possible use of facilities and equipment at the
United Nations Logistics Base at Brindisi, Italy, in order to
minimize the costs of procurement for the Mission;
9. Endorses the conclusions and recommendations
contained in the report of the Advisory Committee on
Administrative and Budgetary Questions,174 and requests the
Secretary-General to ensure their full implementation;
10. Requests the Secretary-General to ensure the full
implementation of the relevant provisions of its resolution
59/296;
11. Also requests the Secretary-General to take all
necessary action to ensure that the Mission is administered with
a maximum of efficiency and economy;
12. Further requests the Secretary-General, in order to
reduce the cost of employing General Service staff, to continue
efforts to recruit local staff for the Mission against General
Service posts, commensurate with the requirements of the
Mission;
Financial performance report for the period from 1 July
2003 to 30 June 2004
13. Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General on
the financial performance of the Mission for the period from
1 July 2003 to 30 June 2004;175

_______________

_______________

172

174

173

A/59/616 and A/59/636 and Corr.1.
A/59/736 and Add.10.

100

175

A/59/736/Add.10.
A/59/616.

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

Budget estimates for the period from 1 July 2005 to 30 June
2006
14. Decides to appropriate to the Special Account for
the United Nations Mission in Ethiopia and Eritrea the amount
of 185,993,300 dollars for the period from 1 July 2005 to
30 June 2006, inclusive of 176,664,400 dollars for the
maintenance of the Mission, 7,628,200 dollars for the support
account for peacekeeping operations and 1,700,700 dollars for
the United Nations Logistics Base;
Financing of the appropriation
15. Decides also to apportion among Member States the
amount of 38,748,604 dollars for the period from 1 July to
15 September 2005, in accordance with the levels updated in
General Assembly resolution 58/256 of 23 December 2003, and
taking into account the scale of assessments for 2005, as set out
in its resolution 58/1 B of 23 December 2003;
16. Decides further that, in accordance with the
provisions of its resolution 973 (X) of 15 December 1955, there
shall be set off against the apportionment among Member
States, as provided for in paragraph 15 above, their respective
share in the Tax Equalization Fund of 1,186,104 dollars,
comprising the estimated staff assessment income of 932,812
dollars approved for the Mission, the prorated share of 224,625
dollars of the estimated staff assessment income approved for
the support account, and the prorated share of 28,667 dollars of
the estimated staff assessment income approved for the United
Nations Logistics Base;
17. Decides to apportion among Member States the
amount of 147,244,696 dollars for the period from
16 September 2005 to 30 June 2006 at a monthly rate of
15,499,441 dollars, in accordance with the levels updated in
General Assembly resolution 58/256, and taking into account
the scale of assessments for 2005 and 2006, as set out in its
resolution 58/1 B, subject to a decision of the Security Council
to extend the mandate of the Mission;
18. Decides also that, in accordance with the provisions
of its resolution 973 (X), there shall be set off against the
apportionment among Member States, as provided for in
paragraph 17 above, their respective share in the Tax
Equalization Fund of 4,507,196 dollars, comprising the estimated
staff assessment income of 3,544,688 dollars approved for the
Mission, the prorated share of 853,575 dollars of the estimated
staff assessment income approved for the support account and
the prorated share of 108,933 dollars of the estimated staff
assessment income approved for the United Nations Logistics
Base;
19. Decides further that for Member States that have
fulfilled their financial obligations to the Mission, there shall
be set off against their apportionment, as provided for in
paragraph 15 above, their respective share of the unencumbered
balance and other income in the total amount of 20,184,500

dollars in respect of the financial period ended 30 June 2004, in
accordance with the levels updated in General Assembly
resolution 58/256, and taking into account the scale of
assessments for 2004, as set out in its resolution 58/1 B;
20. Decides that, for Member States that have not
fulfilled their financial obligations to the Mission, there shall be
set off against their outstanding obligations their respective
share of the unencumbered balance and other income in the
total amount of 20,184,500 dollars in respect of the financial
period ended 30 June 2004, in accordance with the scheme set
out in paragraph 19 above;
21. Decides also that the increase of 744,800 dollars in
the estimated staff assessment income in respect of the financial
period ended 30 June 2004 shall be added to the credits from
the amount referred to in paragraphs 19 and 20 above;
22. Emphasizes that no peacekeeping operation shall be
financed by borrowing funds from other active peacekeeping
operations;
23. Encourages the Secretary-General to continue to
take additional measures to ensure the safety and security of all
personnel under the auspices of the United Nations participating
in peacekeeping operations, bearing in mind paragraphs 5 and 6
of Security Council resolution 1502 (2003) of 26 August 2003;
24. Invites voluntary contributions to the Mission in
cash and in the form of services and supplies acceptable to the
Secretary-General, to be administered, as appropriate, in
accordance with the procedure and practices established by the
General Assembly;
25. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its
sixtieth session the item entitled “Financing of the United
Nations Mission in Ethiopia and Eritrea”.
RESOLUTION 59/304
Adopted at the 104th plenary meeting, on 22 June 2005, without a vote, on the
recommendation of the Committee (A/59/834, para. 6)176

59/304. Financing of the United Nations Observer Mission
in Georgia
The General Assembly,
Having considered the reports of the Secretary-General on
the financing of the United Nations Observer Mission in
Georgia177 and the related reports of the Advisory Committee
on Administrative and Budgetary Questions,178
_______________
176

The draft resolution recommended in the report was submitted by the
Chairman of the Committee.
177
A/59/622 and A/59/634.
178
A/59/736 and Add.7.

101

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

Recalling Security Council resolution 854 (1993) of
6 August 1993, by which the Council approved the deployment
of an advance team of up to ten United Nations military
observers for a period of three months and the incorporation of
the advance team into a United Nations observer mission if such
a mission was formally established by the Council,

5. Emphasizes that all future and existing peacekeeping
missions shall be given equal and non-discriminatory treatment
in respect of financial and administrative arrangements;

Recalling also Security Council resolution 858 (1993) of
24 August 1993, by which the Council established the United
Nations Observer Mission in Georgia, and the subsequent
resolutions by which the Council extended the mandate of
the Observer Mission, the latest of which was resolution
1582 (2005) of 28 January 2005,

7. Reiterates its request to the Secretary-General to
make the fullest possible use of facilities and equipment at the
United Nations Logistics Base at Brindisi, Italy, in order to
minimize the costs of procurement for the Observer Mission;

Recalling further its decision 48/475 A of 23 December
1993 on the financing of the Observer Mission and its
subsequent resolutions and decisions thereon, the latest of
which was resolution 58/303 of 18 June 2004,
Reaffirming the general principles underlying the
financing of United Nations peacekeeping operations, as stated
in General Assembly resolutions 1874 (S-IV) of 27 June 1963,
3101 (XXVIII) of 11 December 1973 and 55/235 of
23 December 2000,
Mindful of the fact that it is essential to provide the
Observer Mission with the necessary financial resources to
enable it to fulfil its responsibilities under the relevant
resolutions of the Security Council,
1. Requests the Secretary-General to entrust the Head
of Mission with the task of formulating future budget proposals
in full accordance with the provisions of General Assembly
resolution 59/296 of 22 June 2005, as well as other relevant
resolutions;
2. Takes note of the status of contributions to the
United Nations Observer Mission in Georgia as at 15 April
2005, including the contributions outstanding in the amount of
11 million United States dollars, representing some 4 per cent of
the total assessed contributions, notes with concern that only
thirty-four Member States have paid their assessed contributions
in full, and urges all other Member States, in particular those in
arrears, to ensure payment of their outstanding assessed
contributions;
3. Expresses its appreciation to those Member States
which have paid their assessed contributions in full, and urges
all other Member States to make every possible effort to ensure
payment of their assessed contributions to the Observer Mission
in full;
4. Expresses concern at the delay experienced by the
Secretary-General in deploying and providing adequate
resources to some recent peacekeeping missions, in particular
those in Africa;
102

6. Also emphasizes that all peacekeeping missions
shall be provided with adequate resources for the effective and
efficient discharge of their respective mandates;

8. Endorses the conclusions and recommendations
contained in the report of the Advisory Committee on
Administrative and Budgetary Questions,179 and requests the
Secretary-General to ensure their full implementation;
9. Requests the Secretary-General to ensure the full
implementation of the relevant provisions of its resolution
59/296;
10. Also requests the Secretary-General to take all action
necessary to ensure that the Observer Mission is administered
with a maximum of efficiency and economy;
11. Further requests the Secretary-General, in order to
reduce the cost of employing General Service staff, to continue
efforts to recruit local staff for the Observer Mission against
General Service posts, commensurate with the requirements of
the Mission;
Financial performance report for the period from 1 July
2003 to 30 June 2004
12. Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General on
the financial performance of the Observer Mission for the
period from 1 July 2003 to 30 June 2004;180
Budget estimates for the period from 1 July 2005 to 30 June
2006
13. Decides to appropriate to the Special Account for
the United Nations Observer Mission in Georgia the amount of
36,380,000 dollars for the period from 1 July 2005 to 30 June
2006, inclusive of 34,562,100 dollars for the maintenance of the
Observer Mission, 1,486,500 dollars for the support account for
peacekeeping operations and 331,400 dollars for the United
Nations Logistics Base;
Financing of the appropriation
14. Decides also to apportion among Member States the
amount of 3,031,667 dollars for the period from 1 to 31 July
2005, in accordance with the levels updated in General
_______________
179
180

A/59/736/Add.7.
A/59/622.

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

Assembly resolution 58/256 of 23 December 2003, and taking
into account the scale of assessments for 2005, as set out in its
resolution 58/1 B of 23 December 2003;
15. Decides further that, in accordance with the
provisions of its resolution 973 (X) of 15 December 1955, there
shall be set off against the apportionment among Member
States, as provided for in paragraph 14 above, their respective
share in the Tax Equalization Fund of 207,575 dollars,
comprising the estimated staff assessment income of 187,833
dollars approved for the Observer Mission, the prorated share of
17,508 dollars of the estimated staff assessment income
approved for the support account and the prorated share of
2,234 dollars of the estimated staff assessment income approved
for the United Nations Logistics Base;
16. Decides to apportion among Member States the
amount of 33,348,333 dollars for the period from 1 August
2005 to 30 June 2006 at a monthly rate of 3,031,666 dollars, in
accordance with the levels updated in General Assembly
resolution 58/256, and taking into account the scale of
assessments for 2005 and 2006, as set out in its resolution
58/1 B, subject to a decision of the Security Council to extend
the mandate of the Observer Mission;
17. Decides also that, in accordance with the provisions
of its resolution 973 (X), there shall be set off against the
apportionment among Member States, as provided for in
paragraph 16 above, their respective share in the Tax
Equalization Fund of 2,283,325 dollars, comprising the
estimated staff assessment income of 2,066,167 dollars
approved for the Observer Mission, the prorated share of
192,592 dollars of the estimated staff assessment income
approved for the support account and the prorated share of
24,566 dollars of the estimated staff assessment income
approved for the United Nations Logistics Base;
18. Decides further that, for Member States that have
fulfilled their financial obligations to the Observer Mission,
there shall be set off against their apportionment, as provided for
in paragraphs 14 and 16 above, their respective share of the
unencumbered balance and other income in the amount of
1,104,100 dollars in respect of the financial period ended
30 June 2004, in accordance with the levels updated in General
Assembly resolution 58/256, and taking into account the scale
of assessments for 2004, as set out in its resolution 58/1 B;
19. Decides that, for Member States that have not
fulfilled their financial obligations to the Observer Mission,
there shall be set off against their outstanding obligations their
respective share of the unencumbered balance and other income
in the total amount of 1,104,100 dollars in respect of the
financial period ended 30 June 2004, in accordance with the
scheme set out in paragraph 18 above;
20. Decides also that the increase of 179,600 dollars in
the estimated staff assessment income in respect of the financial
period ended 30 June 2004 shall be added to the credits from

the amount of 1,104,100 dollars referred to in paragraphs 18
and 19 above;
21. Emphasizes that no peacekeeping mission shall be
financed by borrowing funds from other active peacekeeping
missions;
22. Encourages the Secretary-General to continue to
take additional measures to ensure the safety and security of all
personnel under the auspices of the United Nations participating
in the Observer Mission, bearing in mind paragraphs 5 and 6 of
Security Council resolution 1502 (2003) of 26 August 2003;
23. Invites voluntary contributions to the Observer
Mission in cash and in the form of services and supplies
acceptable to the Secretary-General, to be administered, as
appropriate, in accordance with the procedure and practices
established by the General Assembly;
24. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its
sixtieth session the item entitled “Financing of the United
Nations Observer Mission in Georgia”.
RESOLUTION 59/305
Adopted at the 104th plenary meeting, on 22 June 2005, without a vote, on the
recommendation of the Committee (A/59/836, para. 6)181

59/305. Financing of the United Nations Mission in Liberia
The General Assembly,
Having considered the reports of the Secretary-General on
the financing of the United Nations Mission in Liberia182 and
the related reports of the Advisory Committee on
Administrative and Budgetary Questions,183
Recalling Security Council resolution 1497 (2003) of
1 August 2003, by which the Council declared its readiness to
establish a United Nations stabilization force to support the
transitional government and to assist in the implementation of a
comprehensive peace agreement in Liberia,
Recalling also Security Council resolution 1509 (2003) of
19 September 2003, by which the Council decided to establish
the United Nations Mission in Liberia for a period of twelve
months, and the subsequent resolution 1561 (2004) of
17 September 2004, by which the Council extended the
mandate of the Mission until 19 September 2005,
Recalling further its resolution 58/261 A of 23 December
2003 on the financing of the Mission and its subsequent
resolution 58/261 B of 18 June 2004,
_______________
181

The draft resolution recommended in the report was submitted by the
Chairman of the Committee.
182
A/59/624 and A/59/630.
183
A/59/736 and Add.11.

103

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

Reaffirming the general principles underlying the
financing of United Nations peacekeeping operations, as stated
in General Assembly resolutions 1874 (S-IV) of 27 June 1963,
3101 (XXVIII) of 11 December 1973 and 55/235 of
23 December 2000,
Noting with appreciation that voluntary contributions
have been made to the Mission,
Mindful of the fact that it is essential to provide the
Mission with the necessary financial resources to enable it to
fulfil its responsibilities under the relevant resolutions of the
Security Council,
1. Requests the Secretary-General to entrust the Head
of Mission with the task of formulating future budget proposals
in full accordance with the provisions of General Assembly
resolution 59/296 of 22 June 2005, as well as other relevant
resolutions;
2. Takes note of the status of contributions to the
United Nations Mission in Liberia as at 15 April 2005,
including the contributions outstanding in the amount of
96 million United States dollars, representing some 7 per cent of
the total assessed contributions, notes with concern that only
sixty-three Member States have paid their assessed contributions
in full, and urges all other Member States, in particular those in
arrears, to ensure payment of their outstanding assessed
contributions;
3. Expresses its appreciation to those Member States
that have paid their assessed contributions in full, and urges all
other Member States to make every possible effort to ensure
payment of their assessed contributions to the Mission in full;
4. Expresses concern at the financial situation with
regard to peacekeeping activities, in particular as regards the
reimbursements to troop contributors that bear additional
burdens owing to overdue payments by Member States of their
assessments;
5. Also expresses concern at the delay experienced by
the Secretary-General in deploying and providing adequate
resources to some recent peacekeeping missions, in particular
those in Africa;
6. Emphasizes that all future and existing peacekeeping
missions shall be given equal and non-discriminatory treatment
in respect of financial and administrative arrangements;
7. Also emphasizes that all peacekeeping missions
shall be provided with adequate resources for the effective and
efficient discharge of their respective mandates;
8. Reiterates its request to the Secretary-General to
make the fullest possible use of facilities and equipment at the
United Nations Logistics Base at Brindisi, Italy, in order to
minimize the costs of procurement for the Mission;
104

9. Endorses the conclusions and recommendations
contained in the report of the Advisory Committee on
Administrative and Budgetary Questions, 184 and requests the
Secretary-General to ensure their full implementation;
10. Requests the Secretary-General to ensure the full
implementation of the relevant provisions of its resolution
59/296;
11. Also requests the Secretary-General to entrust the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General to intensify
his/her coordination and collaboration efforts with the agencies,
funds and programmes in Liberia and to develop a workplan
containing an integrated list of priorities, and further requests
the Secretary-General to report to the General Assembly on
actions taken as well as progress made in the context of the
Mission budget for the period from 1 July 2006 to 30 June
2007;
12. Further requests the Secretary-General to take all
necessary action to ensure that the Mission is administered with
a maximum of efficiency and economy;
13. Requests the Secretary-General, in order to reduce
the cost of employing General Service staff, to continue efforts
to recruit local staff for the Mission against General Service
posts, commensurate with the requirements of the Mission;
Financial performance report for the period from 1 August
2003 to 30 June 2004
14. Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General on
the financial performance of the Mission for the period from
1 August 2003 to 30 June 2004;185
Budget estimates for the period from 1 July 2005 to 30 June
2006
15. Decides to appropriate to the Special Account for
the United Nations Mission in Liberia the amount of
760,567,400 dollars for the period from 1 July 2005 to 30 June
2006, inclusive of 722,422,100 dollars for the maintenance of
the Mission, 31,191,200 dollars for the support account for
peacekeeping operations and 6,954,100 dollars for the United
Nations Logistics Base;
Financing of the appropriation
16. Decides also to apportion among Member States the
amount of 166,902,291 dollars for the period from 1 July to
19 September 2005, in accordance with the levels updated in
General Assembly resolution 58/256 of 23 December 2003, and

_______________
184
185

A/59/736/Add.11.
A/59/624.

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

taking into account the scale of assessments for 2005 as set out
in its resolution 58/1 B of 23 December 2003;

credits from the amount of 17,034,600 dollars referred to in
paragraphs 20 and 21 above;

17. Decides further that, in accordance with the
provisions of its resolution 973 (X) of 15 December 1955, there
shall be set off against the apportionment among Member
States, as provided for in paragraph 16 above, their respective
share in the Tax Equalization Fund of 3,552,213 dollars,
comprising the estimated staff assessment income of 2,461,223
dollars approved for the Mission, the prorated share of 967,552
dollars of the estimated staff assessment income approved for
the support account and the prorated share of 123,438 dollars of
the estimated staff assessment income approved for the United
Nations Logistics Base;

23. Emphasizes that no peacekeeping mission shall be
financed by borrowing funds from other active peacekeeping
missions;
24. Encourages the Secretary-General to continue to
take additional measures to ensure the safety and security of all
personnel under the auspices of the United Nations participating
in the Mission, bearing in mind paragraphs 5 and 6 of Security
Council resolution 1502 (2003) of 26 August 2003;

18. Decides to apportion among Member States the
amount of 593,665,109 dollars for the period from
20 September 2005 to 30 June 2006 at a monthly rate of
63,380,616 dollars, in accordance with the levels updated in
General Assembly resolution 58/256, and taking into account
the scale of assessments for 2005 and 2006 as set out in its
resolution 58/1 B, subject to a decision of the Security Council
to extend the mandate of the Mission;

26. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its
sixtieth session the item entitled “Financing of the United
Nations Mission in Liberia”.

25. Invites voluntary contributions to the Mission in
cash and in the form of services and supplies acceptable to the
Secretary-General, to be administered, as appropriate, in
accordance with the procedure and practices established by the
General Assembly;

RESOLUTION 59/306

19. Decides also that, in accordance with the provisions
of its resolution 973 (X), there shall be set off against the
apportionment among Member States, as provided for in
paragraph 18 above, their respective share in the Tax
Equalization Fund of 12,635,087 dollars, comprising the
estimated staff assessment income of 8,754,477 dollars
approved for the Mission, the prorated share of 3,441,548
dollars of the estimated staff assessment income approved for
the support account and the prorated share of 439,062 dollars of
the estimated staff assessment income approved for the United
Nations Logistics Base;

Adopted at the 104th plenary meeting, on 22 June 2005, without a vote, on the
recommendation of the Committee (A/59/837, para. 6)186

20. Decides further that, for Member States that have
fulfilled their financial obligations to the Mission, there shall be
set off against their apportionment, as provided for in
paragraph 16 above, their respective share of the unencumbered
balance and other income in the total amount of 17,034,600
dollars in respect of the financial period ended 30 June 2004, in
accordance with the levels updated in General Assembly
resolution 58/256, and taking into account the scale of
assessments for 2004 as set out in its resolution 58/1 B;

Recalling Security Council resolution 350 (1974) of
31 May 1974 regarding the establishment of the United Nations
Disengagement Observer Force and the subsequent resolutions
by which the Council extended the mandate of the Force, the
latest of which was resolution 1578 (2004) of 15 December
2004,

21. Decides that, for Member States that have not
fulfilled their financial obligations to the Mission, there shall be
set off against their outstanding obligations their respective
share of the unencumbered balance and other income in the
total amount of 17,034,600 dollars in respect of the financial
period ended 30 June 2004, in accordance with the scheme set
out in paragraph 20 above;
22. Decides also that the decrease of 2,096,900 dollars
in the estimated staff assessment income in respect of the
financial period ended 30 June 2004 shall be set off against the

59/306. Financing of the United Nations Disengagement
Observer Force
The General Assembly,
Having considered the reports of the Secretary-General on
the financing of the United Nations Disengagement Observer
Force187 and the related reports of the Advisory Committee on
Administrative and Budgetary Questions,188

Recalling also its resolution 3211 B (XXIX) of
29 November 1974 on the financing of the United Nations
Emergency Force and of the United Nations Disengagement
Observer Force and its subsequent resolutions thereon, the latest
of which was resolution 58/306 of 18 June 2004,

_______________
186

The draft resolution recommended in the report was submitted by the
Chairman of the Committee.
187
A/59/625 and A/59/653 and Corr.1 and 2.
188
A/59/736 and Add.4.

105

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

Reaffirming the general principles underlying the
financing of United Nations peacekeeping operations, as stated
in General Assembly resolutions 1874 (S-IV) of 27 June 1963,
3101 (XXVIII) of 11 December 1973 and 55/235 of
23 December 2000,
Mindful of the fact that it is essential to provide the Force
with the necessary financial resources to enable it to fulfil its
responsibilities under the relevant resolutions of the Security
Council,
1. Requests the Secretary-General to entrust the Head
of Mission with the task of formulating future budget proposals
in full accordance with the provisions of General Assembly
resolution 59/296 of 22 June 2005, as well as other relevant
resolutions;
2. Takes note of the status of contributions to the
United Nations Disengagement Observer Force as at 15 April
2005, including the contributions outstanding in the amount of
16.2 million United States dollars, representing some 1 per cent
of the total assessed contributions, notes with concern that only
forty-nine Member States have paid their assessed contributions
in full, and urges all other Member States, in particular those in
arrears, to ensure the payment of their outstanding assessed
contributions;
3. Expresses its appreciation to those Member States
which have paid their assessed contributions in full, and urges
all other Member States to make every possible effort to ensure
payment of their assessed contributions to the Force in full;
4. Expresses concern at the financial situation with
regard to peacekeeping activities, in particular as regards the
reimbursements to troop contributors that bear additional
burdens owing to overdue payments by Member States of their
assessments;
5. Also expresses concern at the delay experienced by
the Secretary-General in deploying and providing adequate
resources to some recent peacekeeping missions, in particular
those in Africa;
6. Emphasizes that all future and existing peacekeeping
missions shall be given equal and non-discriminatory treatment
in respect of financial and administrative arrangements;
7. Also emphasizes that all peacekeeping missions
shall be provided with adequate resources for the effective and
efficient discharge of their respective mandates;
8. Reiterates its request to the Secretary-General to
make the fullest possible use of facilities and equipment at the
United Nations Logistics Base at Brindisi, Italy, in order to
minimize the costs of procurement for the Force;
106

9. Endorses the conclusions and recommendations
contained in the report of the Advisory Committee on
Administrative and Budgetary Questions, 189 and requests the
Secretary-General to ensure their full implementation;
10. Requests the Secretary-General to ensure the full
implementation of the relevant provisions of its resolution
59/296;
11. Also requests the Secretary-General to take all
necessary action to ensure that the Force is administered with a
maximum of efficiency and economy;
12. Further requests the Secretary-General, in order to
reduce the cost of employing General Service staff, to continue
efforts to recruit local staff for the Force against General Service
posts, commensurate with the requirements of the Force;
Financial performance report for the period from 1 July
2003 to 30 June 2004
13. Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General on
the financial performance of the Force for the period from
1 July 2003 to 30 June 2004;190
Budget estimates for the period from 1 July 2005 to 30 June
2006
14. Decides to appropriate to the Special Account for
the United Nations Disengagement Observer Force the amount
of 43,706,100 dollars for the period from 1 July 2005 to 30 June
2006, inclusive of 41,521,400 dollars for the maintenance of
the Force, 1,786,400 dollars for the support account for
peacekeeping operations and 398,300 dollars for the United
Nations Logistics Base;
Financing of the appropriation
15. Decides also to apportion among Member States the
amount of 43,706,100 dollars at a monthly rate of 3,642,175
dollars, in accordance with the levels updated in General
Assembly resolution 58/256 of 23 December 2003, and taking
into account the scale of assessments for 2005 and 2006, as set
out in its resolution 58/1 B of 23 December 2003, subject to a
decision of the Security Council to extend the mandate of the
Force;
16. Decides further that, in accordance with the
provisions of its resolution 973 (X) of 15 December 1955, there
shall be set off against the apportionment among Member
States, as provided for in paragraph 15 above, their respective
share in the Tax Equalization Fund of 1,427,100 dollars,
comprising the estimated staff assessment income of 1,142,400
dollars approved for the Force for the period from 1 July 2005
_______________
189
190

A/59/736/Add.4.
A/59/625.

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

to 30 June 2006, the prorated share of 252,500 dollars of the
estimated staff assessment income approved for the support
account and the prorated share of 32,200 dollars of the
estimated staff assessment income approved for the United
Nations Logistics Base;
17. Decides that, for Member States that have fulfilled
their financial obligations to the Force, there shall be set off
against their apportionment, as provided for in paragraph 15
above, their respective share of the unencumbered balance and
other income in the amount of 1,593,400 dollars in respect of the
financial period ended 30 June 2004, in accordance with the
levels updated in its resolution 58/256, and taking into account the
scale of assessments for 2004, as set out in its resolutions 58/1 B;
18. Decides also that, for Member States that have not
fulfilled their financial obligations to the Force, there shall be set
off against their outstanding obligations their respective share of
the unencumbered balance and other income in the amount of
1,593,400 dollars in respect of the financial period ended
30 June 2004, in accordance with the scheme set out in
paragraph 17 above;
19. Decides further that the increase of 105,100 dollars
in the estimated staff assessment income in respect of the
financial period ended 30 June 2004 shall be added to the
credits from the amount of 1,593,400 dollars referred to in
paragraphs 17 and 18 above;
20. Emphasizes that no peacekeeping mission shall be
financed by borrowing funds from other active peacekeeping
missions;
21. Encourages the Secretary-General to continue to
take additional measures to ensure the safety and security of all
personnel under the auspices of the United Nations participating
in the Force, bearing in mind paragraphs 5 and 6 of Security
Council resolution 1502 (2003) of 26 August 2003;
22. Invites voluntary contributions to the Force in cash
and in the form of services and supplies acceptable to the
Secretary-General, to be administered, as appropriate, in
accordance with the procedure and practices established by the
General Assembly;
23. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its
sixtieth session, under the item entitled “Financing of the United
Nations peacekeeping forces in the Middle East”, the sub-item
entitled “United Nations Disengagement Observer Force”.

In favour: Afghanistan, Algeria, Andorra, Antigua and Barbuda, Argentina,
Armenia, Austria, Azerbaijan, Bahamas, Bahrain, Bangladesh, Barbados,
Belarus, Belgium, Belize, Botswana, Brazil, Brunei Darussalam, Bulgaria,
Burkina Faso, Cambodia, Canada, Cape Verde, Chile, China, Colombia,
Congo, Costa Rica, Croatia, Cuba, Cyprus, Czech Republic, Denmark, Djibouti,
Dominican Republic, Ecuador, Egypt, Estonia, Finland, France, Gabon,
Germany, Ghana, Greece, Guatemala, Guinea, Guyana, Hungary, Iceland,
India, Indonesia, Ireland, Italy, Japan, Jordan, Kazakhstan, Kuwait, Latvia,
Lebanon, Lesotho, Libyan Arab Jamahiriya, Lithuania, Luxembourg,
Madagascar, Malawi, Malaysia, Maldives, Mali, Malta, Mauritania, Mexico,
Monaco, Morocco, Namibia, Nepal, Netherlands, New Zealand, Nicaragua,
Niger, Nigeria, Norway, Oman, Pakistan, Panama, Paraguay, Peru, Portugal,
Qatar, Republic of Korea, Republic of Moldova, Romania, Russian Federation,
Rwanda, San Marino, Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Serbia and Montenegro, Sierra
Leone, Singapore, Slovakia, Slovenia, Somalia, South Africa, Spain, Sri Lanka,
Sudan, Sweden, Switzerland, Syrian Arab Republic, Tajikistan, Thailand, TimorLeste, Trinidad and Tobago, Tunisia, Turkey, Uganda, Ukraine, United Arab
Emirates, United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United
Republic of Tanzania, Uruguay, Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of), Viet Nam,
Yemen, Zambia, Zimbabwe
Against: Israel, United States of America
Abstaining: Tonga

59/307. Financing of the United Nations Interim Force in
Lebanon
The General Assembly,
Having considered the reports of the Secretary-General on
the financing of the United Nations Interim Force in Lebanon192
and the related reports of the Advisory Committee on
Administrative and Budgetary Questions,193
Recalling Security Council resolution 425 (1978) of
19 March 1978 regarding the establishment of the United
Nations Interim Force in Lebanon and the subsequent
resolutions by which the Council extended the mandate of the
Force, the latest of which was resolution 1583 (2005) of
28 January 2005,
Recalling also its resolution S-8/2 of 21 April 1978 on the
financing of the Force and its subsequent resolutions thereon,
the latest of which was resolution 58/307 of 18 June 2004,
Reaffirming its resolutions 51/233 of 13 June 1997,
52/237 of 26 June 1998, 53/227 of 8 June 1999, 54/267 of
15 June 2000, 55/180 A of 19 December 2000, 55/180 B of
14 June 2001, 56/214 A of 21 December 2001, 56/214 B of
27 June 2002, 57/325 of 18 June 2003 and 58/307 of 18 June
2004,

Adopted at the 104th plenary meeting, on 22 June 2005, on the
recommendation of the Committee (A/59/838, para. 12),191 by a recorded vote
of 126 to 2, with 1 abstention, as follows:

Reaffirming also the general principles underlying the
financing of United Nations peacekeeping operations, as stated
in General Assembly resolutions 1874 (S-IV) of 27 June 1963,
3101 (XXVIII) of 11 December 1973 and 55/235 of
23 December 2000,

_______________

_______________

191

192

RESOLUTION 59/307

The draft resolution recommended in the report was submitted by
Jamaica (on behalf of the States Members of the United Nations that are
members of the Group of 77 and China).

193

A/59/626 and A/59/654.
A/59/736 and Add.3.

107

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

Noting with appreciation that voluntary contributions
have been made to the Force,

Administrative and Budgetary Questions, 194 and requests the
Secretary-General to ensure their full implementation;

Mindful of the fact that it is essential to provide the Force
with the necessary financial resources to enable it to fulfil its
responsibilities under the relevant resolutions of the Security
Council,

11. Requests the Secretary-General to take all necessary
action to ensure that the Force is administered with a maximum
of efficiency and economy;

1. Takes note of the status of contributions to the
United Nations Interim Force in Lebanon as at 15 April 2005,
including the contributions outstanding in the amount of
60.9 million United States dollars, representing some 2 per cent
of the total assessed contributions, notes with concern that only
seventy-three Member States have paid their assessed
contributions in full, and urges all other Member States, in
particular those in arrears, to ensure payment of their
outstanding assessed contributions;
2. Expresses its appreciation to those Member States
that have paid their assessed contributions in full, and urges all
other Member States to make every possible effort to ensure
payment of their assessed contributions to the Force in full;
3. Expresses deep concern that Israel did not comply
with General Assembly resolutions 51/233, 52/237, 53/227,
54/267, 55/180 A, 55/180 B, 56/214 A, 56/214 B, 57/325 and
58/307;
4. Stresses once again that Israel should strictly abide
by General Assembly resolutions 51/233, 52/237, 53/227,
54/267, 55/180 A, 55/180 B, 56/214 A, 56/214 B, 57/325 and
58/307;
5. Expresses concern at the financial situation with
regard to peacekeeping activities, in particular as regards the
reimbursements to troop contributors that bear additional
burdens owing to overdue payments by Member States of their
assessments;
6. Also expresses concern at the delay experienced by
the Secretary-General in deploying and providing adequate
resources to some recent peacekeeping missions, in particular
those in Africa;
7. Emphasizes that all future and existing peacekeeping
missions shall be given equal and non-discriminatory treatment
in respect of financial and administrative arrangements;

12. Also requests the Secretary-General, in order to
reduce the cost of employing General Service staff, to continue
efforts to recruit local staff for the Force against General Service
posts, commensurate with the requirements of the Force;
13. Reiterates its request to the Secretary-General to
take the necessary measures to ensure the full implementation
of paragraph 8 of its resolution 51/233, paragraph 5 of its
resolution 52/237, paragraph 11 of its resolution 53/227,
paragraph 14 of its resolution 54/267, paragraph 14 of its
resolution 55/180 A, paragraph 15 of its resolution 55/180 B,
paragraph 13 of its resolution 56/214 A, paragraph 13 of its
resolution 56/214 B, paragraph 14 of its resolution 57/325 and
paragraph 13 of its resolution 58/307, stresses once again that
Israel shall pay the amount of 1,117,005 dollars resulting from
the incident at Qana on 18 April 1996, and requests the
Secretary-General to report on this matter to the General
Assembly at its sixtieth session;
Financial performance report for the period from 1 July
2003 to 30 June 2004
14. Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General on
the financial performance of the Force for the period from
1 July 2003 to 30 June 2004;195
Budget estimates for the period from 1 July 2005 to 30 June
2006
15. Decides to appropriate to the Special Account for
the United Nations Interim Force in Lebanon the amount of
99,228,300 dollars for the period from 1 July 2005 to 30 June
2006, inclusive of 94,252,900 dollars for the maintenance of the
Force, 4,068,400 dollars for the support account for peacekeeping
operations and 907,000 dollars for the United Nations Logistics
Base;
Financing of the appropriation

8. Also emphasizes that all peacekeeping missions
shall be provided with adequate resources for the effective and
efficient discharge of their respective mandates;

16. Decides also to apportion among Member States the
amount of 8,269,025 dollars for the period from 1 to 31 July
2005, in accordance with the levels updated in General
Assembly resolution 58/256 of 23 December 2003, and taking
into account the scale of assessments for 2005, as set out in its
resolution 58/1 B of 23 December 2003;

9. Reiterates its request to the Secretary-General to
make the fullest possible use of facilities and equipment at the
United Nations Logistics Base at Brindisi, Italy, in order to
minimize the costs of procurement for the Force;

_______________

10. Endorses the conclusions and recommendations
contained in the report of the Advisory Committee on
108

194
195

A/59/736/Add.3.
A/59/626.

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

17. Decides further that, in accordance with the
provisions of its resolution 973 (X) of 15 December 1955, there
shall be set off against the apportionment among Member
States, as provided for in paragraph 16 above, their respective
share in the Tax Equalization Fund of 447,008 dollars,
comprising the estimated staff assessment income of 392,975
dollars approved for the Force, the prorated share of 47,925
dollars of the estimated staff assessment income approved for
the support account and the prorated share of 6,108 dollars of
the estimated staff assessment income approved for the United
Nations Logistics Base;
18. Decides to apportion among Member States the
amount of 90,959,275 dollars for the period from 1 August
2005 to 30 June 2006 at a monthly rate of 8,269,025 dollars, in
accordance with the levels updated in General Assembly
resolution 58/256, and taking into account the scale of
assessments for 2005 and 2006, as set out in its resolution
58/1 B, subject to a decision of the Security Council to extend
the mandate of the Force;
19. Decides also that, in accordance with the provisions
of its resolution 973 (X), there shall be set off against the
apportionment among Member States, as provided for in
paragraph 18 above, their respective share in the Tax
Equalization Fund of 4,917,092 dollars, comprising the
estimated staff assessment income of 4,322,725 dollars
approved for the Force, the prorated share of 527,175 dollars of
the estimated staff assessment income approved for the support
account and the prorated share of 67,192 dollars of the
estimated staff assessment income approved for the United
Nations Logistics Base;
20. Decides further that, for Member States that have
fulfilled their financial obligations to the Force, there shall be set
off against their apportionment, as provided for in
paragraphs 16 and 18 above, their respective share of the
unencumbered balance and other income in the amount of
8,463,000 dollars in respect of the financial period ended
30 June 2004, in accordance with the levels updated in its
resolution 58/256, and taking into account the scale of
assessments for 2004, as set out in its resolution 58/1 B;
21. Decides that, for Member States that have not
fulfilled their financial obligations to the Force, there shall be set
off against their outstanding obligations their respective share of
the unencumbered balance and other income in the amount of
8,463,000 dollars in respect of the financial period ended
30 June 2004, in accordance with the scheme set out in
paragraph 20 above;
22. Decides also that the increase of 541,200 dollars in
the estimated staff assessment income in respect of the financial
period ended 30 June 2004 shall be added to the credits from
the amount of 8,463,000 dollars referred to in paragraphs 20
and 21 above;

23. Emphasizes that no peacekeeping mission shall be
financed by borrowing funds from other active peacekeeping
missions;
24. Encourages the Secretary-General to continue to
take additional measures to ensure the safety and security of all
personnel under the auspices of the United Nations participating
in the Force;
25. Invites voluntary contributions to the Force in cash
and in the form of services and supplies acceptable to the
Secretary-General, to be administered, as appropriate, in
accordance with the procedure and practices established by the
General Assembly;
26. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its
sixtieth session, under the item entitled “Financing of the United
Nations peacekeeping forces in the Middle East”, the sub-item
entitled “United Nations Interim Force in Lebanon”.
RESOLUTION 59/308
Adopted at the 104th plenary meeting, on 22 June 2005, without a vote, on the
recommendation of the Committee (A/59/839, para. 6)196

59/308. Financing of the United Nations Mission for the
Referendum in Western Sahara
The General Assembly,
Having considered the reports of the Secretary-General on
the financing of the United Nations Mission for the Referendum
in Western Sahara197 and the related reports of the Advisory
Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions,198
Recalling Security Council resolution 690 (1991) of
29 April 1991, by which the Council established the United
Nations Mission for the Referendum in Western Sahara, and the
subsequent resolutions by which the Council extended the
mandate of the Mission, the latest of which was resolution
1598 (2005) of 28 April 2005,
Recalling also its resolution 45/266 of 17 May 1991 on
the financing of the Mission and its subsequent resolutions and
decisions thereon, the latest of which was resolution 58/309 of
18 June 2004,
Reaffirming the general principles underlying the
financing of United Nations peacekeeping operations, as stated
in General Assembly resolutions 1874 (S-IV) of 27 June 1963,
3101 (XXVIII) of 11 December 1973 and 55/235 of
23 December 2000,
_______________
196

The draft resolution recommended in the report was submitted by the
Chairman of the Committee.
197
A/59/619 and A/59/629.
198
A/59/736 and Add.5.

109

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

Noting with appreciation that voluntary contributions
have been made to the Mission,

Administrative and Budgetary Questions,199 and requests the
Secretary-General to ensure their full implementation;

Mindful of the fact that it is essential to provide the
Mission with the necessary financial resources to enable it to
fulfil its responsibilities under the relevant resolutions of the
Security Council,

10. Requests the Secretary-General to ensure the full
implementation of the relevant provisions of its resolution
59/296;

1. Requests the Secretary-General to entrust the Head
of Mission with the task of formulating future budget proposals
in full accordance with the provisions of General Assembly
resolution 59/296 of 22 June 2005, as well as other relevant
resolutions;
2. Takes note of the status of contributions to the
United Nations Mission for the Referendum in Western Sahara
as at 15 April 2005, including the contributions outstanding in
the amount of 43.1 million United States dollars, representing
some 7 per cent of the total assessed contributions, notes with
concern that only sixty Member States have paid their assessed
contributions in full, and urges all other Member States, in
particular those in arrears, to ensure payment of their
outstanding assessed contributions;
3. Expresses its appreciation to those Member States
that have paid their assessed contributions in full, and urges all
other Member States to make every possible effort to ensure
payment of their assessed contributions to the Mission in full;
4. Expresses concern at the financial situation with
regard to peacekeeping activities, in particular as regards the
reimbursements to troop contributors that bear additional
burdens owing to overdue payments by Member States of their
assessments;
5. Also expresses concern at the delay experienced by
the Secretary-General in deploying and providing adequate
resources to some recent peacekeeping missions, in particular
those in Africa;
6. Emphasizes that all future and existing peacekeeping
missions shall be given equal and non-discriminatory treatment
in respect of financial and administrative arrangements;
7. Also emphasizes that all peacekeeping missions
shall be provided with adequate resources for the effective and
efficient discharge of their respective mandates;
8. Reiterates its request to the Secretary-General to
make the fullest possible use of facilities and equipment at the
United Nations Logistics Base at Brindisi, Italy, in order to
minimize the costs of procurement for the Mission;
9. Endorses the conclusions and recommendations
contained in the report of the Advisory Committee on
110

11. Decides that the posts of Chief of Staff, Legal
Officer, Information Officer, Assistant in Facilities Management
Services and Information Technology Assistant, which are filled
respectively at the levels of D-1, P-4, P-3, G-7 and FS-5, shall
be budgeted at those levels, pending the management review;
12. Requests the Secretary-General to take all necessary
action to ensure that the Mission is administered with a
maximum of efficiency and economy;
13. Also requests the Secretary-General, in order to
reduce the cost of employing General Service staff, to continue
efforts to recruit local staff for the Mission against General
Service posts, commensurate with the requirements of the
Mission;
Financial performance report for the period from 1 July
2003 to 30 June 2004
14. Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General on
the financial performance of the Mission for the period from
1 July 2003 to 30 June 2004;200
Budget estimates for the period from 1 July 2005 to 30 June
2006
15. Decides to appropriate to the Special Account for
the United Nations Mission for the Referendum in Western
Sahara the amount of 47,948,400 dollars for the period from
1 July 2005 to 30 June 2006, inclusive of 45,540,400 dollars for
the maintenance of the Mission, 1,969,000 dollars for the
support account for peacekeeping operations and 439,000
dollars for the United Nations Logistics Base;
Financing of the appropriation
16. Decides also to apportion among Member States the
amount of 15,982,800 dollars for the period from 1 July to
31 October 2005, in accordance with the levels updated in
General Assembly resolution 58/256 of 23 December 2003, and
taking into account the scale of assessments for 2005 as set out
in its resolution 58/1 B of 23 December 2003;

_______________
199
200

A/59/736/Add.5.
A/59/619.

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

17. Decides further that, in accordance with the
provisions of its resolution 973 (X) of 15 December 1955, there
shall be set off against the apportionment among Member
States, as provided for in paragraph 16 above, their respective
share in the Tax Equalization Fund of 940,600 dollars,
comprising the estimated staff assessment income of 836,000
dollars approved for the Mission, the prorated share of 92,767
dollars of the estimated staff assessment income approved for
the support account and the prorated share of 11,833 dollars of
the estimated staff assessment income approved for the United
Nations Logistics Base;
18. Decides to apportion among Member States the
amount of 31,965,600 dollars for the period from 1 November
2005 to 30 June 2006, at a monthly rate of 3,995,700 dollars, in
accordance with the levels updated in General Assembly
resolution 58/256, and taking into account the scale of
assessments for 2005 and 2006 as set out in its resolution
58/1 B, subject to a decision of the Security Council to extend
the mandate of the Mission;
19. Decides also that, in accordance with the provisions
of its resolution 973 (X), there shall be set off against the
apportionment among Member States, as provided for in
paragraph 18 above, their respective share in the Tax
Equalization Fund of 1,881,200 dollars, comprising the
estimated staff assessment income of 1,672,000 dollars
approved for the Mission, the prorated share of 185,533 dollars
of the estimated staff assessment income approved for the
support account and the prorated share of 23,667 dollars of the
estimated staff assessment income approved for the United
Nations Logistics Base;
20. Decides further that, for Member States that have
fulfilled their financial obligations to the Mission, there shall
be set off against their apportionment, as provided for
in paragraph 16 above, their respective share of the
unencumbered balance and other income in the total amount of

3,872,700 dollars in respect of the financial period ended
30 June 2004, in accordance with the levels updated in General
Assembly resolution 58/256, and taking into account the scale
of assessments for 2004, as set out in its resolution 58/1 B;
21. Decides that, for Member States that have not
fulfilled their financial obligations to the Mission, there shall be
set off against their outstanding obligations their respective
share of the unencumbered balance and other income in the
total amount of 3,872,700 dollars in respect of the financial
period ended 30 June 2004, in accordance with the scheme set
out in paragraph 20 above;
22. Decides also that the decrease of 598,200 dollars in
the estimated staff assessment income in respect of the financial
period ended 30 June 2004 shall be set off against the credits
from the amount of 3,872,700 dollars referred to in
paragraphs 20 and 21 above;
23. Emphasizes that no peacekeeping mission shall be
financed by borrowing funds from other active peacekeeping
missions;
24. Encourages the Secretary-General to continue to
take additional measures to ensure the safety and security of all
personnel under the auspices of the United Nations participating
in the Mission, bearing in mind paragraphs 5 and 6 of Security
Council resolution 1502 (2003) of 26 August 2003;
25. Invites voluntary contributions to the Mission in
cash and in the form of services and supplies acceptable to
the Secretary-General, to be administered, as appropriate, in
accordance with the procedure and practices established by the
General Assembly;
26. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its
sixtieth session the item entitled “Financing of the United
Nations Mission for the Referendum in Western Sahara”.

111

IV. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Sixth Committee
Contents
Resolution
No.

59/280.

Title

Page

United Nations Declaration on Human Cloning...................................................................................................... 114

113

IV. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Sixth Committee

RESOLUTION 59/280
Adopted at the 82nd plenary meeting, on 8 March 2005, on the
recommendation of the Committee (A/59/516/Add.1, para. 17),1 by a recorded
vote of 84 to 34, with 37 abstentions, as follows:
In favour: Afghanistan, Albania, Andorra, Australia, Austria, Bahrain,
Bangladesh, Belize, Benin, Bolivia, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Brunei
Darussalam, Burundi, Chile, Comoros, Costa Rica, Côte d’Ivoire, Croatia,
Democratic Republic of the Congo, Djibouti, Dominican Republic, Ecuador,
El Salvador, Equatorial Guinea, Eritrea, Ethiopia, Georgia, Germany, Grenada,
Guatemala, Guyana, Haiti, Honduras, Hungary, Iraq, Ireland, Italy, Kazakhstan,
Kenya, Kuwait, Lesotho, Liberia, Liechtenstein, Madagascar, Malta, Marshall
Islands, Mauritius, Mexico, Micronesia (Federated States of), Monaco, Morocco,
Nicaragua, Palau, Panama, Paraguay, Philippines, Poland, Portugal, Qatar,
Rwanda, Saint Kitts and Nevis, Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines,
Samoa, San Marino, Sao Tome and Principe, Saudi Arabia, Sierra Leone,
Slovakia, Slovenia, Solomon Islands, Sudan, Suriname, Switzerland, Tajikistan,
the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Timor-Leste, Trinidad and Tobago,
Uganda, United Arab Emirates, United Republic of Tanzania, United States of
America, Uzbekistan, Zambia
Against: Belarus, Belgium, Brazil, Bulgaria, Cambodia, Canada, China,
Cuba, Cyprus, Czech Republic, Democratic People’s Republic of Korea,
Denmark, Estonia, Finland, France, Gabon, Iceland, India, Jamaica, Japan, Lao
People’s Democratic Republic, Latvia, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Netherlands,
New Zealand, Norway, Republic of Korea, Singapore, Spain, Sweden, Thailand,
Tonga, United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland
Abstaining: Algeria, Angola, Argentina, Azerbaijan, Bahamas, Barbados,
Burkina Faso, Cameroon, Cape Verde, Colombia, Egypt, Indonesia, Iran
(Islamic Republic of), Israel, Jordan, Lebanon, Malaysia, Maldives, Mongolia,
Myanmar, Namibia, Nepal, Oman, Pakistan, Republic of Moldova, Romania,
Serbia and Montenegro, Somalia, South Africa, Sri Lanka, Syrian Arab Republic,
Tunisia, Turkey, Ukraine, Uruguay, Yemen, Zimbabwe

59/280. United Nations Declaration on Human Cloning
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 53/152 of 9 December 1998, by
which it endorsed the Universal Declaration on the Human
Genome and Human Rights,2
Approves the United Nations Declaration on Human
Cloning annexed to the present resolution.
Annex
United Nations Declaration on Human Cloning
The General Assembly,
Guided by the purposes and principles of the Charter of
the United Nations,

Recalling the Universal Declaration on the Human
Genome and Human Rights, adopted by the General
Conference of the United Nations Educational, Scientific and
Cultural Organization on 11 November 1997,2 and in particular
article 11 thereof, which states that practices which are contrary
to human dignity, such as the reproductive cloning of human
beings, shall not be permitted,
Recalling also its resolution 53/152 of 9 December 1998,
by which it endorsed the Universal Declaration on the Human
Genome and Human Rights,
Aware of the ethical concerns that certain applications of
rapidly developing life sciences may raise with regard to human
dignity, human rights and the fundamental freedoms of
individuals,
Reaffirming that the application of life sciences should
seek to offer relief from suffering and improve the health of
individuals and humankind as a whole,
Emphasizing that the promotion of scientific and technical
progress in life sciences should be sought in a manner that
safeguards respect for human rights and the benefit of all,
Mindful of the serious medical, physical, psychological
and social dangers that human cloning may imply for the
individuals involved, and also conscious of the need to prevent
the exploitation of women,
Convinced of the urgency of preventing the potential
dangers of human cloning to human dignity,
Solemnly declares the following:
(a) Member States are called upon to adopt all measures
necessary to protect adequately human life in the application of
life sciences;
(b) Member States are called upon to prohibit all forms
of human cloning inasmuch as they are incompatible with
human dignity and the protection of human life;
(c) Member States are further called upon to adopt the
measures necessary to prohibit the application of genetic
engineering techniques that may be contrary to human dignity;
(d) Member States are called upon to take measures to
prevent the exploitation of women in the application of life
sciences;
(e) Member States are also called upon to adopt and
implement without delay national legislation to bring into effect
paragraphs (a) to (d);

_______________
1

The draft resolution recommended in the report was sponsored in the
Committee by Honduras.
2
United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization,
Records of the General Conference, Twenty-ninth Session, Paris,
21 October–12 November 1997, vol. 1: Resolutions, resolution 16.

114

(f) Member States are further called upon, in their
financing of medical research, including of life sciences, to take
into account the pressing global issues such as HIV/AIDS,
tuberculosis and malaria, which affect in particular the
developing countries.

V. Decisions
Contents
Decision
No.

Title

Page

A. Elections and appointments
59/406.

Election of judges of the International Tribunal for the Prosecution of Persons Responsible for Serious
Violations of International Humanitarian Law Committed in the Territory of the Former Yugoslavia since 1991......... 117
Decision B ........................................................................................................................................................... 117
Decision C ........................................................................................................................................................... 117

59/408.

Appointment of members of the Committee on Contributions ................................................................................. 118
Decision B ........................................................................................................................................................... 118

59/415.

Election of a member of the International Court of Justice....................................................................................... 118

59/416.

Appointment of members of the Joint Inspection Unit............................................................................................. 119
Decision A ........................................................................................................................................................... 119
Decision B ........................................................................................................................................................... 119

59/417.

Confirmation of the appointment of the Administrator of the United Nations Development Programme..................... 119

59/418.

Appointment of the Under-Secretary-General for Internal Oversight Services........................................................... 119

59/419.

Confirmation of the appointment of the Secretary-General of the United Nations Conference on Trade and
Development........................................................................................................................................................ 120

59/420.

Election of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees ............................................................................ 120

59/421.

Election of the President of the General Assembly at its sixtieth session ................................................................... 120

59/422.

Election of the Chairmen of the Main Committees of the General Assembly at its sixtieth session ............................. 120

59/423.

Election of the Vice-Presidents of the General Assembly at its sixtieth session.......................................................... 121
B. Other decisions
1. Decisions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

59/503.

Adoption of the agenda and allocation of agenda items ........................................................................................... 122
Decision B ........................................................................................................................................................... 122

59/553. Participation of civil society representatives in the high-level meeting to review the progress achieved
in realizing commitments set out in the Declaration of Commitment on HIV/AIDS .......................................... 123
59/566.

Question of equitable representation on and increase in the membership of the Security Council and related
matters................................................................................................................................................................. 123

59/567.

Cooperation between the United Nations and the Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe..................... 124

59/568.

Prevention of armed conflict.................................................................................................................................. 124

59/569.

Improving the financial situation of the United Nations........................................................................................... 124

59/570.

Financing of the United Nations Mission in East Timor........................................................................................... 124

59/571.

The situation in the occupied territories of Azerbaijan ............................................................................................. 124

115

V. Decisions
Resolution
No.

Title

Page

2. Decisions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee
59/551.

Questions deferred for future consideration ............................................................................................................ 125
Decision B ........................................................................................................................................................... 125
Decision C ........................................................................................................................................................... 125
Decision D........................................................................................................................................................... 126

59/554.

United Nations Fund for International Partnerships................................................................................................. 126

59/555.

Construction of additional office facilities at the Economic Commission for Africa in Addis Ababa........................... 126

59/556.

Review of the structure and functions of all liaison offices or representation in New York of organizations
headquartered elsewhere funded from the regular budget ........................................................................................ 126

59/557.

Report of the Office of Internal Oversight Services on the review of the operations and management of United
Nations libraries ................................................................................................................................................... 127

59/558.

Review of the regular programme of technical cooperation and the Development Account........................................ 127

59/559.

Standards of accommodation for air travel.............................................................................................................. 127

59/560.

Recruitment ......................................................................................................................................................... 127

59/561.

Strengthening of the international civil service........................................................................................................ 127

59/562.

Administrative and budgetary aspects of the financing of the United Nations peacekeeping operations:
programme budget implications of draft resolution A/C.5/59/L.53 ........................................................................... 127

59/563.

Updated financial position of closed peacekeeping missions as at 30 June 2004........................................................ 127

59/564.

Financing of the United Nations Angola Verification Mission and the United Nations Observer Mission in
Angola................................................................................................................................................................. 128

59/565.

Financing of the United Nations Iraq-Kuwait Observation Mission.......................................................................... 128

116

V. Decisions

A. Elections and appointments
59/406. Election of judges of the International Tribunal for the Prosecution of Persons
Responsible for Serious Violations of International Humanitarian Law Committed
in the Territory of the Former Yugoslavia since 1991
B1
At its 80th plenary meeting, on 20 January 2005, the General Assembly decided to endorse
the recommendations of the Secretary-General2 that were endorsed by the Security Council in its
resolution 1581 (2005) of 18 January 2005.
C
At its 116th plenary meeting, on 24 August 2005, the General Assembly, in accordance with
article 13 ter of the statute of the International Tribunal for the Prosecution of Persons Responsible
for Serious Violations of International Humanitarian Law Committed in the Territory of the
Former Yugoslavia since 1991, elected the following twenty-seven ad litem judges for a four-year
term of office beginning on 24 August 2005:3
Mr. Melville BAIRD (Trinidad and Tobago)
Mr. Frans BAUDUIN (Netherlands)
Mr. Ali Nawaz CHOWHAN (Pakistan)
Mr. Pedro DAVID (Argentina)
Ms. Elizabeth GWAUNZA (Zimbabwe)
Mr. Burton HALL (Bahamas)
Mr. Frederik HARHOFF (Denmark)
Mr. Frank HÖPFEL (Austria)
Ms. Tsvetana KAMENOVA (Bulgaria)
Mr. Uldis KINIS (Latvia)
Mr. Raimo LAHTI (Finland)
Ms. Flavia LATTANZI (Italy)
Mr. Antoine MINDUA (Democratic Republic of the Congo)
Mr. Jawdat NABOTY (Syrian Arab Republic)
Ms. Janet NOSWORTHY (Jamaica)
Ms. Chioma Egondu NWOSU-IHEME (Nigeria)
Ms. Prisca Matimba NYAMBE (Zambia)
Ms. Michèle PICARD (France)
Mr. Brynmor POLLARD (Guyana)
Mr. Árpád PRANDLER (Hungary)
Ms. Kimberly PROST (Canada)
Ms. Vonimbolana RASOAZANANY (Madagascar)
Mr. Ole Bjørn STØLE (Norway)
Mr. Krister THELIN (Sweden)
Mr. Klaus TOLKSDORF (Germany)
Mr. Stefan TRECHSEL (Switzerland)
Tan Sri Dato’ Lamin Haji MOHD YUNUS (Malaysia)

_______________
1

Decision 59/406, in section A of the Official Records of the General Assembly, Fifty-ninth Session, Supplement
No. 49 (A/59/49), vol. II, becomes decision 59/406 A.
2
See A/59/666.
3
A/59/886, A/59/887 and Add.1 and A/59/888.

117

V. Decisions

59/408. Appointment of members of the Committee on Contributions
B4
At its 101st plenary meeting, on 6 June 2005, the General Assembly, on the
recommendation of the Fifth Committee,5 decided to appoint Mr. Henrique da Silveira Sardinha
Pinto as a member of the Committee on Contributions for a term of office beginning on 6 June
2005 and ending on 31 December 2005, as a result of the resignation of Mr. Alvaro Gurgel de
Alencar Netto.
As a result, the Committee on Contributions is composed as follows: Mr. Kenshiro
AKIMOTO (Japan),** Mr. Meshal AL-MANSOUR (Kuwait),** Mr. Petru DUMITRIU (Romania),**
Mr. David DUTTON (Australia),*** Mr. Paul EKORONG A DONG (Cameroon),*** Mr. Haile
Selassie GETACHEW (Ethiopia),** Mr. Bernardo GREIVER (Uruguay),*** Mr. Hassan
Mohammed HASSAN (Nigeria),*** Mr. Ihor V. HUMENNY (Ukraine),** Mr. Eduardo IGLESIAS
(Argentina),*** Mr. David A. LEIS (United States of America),** Mr. Vyacheslav A. LOGUTOV
(Russian Federation),* Mr. Bernard MEIJERMAN (Netherlands),* Mr. Hae-yun PARK (Republic of
Korea),* Mr. Eduardo Manuel da Fonseca Fernandes RAMOS (Portugal),*** Mr. Henrique da
Silveira SARDINHA-PINTO (Brazil),* Mr. Ugo SESSI (Italy)* and Mr. WU Gang (China).*
___________________
*

Term of office expires on 31 December 2005.

**

Term of office expires on 31 December 2006.

***

Term of office expires on 31 December 2007.

59/415. Election of a member of the International Court of Justice
The General Assembly, at its 81st plenary meeting, on 15 February 2005, and the Security
Council, at its 5121st meeting, on the same date, proceeded independently of one another to elect,
in accordance with Articles 2 to 4, 7 to 12 and 14 and 15 of the Statute of the International Court
of Justice, rules 150 and 151 of the rules of procedure of the Assembly and rules 40 and 61 of the
provisional rules of procedure of the Council, Mr. Ronny Abraham (France) as a member of the
Court for a term of office beginning on 15 February 2005 and expiring on 5 February 2009, as a
result of the resignation of Mr. Gilbert Guillaume.6
As a result, the International Court of Justice is composed as follows: Mr. SHI Jiuyong
(China),*** President, Mr. Raymond RANJEVA (Madagascar),** Vice-President, Mr. Ronny
ABRAHAM (France),** Mr. Awn Shawkat AL-KHASAWNEH (Jordan),** Mr. Thomas
BUERGENTHAL (United States of America),* Mr. Nabil ELARABY (Egypt),* Ms. Rosalyn HIGGINS
(United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland),** Mr. Pieter KOOIJMANS
(Netherlands),* Mr. Abdul G. KOROMA (Sierra Leone),*** Mr. Hisashi OWADA (Japan),***
Mr. Gonzalo PARRA-ARANGUREN (Venezuela),** Mr. Francisco REZEK (Brazil),* Mr. Bruno
SIMMA (Germany),*** Mr. Peter TOMKA (Slovakia)*** and Mr. Vladlen S. VERESHCHETIN
(Russian Federation).*
___________________
*

Term of office expires on 5 February 2006.

**

Term of office expires on 5 February 2009.

***

Term of office expires on 5 February 2012.

_______________
4

Decision 59/408, in section A of the Official Records of the General Assembly, Fifty-ninth Session, Supplement
No. 49 (A/59/49), vol. II, becomes decision 59/408 A.
5
A/59/583/Add.1, para. 4.
6
A/59/683-S/2005/51.

118

V. Decisions

59/416. Appointment of members of the Joint Inspection Unit
A
At its 94th plenary meeting, on 28 April 2005, the General Assembly, pursuant to article 3,
paragraph 2, of the statute of the Joint Inspection Unit, contained in the annex to resolution 31/192
of 22 December 1976, appointed Mr. Juan Luis Larrabure as a member of the Joint Inspection
Unit for a term of office beginning on 28 April 2005 and expiring on 31 December 2008, as a
result of the resignation of Mr. Christopher Thomas.7
B
At its 116th plenary meeting, on 24 August 2005, the General Assembly, pursuant to
article 3, paragraph 2, of the statute of the Joint Inspection Unit, contained in the annex to
resolution 31/192 of 22 December 1976, appointed Mr. Gérard Biraud, Mr. István Posta, Mr. Papa
Louis Fall and Mr. Cihan Terzi as members of the Joint Inspection Unit for a five-year term of
office beginning on 1 January 2006 and expiring on 31 December 2010.8
As a result, the Joint Inspection Unit is composed as follows: Mr. Gérard BIRAUD
(France),**** Mr. Papa Louis FALL (Senegal),**** Mr. Even Francisco FONTAINE ORTIZ
(Cuba),* Mr. Tadanori INOMATA (Japan),*** Mr. Juan Luis LARRABURE (Peru),** Mr. István
POSTA (Hungary),**** Mr. TANG Guangting (China), * Mr. Cihan TERZI (Turkey),****
Mr. Victor VISLYKH (Russian Federation),* Ms. Deborah WYNES (United States of America)* and
Mr. Muhammad YUSSUF (United Republic of Tanzania).*
___________________
*

Term of office expires on 31 December 2007.

**

Term of office expires on 31 December 2008.

***

Term of office expires on 31 December 2009.

**** Term of office expires on 31 December 2010.

59/417. Confirmation of the appointment of the Administrator of the United Nations
Development Programme
At its 95th plenary meeting, on 5 May 2005, the General Assembly confirmed the
appointment by the Secretary-General of Mr. Kemal DERVIŞ as Administrator of the United
Nations Development Programme for a four-year term of office beginning on 15 August 2005 and
ending on 14 August 2009.9
59/418. Appointment of the Under-Secretary-General for Internal Oversight Services
At its 95th plenary meeting, on 5 May 2005, the General Assembly approved the
appointment by the Secretary-General of Ms. Inga-Britt AHLENIUS as Under-Secretary-General
for Internal Oversight Services for one fixed term of five years beginning on 15 July 2005 and
ending on 14 July 2010.10

_______________
7

See A/59/788.
See A/59/889.
9
See A/59/240.
10
See A/59/109 and Add.1.
8

119

V. Decisions

59/419. Confirmation of the appointment of the Secretary-General of the United Nations
Conference on Trade and Development
At its 97th plenary meeting, on 11 May 2005, the General Assembly confirmed the
appointment by the Secretary-General of the United Nations of Mr. Supachai PANITCHPAKDI as
Secretary-General of the United Nations Conference on Trade and Development for a four-year
term of office beginning on 1 September 2005 and ending on 31 August 2009.11
59/420. Election of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees
At its 98th plenary meeting, on 27 May 2005, the General Assembly, on the proposal of the
Secretary-General, decided to elect Mr. Antônio Manuel de Oliveira GUTERRES as United Nations
High Commissioner for Refugees for a period of five years beginning on 15 June 2005 and ending
on 14 June 2010.12
59/421. Election of the President of the General Assembly at its sixtieth session13
At its 102nd plenary meeting, on 13 June 2005, the General Assembly, in accordance with
Article 21 of the Charter of the United Nations and rule 30 of the rules of the procedure of the
Assembly,14 elected by acclamation Mr. Jan Eliasson, Ambassador of Sweden to the United States
of America, as President of the General Assembly at its sixtieth session.
59/422. Election of the Chairmen of the Main Committees of the General Assembly at its
sixtieth session13
On 13 June 2005, the six Main Committees of the General Assembly held meetings in
accordance with rules 99 (a)15 and 103 of the rules of procedure of the Assembly for the purpose
of electing their Chairmen.
At the 103rd plenary meeting, on 13 June 2005, the President of the General Assembly
announced that the following persons had been elected as Chairmen of the Main Committees of
the General Assembly at its sixtieth session:
First Committee:

Mr. CHOI Young-jin (Republic of Korea)

Special Political and
Decolonization Committee
(Fourth Committee):
Mr. Yashar ALIYEV (Azerbaijan)
Second Committee:

Mr. Aminu Bashir WALI (Nigeria)

Third Committee:

Mr. Francis BUTAGIRA (Uganda)

Fifth Committee:

Mr. John William ASHE (Antigua and Barbuda)

Sixth Committee:

Mr. Juan Antonio YÁÑEZ-BARNUEVO (Spain)

_______________
11

See A/59/110.
See A/59/241.
13
In accordance with rule 38 of the rules of procedure of the General Assembly, the General Committee consists of
the President of the Assembly, the twenty-one Vice-Presidents and the Chairman of the six Main Committees.
14
Rule 30 was amended by resolution 56/509 of 8 July 2002.
15
Rule 99 (a) was amended by resolution 56/509 of 8 July 2002.
12

120

V. Decisions

59/423. Election of the Vice-Presidents of the General Assembly at its sixtieth session13
At its 103rd plenary meeting, on 13 June 2005, the General Assembly, in accordance with
paragraphs 2 and 3 of the annex to resolution 33/138 of 19 December 1978 and rule 30 of the
rules of procedure of the Assembly,14 elected by acclamation the following twenty-one Member
States as Vice-Presidents of the General Assembly at its sixtieth session: ANGOLA, ARMENIA,
BRAZIL, CENTRAL AFRICAN REPUBLIC, CHINA, FRANCE, GUINEA-BISSAU, INDIA, IRAN (ISLAMIC
REPUBLIC OF), ISRAEL, KENYA, MALAYSIA, MALI, MYANMAR, PAKISTAN, PARAGUAY, RUSSIAN
FEDERATION, TUNISIA, UNITED KINGDOM OF GREAT BRITAIN AND NORTHERN IRELAND, UNITED
STATES OF AMERICA and VENEZUELA (BOLIVARIAN REPUBLIC OF).

121

V. Decisions

B. Other decisions
1.

Decisions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

59/503. Adoption of the agenda and allocation of agenda
items
B16
At its 77th plenary meeting, on 18 January 2005, the
General Assembly decided to reopen consideration of agenda
item 39 entitled “Strengthening of the coordination of
humanitarian and disaster relief assistance of the United
Nations, including special economic assistance”, under heading
E (Effective coordination of humanitarian assistance efforts), in
order to consider expeditiously a draft resolution.17
At its 80th plenary meeting, on 20 January 2005, the
General Assembly decided to reopen consideration of agenda
item 18 entitled “Election of judges of the International Tribunal
for the Prosecution of Persons Responsible for Serious
Violations of International Humanitarian Law Committed in the
Territory of the Former Yugoslavia since 1991”, under heading I
(Organizational, administrative and other matters). The
Assembly also decided to proceed immediately to its
consideration in order to take action on the recommendations of
the Secretary-General.18
At its 84th plenary meeting, on 29 March 2005, the
General Assembly, on the proposal of the Secretary-General,19
having waived the relevant provisions of rule 40 of its rules of
procedure, decided to include in the agenda of its fifty-ninth
session an additional item entitled “Financing of the United
Nations Mission in the Sudan”, under heading I (Organizational,
administrative and other matters), and to allocate it to the Fifth
Committee.
At its 91st plenary meeting, on 13 April 2005, the General
Assembly decided to consider directly in plenary meeting
agenda item 148 entitled “Measures to eliminate international
terrorism”, under heading H (Drug control, crime prevention
and combating international terrorism in all its forms and
manifestations), and to proceed immediately to its consideration
in order to consider expeditiously a draft resolution
recommended by the Ad Hoc Committee established by
General Assembly resolution 51/210 of 17 December 1996.20

_______________
16

Decision 59/503, in section B of the Official Records of the General
Assembly, Fifty-ninth Session, Supplement No. 49 (A/59/49), vol. II,
becomes decision 59/503 A.
17
A/59/L.58.
18
A/59/666.
19
A/59/239.
20
A/59/766, para. 3.

122

At its 95th plenary meeting, on 5 May 2005, the General
Assembly, on the proposal of the Secretary-General,9 having
waived the relevant provisions of rule 40 of its rules of
procedure, decided to include in the agenda of its fifty-ninth
session an additional sub-item entitled “Confirmation of the
appointment of the Administrator of the United Nations
Development Programme” as sub-item (k) of agenda item 17
entitled “Appointments to fill vacancies in subsidiary organs
and other appointments”, under heading I (Organizational,
administrative and other matters), and to consider it directly in
plenary meeting. Having waived rule 15 of its rules of
procedure, the Assembly also decided to proceed immediately
to the consideration of sub-item (k) in order to take action on the
appointment.
At its 98th plenary meeting, on 27 May 2005, the General
Assembly decided to consider directly in plenary meeting
agenda item 84 entitled “Follow-up to and implementation of
the outcome of the International Conference on Financing for
Development”, under heading B (Promotion of sustained
economic growth and sustainable development in accordance
with the resolutions of the General Assembly and recent United
Nations conferences), and to proceed immediately to its
consideration in order to consider expeditiously a draft
resolution.21
At the same meeting, the General Assembly, on the
proposal of the Secretary-General,12 having waived the relevant
provisions of rule 40 of its rules of procedure, decided to
include in the agenda of its fifty-ninth session an additional subitem entitled “Election of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees” as sub-item (b) of agenda item 16
entitled “Elections to fill vacancies in subsidiary organs and
other elections”, under heading I (Organizational,
administrative and other matters), and to consider it directly in
plenary meeting.
At its 101st plenary meeting, on 6 June 2005, the General
Assembly decided to reopen consideration of sub-item (b) of
agenda item 17, entitled “Appointment of members of the
Committee on Contributions”, under heading I (Organizational,
administrative and other matters), in order to consider
expeditiously the report of the Fifth Committee.22
At its 113th plenary meeting, on 14 July 2005, the General
Assembly decided to consider directly in plenary meeting subitem (b) entitled “Further implementation of the Programme of

_______________
21
22

A/59/L.61.
A/59/583/Add.1.

V. Decisions

Action for the Sustainable Development of Small Island
Developing States” of agenda item 85 entitled “Sustainable
development”, under heading B (Promotion of sustained
economic growth and sustainable development in accordance
with the resolutions of the General Assembly and recent United
Nations conferences), and to proceed immediately to its
consideration in order to consider expeditiously a draft
resolution.23
At the same meeting, the General Assembly also decided
to consider directly in plenary meeting agenda item 113 entitled
“Scale of assessments for the apportionment of the expenses of
the United Nations”, under heading I (Organizational,
administrative and other matters), and to proceed immediately
to its consideration in order to consider expeditiously a draft
resolution.24
59/553. Participation of civil society representatives in
the high-level meeting to review the progress
achieved in realizing commitments set out in the
Declaration of Commitment on HIV/AIDS

Thai Drug Users’ Network
Paisan Suwannawong, Founder
India HIV/AIDS Alliance (Alliance India)
Dr. Balwant Singh, Director
Maiti Nepal
Anuradha Koirala, Director
International Community of Women Living with HIV/AIDS
Gracia Violeta Ross, Volunteer Coordinator, Andean
International Community of Women Living with HIV/AIDS
Community Action Resource
Catherine Williams, Director
Central and Eastern European Harm Reduction Network
Anya Sarang, President
Pacific Island AIDS Foundation
Maire Bopp Dupont, Founder and Chief Executive Officer
Female Health Company
Mary Ann Leeper, PhD, President

At its 80th plenary meeting, on 20 January 2005, the
General Assembly, on the proposal of its President,25 decided to
approve for participation in the high-level meeting to review the
progress achieved in realizing the commitments set out in the
Declaration of Commitment on HIV/AIDS, to be held on
2 June 2005, the list of civil society representatives contained in
the annex below, which was drawn up by the President pursuant
to paragraph 3 (d) of resolution 58/313 of 1 July 2004.

World AIDS Campaign
Marcel van Soest, Executive Director

Annex

At its 117th plenary meeting, on 12 September 2005, the
General Assembly, recalling its previous relevant resolutions
and decisions, having considered the report of the Open-ended
Working Group on the Question of Equitable Representation on
and Increase in the Membership of the Security Council and
Other Matters related to the Security Council, which was
established pursuant to its resolution 48/26 of 3 December
1993, on its deliberations during the fifty-ninth session of the
General Assembly,26 and bearing in mind the United Nations
Millennium Declaration of 8 September 2000, adopted by
Heads of State and Government,27 in which they resolved to
intensify their efforts to achieve a comprehensive reform of the
Security Council in all its aspects:

List of fifteen civil society representatives to be invited to the
high-level meeting of the General Assembly to review the
progress achieved in realizing the commitments set out in
the Declaration of Commitment on HIV/AIDS, to be
convened on 2 June 2005
Women Fighting AIDS in Kenya
Dorothy Onyango, Executive Director
International HIV/AIDS Alliance, Mozambique
Santos Alfredo, Director
Hope for African Children Initiative
Pat Youri, Executive Director
Ethiopian Women Lawyers Association
Meaza Ashenafi, Executive Director
Association for the Promotion of Fundamental Liberties
in Chad
Gilbert Maoundonodji, President and Legal Consultant

_______________
23

A/59/L.63.
24
A/59/L.66.
25
A/59/L.59.

Global Business Coalition on HIV/AIDS
Trevor Neilson, Executive Director
59/566. Question of equitable representation on and
increase in the membership of the Security Council
and related matters

(a) Took note of the report of the Working Group on its
work during the fifty-ninth session of the General Assembly;
(b) Noted with appreciation the Chairman’s initiative to
stimulate an active discussion on substantive topics relating to

_______________
26
Official Records of the General Assembly, Fifty-ninth Session, Supplement
No. 47 (A/59/47).
27
See resolution 55/2.

123

V. Decisions

the comprehensive reform of the Security Council, and in that
regard noted the six topics discussed by the Working Group;
(c) Urged the Working Group to continue to exert
efforts during the sixtieth session, aimed at achieving progress
in the consideration of all issues relevant to the question of
equitable representation on and increase in the membership of
the Security Council and other matters related to the Council;
(d) Decided that the question of equitable representation
on and increase in the membership of the Security Council and
other matters related to the Council should be considered during
the sixtieth session of the General Assembly;
(e) Also decided that the Working Group should
continue its work, taking into account the progress achieved
during the forty-eighth to fifty-ninth sessions and drawing on
the experience of the fifty-ninth session as well as the views to
be expressed during the sixtieth session, and should submit a
report to the General Assembly before the end of its sixtieth
session, including any agreed recommendations.
59/567. Cooperation between the United Nations and the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in
Europe
At its 117th plenary meeting, on 12 September 2005, the
General Assembly, at the request of Slovenia,28 on behalf of
the States members of the Organization for Security and
Cooperation in Europe, decided to defer consideration of the
sub-item entitled “Cooperation between the United Nations and
the Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe” and
to include it as an item in the draft agenda of its sixtieth session,
on the understanding that without a precedent being set, the subitem would again fall under the item entitled “Cooperation
between the United Nations and regional and other
organizations”, which is to be included in the agenda of the sixtyfirst session and considered biennially, pursuant to resolution
55/285 of 7 September 2001.

_______________
28

A/59/908.

124

59/568. Prevention of armed conflict
At its 117th plenary meeting, on 12 September 2005, the
General Assembly decided to defer consideration of the item
entitled “Prevention of armed conflict” and to include it in the
draft agenda of its sixtieth session.
59/569. Improving the financial situation of the United
Nations
At its 117th plenary meeting, on 12 September 2005, the
General Assembly decided to defer consideration of the item
entitled “Improving the financial situation of the United
Nations” and to include it in the draft agenda of its sixtieth
session.
59/570. Financing of the United Nations Mission in East
Timor
At its 117th plenary meeting, on 12 September 2005, the
General Assembly decided to defer consideration of the item
entitled “Financing of the United Nations Mission in East
Timor” and to include it in the draft agenda of its sixtieth
session.
59/571. The situation in the occupied territories of
Azerbaijan
At its 117th plenary meeting, on 12 September 2005, the
General Assembly, on the proposal of the sponsor of the item,
decided to defer consideration of the item entitled “The situation
in the occupied territories of Azerbaijan” and to include it in the
draft agenda of its sixtieth session.

V. Decisions

2.

Decisions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

59/551. Questions deferred for future consideration
29

B

Item 113: Scale of assessments for the apportionment of the
expenses of the United Nations
Letter dated 27 December 2001 from the SecretaryGeneral to the President of the General Assembly39

At its 91st plenary meeting, on 13 April 2005, the General
Assembly, on the recommendation of the Fifth Committee,30
decided to defer for future consideration the following agenda
items and related documents:
Item 108: Programme budget for the biennium 2004–2005

Note by the Secretary-General on the outstanding
assessed contributions of the former Yugoslavia40
Item 116: United Nations common system

Second annual progress report of the Secretary-General
on the implementation of the capital master plan31

Report of the International Civil Service Commission for
2004: comments of the International Civil Service
Commission on the report of the Panel on the
Strengthening of the International Civil Service41

Report of the Secretary-General on the plans for three
additional conference rooms and viable solutions for
allowing natural light into the rooms32

Note by the Secretariat transmitting the report of the Panel
on the Strengthening of the International Civil Service42

Report of the Secretary-General on viable options for
ensuring sufficient parking space at United Nations
Headquarters33

Note by the Secretary-General transmitting his comments
and those of the United Nations Chief Executives Board
for Coordination on the report of the Panel on the
Strengthening of the International Civil Service43

Report of the Secretary-General on the status of possible
funding arrangements for the capital master plan34
Report of the Secretary-General on cooperation with the
City and State of New York related to the capital master
plan35
Note by the Secretary-General transmitting the report of
the Board of Auditors on the capital master plan for the
biennium ended 31 December 200336
Note by the Secretary-General transmitting the report of
the Office of Internal Oversight Services on the United
Nations capital master plan for the period from August
2003 through July 200437

C
At its 104th plenary meeting, on 22 June 2005, the
General Assembly, on the recommendation of the Fifth
Committee, 44 decided to defer until its sixtieth session
consideration of the following agenda items and related
documents:
Item 113: Scale of assessments for the apportionment of the
expenses of the United Nations
Letter dated 27 December 2001 from the SecretaryGeneral to the President of the General Assembly39

Report of the Advisory Committee on Administrative and
Budgetary Questions on the capital master plan38

Note by the Secretary-General on the outstanding
assessed contributions of the former Yugoslavia40
Item 114: Human resources management

_______________

Report of the Secretary-General on the list of staff of the
United Nations Secretariat45

29

Decision 59/551, in section B.6 of the Official Records of the General
Assembly, Fifty-ninth Session, Supplement No. 49 (A/59/49), vol. II,
becomes decision 59/551 A.
30
A/59/652/Add.1, para.17.
31
A/59/441.
32
A/58/556.
33
A/58/712.
34
A/58/729.
35
A/58/779.
36
A/59/161.
37
A/59/420.
38
A/59/556.

_______________
39

A/56/767.
A/58/189.
41
Official Records of the General Assembly, Fifty-ninth Session, Supplement
No. 30 (A/59/30), vol. II.
42
A/59/153.
43
A/59/399.
44
A/59/652/Add.2, para. 5.
45
A/C.5/59/L.34.
40

125

V. Decisions

Biennial report of the Secretary-General on the use of
gratis personnel, indicating nationality and summarizing
duration of service and function performed46
Report of the Advisory Committee on Administrative and
Budgetary Questions on gratis personnel provided by
Governments and other entities47
Report of the Secretary-General on a comprehensive
assessment of the system of geographical distribution and
assessment of the issues relating to possible changes in the
number of posts subject to the system of geographical
distribution48
D
At its 117th plenary meeting, on 12 September 2005, the
General Assembly, on the recommendation of the Fifth
Committee, 49 decided to defer until its sixtieth session
consideration of the following agenda item and related
documents:
Item 108: Programme budget for the biennium 2004–2005
Second annual progress report of the Secretary-General
on the implementation of the capital master plan50
Report of the Secretary-General on plans for three
additional conference rooms and viable solutions for
allowing natural light into the rooms32
Report of the Secretary-General on viable options for
ensuring sufficient parking space at United Nations
Headquarters33
Report of the Secretary-General on the status of possible
funding arrangements for the capital master plan34
Report of the Secretary-General on cooperation with the
City and State of New York related to the capital master
plan35
Note by the Secretary-General transmitting the report of
the Board of Auditors on the capital master plan for the
biennium ended 31 December 200336

Report of the Advisory Committee on Administrative and
Budgetary Questions on the capital master plan38
Oral report of the Chairman of the Advisory Committee
on Administrative and Budgetary Questions51
59/554. United Nations Fund for International
Partnerships
At its 91st plenary meeting, on 13 April 2005, on the
recommendation of the Fifth Committee, 52 the General
Assembly took note of the report of the Secretary-General on
the United Nations Fund for International Partnerships.53
59/555. Construction of additional office facilities at the
Economic Commission for Africa in Addis Ababa
At its 91st plenary meeting, on 13 April 2005, on the
recommendation of the Fifth Committee,52 the General
Assembly:
(a) Took note with appreciation of the efforts by the
Government of Ethiopia to facilitate the construction project;
(b) Also took note of the report of the Secretary-General
on the construction of additional office facilities at the
Economic Commission for Africa in Addis Ababa, 54 and
endorsed the recommendations contained in the related report of
the Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary
Questions.55
59/556. Review of the structure and functions of all liaison
offices or representation in New York of
organizations headquartered elsewhere funded
from the regular budget
At its 91st plenary meeting, on 13 April 2005, on the
recommendation of the Fifth Committee,52 the General
Assembly took note of the report of the Secretary-General on
the review of the structure and functions of all liaison offices or
representation in New York of organizations headquartered
elsewhere funded from the regular budget 56 and the related
report of the Advisory Committee on Administrative and
Budgetary Questions.57

Note by the Secretary-General transmitting the report of
the Office of Internal Oversight Services on the United
Nations capital master plan for the period from August
2003 through July 200437

_______________
_______________
46

A/59/716.
A/59/786.
48
A/59/724.
49
A/59/652/Add.3, para. 6.
50
A/59/441 and Add.1 and 2.
47

126

51
See Official Records of the General Assembly, Fifty-ninth Session, Fifth
Committee, 53rd meeting (A/C.5/59/SR.53), and corrigendum.
52
A/59/448/Add.3, para. 13.
53
A/59/170.
54
A/59/444.
55
A/59/572.
56
A/59/395.
57
A/59/552.

V. Decisions

59/557. Report of the Office of Internal Oversight Services
on the review of the operations and management of
United Nations libraries
At its 91st plenary meeting, on 13 April 2005, on the
recommendation of the Fifth Committee,52 the General
Assembly decided to defer until its sixtieth session
consideration of the report of the Office of Internal Oversight
Services on the review of the operations and management of
United Nations libraries.58
59/558. Review of the regular programme of technical
cooperation and the Development Account
At its 91st plenary meeting, on 13 April 2005, on the
recommendation of the Fifth Committee,52 the General
Assembly decided to consider, as a matter of priority at the
earliest possible period, but not later than the main part of its
sixtieth session, the report of the Secretary-General on the
review of the regular programme of technical cooperation and
the Development Account.59
59/559. Standards of accommodation for air travel
At its 91st plenary meeting, on 13 April 2005, on the
recommendation of the Fifth Committee,52 the General
Assembly took note of the report of the Secretary-General on
standards of accommodation for air travel60 and the related
report of the Advisory Committee on Administrative and
Budgetary Questions.61
59/560. Recruitment
At its 91st plenary meeting, on 13 April 2005, the General
Assembly, on the recommendation of the Fifth Committee: 62
(a) Decided, in view of the fact that printed copies of
vacancy announcements were not distributed to delegations as
required by paragraph 5 of section II of General Assembly
resolution 59/266 of 23 December 2004 with respect to the
establishment, in accordance with section XI of resolution
59/276 of 23 December 2004, of the Department of Safety and
Security, that the D-2 post of Deputy to the Under-SecretaryGeneral, the D-2 post of Director of the Division of Regional
Operations, the D-2 post of Director of the Division of Safety
and Security Services and the D-1 post of Executive Officer
should, on an exceptional basis, be re-advertised for thirty days,
while the process continued with respect to recruitment actions
already under way;

(b) Also decided that, in respect of the fourteen P-3 to
P-5 posts in the Department of Safety and Security for which
vacancy announcements were issued between 3 and 31 March
2005 in Galaxy, but not distributed in printed form, the deadline
for receipt of applications should be extended by fifteen days,
on an exceptional basis;
(c) Requested the Secretary-General to comply fully
with the provisions of paragraph 5 of section II of resolution
59/266.
59/561. Strengthening of the international civil service
At its 91st plenary meeting, on 13 April 2005, on the
recommendation of the Fifth Committee, 63 the General
Assembly decided to consider, as a matter of priority, the
question of the strengthening of the international civil service
during its sixtieth session.
59/562. Administrative and budgetary aspects of the
financing of the United Nations peacekeeping
operations: programme budget implications of
draft resolution A/C.5/59/L.53
At its 104th plenary meeting, on 22 June 2005, the
General Assembly, on the recommendation of the Fifth
Committee,64 having considered the statement of programme
budget implications submitted by the Secretary-General,65 noted
that an additional appropriation of 466,600 United States dollars
would be required for the support account for peacekeeping
operations for the period from 1 July 2005 to 30 June 2006 for
the Office of Internal Oversight Services, should it adopt draft
resolution A/C.5/59/L.53, entitled “Administrative and
budgetary aspects of the financing of the United Nations
peacekeeping operations: cross-cutting issues”.
59/563. Updated financial position of closed peacekeeping
missions as at 30 June 2004
At its 104th plenary meeting, on 22 June 2005, the
General Assembly, on the recommendation of the Fifth
Committee,64 took note of the reports of the Secretary-General
on the updated financial position of closed peacekeeping
missions66 and the related reports of the Advisory Committee on
Administrative and Budgetary Questions, 67 and decided to
consider the issue of the updated financial position of closed
peacekeeping missions as at 30 June 2005 during the main part
of its sixtieth session.

_______________

_______________

58

63

59

64

A/59/373.
A/59/397.
60
A/59/523.
61
A/59/573.
62
A/59/774, para. 8.

A/59/647/Add.1, para. 6.
A/59/532/Add.1, para. 22.
65
A/C.5/59/32.
66
A/58/778 and A/59/752.
67
A/58/799 and A/59/790.

127

V. Decisions

59/564. Financing of the United Nations Angola
Verification Mission and the United Nations
Observer Mission in Angola
At its 104th plenary meeting, on 22 June 2005, the
General Assembly, on the recommendation of the Fifth
Committee:68
(a) Decided that updated information on the financial
position of the United Nations Angola Verification Mission and
the United Nations Observer Mission in Angola should be
included in the report to be considered by the Assembly at its
sixtieth session on the updated financial position of closed
peacekeeping missions, under the item entitled “Administrative
and budgetary aspects of the financing of the United Nations
peacekeeping operations”;

(b) Also decided that the item entitled “Financing of the
United Nations Angola Verification Mission and the United
Nations Observer Mission in Angola” should be eliminated
from the agenda.
59/565. Financing of the United Nations Iraq-Kuwait
Observation Mission
At its 104th plenary meeting, on 22 June 2005, the
General Assembly, on the recommendation of the Fifth
Committee,69 having considered the report of the SecretaryGeneral on the final disposition of the assets of the United
Nations Iraq-Kuwait Observation Mission 70 and the related
report of the Advisory Committee on Administrative and
Budgetary Questions,71 took note of the report of the SecretaryGeneral.

_______________
69

_______________
68

A/59/831, para. 4.

128

A/59/835, para. 6.
A/59/614.
71
A/59/736/Add.14.
70

Annex I
Allocation of agenda items1
1

1. The following additional items were considered directly in plenary meeting, under heading I (Organizational, administrative
and other matters), during the resumed fifty-ninth session of the General Assembly:2
16. Elections to fill vacancies in subsidiary organs and other elections:3
(b)

Election of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees.

17. Appointments to fill vacancies in subsidiary organs and other appointments:4
(k)

Confirmation of the appointment of the Administrator of the United Nations Development Programme.

2. The following items, which had been allocated to the Second Committee, were also considered directly in plenary meeting
during the resumed fifty-ninth session, under heading B (Promotion of sustained economic growth and sustainable development in
accordance with the resolutions of the General Assembly and recent United Nations conferences):2
84. Follow-up to and implementation of the outcome of the International Conference on Financing for
Development.3
85. Sustainable development:5
(b)

Further implementation of the Programme of Action for the Sustainable Development of Small Island
Developing States.

3. The following item, which had been allocated to the Fifth Committee, was also considered directly in plenary meeting during
the resumed fifty-ninth session, under heading I (Organizational, administrative and other matters):2
113. Scale of assessments for the apportionment of the expenses of the United Nations.5
4. The following item, which had been allocated to the Sixth Committee, was also considered directly in plenary meeting during
the resumed fifty-ninth session, under heading H (Drug control, crime prevention and combating international terrorism in all its
forms and manifestations):2
148. Measures to eliminate international terrorism.4
5. The following additional item was allocated to the Fifth Committee at the resumed fifty-ninth session, under heading I
(Organizational, administrative and other matters):2
164. Financing of the United Nations Mission in the Sudan.6

_______________
1
Further to resolution 58/316 of 1 July 2004, agenda items are organized under headings corresponding to the priorities of the Organization, as contained in
the medium-term plan for the period 2002–2005.
2 See decision 59/503 B in section V.B of the present volume.
3
A/59/252/Add.7.
4
A/59/252/Add.6.
5
A/59/252/Add.8.
6
A/59/252/Add.5.

129

Annex II
Checklist of resolutions and decisions
Resolutions
Resolution
No.

Item

Plenary
meeting

Date of adoption

Page

129

104th

22 June 2005

53

136

104th

22 June 2005

54

153

104th

22 June 2005

56

154

104th

22 June 2005

58

155

104th

22 June 2005

60

105 (b)

113th

14 July 2005

2

Resolution B..........................................................................

106

104th

22 June 2005

62

Strengthening emergency relief, rehabilitation,
reconstruction and prevention in the aftermath of the
Indian Ocean tsunami disaster .............................................

39

79th

19 January 2005

2

59/280.

United Nations Declaration on Human Cloning.................

150

82nd

8 March 2005

114

59/281.

Comprehensive review of the whole question of
peacekeeping operations in all their aspects........................

77

84th

29 March 2005

48

59/282.

Special subjects relating to the programme budget for the
biennium 2004–2005............................................................

108

91st

13 April 2005

63

59/283.

Administration of justice at the United Nations..................

108 and 120

91st

13 April 2005

65

59/284.

Financing of the United Nations Peacekeeping Force in
Cyprus
Resolution A..........................................................................

126

91st

13 April 2005

69

Resolution B..........................................................................

126

104th

22 June 2005

70

Resolution A..........................................................................

127

91st

13 April 2005

73

Resolution B..........................................................................

127

104th

22 June 2005

74

59/13.

Title

Financing of the United Nations Mission of Support in
East Timor
Resolution B..........................................................................

59/14.

Financing of the United Nations Mission in Sierra Leone
Resolution B..........................................................................

59/15.

Financing of the United Nations Operation in Burundi
Resolution B..........................................................................

59/16.

Financing of the United Nations Operation in Côte
d’Ivoire
Resolution B..........................................................................

59/17.

Financing of the United Nations Stabilization Mission
in Haiti
Resolution B..........................................................................

59/113.

World Programme for Human Rights Education
Resolution B..........................................................................

59/264.

59/279.

59/285.

Financial reports and audited financial statements, and
reports of the Board of Auditors

Financing of the United Nations Organization Mission in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo

131

Annex II – Checklist of resolutions and decisions
Resolution
No.

Item

Plenary
meeting

Date of adoption

Page

Resolution A..........................................................................

133

91st

13 April 2005

76

Resolution B..........................................................................

133

104th

22 June 2005

77

Report of the Office of Internal Oversight Services on
strengthening the investigation functions in the United
Nations...................................................................................

107

91st

13 April 2005

79

59/288.

Procurement reform..............................................................

107

91st

13 April 2005

80

59/289.

Outsourcing practices ...........................................................

107

91st

13 April 2005

82

59/290.

International Convention for the Suppression of Acts of
Nuclear Terrorism .................................................................

148

91st

13 April 2005

4

Preparation for and organization of the High-level Plenary
Meeting of the General Assembly .......................................

45 and 55

92nd

15 April 2005

11

59/292.

Financing of the United Nations Mission in the Sudan......

164

93rd

21 April 2005

83

59/293.

Modalities for the High-level Dialogue on Financing for
Development .........................................................................

84

98th

27 May 2005

15

Special subjects and questions relating to the programme
budget for the biennium 2004–2005....................................

108

104th

22 June 2005

84

59/295.

Capital master plan................................................................

108

104th

22 June 2005

85

59/296.

Administrative and budgetary aspects of the financing of
the United Nations peacekeeping operations: cross-cutting
issues......................................................................................

123

104th

22 June 2005

86

59/297.

Peacekeeping Reserve Fund.................................................

123

104th

22 June 2005

95

59/298.

Reformed procedures for determining reimbursement to
Member States for contingent-owned equipment...............

123

104th

22 June 2005

95

Financing of the United Nations Logistics Base at
Brindisi, Italy.........................................................................

123

104th

22 June 2005

96

Comprehensive review of a strategy to eliminate future
sexual exploitation and abuse in United Nations
peacekeeping operations.......................................................

77

104th

22 June 2005

48

59/301.

Support account for peacekeeping operations ....................

123

104th

22 June 2005

97

59/302.

Financing of the United Nations Mission in Bosnia and
Herzegovina ..........................................................................

125

104th

22 June 2005

99

Financing of the United Nations Mission in Ethiopia and
Eritrea.....................................................................................

130

104th

22 June 2005

99

Financing of the United Nations Observer Mission in
Georgia ..................................................................................

131

104th

22 June 2005

101

59/305.

Financing of the United Nations Mission in Liberia ..........

134

104th

22 June 2005

103

59/306.

Financing of the United Nations Disengagement Observer
Force ......................................................................................

135 (a)

104th

22 June 2005

105

59/286.

59/287.

59/291.

59/294.

59/299.
59/300.

59/303.
59/304.

132

Title

Financing of the United Nations Interim Administration
Mission in Kosovo

Annex II – Checklist of resolutions and decisions
Resolution
No.

Title

Item

Plenary
meeting

Date of adoption

Page

Financing of the United Nations Interim Force in
Lebanon .................................................................................

135 (b)

104th

22 June 2005

107

Financing of the United Nations Mission for the
Referendum in Western Sahara............................................

137

104th

22 June 2005

109

59/309.

Multilingualism.....................................................................

156

104th

22 June 2005

16

59/310.

Cooperation between the United Nations and the
Economic Community of Central African States ...............

56 (g)

113th

14 July 2005

17

International Meeting to Review the Implementation of
the Programme of Action for the Sustainable
Development of Small Island Developing States ...............

85 (b)

113th

14 July 2005

19

Requests for exemption under Article 19 of the Charter of
the United Nations ................................................................

113

113th

14 July 2005

21

59/313.

A strengthened and revitalized General Assembly .............

52

117th

12 September 2005

22

59/314.

Draft outcome document of the High-level Plenary
Meeting of the General Assembly of September 2005 ......

45 and 55

118th

13 September 2005

24

Item

Plenary
meeting

Date of adoption

Page

Decision B..............................................................................

18

80th

20 January 2005

117

Decision C..............................................................................

18

116th

24 August 2005

117

Decision B..............................................................................

17 (b)

101st

6 June 2005

118

59/415.

Election of a member of the International Court of Justice

15 (c)

81st

15 February 2005

118

59/416.

Appointment of members of the Joint Inspection Unit
Decision A..............................................................................

17 (h)

94th

28 April 2005

119

Decision B..............................................................................

17 (h)

116th

24 August 2005

119

Confirmation of the appointment of the Administrator of
the United Nations Development Programme.....................

17 (k)

95th

5 May 2005

119

Appointment of the Under-Secretary-General for Internal
Oversight Services.................................................................

17 (i)

95th

5 May 2005

119

Confirmation of the appointment of the Secretary-General
of the United Nations Conference on Trade and
Development..........................................................................

17 (j)

97th

11 May 2005

120

59/307.
59/308.

59/311.

59/312.

Decisions
Decision
No.

59/406.

59/408.

59/417.
59/418.
59/419.

Title

Election of judges of the International Tribunal for the
Prosecution of Persons Responsible for Serious Violations
of International Humanitarian Law Committed in the
Territory of the Former Yugoslavia since 1991

Appointment of members of the Committee on
Contributions

133

Annex II – Checklist of resolutions and decisions
Decision
No.

Title

Item

Plenary
meeting

Date of adoption

Page

Election of the United Nations High Commissioner for
Refugees.................................................................................

16 (b)

98th

27 May 2005

120

Election of the President of the General Assembly at its
sixtieth session .......................................................................

4

102nd

13 June 2005

120

Election of the Chairmen of the Main Committees of the
General Assembly at its sixtieth session...............................

5

103rd

13 June 2005

120

Election of the Vice-Presidents of the General Assembly at
its sixtieth session...................................................................

6

103rd

13 June 2005

121

8

77th

18 January 2005

122

Decision B..............................................................................

107

91st

13 April 2005

125

Decision C..............................................................................

107

104th

22 June 2005

125

Decision D..............................................................................

107

117th

12 September 2005

126

Participation of civil society representatives in the highlevel meeting to review the progress achieved in realizing
commitments set out in the Declaration of Commitment on
HIV/AIDS..............................................................................

43

80th

20 January 2005

123

59/554.

United Nations Fund for International Partnerships............

108

91st

13 April 2005

126

59/555.

Construction of additional office facilities at the Economic
Commission for Africa in Addis Ababa ...............................

108

91st

13 April 2005

126

Review of the structure and functions of all liaison offices
or representation in New York of organizations
headquartered elsewhere funded from the regular budget

108

91st

13 April 2005

126

Report of the Office of Internal Oversight Services on the
review of the operations and management of United
Nations libraries.....................................................................

108

91st

13 April 2005

127

Review of the regular programme of technical cooperation
and the Development Account..............................................

108

91st

13 April 2005

127

59/559.

Standards of accommodation for air travel ..........................

108

91st

13 April 2005

127

59/560.

Recruitment............................................................................

108 and 114

91st

13 April 2005

127

59/561.

Strengthening of the international civil service....................

116

91st

13 April 2005

127

59/562.

Administrative and budgetary aspects of the financing of
the United Nations peacekeeping operations: programme
budget implications of draft resolution A/C.5/59/L.53 .......

123

104th

22 June 2005

127

Updated financial position of closed peacekeeping missions
as at 30 June 2004..................................................................

123

104th

22 June 2005

127

Financing of the United Nations Angola Verification
Mission and the United Nations Observer Mission in
Angola ....................................................................................

124

104th

22 June 2005

128

59/420.
59/421.
59/422.
59/423.
59/503.

Adoption of the agenda and allocation of agenda items
Decision B..............................................................................

59/551.

59/553.

59/556.

59/557.

59/558.

59/563.
59/564.

134

Questions deferred for future consideration

Annex II – Checklist of resolutions and decisions
Decision
No.

Title

Item

Plenary
meeting

Date of adoption

Page

Financing of the United Nations Iraq-Kuwait Observation
Mission ...................................................................................

132 (a)

104th

22 June 2005

128

Question of equitable representation on and increase in the
membership of the Security Council and related matters ...

53

117th

12 September 2005

123

Cooperation between the United Nations and the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe........

56 (n)

117th

12 September 2005

124

59/568.

Prevention of armed conflict.................................................

24

117th

12 September 2005

124

59/569.

Improving the financial situation of the United Nations.....

110

117th

12 September 2005

124

59/570.

Financing of the United Nations Mission in East Timor.....

128

117th

12 September 2005

124

59/571.

The situation in the occupied territories of Azerbaijan........

163

117th

12 September 2005

124

59/565.
59/566.
59/567.

135
