asdf

United Nations

S/PV.6822

Security Council

Provisional

Sixty-seventh year

6822nd meeting
Tuesday, 21 August 2012, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Araud . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(France)

Members:

Azerbaijan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Colombia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Germany . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Guatemala . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
India . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Morocco . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Pakistan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Portugal . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
South Africa . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Togo . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . . .
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Mr. Musayev
Mr. Wang Min
Mr. Quintana
Mr. Berger
Mr. Rosenthal
Mr. Hardeep Singh Puri
Mr. Bouchaara
Mr. Tarar
Mr. Cabral
Mr. Zhukov
Mr. Sangqu
Mr. Menan
Mr. Tatham
Mrs. DiCarlo

Agenda
Security Council resolutions 1160 (1998), 1199 (1998), 1203 (1998), 1239 (1999) and
1244 (1999)
Report of the Secretary-General on the United Nations Interim Administration
Mission in Kosovo (S/2012/603)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. The ﬁnal text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the
delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-506.

12-46686 (E)

*1246686*

S/PV.6822

such opportunities can be very high. My assessment is
that more active and deliberate political international
engagement with the parties is urgently needed. The
elevation of the level of representation of the parties
at the table today attests to such an assessment.During
the current reporting period, sessions of the European
Union-led Belgrade-Pristina dialogue remained
suspended owing to the May general elections in Serbia
and the political process leading to the formation of a
new Government on 27 July.

The meeting was called to order at 10.05 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Security Council resolutions 1160 (1998), 1199
(1998), 1203 (1998), 1239 (1999) and 1244 (1999)
Report of the Secretary-General on the
United Nations Interim Administration
Mission in Kosovo (S/2012/603)
The President (spoke in French): Under rule 37 of
the Council’s provisional rules of procedure, I invite the
representative of Serbia to participate in this meeting.
On behalf of the Council, I welcome His Excellency
Mr. Ivica Dačić, Prime Minister of the Republic of
Serbia.
Under rule 39 of the Council’s provisional
rules of procedure, I invite Mr. Farid Zarif, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General and Head of
the United Nations Interim Administration Mission in
Kosovo, to participate in this meeting.
In accordance with the understanding reached in
the Council’s prior consultations, I shall take it that the
Security Council agrees to extend an invitation
under rule 39 of its provisional rules of procedure to
Mr. Hashim Thaçi to participate in this meeting.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I wish to draw the attention of Council members
to document S/2012/603, which contains the report of
the Secretary-General on the United Nations Interim
Administration Mission in Kosovo.
I now give the floor to Mr. Zarif.
Mr. Zarif: I thank the President of the Security
Council for the opportunity today to introduce the report
of the Secretary-General on the activities of the United
Nations Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo
(UNMIK) (S/2012/603), and to brief the Council on
current developments and issues that the international
community is confronting in Kosovo.
In particular, I wish today to highlight, once
more, the risks of the sometimes quiet, yet hazardous,
tendency towards complacency. From the perspective of
those of us on the ground, opportunities to reinvigorate
a political process are fleeting, while the cost of missing

2

I had the opportunity, some two weeks ago, to
meet with the new leadership in Belgrade, including
President Tomislav Nikolić and Prime Minister Ivica
Dačić. I wish to take this opportunity to congratulate
His Excellency Mr. Ivan Mrkić on his appointment as
the new Minister for Foreign Affairs of Serbia. During
my meetings with the Serbian leadership, I welcomed
their early and clear assurances of their commitment
to the full implementation of agreements previously
reached in the dialogue, and also to the early resumption
of dialogue.
A clear demonstration of a full faith commitment
to the dialogue, including through the expeditious
implementation of the agreements reached, is now
very important from both sides. As highlighted in
the Secretary-General’s report, delays in carrying out
commitments or in settling subsequent discrepancies
in interpretation should not be an excuse to prolong
the pause in the process. I trust that, with the new
Government now in place in Belgrade, the European
Union-facilitated dialogue will soon resume. I further
hope that those involved in the process will have used
the period of the recent hiatus to focus on further
enhancements to the process, including dedicating
increased attention to the implementation stage.
The first official visit of the Secretary-General to
the region, in late July, just after the end of the period
covered by his report, contributed to raising the level of
the discussions on a number of essential issues. I believe
it also contributed to setting the stage for what we all
have hoped to witness, namely, an energized approach
to tackling key issues in the very near future. Important
as it is to ensure the parties’ renewed commitment to
dialogue, the international community should also
strive to renew its engagement during the next critical
period.
On the ground, considerable progress has been
made towards increased cohesion and efficiency

12-46686

S/PV.6822

among the internationally mandated presences.
Increased exchanges among UNMIK, the European
Union Office in Kosovo, the Kosovo Force (KFOR),
the European Union Rule of Law Mission (EULEX)
and the Organization for Security and Cooperation in
Europe have resulted in improved coherence of efforts
on many issues of common interest. Such coordination
also brings into clearer view those issues that can be
addressed through improved joint effort, as well as
those that have been held up by the lack of political
progress.
The European Union Office in Kosovo has continued
stepping up its operations, under the leadership of
European Union Special Representative Žbogar. During
the current reporting period, EULEX carried out a
substantial internal restructuring aimed at streamlining
its operation, while also increasing conceptual clarity
and efficiency. Alongside that conceptual redesign,
it remains essential, in our view, that great care be
taken to ensure capability and readiness for effective
interventions, especially in areas where the development
of rule-of-law institutions remains insufficient and
where they are at times subjected to political currents.
Although UNMIK’s operational activities are
limited, we have nonetheless remained focused on
increasing positive results from our engagement with
the Kosovo authorities, in areas that contribute directly
to improvements in the lives of the Kosovar people. I
was gratified by the findings of a survey held in June
that showed a healthy trend in the standing of the
United Nations among the Kosovo population. The
European Union-sponsored poll revealed that more than
three-quarters of the Kosovo population had trust in the
United Nations, an increase of some 15 per cent since
the previous survey, in 2010.
In addition to our relations at the political level
in Kosovo, the Mission’s work has been undergoing
refinement, with the objective of enabling us to work
more efficiently with the local communities, the
institutions and our international partners in support of
a much-needed progress in human rights protection, the
return of internally displaced persons and refugees, and
determining the fate of missing persons.
Our endeavours also include coordinated steps to
improve constructive engagement at all levels in the
northern part of Kosovo. Concerning that area, far more
effort will be needed to change the familiar posturing
and rhetoric that emanates alternately from Pristina,

12-46686

Belgrade and northern Kosovo. As I have stressed in
previous Council meetings, setting enabling conditions
for a legitimate and genuine representation of the
interests of the population in northern Kosovo should
be a matter of priority. Achieving that goal will require
demonstrated goodwill as well as political maturity
from all sides. We hope that progress towards that goal
will not continue to be hindered by the unconstructive
patterns and political bluster that have become far too
pervasive. That essential component of overall political
progress will also depend upon positive engagement
and support from the members of the Council.
It is my sincere hope that, during the forthcoming
period, neither the parties nor the key international
stakeholders will allow any opportunity to be missed
for imparting vitality to the efforts aimed at addressing
the root and core political problems in a deliberate and
forthright manner. We must be mindful not to conflate
short-term stability with genuine progress towards
fundamental solutions.
Accordingly, I wish to appeal once again to the
members of the Council to positively apply their
authority and influence in order to assist and encourage
the parties towards a more creative, bold and forwardlooking approach to negotiations, based on compromise
and mutual respect. I believe that only by pursuing
that path can we expect any real progress, along with
greater successes, eventually putting the unfortunate
past to rest. A less active approach now will, in my
view, amount to perpetuating the status quo, which is
in the interest of no one.
I wish to add, on the occasion of the conclusion
of their 12-month tenure in the coming days, a
special word of appreciation to the outgoing KFOR
Commander, Major General Drews of Germany, and
his Deputy, Brigadier General Luif of Austria, for their
exceptional professionalism and consistent engagement
in maintaining a safe and secure environment during
the past year. They have been instrumental in promoting
the goal of synergy of effort among the mandate-holders
on the ground.
Finally, I wish sincerely to thank the Council
members for their continuing support for the work of
UNMIK.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to Mr. Dačić, Prime Minister of the Republic of
Serbia.

3

S/PV.6822

Mr. Dačić (Serbia) (spoke in Serbian; English
text provided by the delegation): I would like to thank
you, Mr. President, for convening this meeting of the
Security Council pursuant to resolution 1244 (1999).
I welcome the presence of Special Representative
Farid Zarif and thank him for his statement.
During the current reporting period, the citizens
of Serbia voted in free and fair general elections.
International observers concluded that the vote was in
line with the most rigorous international standards, as
in any stable democracy.
The consolidation of regional peace, security and
stability is a priority for the newly elected authorities of
the Republic of Serbia. I would like to remind this body
that practically right after the Second World War had
come to an end, those who had been the most fervent of
enemies began to lay the foundations for a new, stable
and prosperous Europe. That was the starting point for
today’s European Union (EU), in which Serbia too seeks
its place. On the other hand, more than 20 years since
the breakup of the former Yugoslavia and the ensuing
and civil wars, the peoples of the region continue to live
in the past and making mutual accusations, instead of
finding a sustainable solution for the future.
That is why resolving the final status of Kosovo and
Metohija is one of my Government’s most important
priorities. Through a process of negotiations and
dialogue, we stand ready to arrive at a sustainable
solution that takes into account the legitimate interests
of Albanians, Serbs and all others who live in Kosovo.
I want to be very clear that Serbia will never, under
any circumstances, implicitly or explicitly, recognize
the unilateral declaration of independence by Kosovo’s
ethnic Albanian authorities, because it was not the result
of mutual agreement. Our nation will remain united on
that fundamental issue. We will continue to defend our
constitutional order using all peaceful means at the
disposal of a democratic State Member of the United
Nations. I believe that none of the countries represented
in the Chamber would act differently were its nation to
find itself in a situation similar to ours.
Before proceeding with the rest of my remarks, I
would like to express my country’s sincere gratitude
to the majority of the States Members of the United
Nations, which respect Serbia’s sovereignty and
territorial integrity. I appeal to them to continue to
refrain from recognizing any solution to Kosovo that is

4

not the product of a clear and final agreement between
the parties.
Kosovo’s final status remains unresolved. No
solution to that status has been approved by the Security
Council, and no comprehensive settlement has been
accepted by the stakeholders. Accordingly, it is the
position of the Republic of Serbia that Kosovo cannot
be allowed to accede to any international organization
in which membership is reserved for sovereign States.
With respect to the interim arrangements reached
at Brussels during the EU-facilitated technical talks, as
referenced in paragraph 14 of the report (S/2012/603)
of the Secretary-General before the Council today, I
underline that there is no doubt that they are statusneutral and accord with resolution 1244 (1999). As a
point of fact, the participation of the Pristina authorities
as non-State actors is restricted to meetings in regional
forums whose aim is “to promote cooperation or
integration in the Balkan region”, to quote from the
terms agreed by the parties. Let me reiterate once
more that that refers exclusively to participation, not
membership.
The Secretary-General’s report is explicit in that
regard:
“many difficulties in Kosovo are not simply the
result of the … differences among the parties but
also of the ongoing lack of international consensus,
which could assist the parties in reaching the
necessary compromises and thus making faster
progress towards lasting political settlements”
(S/2012/603, para. 47).
We fully share that assessment. For that to
be achieved, a further effort by the international
community is needed. Serbia is ready to participate
constructively in such a process.
Serbia remains fundamentally committed to a
process that would ultimately lead to lasting peace
between Serbs and Albanians. The EU-facilitated
technical dialogue is part of that endeavour. In that
regard, let me underline that the new Serbian authorities,
including the new President and Government, intend to
implement all the agreements reached so far, while also
insisting that Pristina must do so as well.
While the technical dialogue should continue,
it is not a panacea. Serbia is ready for high-level
talks. Negotiations on all outstanding issues cannot
be avoided. Such a process will necessitate not only

12-46686

S/PV.6822

strong leadership and vision, as the Secretary-General
indicates; political will to compromise will also be
required by both sides. Belgrade cannot only keep
giving, and Pristina taking. Such an approach could
never produce a legitimate and sustainable agreement,
for its basis would not be consent but imposition. My
Government is ready to engage in good faith at all
levels in order to achieve a mutually acceptable and
comprehensive solution to the final status of Kosovo.

(S/2012/603, para. 7) is a further demonstration of
Pristina’s complete disregard of the exclusive jurisdiction
of the Security Council on this matter. Let me underline
that, in spite of those disturbing developments, our longstanding position on the European Union’s engagement
in Kosovo remains unchanged. We believe that the EU
should sustain its status-neutral efforts in order to build
the lacking institutional environment and improve the
dismal societal conditions in the province.

Today’s report draws our attention to unilateral
developments that gravely undermine the prerogative
of this body and the authority of resolution 1244 (1999),
which all Member States are bound to respect under
Chapter VII of the Charter of the United Nations. I
refer in particular to a major change in the functions
of the European Union Rule of Law Mission (EULEX).
According to the report contained in annex I of the
Secretary-General’s report, EULEX has successfully
started the process of realigning its structure with
its revised priorities. The Mission has now been
reconfigured. Following the adoption of new planning
documents, the new structure came into effect during
this reporting period. No further details are provided.

I would like clearly to state Serbia’s position that
what is required is deeper engagement by EULEX,
not retrenchment. If EULEX does not have enough
capacity, an alternative is for the United Nations
Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK)
to review its own reconfiguration and presence level,
in accordance with resolution 1244 (1999). Should it
become necessary, Serbia will work through the Fifth
Committee of the General Assembly to ensure that
additional funds are allocated to UNMIK through the
upcoming budgeting process.

The broader context is the announcement by the
so-called International Steering Group that the selfassigned mandate of the so-called International Civilian
Office to forcibly implement the Ahtisaari proposal,
which Serbia has not accepted, will come to an end in
autumn. The Secretary-General’s report tells us that
reforms were enacted by the authorities in Pristina, and
that they are expected to remove the executive authority
of the international organizations in Kosovo.
It is the view of Serbia that the Security Council
is the only institution of indisputable and universal
legitimacy authorized to make the sort of changes
that the report refers to. That is the reason that this
body’s presidential statement of 26 November 2008
(S/PRST/2008/44) and the Secretary-General’s report
(S/2008/692) of 24 November 2008 were able to affirm
that EULEX would fully respect resolution 1244 (1999)
and operate under the overall authority and within the
status-neutral framework of the United Nations.
As what EULEX calls its reconfiguration has not
been put before the Security Council for approval, nor
authorized by anyone representing the United Nations,
it does not conform to resolution 1244 (1999). Moreover,
unilaterally “remove[ing] the executive authority of
the international organizations [operating] in Kosovo”

12-46686

The Secretary-General’s report addresses the
security threats faced by the Serbian community in
both north and South Kosovo. It draws attention to
the double murder of the elected Kosovo Serb village
representative and his wife near the town of Uroševac.
Unfortunately, the perpetrators remain at large, as is
almost always the case in attacks against Serbs. The
report also highlights the numerous threatening letters
and pamphlets sent by ultra-nationalist pan-Albanian
organizations to returnees. In addition, it lists various
cases of arson, theft, looting of homes and stoning of
Serb vehicles.
Moreover, it underscores that
“acts of vandalism and religious intolerance have
continued during the reporting period, including
thefts of money, gates and a bell from the premises
of an Orthodox Church and the desecration of
Orthodox cemeteries” (S/2012/603, para. 35).
Furthermore, the report mentions “[f]our incidents
of verbal or physical attacks against Orthodox monks”
(ibid, para. 35). No descriptions are given, with the
document remaining silent about whether arrests were
made in connection with any of those hate crimes.
In our view, those and many other incidents are
part of an orchestrated campaign of intimidation
directed at Kosovo Serbs. It clearly has the ultimate
aim of completing the total ethnic cleansing of Serbs

5

S/PV.6822

and the cultural cleansing of our patrimony. The
results are clear. In the current reporting period, only
45 Kosovo Serb internally displaced persons returned
to the province. According to reports by the Office of
the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees,
that number is less than half who did so during the
same period last year. Let me remind the Council that,
according to the United Nations, more than 200,000
non-Albanians have been expelled from the territory of
Kosovo and Metohija since June 1999.
The Secretary-General’s report notes a “decision by
the Kosovo authorities to ban, as from July, the use of
Serbian licence plates issued for Kosovo” (ibid, para.
14). That has led some Kosovo Serbs to adopt the new
automobile number plate system issued by Pristina.
The stated aim of that programme is, apparently,
to eliminate discrimination, as all residents of the
province are supposed to be provided with ethnically
unidentifiable plates. However, a recent European
Union-funded report brings this fundamentally into
question. Authored by the European non-governmental
organization Diadikasia, it is entitled “Freedom of
movement: issuance of RKS license plates to members
of non-Albanian communities in Kosovo, 2012.”
I cite its troubling conclusion: “There is a pattern,
according to which only certain couples of letters are
issued to members … of the Serbian community”.
According to the evidence, Kosovo Albanians are
issued plates with different letter combinations. This
worrisome and highly discriminatory practice was
confirmed to the authors of the report by a Kosovo
police official, who is quoted in the document as saying
that “It is a public secret that Serb cars are marked.”
Seven decades after the old continent saw the
end of regimes visually marking members of ethnic
groups in public, the practice has now returned to
European shores. Such a practice, if it is true, must be
condemned in the harshest of terms. This is yet another
piece of evidence that the ethnic Albanian authorities
are engaged in an ongoing campaign to discriminate
against and terrify Serbs.
Furthermore, the Secretary-General’s report draws
attention to numerous instances of the disproportionate
use of force by the Kosovo police service, and underscores
the repeated refusal by the so-called Minister of the
Interior, Bajram Rexhepi, to launch disciplinary action
against those under his command who engage in brutal
and discriminatory conduct or whose inaction threatens

6

the safety of Serbs. The Secretary-General explicitly
concludes that the incidents outlined in his report
“provide grounds for serious concern with regard to the
institutional capacity of the Kosovo police to manage
tensions and build public confidence” (ibid, para. 18).
Against that backdrop, the announced abrogation of
the executive functions of the European Union Rule
of Law Mission (EULEX) is even more worrisome.
Serbian officials have continued to meticulously follow
the investigation launched by the EULEX Special
Investigative Task Force into the allegations made in a
December 2010 report written by the Swiss task force
member, Mr. Dick Marty, and nearly unanimously
approved by the Council of Europe Parliamentary
Assembly.
According to the Council of Europe Parliamentary
Assembly report, entitled “Investigation of allegations
of inhuman treatment of people and illicit trafficking
in human organs in Kosovo”, hundreds of Serbs were
abducted in Kosovo before, during and immediately
after the 1999 conflict and sent to secret detention
camps in the Republic of Albania. Many of them were
subsequently selected for forced surgery before being
murdered. Their internal body organs were extracted
and sold on the international black market.
In the same way as Serbia has done everything
to uncover and prosecute all those who committed
atrocities against the Albanian population in Kosovo,
Serbia expects that the full truth will be sought out and
that all who are responsible for such war crimes against
Serbs in Kosovo will be punished.
The families of the Serbian victims must not be
seen as being any less deserving of justice than the
victims of other war crimes committed in the former
Yugoslavia during the 1990s.
Serbia supports the work of the EULEX Task Force,
which has, as annex I of the Secretary-General’s report
states, intensified contacts and working relationships
with a number of State and non-State actors.
Nonetheless, as has been the case since before the
establishment of the Task Force, the critical question of
jurisdiction remains unanswered. That will be necessary
in order for the Task Force to be able to uncover the
full truth about various terrible allegations, including
those made in the Council of Europe Parliamentary
Assembly report, which, in paragraph 68, identifies a
number of senior Kosovo Liberation Army officials as
having “played vital roles as co-conspirators in various

12-46686

S/PV.6822

categories of criminal activity”. That includes humanorgan trafficking.
As on previous occasions before the Council, Serbia
underscores its belief that the Security Council must
play a significant role in the matter, as it is the organ
able to secure the obligatory and binding cooperation of
Member States. International media stories continue to
bring to our attention the fact that the alleged criminal
trail leads to many parts of the world, including to some
of the members of the Security Council. We appeal
to the Council to ensure that a comprehensive and
independent investigation remains a United Nations
priority. Serbia has made proposals with regard to the
investigation mechanism we envision.
As with the briefings given to the Security Council
twice annually by senior officials of the International
Criminal Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia, we expect
that the investigators dealing with the organ trafficking
case will brief the Council in a similar manner.
We are committed to reaching lasting peace
between Serbs and Albanians in the Balkans. But for
such a peace to be lasting it must also be just. I say
this not only as Serbia’s Prime Minister, but foremost
as someone who was born in Kosovo and Metohija, in
Prizren, a city that in the Middle Ages served as the
Serbian capital and in which today there are fewer than
20 Serbs.
That will require both parties to make difficult and
courageous decisions. We are ready to do our part. Serbia
is ready for normalization and regional reconciliation.
That is in the interests of ordinary citizens. Serbia is also
ready to engage in a dialogue whose goal is to arrive at
a comprehensive solution, but we are not, nor will we
be, ready to accept Kosovo’s unilateral declaration of
independence. Unilateral moves, on anyone’s part, do
not bring us closer to a comprehensive settlement. Quite
the contrary, they can only pull us farther away.
What has so far been lacking is a credible interlocutor
who is willing and able to do what is necessary to reach
a comprehensive settlement. Compromises will need to
be made for an agreement to be reached. It is not only
we who must grasp that point; Pristina must do so also.
As we consider how to move forward, we could
draw inspiration from Nelson Mandela, who has
movingly written that “If you want to make peace with
your enemy, you have to work with your enemy. Then
he becomes your partner”.

12-46686

The President (spoke in French): I thank Prime
Minister Dačić for his statement.
I now give the floor to Mr. Thaçi.
Mr. Thaçi (spoke in Albanian; English text
provided by the delegation): It is my pleasure to address
the Security Council today on the latest developments
in Kosovo.
Let me begin by thanking Secretary-General Ban
Ki-moon for his unflagging efforts for peace and
progress in Kosovo and the Balkans. His first visit to the
Republic of Kosovo, last month, reaffirmed our shared
values, mutual interests and common efforts towards a
prosperous Kosovo. As the Secretary-General was able
to see during his visit, my country is among the most
successful examples of State-building in the context of
various peacebuilding missions in different parts of the
world over the past few decades. Therefore, let me say
at the outset that both the United Nations and Kosovo
should be proud of that significant achievement.
Our determination and the immense support of the
international community have produced a modern
and viable State with a main goal of integration into
Euro-Atlantic institutions.
The status of Kosovo has been determined; it was
decided on in February 2011. Allow me to inform
the Council that I will be focusing on the following
matters of importance regarding the consolidation
of Kosovo’s statehood: the end of internationally
supervised independence, the situation in the northern
municipalities, the technical dialogue between the
Republic of Kosovo and the Republic of Serbia and
Kosovo’s prospects for European integration.
It is a fact that since February 2008 Kosovo has built
a cohesive State and has strengthened its multi-ethnic
and democratic institutions. As the Prime Minister of
the Republic of Kosovo, I am honoured to report on
the recent State-building progress as the result of the
historic decision by the International Steering Group
to end the supervised independence of Kosovo. Five
years ago, Kosovo declared its independence, based
on an internationally designed process by the United
Nations led by the Special Envoy of the SecretaryGeneral, President Martti Ahtisaari. As a result of
the implementation of the Comprehensive Settlement
Proposal, Kosovo was transformed into a functional,
democratic and multi-ethnic State.

7

S/PV.6822

The adoption and implementation of the
Constitution, the decentralization of power to
municipalities across the country, the establishment
of six new municipalities for the Serb communities
and the election of 24 members of Parliament from
the communities, out of which 13 are from Serb
communities, in our 120-seat Parliament — those are
only a few examples of the significant transformation
of my country. In my Government, three Kosovo Serbs
serve as ministers, including a Deputy Prime Minister.
Essential to that process has been the establishment
of an elaborate system of minority rights, to bring all
of Kosovo’s citizens, regardless of their ethnic identity,
into the political structures of the new State. The entire
legal framework covering the public sector’s legislation
guarantees equal rights and the representation of all
ethnic groups in Kosovo. My Government has built a
strong foundation and multilayered system of rights
that meet, and at times exceed, international norms.
Our unwavering commitment to those principles further
demonstrates that Kosovo is a multi-ethnic State based
on European values and standards, where the principles
and the spirit of the Ahtisaari plan will forever be part
of our State and society.
In the recent months we have adopted 21 important
laws and amendments related to the ending of
supervised independence, on community rights, on
decentralization, on cultural and religious heritage
and on dealing with the past and reconciliation. Some
of them are in the implementation stage as we speak.
During the reporting period I made the decision to
appoint a language commissioner and a director for
channel 2 of Kosovo’s public broadcasting system,
which is exclusively for Serbs and other communities.
As the report of the Secretary-General (S/2012/603)
says, the respective laws and amendments are intended
to strengthen the protection of the Serbian Orthodox
Church and other cultural heritage sites. We are proud
to preserve 45 religious, historical and cultural objects
listed as special protective zones. My Government
recently approved a list of cultural heritage monuments
and sites under temporary protection. We are very
mindful of, and committed to, the safeguarding of
all religions. The Kosovo police is fully prepared to
take over the responsibilities of providing protection
for monasteries and other structures currently the
responsibility of the Kosovo Force (KFOR).

deadlock, the case of Kosovo can offer lessons in
State-building. The end of internationally supervised
independence has opened a new chapter in Kosovo’s
statehood by establishing viable democratic institutions,
a free-market economy, modern infrastructure and
justice as well as a public administration, education
and culture. We have continued to advance public
administration reform, based on the recommendations
of the European Commission progress report,
towards an independent, effective and multi-ethnic
administration, by incorporating the practices of
democratic governance.
Kosovo has the most stable institutions in the
region, and it has maintained its macroeconomic and
fiscal stability in spite of the European financial and
debt crisis. This year we foresee an economic growth
of 5 per cent. The end of the supervised independence
reflects the international community’s confidence that
Kosovo, with the support of its current leadership and its
people, will successfully join the European Union (EU)
in the coming years. My Government is very committed
to, and focused on, the rule of law and the fight against
corruption and organized crime. The European Union
Rule of Law Mission in Kosovo (EULEX) has played
a crucial role in the past few years. Based on our
achievements, we fully endorse reconfiguration and
downsizing by about 25 per cent. As the EULEX report
(S/2012/603, annex I) confirms, Kosovo’s rule of law
institutions have made great progress and EULEX
will continue to be a strategic partner of the Republic
of Kosovo. The end of supervised independence and
the reconfiguration of EULEX are complementary in
consolidating statehood and are a clear sign of Kosovo’s
overall progress.
We fully acknowledge EULEX’s role in the rule of
law and in the EU integration process. Accordingly, we
remain committed to adopting a new legal basis in the
context of the extension of the EULEX mission until
mid-June 2014. The outcome of the negotiations will
be adopted by the Kosovo Parliament as a bilateral
agreement between Kosovo and the EU.
In the past month, the number of formal recognitions
of Kosovo’s independence has continued to increase in
what has proven to be an unstoppable process. I would
like to thank the Republic of Chad and the Republic of
Mali for their recent decisions to recognize Kosovo’s
independence.

At a time when many countries are coping with
economic problems, ethnic strife and governmental

8

12-46686

S/PV.6822

Almost half of the States Members of the United
Nations have now recognized the Republic of
Kosovo, and we expect additional recognitions in the
coming weeks and months. We firmly believe that
non-recognition endangers our stability, undermines
European and international investment in Statebuilding efforts and jeopardizes prospective integration
throughout the region. Implementing the provisions of
the Comprehensive Settlement Proposal and ending
supervised independence will be enormous milestones
in building a multi-ethnic, vibrant and diverse Kosovo.
I am pleased to inform the Council that a growing
number of communities are requesting various services
from my Government. More than 50,000 Kosovo Serbs
have been issued personal identification documents
and passports of the Republic of Kosovo, including
numerous Serbian religious and community leaders.
Our commitment to the promotion and protection of
the rights of communities and their members, including
the right of return, remain central to our domestic
policy. My Government has allocated over €8 million
for 2012, and over the next three years will allocate
more than €21 million solely targeted towards the rights
of returns and communities.
Numerous viable strategies and action plans have
been adopted and new municipal offices for communities
and returns have been established to promote and protect
the rights of non-majority communities, displaced
persons, returnees and repatriated persons, as well as
to ensure equal access to public services and coordinate
the returns process.
On 30 April, my Government reached an agreement
with the Organization for Security and Cooperation in
Europe to enable Kosovo Serbs with dual citizenship to
vote in the recent Serbian elections. The dual citizenship
principle is enshrined in the Constitution of the Republic
of Kosovo in accordance with European standards.
The turnout of Kosovo Serbs in those elections was
approximately 30 per cent, which was smaller than
the turnout in the most recent local and parliamentary
elections organized by Kosovo institutions.
It is important to emphasize that for the first
time since the end of the war, Serbia has agreed not
to organize elections in Kosovo, thus accepting the
legitimacy of the constitutional order of my country.
In the current period, a security incident occurred
on 28 June in Pristina at the Merdarë/Merdare crossing

12-46686

point. A total of 32 Kosovo police officers were injured
as a result of direct clashes with Serbian protestors,
who threw stones and attempted to remove a Kosovo
border marker.
The response by our police force, which was
established in 1999 by the United Nations, was
measured and non-violent. Today the Kosovo police is
the leading security sector institution, with minority
communities accounting for approximately 15 per cent
of the force — a number that is exemplary by all Balkan
standards.
A criminal act occurred on 6 July. We strongly
condemn the murder of two Kosovo citizens in the
village of Tallinovc/Talinovac in Ferizaj/Uroševac
municipality. Kosovo authorities consider that murder
a criminal act contrary to the values of our society and
State. Our swift response indicated that such violence
is intolerable, and the authorities were required to
investigate the case to ensure that the perpetrators
would be brought to justice as soon as possible.
Allow me to note that credible data illustrates
that ethnically motivated crimes in Kosovo have
significantly declined during the post-independence
period. Nowadays, Pristina is safer than most
regional capitals. In that context, according to the
survey launched by the United Nations Development
Programme in July, Kosovo Serb satisfaction with
security institutions has experienced a positive trend
upward. The survey also confirmed that personal
security is no longer considered a prevailing issue.
I am pleased to inform the Council that, on
4 June, my Government announced the establishment
of the Interministerial Working Group on Dealing
with the Past and Reconciliation, which signals the
Government’s commitment to that important initiative.
The point is not to punish, but to establish a reparations
programme for victims and their families and to
prosecute perpetrators, so that members of every ethnic
community can move forward towards reconciliation.
Let me reiterate here that my country has made
enormous progress in integrating the Serb community
at both the central and local Government levels. We are
committed to, and have succeeded in, integrating more
than 100,000 Kosovo Serbs throughout Kosovo and in
our institutions. They now enjoy self-governance in the
Gračanica/Graçanicë, Novo Brdo/Novobërdë, Klokot/
Kllokot, Ranilug/Ranillug, Parteš/Partesh and Štrpce/
Shtërpcë municipalities.

9

S/PV.6822

However, we have been unable to achieve the same
results in three municipalities in the northern area
of Kosovo, where there are only 30,000 local Serbs.
At the same time, Serbia has attempted to exercise
administrative control over those municipalities
through its illegal police and security structures,
which are led, financed and directly controlled by the
Government in Belgrade. Serbia has not allowed local
Serbs to cooperate with the international presence,
KFOR, EULEX or Kosovo institutions.
My Government’s position is clear on the issue
of the north. We are against the ideas of partition,
border alteration or exchanging territories. As a result,
my Government has recently decided to establish
an administrative office in northern Mitrovica. The
office will provide all services to the citizens of that
part of Kosovo and will coordinate the Government’s
engagement and investments in that area. Initially,
the office will include seven directorates and 55
employees and will be headed by a community activist
in northern Mitrovica. That is another important step
towards establishing the northern municipality of
Mitrovica as stipulated by the Ahtisaari proposal. The
office will provide up to 80 new jobs and will have a
budget of about €4 million per year for basic services
to the community and for infrastructure projects in
northern Mitrovica. We have received positive feedback
from local citizens, measured by the thousands of
applications for employment that have been received by
the administrative office.
This year I announced the launching of a dialogue
between my Government and the Kosovo Serbs of
the northern municipalities, in order to address the
situation in that area. We have already developed a
plan on how to integrate that area with the rest of
Kosovo. In addition, in the progress report for the past
year in Kosovo, the European Commission required
an integration strategy covering the three northern
municipalities. We must insist on the rule of law in
that part of Kosovo, the withdrawal of Serbia’s illegal
police and security forces; freedom of movement for all
people; economic development and support; the return
of displaced persons; and reconciliation.
On behalf of the Republic of Kosovo, we have
pledged to communicate and cooperate with every single
Serb leader elected in the northern part who respects
the institutions of my country. We are ready to find the
best solution for integrating Kosovo’s Serbs politically,
economically and socially with the rest of Kosovo.

10

However, we will never compromise the independence,
sovereignty, territorial integrity or constitutional order
of our State.
Kosovo believes in dialogue as a democratic value,
and in that spirit we began a technical dialogue with
the Republic of Serbia in March 2011. That dialogue,
held under European Union facilitation, as stipulated
by the General Assembly, has resulted in considerable
progress and has produced seven important bilateral
agreements. Some of those agreements are in the
process of implementation; however, the majority
remain on paper only.
The agreement on integrated border management
was concluded on 2 December 2011, but the technical
protocol has still not been signed by Serbia. Serbia
refuses to implement the agreement on regional
cooperation. We believe that true progress in the
dialogue can be made only if the agreements are fully
implemented; that is why the Republic of Kosovo has
proved itself to be constructive and effective in reaching
and implementing the agreements. The credibility of
the technical dialogue is at stake, and we call on Serbia
to deliver on what was agreed during this process.
At the same time, let me reiterate here that the
normalization of relations with Serbia is our priority.
We are aware of the fact that the absence of normal
relations and border demarcation between Kosovo
and Serbia is a major impediment to the achievement
of stability, security and prosperity throughout the
Balkans.
I wish to reaffirm here very clearly that while we
are very dedicated to dialogue, at no time and in no
circumstances will the territorial integrity of Kosovo
ever be put into question. The Kosovo State is a political
and juridical fact.
I firmly believe that both nations should not remain
hostages to political tensions, especially since the past
and the future of our countries are deeply intertwined.
We will advance our Euro-Atlantic aspirations and
move ahead towards membership in the European
Union and NATO.
The main agenda of my Government, along with
political stability and economic development, is
membership in the European Union. Since 1999, the
EU has been an integral part of the international effort
to build a new future. We continue to cooperate closely
with the EU Office in Kosovo, EULEX and with the
representatives of EU member States in Pristina.
12-46686

S/PV.6822

During the reporting period, Kosovo made progress
in the process of establishing formal relations with the
European Union. Through a feasibility study, we have
established a path towards starting negotiations on the
signing of a stabilization and association agreement
with the EU. In addition, on 14 June we officially
received the visa liberalization road map adopted
by the European Commission, and we have formally
entered into a structured dialogue regarding the rule
of law. Furthermore, this autumn the EU will publish
a feasibility study on Kosovo’s readiness to negotiate
a stabilization and association agreement with the
European Union. That will be a historic moment that
will open a new phase in EU-Kosovo relations.
Kosovo deserves to advance within the European
integration process. Our history, culture and geography
make us European; we already share core European
values and will continue to practice them.
On behalf of the institutions and the people of
the Republic of Kosovo, let me conclude here by
re-emphasizing the fact that for my country, the
consolidation of statehood and the strengthening
of international recognition are our main priorities.
Today our optimism is fuelled by the fact that we are a
modern, viable and multi-ethnic State moving towards
integration into Euro-Atlantic institutions. We are and
will remain a full, proactive and responsible member
of the international community by being an exporter of
peace, stability and prosperity in the Balkans and in
Europe.
The President (spoke in French): I shall now give
the floor to the members of the Council.
Mr. Bouchaara (Morocco) (spoke in French):
Allow me to begin by thanking Mr. Farid Zarif, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for Kosovo
and Head of the United Nations Interim Administration
Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK), for his exhaustive
briefing. I should like also to welcome His Excellency
Mr. Ivica Dačić, Prime Minister of the Republic of
Serbia, and to thank him for his briefing. We also thank
Mr. Thaçi.
The period covered by the report (S/2012/603) of
the Secretary-General was characterized by relative
calm in spite of the incidents that took place in northern
Kosovo, where the security situation remains precarious,
as underscored by the Secretary-General. It is crucial
that an increased commitment be demonstrated with
respect to the management of the security sector, in

12-46686

particular with respect to the protection of minorities,
their property and their cultural and religious heritage.
The period was most notably marked by the holding,
on 6 and 20 May last, of parliamentary and presidential
elections in Serbia, including the voting in Kosovo,
which took place in an orderly fashion thanks to the
responsible approach adopted by both parties, with
the support of the Organization for Security and
Cooperation in Europe, the European Union Rule of
Law Mission in Kosovo and the Kosovo Force.
We are pleased that several agreements were
signed between parties on a number of important
issues, including regional cooperation, freedom of
movement, the certification of diplomas, civil registry
books, cadastre records, the integrated management
of crossing points and the free movement of goods.
It is clear that the effective implementation of those
agreements, which will require a commitment by both
parties to rise above their differences of opinion, will
have a positive impact on the daily lives of the people
and will contribute to the easing of tensions and to the
strengthening of conditions conducive to dialogue, in
particular with respect to the most difficult issues.
We note also that during the reporting period, as
highlighted by the Secretary-General, dialogue between
the parties was suspended owing to electoral calendar.
The reaffirmation by the new Serbian President of his
country’s commitment to honouring the obligations
undertaken with Pristina, and his statements in favour
of continued dialogue with the authorities of the latter,
are encouraging developments.
On another note, we welcome the progress made
in the investigation of allegations of illicit trafficking
in human organs, and we look forward in particular
to the start, on 3 September, of the trial of persons
accused of being involved in organized crime, human
trafficking and the illegal exercise of medical activities.
It is important that every effort be made to investigate
those allegations and that the perpetrators be brought to
justice. We thank UNMIK for its support for the parties,
which made it possible for progress to be achieved, in
particular concerning the issue of missing persons.
In spite of the fact that incidents continue to
occur, there are grounds for hope with respect to the
continuation of dialogue between the parties and
their commitment to respect previous agreements and
in particular to refrain from any actions that could
heighten inter-communal tensions. Indeed, a great

11

S/PV.6822

deal of progress has been made in improving relations
between the parties. That progress must continue.
It is important to continue, with the support of
the international community, to deploy the efforts
required to ensure a better future for the peoples of
the region and to reach compromise solutions, through
negotiation and dialogue, concerning the various issues
under consideration, in keeping with the provisions of
resolution 1244 (1999).
Mr. Tatham (United Kingdom): I should like to
start by thanking the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, Mr. Farid Zarif, for his briefing
today, for his work and for the work of the United
Nations Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo
(UNMIK) as a whole. I would like to welcome to the
Council His Excellency Mr. Hashim Thaçi, Prime
Minister of Kosovo. I would also like to welcome His
Excellency Mr. Ivica Dačić, Prime Minister of Serbia,
to today’s Council meeting, and to congratulate him on
his appointment. The United Kingdom looks forward
to working closely with the new Government in Serbia.
The United Kingdom is grateful for the SecretaryGeneral’s comprehensive report (S/2012/603). There
continues to be steady progress in Kosovo on the
political level, as reflected in the International Steering
Group’s decision to work towards an end to supervised
independence in September. That step recognizes the
positive steps Kosovo has taken over the past four years,
especially its adoption of laws complying with and
implementing the Comprehensive Settlement Proposal.
Of particular note are the laws on Prizren and Velika
Hoča, the appointment of a language commissioner
and moves to appoint a director for a new Serbian TV
channel, RTK2.
The momentum created by Kosovo’s desire to end
supervised independence must be maintained through
its European Union (EU) accession path. Regional
cooperation and good-neighbourly relations are an
integral part of EU accession. It is understandable that
the election period in Serbia and the subsequent business
of Government formation have created a hiatus in the
process of EU-facilitated dialogue. With the formation
of the new Government in Serbia, however, we hope
to see a resumption of the EU-facilitated dialogue
with Kosovo as soon as possible — and, indeed, not
just resumption but, to use the Special Representative’s
word, reinvigoration.

12

It is crucial that Belgrade implement technical
agreements already reached on regional cooperation,
the freedom of movement and, in particular, integrated
border management. I welcome to the commitment to
that end that we have just heard from Prime Minister
Dačić, and hope to see rapid follow-up. Pristina
must also maintain its active commitment to those
agreements and put in place the measures necessary
for implementing the agreement on cadastre records.
We support the development of the Pristina-Belgrade
dialogue to address key political challenges, including
northern Kosovo.
On the situation in northern Kosovo, Pristina
and Belgrade must engage with each other in order
to tackle key outstanding issues. It is important
that they act responsibly, cooperating with both the
European Union Rule of Law Mission (EULEX) and
the Kosovo Force (KFOR). The United Kingdom is
grateful for the professional way in which EULEX and
KFOR have continued to carry out their mandates in
demanding circumstances. Attempts to inhibit their
freedom of movement — and instances of this are set
out in the Secretary-General’s report — are of course
unacceptable.
It is the responsibility of Pristina to identify
a way forward, but that responsibility has to be
supported by Belgrade in line with the EU conditions
set in December 2011 for a visible and sustainable
improvement of relations with Kosovo. We want to see
an approach from both sides, and from all members of
the new Government in Serbia, that creates space for
compromise and cooperation. That must be supported
by action to address the illegal parallel structures that
exist in the north.
The Kosovo Government must demonstrate its
commitment to minorities across Kosovo. It must set out
its strategy for the north, including a socio-economic
vision. In that regard, we welcome the opening of the
northern Mitrovica administrative office, a crucial first
step towards providing practical support to Kosovo
citizens in the north. We hope that the international
community will demonstrate its support for sustainable
governance in northern Kosovo by assisting Pristina in
consolidating that initiative.
The United Kingdom is concerned about recent
ethnically motivated violence. The incidents during
Saint Vitus Day celebrations were unacceptable. Visible
measures aimed at preventing inter-ethnic incidents

12-46686

S/PV.6822

will be key to engaging the Kosovo-Serbian community
in the north.
We welcome efforts by the Special Representative
to focus on returns and the challenges faced by
minorities in Kosovo. Security is an important
factor for returnees but, in our view, the overriding
considerations are socio-economic, including access to
employment and education. The Office of the United
Nations High Commissioner for Refugees attributes a
recent drop in returns to the lack of available land for
returnees and the limited number of houses being built.
It is essential that funding be maintained to support the
continuation of the returns process, both by the Kosovo
Government and by the international community. The
United Kingdom is the largest bilateral donor, having
contributed £400,000 to returns projects during 2012.
We encourage others to offer their support.
The United Kingdom welcomes the thorough and
vigorous work being carried out by the EULEX Special
Investigative Task Force, which is looking into the
allegations relating to organ trafficking made in the
Marty report. We remain strongly of the view that
EULEX is the right body to take that work forward. It
has the necessary authority and jurisdiction, and it has
established close cooperation with key stakeholders,
including the authorities in Albania and Serbia. We are
confident in its capacity and determination to take that
important work forward.
The United Kingdom will continue to support
the irreversible progress of both Kosovo and Serbia
towards EU membership. We look forward to their
EU perspectives being embedded further in the
Commission’s enlargement package this autumn. We
hope that both Pristina and Belgrade will underpin
their EU progression with a spirit of cooperation and
constructive reconciliation when the EU-facilitated
dialogue resumes.
Mr. Hardeep Singh Puri (India): Let me, at
the outset, thank the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, Mr. Farid Zarif, for his briefing
on the United Nations Interim Administration Mission
in Kosovo (UNMIK). I would also like to thank His
Excellency Prime Minister Ivica Dačić of Serbia and
Mr. Hashim Thaçi for their statements.
The reporting period has seen several important
developments. It is a matter for satisfaction that the
conduct of the Serbian presidential and parliamentary
elections in Kosovo went off in a peaceful and orderly

12-46686

manner, thanks to the efforts of UNMIK and other
international organizations, especially the Organization
for Security and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE),
to establish an appropriate modality for the voting
acceptable to all sides.
We also welcome the expression on the part of both
Belgrade and Pristina of the will necessary to resume
the European Union — facilitated dialogue, once
the new Government assumes office in Belgrade, in
order to discuss the implementation of the agreements
reached so far and take up new subjects. In that regard,
we particularly welcome the statements by President
Tomislav Nikolić reaffirming Serbia’s commitment
to honouring all agreements reached in the dialogue,
as well as his readiness to engage in talks with the
Pristina leadership in the future. We hope that the talks
will resume soon and result in concrete progress on the
contentious issues.
The question of missing persons is an important
humanitarian issue. We hope that, with the direct
support and encouragement of UNMIK, it will be
possible to make further progress on it. We have noted
the steps taken by the Special Investigative Task Force
of the European Union Rule of Law Mission (EULEX)
to investigate allegations of organ trafficking, as well as
Albania’s recent adoption of a law on cooperation with
the Task Force. We reiterate our stand that a thorough
and impartial investigation should be carried out into
all aspects of the matter.
We share the Secretary-General’s assessment that
the situation in the northern part of Kosovo continues
to be fragile and requires constant vigilance and
restraint from all sides in order to reduce the potential
for instability. We note with concern that during the
reporting period a number of inter-communal violent
acts took place in June and July. The attack on buses
transporting Serb children is a matter for serious
concern, as are the continuing violence and crime
against the Serbian minority, including the murder of a
returnee couple. We share the Secretary-General’s view
of the need for genuine outreach by Kosovo institutions,
particularly the police. We urge the international
organizations present in Kosovo, especially the Kosovo
Force (KFOR) and EULEX, to exercise their authority
in order to prevent a recurrence of such incidents and
ensure the minority’s safety.
In conclusion, I would like to express our
appreciation for the fact that UNMIK has continued

13

S/PV.6822

to implement its mandate in an impartial and statusneutral manner, and to facilitate cooperation between
Pristina and Belgrade, the communities in Kosovo,
and KFOR, EULEX and the OSCE. We commend
and support the Special Representative and UNMIK
for their contribution to improving the situation in
northern Kosovo, and for the services that the Mission
is rendering in areas that better the daily lives of
all Kosovars. The Mission should be continued in
accordance with resolution 1244 (1999) and other
relevant decisions. Other agencies in Kosovo — the
OSCE, KFOR, EULEX and so on — should continue to
cooperate and coordinate with UNMIK in accordance
with their respective mandates.
Mr. Berger (Germany) (spoke in French): First and
foremost, allow me to welcome His Excellency Mr. Ivica
Dačić, Prime Minister of Serbia; His Excellency
Mr. Hashim Thaçi, Prime Minister of Kosovo; His
Excellency Mr. Enver Hoxhaj, Minister for Foreign
Affairs of Kosovo; and His Excellency Mr. Ivan Mrkić,
Minister for Foreign Affairs of Serbia.
Like the speakers who have gone before me, I
should like to thank the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, Mr. Farid Zarif, for his detailed
briefing. Over the past three months, we have witnessed
two major political events in Kosovo and in the region,
which I would like to touch upon today.
First, presidential and legislative elections in Serbia
were held in May, and led to the establishment of a
new Government in Belgrade. We are pleased that a
wide majority of Serbians — 75 per cent — supported
parties advocating a strengthened integration of Serbia
with the European Union (EU). I would like to assure
Mr. Dačić that Germany shall continue to be a reliable
partner ready to closely cooperate with his Government
and support the process of necessary reform.
We also welcome the fact that Serbian citizens of
Kosovo were able to participate in elections without
having encountered any major security issues. That is
the result of pragmatic cooperation between all parties
involved and the noteworthy support of the Organization
for Security and Cooperation in Europe, the Kosovo
police, the European Union Rule of Law Mission in
(EULEX) and the Kosovo Force (KFOR).
The Government of Kosovo took the opportunity
presented to demonstrate that it actively took into
account the interests of the Serbian minority in the
country. The elections also demonstrate that it is

14

possible to make compromises on practical issues when
there is a political will to find a solution that benefits
both parties.
After the establishment of a new Serbian
Government, we hope that dialogue mediated by the
EU between Belgrade and Pristina will swiftly resume.
Given the possibility of EU membership for both Serbia
and Kosovo, such dialogue continues to be the most
effective means of contributing to keeping peace and
stability in the region going.
Therefore, we fully back the initiative of the High
Representative of the EU, Catherine Ashton, which has
the objective of raising the dialogue, under the auspices
of the EU, to a political level so as to accomplish
tangible and sustainable progress in normalizing
relations between Belgrade and Pristina. We welcome
the fact that Prime Ministers Dačić and Thaçi have
noted that they were ready to engage in such dialogue.
(spoke in English)
The swift and full implementation of existing
agreements, for example on integrated border
management and on the representation of Kosovo in
regional organizations, remains key. As a second step,
agreements need to be reached in areas that have not
been tackled yet, like energy and telecommunications.
On his recent, very timely visit to Kosovo and
other countries in the region, including to places
of symbolic importance such as Srebrenica in
Bosnia and Herzegovina, and Prizren and the Visoki
Dečani Monastery in Kosovo, the Secretary-General
consistently highlighted the need for the resolution of
existing tensions through dialogue and closer regional
cooperation. With regard to Kosovo, we hope that both
sides will respond to the Secretary-General’s call by
constructively engaging in the high-level dialogue
process, as a necessary step towards fulfilling their
countries’ European aspirations.
The second major political development that I
would like to touch upon today is the decision taken
by the International Steering Group on 2 July to
end the supervision of Kosovo’s independence and,
accordingly, to close the International Civilian Office
in Kosovo. Ending supervised independence, which still
requires the adoption of the necessary constitutional
and legislative amendments by the competent Kosovo
authorities, is based on our firm conviction that Kosovo
has grown into a democratic and multi-ethnic State
through the implementation of its obligations under the
12-46686

S/PV.6822

Ahtisaari plan. Those obligations include, inter alia, the
adoption of laws on the rights of ethnic minorities, on
cultural and religious heritage and on decentralization.
However, certain challenges persist. We condemn
all acts of inter-ethnic violence by all parties and
reaffirm our strong support for continued cooperation
between the Kosovo police and EULEX in that regard.
Other parties, including Serbs in northern Kosovo,
need to refrain from violence and enhance their
cooperation with EULEX as well. However, the report
provided by EULEX clearly indicates that acts of
violence against perpetrators of all ethnic backgrounds
are being investigated and prosecuted. Statements
making different claims are therefore simply false and
dangerously misleading.
We welcome UNMIK’s focus on the challenges
faced by minority communities in Kosovo and on the
question of voluntary returns to Kosovo. However, any
future analysis of the question of voluntary returns will
also need to take economic and demographic factors
into account.
Finally, I would like to touch briefly upon the
situation in northern Kosovo, where the security
situation remains volatile. Owing to roadblocks and
repeated physical attacks on EULEX staff and vehicles,
the free movement of EULEX remains impaired. We
strongly condemn ongoing roadblocks and threats
against EULEX staff and call upon all parties, especially
the Serbian authorities, to use their influence on the
responsible actors in northern Kosovo to allow EULEX
to fully carry out its mandate.
We also strongly condemn continued acts of
violence against KFOR, such as the use of firearms by
Serbian protesters against a group of KFOR soldiers on
1 June in a clear attempt to severely injure or even kill
the soldiers.
Ultimately, the problems in northern Kosovo can
only be solved politically. Building confidence between
the local population and the competent authorities in
Pristina remains indispensable. In that context, we
commend the Government of Kosovo on its decision to
establish an administrative office in north Mitrovica.
That decision marks an important step in a broader
strategy to reach out to the Serbian population in the
north. We encourage all actors on the ground, including
UNMIK, to support Pristina’s outreach initiative.

12-46686

Let me once against stress that Germany takes the
allegations contained in the so-called Marty report
seriously. We are therefore very pleased that the
important work of the EULEX Special Investigative
Task Force has progressed significantly since our last
debate in May (see S/PV.6769). The passing of a law
that enables the Task Force to conduct full, fair and
independent criminal investigations in Albania has
been a major step. The Task Force has also intensified
its cooperation with other relevant counterparts in the
region and with the International Criminal Court for
the Former Yugoslavia. We therefore call on all sides
to stop engaging in discussions about reporting lines,
roles and responsibilities, and rather unite behind the
Special Investigative Task Force’s important work.
Mr. Zhukov (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We are grateful to Mr. Zarif for presenting
the report of the Secretary-General on the activities
of the United Nations Interim Administration Mission
in Kosovo (UNMIK) (S/2012/603). We welcome the
participation in today’s meeting of the Prime Minister
of Serbia, Mr. Ivica Dačić, and we share his views.
We have carefully listened to the statement made by
Mr. Thaçi.
Russia’s position with respect to the non-recognition
of the unilaterally declared independence of Kosovo
remains in place. Resolution 1244 (1999) continues to
be of the utmost relevance and remains obligatory for all
as the international legal basis for the settlement of the
Kosovo crisis and for ensuring security in the region.
We continue to believe that UNMIK remains, pursuant
to the Council mandate, the primary international civil
presence in Kosovo. It must play a fully active role in
moving the settlement process in Kosovo forward.
In that context, we support the position of the new
Government of Serbia, calling for the participation
of the United Nations in the negotiation process
between Belgrade and Pristina. We insist that UNMIK
carry out its obligations with respect to the foreign
representation of Kosovo in international organizations
and mechanisms.
We are concerned with the decision of Kosovo to
establish the so-called new administrative office in
northern Mitrovica, whose financing is to be covered
by funds that had been previously earmarked for the
needs of the northern part of the city through UNMIK.
That decision has already drawn a negative reaction

15

S/PV.6822

from the Serbian people in Mitrovica, and can only lead
to further destablization in the region as a whole.

and that it has not acted to return their property or to
uphold their fundamental human rights and freedoms.

Unfortunately, the situation in the enclaves is truly
dismal, above all with respect to security, which was not
duly reflected in the report on the activities of UNMIK.
According to data, a dozen or so ethnically motivated
killings took place over the past year. No appropriate
investigation is being conducted by the Kosovo police
or by the international presence, including the European
Union Rule of Law Mission (EULEX). Against that
backdrop, Serbs are in constant fear for their lives. In
the enclaves there are frequent cases of houses built for
Serbs being set on fire, and of the distribution of flyers
calling for reprisals and for Serbs to leave Kosovo. A
glaring example was the killing of Serbian returnees on
6 July in Talinovac, near the city of Urosevac. Another
noteworthy incident took place on 28 June. As a result
of clashes of Serbs with Kosovar police, dozens were
wounded and beaten, including children.

Without a deep-rooted change in the attitude of
Pristina and the international presence, resolving those
issues will be impossible.

There is also a continuing difficult situation
with respect to the confiscation of Serbian property.
According to far from complete data from the Kosovar
property agency, there are no fewer than 20,000 cases
of confiscated private property, including houses,
apartments and land. According to statistics from Serbs
themselves, the list of illegally seized property exceeds
30,000. A destabilizing factor is the activity of the
Kosovar Albanian authorities who, under the pretext
of implementing the Belgrade-Pristina agreement, are
preventing the use of Serbian licence plates, forcing
Serbs to fill out State documents, including for
citizenship in the so-called Republic of Kosovo, and to
pay back taxes.
In carrying out those measures, EULEX is
playing an active role by implementing decisions of
the so-called Kosovar Minister of the Interior. We
have repeatedly spoken of the regrettable situation of
property belonging to the Serbian Orthodox Church.
The monasteries of Dević and Visoki Dečani have
been subjected to acts of vandalism and the monks are
subject to attacks. Pilgrims in buses are pelted with
stones, despite security provided by the police. There
is a clear disconnect between the policy for the return
of internally displaced persons (IDPs) and the growing
outflow from the region of members of national
minorities, which shows that the Kosovar Government,
with the acquiescence of the international presence,
systematically hinders the return of individuals forced
to leave the region, who number upwards of 200,000,

16

We stand for the comprehensive and full
investigation of crimes committed in Kosovo against
ethnic minorities. Passing over such incidents in
silence or brushing them aside is unacceptable. That
fully pertains to the investigation of findings of illegal
trafficking in human human organs, discovered by the
Rapporteur of the Council of Europe, Mr. Dick Marty.
We are displeased by the slow pace of that process,
led by EULEX. The findings contained in the Marty
report direct imply the participation in those crimes by
current leaders in the region. Investigations must be
impartial and reliable. That is the very reason that we
would once again support Serbia’s proposal to transfer
investigations to the United Nations.
To conclude, we would once again like to stress that
UNMIK should not become a passive observer to the
growing issues of national minorities, the protection
of the Serbian cultural heritage and the return of
local IDPs. The lack of an appropriate reaction to
those matters could seriously destabilize the region.
Noting the openness of the new Government of Serbia
to continuing dialogue with Pristina, which should
move to a political level, UNMIK must more closely
cooperate or participate in the negotiation process and
forthcoming meetings.
Mr. Cabral (Portugal): I would like to begin by
welcoming Serbia’s Prime Minister, Mr. Ivica Dačić, in
his first appearance at the Council in that capacity, and
to wish him the best in his high duties. I also welcome
Prime Minister Hashim Thaçi of Kosovo and thank
both Prime Ministers for their statements. I also thank
Mr. Farid Zarif for his very comprehensive briefing
and for his work as Head of the United Nations Interim
Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK).
On a general note, I would like to highlight the
restraint and constructive pragmatism of the relevant
political actors on all sides in the context of the holding
in Kosovo of Serbian parliamentary and presidential
elections. Together with the outstanding job done by the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe
(OSCE), they contributed decisively to the successful
conduct of the voting.

12-46686

S/PV.6822

The situation in Kosovo over the past few months
has already been addressed in detail by both Prime
Ministers in their statements and by the briefing of the
Special Representative. I shall focus my statement on
three specific aspects.
First, the Belgrade-Pristina dialogue, facilitated by
the European Union, should be resumed in the shortest
possible term. Portugal calls upon the parties to
constructively re-engage in the dialogue that constitutes
the fundamental tool that brings the two sides together
to work for the common good of all those involved in,
and affected by, the situation in Kosovo. The BelgradePristina dialogue must not be allowed to wither on the
basis of transient political circumstances. The progress
achieved so far has had an impact on the everyday lives
of thousands of people regardless of their ethnicity or
their political stance on the status of Kosovo, showing
that the basis and the need for dialogue continue to exist.
In that context, the implementation of the agreements
reached should proceed swiftly, and differences over
their interpretation should be resolved.
Secondly, the potential for instability in Kosovo
remains, and the political and security situations must
continue to be addressed by all involved in a balanced
and cautious way. The incidents and breaches of public
order mentioned in the Secretary-General’s report
(S/2012/603) and in Mr. Zarif’s briefing have resulted
in the wounding of civilians, including children, as well
as of soldiers of the Kosovo Force (KFOR). Portugal
vigorously condemns those incidents. We believe that
they indicate that there are reasons for the international
community to pay particular attention to the nature
of, and motives for, those incidents and to be actively
engaged both in preventing future violence and in
reacting swiftly to similar occurrences.
Changes are coming to Kosovo at a fast pace. The
next few months will be of great importance at both the
political and institutional levels, as well as with respect
to the security environment. In that regard, we take
very seriously the Secretary-General’s warning about
the near future. There is indeed a need to genuinely
reach out to the population in the northern part of
Kosovo. Precipitous action may spark a sequence of
events, the result of which may be unforeseen in scope
and seriousness. Portugal calls upon all stakeholders to
refrain from any actions that may increase tension, and
to exert maximum restraint in reacting to provocations
that serve only very limited interests at the expense
of stability and of a commonly acceptable solution for

12-46686

the situation in the north of Kosovo. In that regard, the
United Nations, the OSCE, KFOR and the European
Union Rule of Law Mission, among other international
actors on the ground, will be required to carry out their
mandates in a changing and demanding environment.
We are confident that they will continue to fulfil what
the international community and the Council expect of
them.
Thirdly, with respect to human rights and the rule of
law, Portugal is encouraged to see that significant and
constructive activity took place in Kosovo during the
reporting period, and on very diverse aspects of human
rights issues. It is a positive sign that the “Dialogue
between women in Kosovo” initiative was able to bring
to the same table Kosovars, Albanians and Serbs, as
well as representatives from neighbouring countries
In the same regard, we welcome the positive work
being done on an action plan for the implementation of
resolution 1325 (2000), which is to be finalized by the
end of the year.
We also note the establishment of the
Interministerial Working Group on Dealing with the
Past and Reconciliation, whose results we are sure will
be followed closely within and outside Kosovo. We are
concerned, however, about the challenges that minority
communities still face. It is vital for public institutions
in Kosovo, namely, the police, to be perceived by all
communities as neutral guardians and enforcers of
the rule of law. The security situation, and the way
it is perceived among minorities, is essential to their
integration into Kosovo society and to the returnee
process.
Finally, I should like to say a word about the
work of the European Rule of Law Mission in Kosovo
(EULEX). We consider any attempts to obstruct
the work of EULEX and any threats to the security
of its personnel, or indeed to the security of any
international organization on the ground in Kosovo, to
be totally unacceptable. It is imperative that EULEX
find the necessary support and cooperation from all
stakeholders to assist in the institutional reform needed
in Kosovo, in addition to the ongoing successful fight
against corruption and organized crime.
Portugal also reiterates its support for the Special
Investigative Task Force concerning allegations of
trafficking in human organs. We are encouraged by the
degree of cooperation pledged by regional Governments
and partners. We hope that that will translate into
results in the foreseeable future.
17

S/PV.6822

The month between today and the next debate
of the Security Council on UNMIK will prove to be
very important not only for the future of Kosovo but
also for Kosovo’s neighbours, and indeed the entire
region. The anticipated closure of the International
Civilian Office entails political and institutional
developments that are bound to have an impact on the
ground, posing new challenges. We expect Kosovo
to remain strongly committed to a peaceful, stable,
democratic and multi-ethnic State. Portugal believes
that, under the dutiful and insightful leadership of
Special Representative of the Secretary-General Zarif,
the United Nations will continue to thoroughly fulfil its
mandate and uphold international peace and security.
Mr. Wang Min (China) (spoke in Chinese): I would
like to thank Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral Farid Zarif for the briefing he has just given
us. I also welcome His Excellency Prime Minister Ivica
Dačić of the Republic of Serbia to today’s meeting of
the Security Council. I have listened attentively to the
statement made by Mr. Thaçi.
The situation in northern Kosovo has remained
tense. The number of voluntary returns among displaced
persons has declined markedly, and we express our
concern in that regard. Relations among ethnic groups
in northern Kosovo are sensitive and complex. We
hope that the parties concerned will adopt a prudent
approach aimed at promoting national reconciliation
and the stabilization of the situation by resolving their
differences through dialogue, while avoiding any action
that may further complicate or serve to escalate the
situation.
China has always maintained that the sovereignty
and territorial integrity of Serbia should be fully
respected. On the question of Serbia, a mutually
acceptable settlement plan should be agreed by the
parties themselves through dialogue and negotiation, in
the framework of resolution 1244 (1999).
China congratulates Serbia on the establishment
of its new Government. We hope that Belgrade and
Pristina will continue and move forward the process of
dialogue. That is not only in the interests of the parties
themselves and to the benefit of the well-being of the
people, but also in the interests of peace and stability in
the Balkans and the whole of Europe.
Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon recently visited
the Balkan region, including Serbia and Kosovo. The
United Nations Interim Administration Mission in

18

Kosovo (UNMIK) has made unremitting efforts to
promote regional peace and stability and to advance
dialogue. China expresses its appreciation in that
regard. We support UNMIK’s ongoing efforts to
undertake activities in accordance with the Security
Council’s mandate. We hope that UNMIK, the European
Union Rule of Law Mission and the Kosovo Force will
strengthen their coordination and play a positive and
constructive role in promoting the settling of relevant
issues.
China is deeply concerned about the illicit trafﬁcking
in human organs. No acts that violate the norms of
international law and international humanitarian law
should be condoned. Serbia’s concern in that regard is
justiﬁed. We support the United Nations in investigating
the relevant cases.
Mrs. DiCarlo (United States of America): I would
like to thank Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral Farid Zarif for his briefing. I would also like to
welcome to the Security Council today Prime Minister
Ivica Dačić of Serbia and Prime Minister Hashim Thaçi
of Kosovo. I thank them both for their comments. I
would like to make five points.
First, the United States commends the Republic of
Kosovo for several positive developments during the
reporting period. We especially welcome the facilitation
by the Organization for Security and Cooperation in
Europe (OSCE) of peaceful Serbian parliamentary and
presidential elections for dual nationals in Kosovo. The
OSCE enabled dual nationals to exercise their right to
vote without infringing upon Kosovo’s sovereignty.
Kosovo and Serbia worked effectively with each other
and with the international community to promote
the development of strong democratic institutions.
It is unfortunate that two Serb municipalities in the
north flagrantly ignored Kosovo and Serbian law by
improvising a parallel voting process. We welcome
Belgrade’s rejection of those actions. Parallel structures
have no legitimate role in Kosovo. They should have
been dismantled long ago, in accordance with resolution
1244 (1999).
Now that the new Serbian Government is in place
in Belgrade, we hope to see the resumption of the
European Union (EU)-facilitated dialogue. That includes
implementing agreements previously reached, including
on integrated border management. We welcome the
commitments today of both Prime Ministers to pursue
constructive engagement through that mechanism. The
United States continues to support the EU’s efforts to
12-46686

S/PV.6822

foster dialogue between Kosovo and Serbia, with the
goal of normalizing relations between the two States in
order to enable both countries to fulﬁ l their European
aspirations. As we have stated previously, the European
Union is uniquely placed to lead that dialogue.
Secondly, the United States congratulates Kosovo
on the upcoming end of supervised independence. We
join our colleagues in the International Steering Group
in recognizing the enormous progress that Kosovo
has achieved, including upholding its commitment
to implement provisions embodied in Special Envoy
Ahtisaari’s proposal and enshrining them into law.
The United States commends the International
Civilian Ofﬁce, which has worked with the Government
of Kosovo to achieve those gains. The decision to end
supervised independence in September is a vote of
conﬁdence in Kosovo’s dedication and ability to build a
multi-ethnic, democratic nations.
Thirdly, the United States remains concerned
over threats to security and the freedom of movement
in northern Kosovo. The report (S/2012/603) of the
Secretary-General touches on that. However, more
focus should have been given in the report to the lack
of cooperation and attacks and threats to international
personnel from hardliners in the north. Blockades
continue to be erected, troop movements continue to be
restricted and officials of the European Union Rule of
Law Mission (EULEX) and troops of the Kosovo Force
(KFOR) continue to be threatened. The principal threats
to peace in Kosovo come from the nexus of hard-line
criminal elements in the north. We look to Belgrade
to set a positive tone, cooperate fully with KFOR and
EULEX, and encourage Kosovo Serbs in the north to
cooperate. KFOR’s efforts in support of EULEX to
close illegal border crossings and remove roadblocks
are most definitely part of its mandate. The Council
expects all parties to support those efforts.
We commend the Government of Kosovo for opening
the administrative office for northern Mitrovica. The
international community should not impede the Kosovo
Government’s natural prerogative and capacity to
provide services to its citizens in the north. We hope to
see cooperation on the part of UNMIK with the Kosovo
Government on that issue. A significant number of
northern Kosovo Serbs have applied for, and were
granted, positions at the new administrative office. We
condemn all violence against Kosovo Serbs working in
the office and using its services. We hope to see those
acts covered in the Secretary-General’s next report.
12-46686

I commend the Kosovo police and EULEX for
their efforts to protect the local population, and we
remain confident of their investigative capacity and
professionalism. We note the collaboration between
EULEX and the Kosovo police in investigating the
recent double murder of a Kosovo Serb couple.
We share the Special Representative’s concern
that, as in previous years, hard-liners used the Saint
Vitus Day celebrations to incite inter-ethnic tension.
We condemn attacks, both on the Kosovo police and
on pilgrims.
Fourthly, with regard to the allegations raised in the
Marty report on alleged organ trafficking, the United
States takes seriously all allegations of serious crimes
committed in the region. We underline our full support
for EULEX’s work in that regard. We also commend
the significant progress made by the EULEX Special
Investigative Task Force. We again underscore our
staunch support for Ambassador Williamson, the Task
Force and the countries cooperating with the Task Force
in its crucial work on all of the cases currently under
investigation, especially those related to allegations of
organ trafficking in connection with the 1999 conflict.
Finally, we are concerned about the violence that
returnees continue to experience. Managing the returnee
process is difficult. The looting of returnee houses, the
stoning of vehicles and acts of physical violence are
unacceptable and block reintegration. We commend the
Kosovo Government for its commitment to supporting
returning populations through its municipal offices for
communities and returns. As is true elsewhere in the
region, more needs to be done to create conditions for
voluntary returns.
The United States remains committed to advancing
peace, stability and prosperity in the entire Balkan
region. We look forward to continued cooperation
with both Serbia and Kosovo towards realizing their
aspirations for European and Euro-Atlantic integration.
Mr. Tarar (Pakistan): We are grateful to Mr. Farid
Zarif for his briefing. We welcome to the Security
Council His Excellency the Prime Minister of Serbia.
And we thank Mr. Thaçi for his statement.
The United Nations Interim Administration Mission
in Kosovo plays a vital role in ensuring stability in
Kosovo. We commend the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General and his team for their contribution
to the security and stability of Kosovo.

19

S/PV.6822

All constituents of the international presence in
Kosovo must maintain neutrality while executing their
respective mandates. Although the overall situation in
Kosovo remained stable during the past three months,
the situation in the northern area continues to be fragile.
We are particularly concerned over the recurrence
of violence in northern Kosovo. Such incidents can
undermine the security and stability of the territory,
as well as have a regressive effect on the political
process. The incidents also point to the need to address
deficiencies in the training and discipline of Kosovo’s
police.
We look forward to the resumption of the European
Union-facilitated dialogue without any preconditions,
following the formation of a new Government in Serbia.
In order for the process to be productive, it is important
to implement the agreements that were reached earlier.
We take note of the progress made for the
certification of university diplomas. We would urge both
sides to resolve the issues pertaining to the agreements
on regional cooperation and freedom of movement, as
well as the agreement on the integrated management of
crossing points. The authorities in Kosovo need to move
towards enacting the necessary legislation on cadastre
records.
The implementation of agreements, however, will
need the demonstration of political will and flexibility
on the part of both sides.
The decline in the number of voluntary returnees
during the reporting period covered by the SecretaryGeneral’s report (S/2012/603) is a matter of concern.
The report highlights some incidents of minorities
being targeted. Such incidents exacerbate the perception
of insecurity and deter voluntary returns; they should
be investigated properly and the perpetrators should be
brought to justice.
Acts of vandalism against sites of culture and
religious heritage are unacceptable and need to be
addressed effectively.
Finally, we call upon all parties to pursue the path
of dialogue, engagement and mutual accommodation
for the sake of lasting peace in Kosovo and the region.
Mr. Quintana (Colombia) (spoke in Spanish): I wish
to thank the Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral for the information that he has provided to the
Council today, which supplements that contained in the
Secretary-General’s report (S/2012/603) concerning
20

the recent progress made in the implementation of the
mandate of the United Nations Interim Administration
Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK). I would also like to
welcome the presence of His Excellency Mr. Ivica
Dačić, Prime Minister of the Republic of Serbia, and
His Excellency Mr. Hashim Thaçi, Prime Minister of
the Republic of Kosovo.
Colombia recognizes and supports UNMIK’s
important role and believes that, in defining its priorities,
the Mission must continue to promote security, stability
and respect for human rights in Kosovo and the region
through its cooperation with the parties involved and
with regional and international agencies. UNMIK’s
work is essential in persuading the parties of the need
to show moderation in their statements and to promote
the dialogue that will make it possible to achieve
sustainable solutions to the disputes.
With regard to the European Union Rule of Law
Mission in Kosovo (EULEX), Colombia supports the
joint efforts that have been made by that Mission and by
the Kosovo authorities in order to implement the rule of
law in Kosovo and reduce the level of impunity.
Colombia calls upon the parties to adopt measures
to reduce tension and to avoid the eruption of a new
crisis, as well as to work with the necessary political
resolve based on previous agreements, bearing in mind
that that is the only true way towards peace.
We condemn violent activities that are aimed at
intimidating communities, as happened to Kosovo Serbs
in the municipality of Klinë/Klina and in the village of
Drenovc/Drenovac. We call upon the authorities and
the communities to work towards reconciliation and
peaceful coexistence among all inhabitants of Kosovo.
Colombia welcomes the initiative taken by the
Office of the High Commissioner for Human Rights
in Kosovo and UN-Women in lending their support to
the entity for gender equality under the Office of the
Prime Minister, with the aim of designing an action
plan for the implementation of resolution 1325 (2000).
In turn, we also recognize the work of the Office of
the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees
and its partners in implementing outreach activities
addressing displaced persons, both within and outside
Kosovo.
We also wish to express our support for a regional
perspective aimed at resolving the problems, and in
particular, for the actions of the European Union in
bringing about a rapprochement between Pristina and
12-46686

S/PV.6822

Belgrade, and for the involvement of the Organization
for Security and Cooperation in Europe in that process.
Finally, we reject and condemn all types of attacks
perpetrated against the facilities and personnel of
international organizations that are present in Kosovo
and call for due respect for those persons and for their
work, in particular that of EULEX.
Mr. Sangqu (South Africa): South Africa would like
to thank the Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral, Mr. Farid Zarif, for his briefing today on the
activities of the United Nations Interim Administration
Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK). We welcome Serbian
Prime Minister Ivica Dačić to the Council and thank
him for his statement. We also welcome Mr. Hashim
Thaçi and thank him for his statement.
We wish to begin by expressing South Africa’s
appreciation and support for the role of UNMIK, under
the capable leadership of Mr. Zarif, in implementing
resolution 1244 (1999).
While the situation in Kosovo is somewhat
stable, the incidents brought to our attention in the
Secretary-General’s report (S/2012/603) underline the
fact that fault lines still exist that have the potential
to negate the gains made, resulting in pushing the
parties farther apart, unless they are addressed and a
solution is found. We welcome the recent visit to the
region by the Secretary-General and his call for strong
efforts towards the normalization of relations between
Belgrade and Pristina, including a true, serious and
sincere commitment to dialogue.
My delegation continues to support the dialogue
process between Belgrade and Pristina, facilitated
by the European Union, as mandated by the General
Assembly. We are pleased that the new Serbian
Government, in particular the new President, has
reaffirmed its commitment to that negotiation process
and to honouring all agreements reached thus far. South
Africa encourages all sides to strengthen that dialogue
process in order to reach agreement on outstanding
and contentious issues, including the difficulties being
encountered in the implementation of agreements
already reached. Implementation should be done in
the same good faith manner in which agreements were
reached in the first place.
The successful holding of the Serbian elections in
Kosovo should not be underestimated. The peaceful and
orderly manner in which they took place is a positive
sign that there is political will to peacefully resolve
12-46686

issues. The Organization for Security and Cooperation
in Europe is to be commended for its role in facilitating
that process. We are, however, concerned that the
security situation in northern Kosovo remains fragile.
The continued outbreaks of violence and increased
tension between ethnic groups are symptomatic of the
largely unresolved matters between Serbia and Kosovo.
That is not conducive to creating the conditions for
peace and national reconciliation to take place. Both
sides should work towards exercising restraint and
preventing violent confrontations from occurring. We
call on all sides to utilize regular, direct dialogues as
an important confidence-building measure to improve
trust and allow the parties to address the outstanding
and contentious issues.
We welcome the progress achieved so far in
identifying the remains of some missing persons. The
parties’ commitment and cooperation on the issue
of missing persons is to be commended. We remain
confident that, with the support of UNMIK and
assistance from the International Committee of the Red
Cross, much can be achieved.
The treatment of ethnic minorities and the lack of
protection measures appear to be impeding progress on
their voluntary return to Kosovo. We have noted that the
figures on the returnees are much lower, as compared
to the previous year. The international community must
affirm that it remains the responsibility of Kosovo’s
authorities to ensure that safe conditions on the ground
are present, to protect the rights of minorities by law and
that protective measures are employed in that regard. My
delegation again urges the parties to show the necessary
flexibility and to cooperate in finding solutions to this
outstanding issue. The successful resolution of the issue
of the treatment of ethnic minorities in Kosovo could be
used as an important confidence-building measure to
improve trust and create the climate for the parties to
address other outstanding and contentious issues.
My delegation remains concerned that cultural
and religious sites in Kosovo continue to face security
risks, including vandalism. We call on Pristina to
reinforce security measures to guard such sites.
The public reconciliatory pronouncements from the
leaders on both sides are welcome and remain positive
contributions towards reconciliation.
Regarding the allegations about organ trafficking,
we have noted the progress that has been achieved thus
far, and we wish to reiterate our position that a credible,

21

S/PV.6822

third-party, impartial and independent inquiry into the
allegations should be conducted.
In conclusion, South Africa maintains that
resolution 1244 (1999) remains in force and forms the
basis for the resolution of the situation in Kosovo. It
is therefore incumbent on the international presence in
Kosovo, including the Kosovo Force and the European
Union Rule of Law Mission, to maintain a steady,
neutral position in the execution of their mandates, in
line with the Security Council’s previous decisions. The
two sides should refrain from any actions that could
undermine the achievements attained in the dialogue
process. We therefore call on the parties to exercise
flexibility and to enhance their engagement in order
to resolve outstanding matters and for reconciliation to
prevail.
Mr. Rosenthal (Guatemala) (spoke in Spanish):
We would like to thank the Secretary-General for his
report on the United Nations Interim Administration
Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK) contained in document
S/2012/603. Likewise, allow me welcome and thank
Special Representative of the Secretary-General
Farid Zarif for his briefing. We are also grateful for
the presentations that we heard earlier this morning
from Prime Minister of Serbia Ivica Dačić and from
Mr. Hashim Thaçi.
We commend Serbia on its successful elections
and we hope that once the establishment of the
Government in Belgrade is finalized dialogue with
Pristina will resume, focused on the implementation of
existing agreements as well as tackling new subjects.
We welcome the clear reaffirmation of commitment
by the new President of Serbia to fully comply with
agreements already achieved. The Secretary-General’s
report describes events that make it clear that UNMIK
continues to play an essential role as a guardian of
stability and neutrality in Kosovo and the region.
I would first like to refer to the situation in northern
Kosovo, which as the Secretary-General states, remains
fragile. We call on the parties to act with restraint,
to prevent a political setback or a resurgence of
instability. We share the Secretary-General’s concern
about Pristina’s intention to cut funding of the UNMIK
Administration Mitrovica, diverting it to a local
administrative office, which lacks the support and trust
of the public.
The report highlights the ongoing challenges faced
by minority communities throughout Kosovo. Since

22

the Secretary-General’s last report (S/2012/275) there
has been an increase in criminal acts greatly harmful
to minority communities, as compared with the same
period last year. What is especially alarming is that the
attacks have now intensified and become more brutal. In
that regard, we would like to receive recommendations
on a more regular basis about how the Security Council
can support UNMIK in fulfilling its mandate. That is
also critical to increasing the rate of voluntary returnees
to Kosovo.
That brings me to another point, which is the
need to strengthen the rule of law and the judicial
sector, especially the need to improve the response of
public institutions, especially the police, when such
incidents occur. We expect that every complaint will be
conscientiously investigated and that those responsible
are brought to justice.
In that connection, I should also like to refer to
the Special Investigative Task Force charged with
analysing allegations of human rights violations and
organ trafficking in Kosovo. We are closely following
the progress in that regard. We note the report by
the European Union Rule of Law Mission in Kosovo
(S/2012/603, annex I). We continue to believe that it
would be best to find an arrangement that involved the
United Nations in investigating those allegations.
Finally, I wish to express our complete support for
the Mission, as well as for the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General. We urge them to continue
to fulfil their mandate in accordance with resolution
1244 (1999), which is the basis of the legal framework
in Kosovo.
Mr. Musayev (Azerbaijan): At the outset, I would
like to thank the Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral, Mr. Farid Zarif, for presenting the report of
the Secretary-General on the United Nations Interim
Administration Mission in Kosovo (S/2012/603). We
welcome the participation in today’s meeting of His
Excellency Mr. Ivica Dačić, Prime Minister of Serbia,
and we thank him and Mr. Hashim Thaçi for their
statements.
The position of Azerbaijan with regard to the
sovereignty and territorial integrity of Serbia and
non-recognition of Kosovo’s unilateral declaration
of independence remains unchanged. Resolution
1244 (1999) continues to be the binding international
legal basis for a comprehensive settlement through a
negotiated political process.

12-46686

S/PV.6822

We welcome the peaceful and orderly conduct of
Serbian presidential and parliamentary elections in
Kosovo in May, and we commend the Organization
for Security and Cooperation in Europe and other
international partners for their contribution to the
preparation and conduct of the voting.

Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK) and other
international partners, the sides have made important
steps towards addressing that human rights issue in
a spirit of cooperation. We look forward to further
progress and encourage the sides to continue their
efforts to that effect.

We note that both sides have expressed the
will to resume consultations in order to discuss the
implementation of existing agreements. We believe
that a good faith commitment to continued dialogue
will contribute to further tangible progress in the near
future.

The protection of religious and cultural heritage
in Kosovo should remain an UNMIK priority. Some
progress was observed during the reporting period,
including the reconstruction of several sites, improved
interaction at the local level and legislative measures
taken after long delays to strengthen the protection of
cultural heritage sites in some areas.

Although the overall security situation remained
generally calm during the reporting period, a series of
incidents that occurred in northern Kosovo and other
areas served to increase tensions on the ground.
We condemn the double murder on 6 July of a
popular Kosovo Serb village leader and his wife in the
home to which they had recently returned in Kosovo.
We concur with Mr. Zarif that such terrible crimes must
not be allowed to remain unsolved or go unpunished.
We look forward to the conclusion of the ongoing
investigation.
The situation regarding the return of internally
displaced persons to Kosovo again showed few signs of
improvement during the reporting period. More attention
and strengthened political will are required to reverse
the continuing decline in the number of returns. In that
regard, we share the view of the Secretary-General that,
among other measures, improved responses by public
institutions, in particular the police and other public
service providers, are needed to address the continuing
challenges faced by the minority communities in all
parts of Kosovo.
We take note of the information on some important
developments pertaining to the investigation of facts
related to organized crime, the inhuman treatment of
people and organ trafficking. We strongly believe that
establishing the truth will serve the principles of justice
and the rule of law and will contribute to a lasting
political settlement. The Security Council should play a
greater role in that regard. We do not see any obstacles
that could prevent the process from being empowered
by and accountable to the Council.
The issue of missing persons continues to be one
of the major obstacles to reconciliation efforts. It is
therefore encouraging that during the reporting period,
with the direct support of the United Nations Interim
12-46686

At the same time, we deeply regret that acts of
vandalism and religious intolerance have continued. We
recall the obligation to comply with the commitments
made by each side in that regard.
In conclusion, I would like to commend UNMIK
under the leadership of Special Representative Zarif for
its efforts and important role in maintaining peace and
stability in Kosovo and in the entire region.
Mr. Menan (Togo) (spoke in French): I would like
to begin by thanking the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, Mr. Farid Zarif, for the report he
just introduced to the Security Council on the United
Nations Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo
(S/2012/603). I also wish to thank His Excellency
Mr. Ivica Dačić, Prime Minister of Serbia, and
Mr. Hashim Thaçi for their statements.
At the previous Council meeting on the United
Nations Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo
(UNMIK) (see S/PV.6769), the Togolese delegation
expressed its concern about possible difficulties
in connection with the legislative and presidential
elections to be held in Serbia with the participation
of Kosovo Serbs. At that time, the overall atmosphere
favoured scepticism and foreshadowed an uncertain
future.
Today, however, Togo is pleased to note the
commendable conduct of the elections, as indicated in
the report of the Secretary-General, thanks to the many
efforts on the part of the international community, in
particular UNMIK, the Kosovo Force (KFOR), the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe
(OSCE) and the European Union Rule of Law Mission
in Kosovo, to create the conditions necessary for
Serbians to participate in the recent elections.

23

S/PV.6822

We are convinced that the post-electoral context is
also a propitious time to urge stakeholders in Kosovo
to work together to consolidate and strengthen the
achievements. The recent peaceful elections will
help to restore citizens’ trust in their ability to move
beyond their differences in order to build democratic
institutions.
That bright spot, nevertheless, should not lead to
blind optimism. Although there has been progress in
strengthening achievements through various agreements
concluded among Kosovo stakeholders, much remains
to be done to guarantee the security necessary in
Kosovo for all of its communities to flourish.
During the reporting period, efforts made after so
many sacrifices to guarantee security in Kosovo were
called into question by acts of violence, in particular
acts committed against KFOR personnel, and a certain
undermining of the freedom of movement. The incidents
that took place in northern Kosovo could threaten the
peace, which continues to be fragile. We therefore
call upon all Kosovo authorities and communities to
demonstrate responsibility and establish conditions
conducive to implementing the Government’s priorities
and meeting the needs of the population.
We are pleased that the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General has often called for dialogue among
the parties, which is the only guarantee for a settlement
based on consensus on the pending issues of northern
Kosovo, in particular democratic representation.
With respect to relations between Serbia and
Kosovo, we hope that the establishment of a new Serbian
Government will serve as an opportunity to resume the
stalled consultations between the Belgrade and Pristina
authorities, under the auspices of the European Union.
My country calls upon the two capitals to follow that
path.
My country also remains concerned about the issue
of human rights in Kosovo. We believe that upholding
human rights should be a matter for all members of
Kosovo society and that everything must be done to
ensure that no crime or unlawful behaviour be justified
by the freedom of religion or belief. Along those lines,
my country urges the Kosovo authorities to establish
the conditions necessary to protect the fundamental
freedoms of each community while respecting those of
the others.

24

The reconciliation attempts undertaken by the
Government in connection with Kosovo’s past, with a
view to overcoming the difficulties that the country has
faced, must be encouraged. In that respect, my country
welcomes the activities undertaken by UNMIK, the
Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for
Human Rights and the United Nations Entity for Gender
Equality and the Empowerment of Women to promote
and protect human rights in Kosovo.
So as to prevent duplication and take account of
all of the different activities being undertaken in
Kosovo with a view to reconciliation, a sustainable
political settlement of the crisis and the preservation
of the considerable investments that have been made,
the partners must take a consistent and coordinated
approach to the activities they undertake. We welcome
the positive steps taken by certain partners which
have stood by Kosovo, in particular UNMIK, KFOR,
EULEX and the OSCE.
The President (spoke in French): I shall now make
a statement in my capacity as the representative of
France.
I wish at the outset to thank the Prime Minister of
the Republic of Serbia and the Prime Minister of the
Republic of Kosovo for their statements. I also welcome
the presence among us of Mr. Farid Zarif, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General.
As the key issues have already been discussed, I
shall restrict myself to the following three points.
First, the end of Kosovo’s supervised independence
on 10 September is an opportunity that should be seized,
not to revisit past legal controversies but to consolidate
a sovereign, peaceful, democratic and multi-ethnic
Kosovo living in peace with its neighbours. That will
require the early resumption of dialogue between Serbia
and Kosovo under the auspices of the European Union.
In that regard, we are encouraged by the statements
made by the new Serbian authorities indicating their
determination to make progress and to implement,
at an early date, existing agreements. Pristina must
also convince the Kosovo Serbs that the Serbs and
the Albanians share a common destiny and have
common interests both north and south of the river
Ibar, and Belgrade, for its part, must dismantle the
parallel structures that have been set up in the north.
It is essential to consolidate the rights of minorities
throughout Kosovo, to continue to protect their cultural

12-46686

S/PV.6822

and religious heritage, and to ensure the return of
refugees in suitable conditions.
Secondly, the prospect of European integration
must enable Serbia and Kosovo to turn the page on
past conflicts. The future of the two countries lies
within the European Union. The granting of candidate
status to Serbia and the launching of a feasibility study
with regard to a stabilization and association pact for
Kosovo are tangible elements of the progress that has
been achieved. They have been made possible by the
dialogue between Belgrade and Pristina, which has
been bearing fruit since March 2011.
The European Union will now focus its efforts
on supporting political dialogue between the two
parties and ensuring compliance with past agreements
between the two capitals. On the ground, the European
Union Rule of Law Mission in Kosovo (EULEX) and
the Kosovo Force (KFOR) will continue to support
the peaceful transition and will focus on establishing
the rule of law and freedom of movement in northern
Kosovo, restructuring their presence accordingly.
The United Nations Interim Administration Mission
in Kosovo must take note of these developments. The
international presence in Kosovo will not be there
indefinitely. As Kosovo institutions mature, they will
be increasingly up to the task of ensuring the security
and political rights of minorities.

12-46686

Thirdly, the region is not condemned to a cycle
of violence or conflict. The situation on the ground
is headed in the right direction, although it remains
fragile. Soldiers and individuals deployed under KFOR
and EULEX are responsible for ensuring respect for
freedom of movement in Kosovo, pursuant to resolution
1244 (1999). Any obstacle to their own freedom of
movement and any acts of violence against them must
be unambiguously condemned.
Finally, the lack of consensus within the
international community should not serve as a pretext
for a lack of action. Dual-national Kosovo Serbs living
in Kosovo were able to participate peacefully in the
legislative and presidential elections held in Serbia.
The transfer of security responsibilities at the Dević
Convent to the Kosovo police also took place in a
satisfactory manner — clear evidence of the fact that
when there is political will on the part of both parties,
agreements are possible, and can even be expedited,
even on the most sensitive issues.
I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.
There are no further speakers on my list. The
Security Council has thus concluded the present stage
of the consideration of the item on its agenda.
The meeting rose at 12.25 p.m.

25
