Reaolutions adopted on the reporta of the Third Committee

a United Nations High Commissioner for Human
Rights or sorne other appropriate international machinery,
Recalling also that in its resolution 2333 (XXII)
of 18 December 1967 the General Assembly expressed
regret that the consideration of this question had not
been possible owing to the heavy programme of work
and decided to give high priority to the consideration
of the question at its twenty-third session,
Regretting that, despite that decision, it has not been
possible to do so owing to the heavy programme of
work at the current session,
1. Again decides to give high priority, in accordance
with the aforementioned resolutions and decisions to
the consideration of this question at its twenty-fourth
session;
2. Req11ests the Secretary-General to provide the
General Assembly at its twenty-fourth session with ali
the relevant information prepared in conformity with

the resolutions of the General Assembly, the Economic
and Social Council and the Commission on Human
Rights on this matter.
1748th plenary meeting,
19 Decembe,- 1968.
2438 (XXIII). Measures to be taken against
nazism and racial intolerance
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 2331 (XXII) of 18 December 1967 on measures to be taken against nazism and
racial intolerance,
Reaffirming that racism, nazism and the ideology and
policy of apartheid are incompatible with the objectives
of the Charter of the United Nations and the Universal
Declaration of Human Rights, the Convention on the
Prevention and Punishment of the Crime of Genocide.
the United N' ations Declaration on the Elimination of
Ali Forms of Racial Discrimination, the International
Convention on the Elimination of Ali Forms oí Racial
Discrimination and other international instruments,
Exprcssin,q its deep concern at the fact that, in spite
of General Assembly resolution 2331 (XXII), the activities of groups and organizations propagating racism,
nazism ami similar ideologies based on terrorism and
racial intolerance still continue,
Bearing in mina that such ideologies have in the past
led to barharous acts which outraged the conscience
of mankind, to other heinous violations oí human rights
and eventually to a war which brought indescribable
suffering to mankind,
Recalling that the Universal Declaration oí Human
Rights. the International Covenant on Economic, Social
and Cultural Rights and the lnternatio11al Covenant
on Civil and Political Rights stipulate that nothing
in those instruments may he interpreted as implying for
any State, group or person any right to engage in any
activity or to perform any act such as racist or nazi
practices and similar ideologies aime<l at the <lestruction
of any of the rights set forth therein,
Taki11g note of resolution II on measures to he
taken against nazism and racial intolerance, adopte<l on
11 May 1968 by the International Conference on
Human Rights, 22
22 See Final Act of the International Conference on Human
Rights (United Nations publication, Sales No.: E.68.XIV.2),
p. s.

47

l. Once again resolutely cond.emns racism, nazism,
apartheid and ali similar ideologies and practices which
are based on racial intolerance and terror as a gross
violation gf human rights and fundamental freecloms
and of the principies of the Charter of the United
Nations, and which may jeopardize world peace and
the security of peoples ;
2. Urgently calls iipon ali States to take without
delay, with due regard to the principies contained in
the Universal Declaration of Human Rights, legislative
and other positive measures to outlaw groups and organizations which are disseminating propaganda for
racism, nazism, the policy of apartheid and other fortns
of racial intolerance, and to prosecute them in the
courts;
3. Calls upan ali States and peoples, as well as national and international organizations, to strive for the
eradication, as soon as possible and once and for ali,
oí racism, nazism and similar ideologies and practices,
inclucling apartheid, which are based on racial intolerance and terror ;
4. Requests the Secretary-General to submit to the
General Assembly a survey of information which may
be available to him on international instruments, legislation and other measures taken or envisaged, both at
the national and international levels, with a view to
halting racist, nazi and similar activities, such as
apartheid;
5. Invites States Members of the Unitecl Nations
and members of the specialized agencies to co-operate
with the Secretary-General by providing him with information of this kind;
6. Decides to consider at its twenty-fourth session
the question of measures to be taken against nazism
and racial intolerance.
1748th plenary meeting,
19 December 1968.
2439 (XXIII). Measures for effectively combating
racial discrimination and the policie& of
apartheid and segregation in southern
Africa

Thc General Assembly,
Having co11sidered the recommendation contained in
Economic and Social Council resolution 1332 (XLIV)
of 31 May 1968,
Recalling its resolution 2144 A (XXI) oí 26 October
1966, in which it invited the Economic ancl Social
Council and the Commission on Human Rights to give
urgent consideration to ways and means of improving
the capacity of the United Nations to put a stop to
violations of human rights wherever they may occur,
Recalling a/so its resolution 2145 (XXI) of 27 October 1966, by which it terminated South Africa's
:VIandate for Namibia, then called South \Vest Africa,
Talúng into accozmt its resolutions 2307 (XXII) of
13 December 1967 on the policies of apartheid of the
Government oí South Africa ancl 2324 (XXII) and
2325 (XXII) of 16 December 1967 on the question
oí Kamibia,
Taki11g into account the documents and recommenda..
tions of the seminars on apartheid held in flrnzil in 1966
and in Zambia in 1967,
Grave/y concerned at the evidence of inhuman practices by the Government of South Africa ami by the
illegal racist minority régime in Southern Rhodesia

48

General Assembly-Twenty-third Session

against the non-white population of South Africa,
Namibia and Southern Rhodesia,
N oting that the Government of South A frica and the
illegal régime in Southern Rhodesia are fin<ling support for the policy of apartheid and racial discrimination in the fact that a number of States are continuing to tra<le with them an<l are maintaining diplomatic,
cultural and other ties ancl relations with them ancl
affor<ling them military assistance,
Convinced that the flagrant violations of human rights
in southern Africa are of serious international concern
;md require urgent and effective action by the United
Nations,
l. Endorses the recommendations of the Special
Rapporteur appointed by the Commission on Human
Rights under its resolution 7 (XXIII) of 16 March
1967 23 that the Government of South Africa be requested to repeal, arnen<l and replace laws cited in paragraph 1547 of the Special Rapporteur's report ;24
2. Considers it essential that, in arder to conform
with its obligations under the Charter of the United
Nations, the Government of South Africa shoul<l undertake to repeal, amend and replace the various discriminatory laws cited in paragraph 1547 of the Special
Rapporteur's report;
3. Calls upon the Government of South Africa to
repeal, amend and replace the laws in force in South
Africa referred to in paragraph 1 above ancl to report
to the Secretary-General on the measures taken or envisaged in accordance with that paragraph;
4. Urges ali States to encourage information media
within their territories to publicize tbe evils of apartheid
and racial discrimination and the inhuman acts practised by the Government of South Africa and the illegal régime in Southern Rhodesia, as well as the aims
and purposes of the United Nations and its efforts to
eliminate these evils;
5. Condemns the actions of ali those Governments
which, in violation of Unite<l N ations resolutions, are
continuing to maintain diplomatic, commercial, military,
cultural and other relations with South Africa ami the
illegal régime in Southern Rhodesia;
6. Ca/Is upon those Governments to break off such
relations;
7. Requests the Secretary-General to take steps to
rlraw the widest possible public attention to the evils
of these policies through the interested non-governmental organizations, trade unions, religious institutions, student and other organizations, as well as
lihrariPs an<l schools;
8. Also requests the Secretary-General to keep un<ler
constant review the question of promoting co-ordination
and co-operation in the activities of the specialized
agencies ancl orgam of tlw 1Jnite<l Nations dealing with
mattérs relating to apartheid ami racial discrimination
in southern Africa;
9. Furthcr requcsts the Secretary-General to establish a L;nited N'ations information centre in South
Africa with a view to <lisseminating the aims an<l purposes of the United N ations;
10. J;'c:q1u::sts the Secretary-General to report to the
Cenera! Assemhly al its twenty-fourth session on the
;rnplement:1tin11 of the nresent resolution, and in particu23 See Officio/ Records of tite Economic and Social Co11ncil,
Forty-.r,-c,,1:d SNsÍl111, Su¡,plemn,t No. 6 (E/4322 and Corr.l),
par.:t 376,
"1 • E;r::N.d,94()/ 1\ddA.

lar on the actions taken by the Government of South
Afric:a to give effect to paragraph 3 above.
1748th plcnary 111eetinq,
19 Deccniber 1968.

2440 (XXIII). Report of the A.d Hoc Working
Group of Experts on the treatment of
political prisoners in South Africa
Thc General Assembfy,
Having considered the recommen<lations contained in
Economic and Social Council resolution 1333 (XLIV)
of 31 May 1968,
Recallinr¡ its resolution 2144 A (XXI) of 26 October 1966 on the question of the violation of human
rights and fundamental freecloms, including policies of
racial discrimination an<l segregation ami of apartheid,
in ali countries, with particular ref erence to colonial
and other clepenclent countries an<l territories, and its
resolution 2307 (XXII) of 13 Decemher 1967 on the
policies of apartheid of the Government of South Africa,
Gravely co11cerncd at the eviclence, in the report 25
of the Ad Hoc Working Gronp of Experts estahlishe<l
under resolution 2 (XXIII) of 6 l\larch 1967 of the
Commission on Human Rights. 26 of the intensification
of inhuman practices by the Government of South
Africa against the opponents of the policies of apartheid,
Determined to protect human rights ancl fundamental
freedoms an<l <lesirous of an urgent ami immediate end
to violations of human rights ami fnndamental freedoms
in South A frica,
l. Reaffirins its recognition of the legitimacy of the
struggle by the opponents of apartheid to realize their
human rights and fundamental freedoms;
2. Condenms any and every practice of torture, inhuman and degrading treatment of detainees and prisoners in South African prisons and in South African
police custo<ly during interrogation and detention, as
indicated in the report of the Ad Hoc Working (;roup
of Experts established under resolution 2 (XXIII) of
the Commission on Human Rights;
3. Ca/ls u pon the Government of Sot1th Af rica:
(a) To initiate investigations i11to the violations mentione<l in the report of the Ad lloc \Vorking Group of
Experts with a view to establishing the degree of
responsibility of the persons listed in appcn<lix [ 1 to
chapter VII of the report, for the pt1rpose of punishing
tbem accordingly ;

( /1) To affor<l the opport1111ity to all persons who
have suffered damage tu receive inclemnification;
(e) To aholish the 180-clav law ami the Terrorism
Act, under which opponents ¡;f the policies of af>artheid
are detained without charge or tria!, as well as the
Suppression of Comnn111is111 :\et, the Sahota"c Act
ami si:nil'.1r laws, a1:cl al~o to refrain from incor¡~rating
the prmc1ples contamed 111 these laws into other laws;
( d) To release immediately l\f r. Robert Soht1kwe;
(e) To release immecliately all other political prisoners ancl ali persous hekl for their opposition to the
policies of apartheid. whether in ¡,rison or police detention;
25 E/CN.4/950.
26 See Official Rccords

of tite Economic and Social Council
Forty-second Session, Supplement No. 6 (E/4322 and Corr.l):
para. 268.
