S/PV.9309 (Resumption 1)

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-eighth year

9309th meeting
Tuesday, 25 April 2023, 3 p.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Vershinin/Ms. Evstigneeva. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Russian Federation)

Members:

Albania . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Brazil. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ecuador. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Gabon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ghana . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Japan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Malta. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Mozambique . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Switzerland . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Arab Emirates . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Spasse
Mrs. Espeschit Maia
Ms. Wang Yingtong
Mr. Egas Benavides
Mrs. Morghad
Mr. Doumbeneny Ndzigna
Mr. Osei-Mensah
Mr. Nishiyama
Mr. De Bono Sant Cassia
Mr. Fernandes
Mr. Hauri
Ms. Tantawy
Mr. Gibbon
Mr. Postel

Agenda
The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of
the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room AB-0601
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

23-11639 (E)
*2311639*

S/PV.9309 (Resumption 1)

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

The meeting resumed at 3.05 p.m.
The President (spoke in Russian): I would like
to remind all speakers to limit their statements to no
more than four minutes in order to enable the Council
to conclude its work on time.
I now give the floor to the representative of Morocco.
Mr. Kadiri (Morocco) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, I would like to congratulate you, Mr. President,
for holding this important meeting, presided over by
His Excellency Mr. Sergey Lavrov, Minister for Foreign
Affairs of the Russian Federation. I would like also to
thank Mr. Tor Wennesland, Special Coordinator for the
Middle East Peace Process, for his valuable briefing. I
would highly recognize and welcome the presence of
His Excellency Mr. Khalifa Shaheen Al Marar, Minister
of State of the sisterly United Arab Emirates, and His
Excellency Mr. Riad Al-Malki, Minister for Foreign
Affairs of the sisterly State of Palestine.
We are meeting at a critical juncture for the
Palestinian question, especially for Al-Quds Al-Sharif.
Unfortunately, we are currently witnessing escalating
tension in the city of Jerusalem owing to the stalemate
of and the disrespect for the Middle East peace process,
which is mainly characterized by the desecration of the
holy sites and the spread of the culture of violence and
hatred throughout the region. Moreover, the unilateral
and systematic measures in violation of international
law and relevant United Nations resolutions and the
provocative actions that undermine the legitimate
rights of the Palestinian people undermine the twoState solution agreed by the international community.
On 5 April, the Kingdom of Morocco condemned the
storming of the Al-Aqsa Mosque by Israeli forces,
their aggression against the worshippers and their
terrorization of them during the holy month of Ramadan.
The Kingdom of Morocco under His Majesty King
Mohammed VI, Chair of the Al-Quds Committee of the
Organization of Islamic Cooperation, has underscored
the need to respect the legal, religious and historical
status quo in the city of Jerusalem and the holy sites,
while rejecting all practices and violations that will
lead only to undermining the peace prospects in the
region. The Kingdom of Morocco stressed its rejection
to such practices, which will further complicate the
situation in the occupied Palestinian territories and
undermine the efforts made to de-escalate the situation
and rebuild confidence.
2/33

25/04/2023

His Majesty King Mohammed VI, as Chair of
Al-Quds Committee, continues to spare no effort at
the political and diplomatic levels and on the ground
to preserve the distinctive status quo of that Holy City.
In that context, His Majesty stressed in the appeal
signed by His Majesty King Mohammed VI and His
Holiness Pope Francis regarding Jerusalem during his
visit to the Kingdom of Morocco on 30 March 2019 the
need to maintain the legal, cultural and religious status
quo of Al-Quds Al-Sharif as it is a common heritage
of humankind and a symbol of peaceful coexistence
for the three Abrahamic religions. The Al-Quds
Committee is tirelessly assuming its political and
practical role in supporting the Palestinian people in
general and the inhabitants of Al-Quds in particular.
It combines the political efforts made by His Majesty
King Mohammed VI with the field work undertaken by
the Bayt Mal Al-Quds Agency upon Royal instructions.
ِ As the field arm of the Al-Quds Committee, the Agency
continues to pursue its mission, namely, to protect the
Holy City within the framework of its annual plan,
taking every measure necessary to ensure its funding
with the participation of Al-Quds inhabitants. The
Kingdom of Morocco will fund more than 86 per cent
of the Agency’s budget.
In 2022, the Agency managed to carry out a number
of projects in the city of Al-Quds, for $3.2 million,
in many fields, including social assistance, health,
education, housing, youth, sports and culture. In 2023,
the Agency launched its programme for the month of
Ramadan, which cost more than $200,000.
The valuable and relentless efforts undertaken
by His Majesty King Mohammed VI as Chair of the
Al-Quds Committee are appreciated and commanded
by the Palestinian leadership and people along with the
international community, as attested to by the statement
delivered this morning on behalf of the Group of Arab
States and the statements to be delivered on behalf
of the Movement of Non-Aligned Countries and the
Organization of Islamic Cooperation. Those statements
only reiterate the resolutions and declarations that were
adopted by those groups at the level of their Heads of
State and Foreign Ministers.
The Kingdom of Morocco reiterates its full
solidarity with the legitimate rights of the brotherly
Palestinian people based on international legitimacy
and the two-State solution, as recognized by the
international community, with a view to establishing
an independent Palestinian State, along the 4 June 1967
23-11639

25/04/2023

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

borders, with East Jerusalem as its capital, a viable
State living side by side with Israel in security, safety
and peace.
The Palestinian question will continue to be the
key to peace and stability in the Middle East region.
That is why it should be decoupled from whatever
undermines its importance and kept apart from futile
political considerations by certain parties that should
have defended the Palestinian question but, instead,
subjected it to bilateral disputes that they have fabricated
in order to serve hostile and geopolitical agendas that
unfortunately negatively affect the Arab and Islamic
stance in support of the Palestinian question. Staying
away from those agendas was the request of the
Palestinian leadership.
In conclusion, I would like to repeat the message
delivered on 12 February by His Majesty Mohammed VI
at the high-level conference held in Cairo to support the
city of Jerusalem:
“Since we believe that peace in the Middle East
region is an inevitable strategic option, the Kingdom
of Morocco will continue to spare no effort and
to leverage all its capabilities and distinguished
relations with all parties and international
stakeholders to contribute to all international
efforts to resume dialogue and negotiations, as that
is the only way to put an end to the conflict and
to achieve security, stability and prosperity in the
Middle East region.”
The President (spoke in Russian): I now give the
floor to the representative of Pakistan.
Mr. Akram (Pakistan): Pakistan commends the
Russian presidency for convening this timely debate on
the Middle East, including the Palestinian question. We
welcome the participation of Foreign Minister Lavrov
in this meeting, and we also welcome the Foreign
Minister of Palestine.
The Prime Minister of Pakistan condemns Israel’s
brutal crackdown during the holy month of Ramadan,
using stun grenades and tear gas against innocent
Muslim worshippers at the Al-Aqsa Mosque, which is
Islam’s the third-holiest site. Violation of its sanctity
offends Muslim across the world.
Israel’s actions are in violation of the historical and
legal status quo. They violate the right to the freedom
of worship, enshrined in article 18 of the International

S/PV.9309 (Resumption 1)

Covenant on Civil and Political Rights and endorsed by
General Assembly resolution 36/55, of 1981.
International law, furthermore, unequivocally
restricts Israel, the occupying Power, from seizing
land and building settlements in occupied territories,
including East Jerusalem. Resolutions 476 (1980), 478
(1980) and 2334 (2016), inter alia, prohibit Israel from
altering the demographic composition of Palestinian
territory occupied since 1967.
In a recent statement, the United Nations Special
Rapporteurs on the situation of human rights in the
Palestinian territories occupied since 1967, on adequate
housing as a component of the right to an adequate
standard of living and on the human rights of internally
displaced persons, stressed, inter alia, that:
“Palestinians under Israeli occupation continue to
be forced out of their homes and dispossessed of their
land and properties on the basis of discriminatory
laws. Israel’s transfer of its own population into the
occupied territory confirms a deliberate intention
to colonize the territory it occupies — a practice
strictly prohibited by international humanitarian
law. It amounts to a prima facie war crime”.
Pakistan welcomed the adoption of General
Assembly resolution 77/400, which seeks an advisory
opinion from the International Court of Justice on
the legal consequences arising from the policies and
practices of Israel in the occupied Palestinian territory,
including East Jerusalem. The Security Council, once it
receives that opinion, will have to adopt further measures
to ensure full compliance with international law.
In particular, Israel must comply with its
international obligation to respect the right of the
Palestinian people to self-determination. Given the
erga omnes character of the right to self-determination,
it is also incumbent on all States, in accordance with
the Charter of the United Nations and international law,
to ensure that any impediment to the exercise by the
Palestinian people of its right to self-determination be
immediately brought to an end.
The international community cannot accept the
fait accompli that Israel is seeking to impose in order
to destroy Palestinian nationhood. There will be no
durable peace in the Holy Land until we see the creation
of an independent, viable and contiguous State of
Palestine, established on the basis of pre-1967 borders,
with Al-Quds Al-Sharif as its capital.

23-116393/33

S/PV.9309 (Resumption 1)

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

Despite Israel’s illegal and disruptive actions, the
Middle East witnessed several positive developments
in recent months. Pakistan warmly welcomes to the
normalization of relations between the Kingdom of
Saudi Arabia and the Islamic Republic of Iran. We
commend the sincere and successful efforts made by
the leadership of the People’s Republic of China to
make that historic diplomatic breakthrough possible.
Pakistan also welcomes the diplomatic and political
measures initiated to restore peace and normalcy in
Syria and Yemen. We hope that all the countries of the
Arab and Islamic world will soon succeed in ending
strife and restoring peace and stability across the
Middle East and the Islamic world.
The President (spoke in Russian): I now give the
floor to the representative of the Islamic Republic
of Iran.
Mr. Iravani (Islamic Republic of Iran): I thank
Russia for organizing this important and timely
open debate.
For 75 years, the Palestinian people have been
victims of the Israeli regime’s unrelenting aggression,
violence and injustice. The occupation of their land
continues, with cities behind a blockade, property and
farm lands being destroyed and confiscated and people
being forced to evacuate their homes.
Since the beginning of the year, Palestinians have
been subjected to excessive violence, suppression
and terror by both illegal Israeli settlers and armed
forces. Those horrific acts are part of a larger pattern
of systematic violations of the fundamental human
rights of Palestinian people by the Israeli regime. They
represent a clear violation of international law and
established principles and norms of human rights.
We are deeply concerned by the repeated assaults
and incursion by extremist settlers, with the support of
Israeli occupation forces, against the sacred Al-Aqsa
Mosque during the holy month of Ramadan. The brutal
attack on worshippers, including women and children,
as they recited their prayers and performed rituals in
the courtyards of the Al-Aqsa Mosque is reprehensible
and must be condemned in the strongest possible terms.
Those atrocious crimes or a clear example of the Israeli
regime’s illegal and apartheid actions, which have
exacerbated the suffering of the Palestinian people and
have eroded the foundations for the establishment of
just and sustainable peace in the region.
4/33

25/04/2023

It is regrettable that the Security Council has
remained silent, rendering United Nations resolutions
ineffective and leaving the Palestinian people to suffer
ongoing atrocities. The absence of accountability has
emboldened this despicable regime to continue violating
all United Nations resolutions, including those adopted
by the Security Council.
We remain steadfast in our belief that the conflict
in Palestine can be resolved only through ending the
occupation and recognizing the inalienable right of selfdetermination of the Palestinian people. This requires
the full restoration and protection of these rights, leading
to the establishment of Palestinian sovereignty over
all of Palestine. However, such a resolution cannot be
achieved if the Security Council fails to act. We call on
the Security Council to fulfil its responsibility to take
decisive action to bring an end to the occupation and
ensure the protection of the rights of Palestinians. Mere
sympathy is no longer sufficient.
The Islamic Republic of Iran regards it as its duty to
support the Palestinian people’s legitimate rights to resist
the operations and aggression of the Israeli apartheid
regime, in line with the right of self-determination. This
will be its principal policy until the occupation ends.
In conclusion, I wish to emphasize the importance
and legal nature of the advisory opinion currently being
considered by the International Court of Justice. The
General Assembly adopted resolution 77/247, which
calls for this opinion to address the legal consequences of
Israeli ongoing violations of the Palestinian people’s right
to self-determination through prolonged occupation,
settlement and annexation of Palestinian territory. We
hope that the Court’s opinion will shed more light on the
ongoing atrocities and violations, contribute to the end
of the occupation and facilitate holding those responsible
for atrocities and violations against the Palestinian
people accountable for their actions.
Once again, the representative of the Israeli regime
abused this Chamber and resorted to lies and fabrications
to make unfounded claims against my country. It is not
surprising or unexpected, given that deception and lies
have long been part of his regime’s tool box. The purpose
is clear: to divert attention from the urgent matter on
the agenda of today’s meeting, namely, the atrocity
crimes committed by this apartheid regime against the
Palestinian people. Such false and unfounded claims do
not merit a response.
23-11639

25/04/2023

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

The President (spoke in Russian): I now give the
floor to Mr. Skoog.
Mr. Skoog: I want to express our appreciation for
the briefing earlier today by the Special Coordinator
for the Middle East Peace Process and acknowledge the
presence of Foreign Minister Al-Malki in the Chamber.
We regret the fact that the other side has left the room
and is not listening to this debate.
I speak on behalf of the European Union (EU) and
its 27 member States. The candidate countries North
Macedonia, Montenegro, Albania, the Republic of
Moldova and Bosnia and Herzegovina, as well as San
Marino, align themselves with this statement.
The European Union and its member States are deeply
concerned at the increasing violence and extremism in
Israel and the occupied Palestinian territory, which are
leading to appalling numbers of Israeli and Palestinian
victims, including children. We continue to call on
Israeli and Palestinian leaders to de-escalate the situation
and refrain from actions that will increase tensions. We
commend the efforts of the United States, Jordan, Egypt
and Office of the United Nations Special Coordinator for
the Middle East Peace Process to de-escalate the situation
and support commitments taken by the parties in Aqaba
and Sharm El-Sheikh. All parties should observe these
commitments in good faith.
This upsurge in violence followed days of tension
and clashes at the holy sites. The EU condemns the
violent incidents that have occurred at the holy sites,
recalls that the use of force must be proportional and
calls for upholding the status quo put in place in 1967
for the Temple Mount/Al-Haram Al-Sharif, in line with
previous understandings and with respect to Jordan’s
special role. Underlining the necessity to respect as well
as the status quo for the Christian sites, which are under
increasing pressure, the EU reiterates the importance
of maintaining the peaceful coexistence of the three
monotheistic religions.
The EU condemns the indiscriminate rocket attacks
on Israel from Gaza and the territories of Lebanon
and Syria. We firmly condemn recent terror attacks
in Israel and the occupied Palestinian territory, as
well as all forms of terrorism. We deplore the tragic
loss of lives, including those of European citizens,
and we remain committed to Israel’s security and
the prevention of and fight against terrorism and
violent extremism. There must be an immediate
end to terror attacks, which should be condemned
by everyone, and to the practices that support them.

S/PV.9309 (Resumption 1)

In line with the EU’s commitment to implementing
resolution 2334 (2016) and recalling that settlements are
illegal under international law, constitute an obstacle
to peace and threaten to make a two-State solution
impossible, the EU reiterates its strong opposition
to Israel’s settlement policy and actions taken in this
context. We also condemn indiscriminate violence by
Israeli settlers against Palestinian civilians, including
the destruction of homes and other properties. Israel
must stop the expansion and legalization of settlements,
prevent settler violence and ensure that perpetrators are
held accountable. The EU will not recognize changes to
the 1967 lines unless agreed by the parties.
Military operations must be proportionate and
in line with international humanitarian law. The
humanitarian situation in the Gaza Strip requires
further easing of restrictions, while addressing Israel’s
legitimate security concerns.
The EU reaffirms its commitment to a just and
comprehensive resolution of the Israeli-Palestinian
conflict based on the two-State solution, with the State
of Israel and an independent, democratic, contiguous,
sovereign and viable State of Palestine living side by
side in peace and security and mutual recognition and
with Jerusalem serving as the future capital of both
States. It is vital to restore a political horizon towards a
two-State solution. Only a negotiated agreement offers
a chance of security and peace for all.
On 13 February, the High Representative and
Vice-President of the European Union, Mr. Josep
Borrell Fontelles, the Foreign Minister of the Kingdom
of Saudi Arabia, Prince Faisal bin Farhan A.F. Al
Furhan Al-Saud, and the Secretary-General of the
League of Arab States, Mr. Ahmed Aboul Gheit,
agreed to explore ways to revive and safeguard the
prospect of the two-State solution and achieve a just,
comprehensive and lasting peace. The EU reaffirmed
its proposal of an unprecedented package of economic,
political and security support in the context of a
final-status agreement, as endorsed in the European
Council conclusions of December 2013. In this effort,
we look forward to working closely with Arab and other
international partners.
The EU will continue to call upon the Palestinian
Authority to hold free, transparent and inclusive national
elections without further delay. It urges all Palestinian
factions to engage in good faith in the reconciliation
process, adhere to previous agreements, renounce

23-116395/33

S/PV.9309 (Resumption 1)

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

25/04/2023

violence and terrorism, recognize Israel’s right to exist
and commit to democratic principles, including the
rule of law. Democratic Palestinian institutions based
on respect for the rule of law and human rights are vital
for the Palestinian people, and, ultimately, for the twoState solution.

affected by the earthquakes. Some €950 million in
grants were pledged for Syria. Following the earthquake,
the European Union has allocated €100 million, out of
which €75 million are for humanitarian assistance. The
emergency response includes the distribution of food,
tents, blankets and medical assistance.

Palestinian civil society must be allowed by all
parties to carry out its important tasks freely, while
freedom of expression must be upheld. The EU is
proud of its continued support for civil society, which
contributes to peace efforts and confidence-building
between Israelis and Palestinians. We call on Israel
to refrain from any action that would prevent these
organizations from continuing their critical human
rights, humanitarian and development work in
the occupied Palestinian territory. Anti-terrorism
legislation should not be used to undermine civil
society and its valuable work and contributions to the
pursuit of accountability.

The European Union and its member States are the
largest donor and since 2011 have provided €27.4 billion
to meet the needs arising from the Syrian crisis, including
more than €4.8 billion at the sixth Brussels Conference
on Supporting the Future of Syria and the Region. Syria
will continue to be a high priority for us. We will host
a seventh Brussels Conference on 15 June, preceded
by a day of dialogue with civil society, in order to both
focus international pressure for a political solution to the
conflict and to generate pledges of humanitarian support
for Syria and in support of Syrian refugees and their host
communities in the region. We are looking forward to
welcoming the international community to the Brussels
Conference and call for everyone’s continued generosity
and support.

In preparation for the next Ad Hoc Liaison
Committee meeting in Brussels on 3 and 4 May, the EU
calls for implementation of the commitments made at
the previous meetings.
Until there is a just, fair, agreed and realistic solution
to the refugee issue in accordance with international
law, the United Nations Relief and Works Agency
for Palestine Refugees in the Near East (UNRWA)
remains crucial for providing the necessary protection
and essential services for Palestine refugees and for
supporting peace and stability in the region. The EU
will continue to support UNRWA in all its fields of
operation, including in East Jerusalem. The EU will
closely monitor developments and their implications on
the ground and remain ready to contribute further to the
protection and the viability of the two-State solution.
I would now like to say a few words about Syria. On
15 March 2023, we marked the twelfth anniversary of
the beginning of the peaceful protests throughout Syria
that were brutally repressed by the Al-Assad regime,
provoking a conflict that continues to this day. Adding
to this tragedy, on 6 February 2023, northern Syria
and Türkiye were struck by devastating earthquakes,
further exacerbating the suffering of the Syrian
people in the region. The President of the European
Commission, Mrs. Ursula von der Leyen, and the Prime
Minister of Sweden, Mr. Ulf Kristersson, co-hosted
an international donor conference on 20 March, in
Brussels, to support the people in Türkiye and Syria
6/33

The European Union remains persuaded that the only
path to sustainable peace for Syria is a political solution
in line with resolution 2254 (2015), with the full, equal
and meaningful participation of women and in line with
the 2012 Geneva communiqué (see S/2012/522, annex).
After more than a decade of conflict, it is essential that the
international community continue to pursue a sustainable
and comprehensive political solution in Syria. The EU
stands firm in its commitment to that goal, supporting
the continued efforts of Special Envoy Pedersen to
make progress on all aspects of resolution 2254 (2015),
including his steps-for-steps approach in furthering the
political process and a resumption of the work of the
Constitutional Committee. We reiterate again that no
normalization, lifting of sanctions or reconstruction will
be possible until the Syrian regime engages in a credible,
sustainable and inclusive political transition within the
framework of resolution 2254 (2015). In the light of
the recent earthquakes, the EU notes the humanitarian
exemptions in place for United Nations sanctions within
the framework of resolution 2664 (2022).
Accountability and justice for victims is essential
for a stable, peaceful Syria. All the parties responsible
for breaches of international humanitarian law and
violations and abuses of human rights, including sexual
and gender-based violence, must be held accountable. We
reiterate our call to have the situation in Syria referred
to the International Criminal Court. In the absence of
23-11639

25/04/2023

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

international justice proceedings, the prosecution of
war crimes and other serious crimes under national
jurisdictions, where possible — and which is now under
way in several EU member States — represents a crucial
contribution towards securing justice, as does the DutchCanadian initiative to hold Syria to account for breaching
the United Nations Convention against Torture. We will
continue to support efforts to gather evidence with a
view to possible future legal action, including by the
International, Impartial and Independent Mechanism for
Syria and the work of the Commission of Inquiry.
The EU commends Syria’s neighbours for hosting
large numbers of refugees for more than a decade. We
would like to remind everyone that the underlying
causes of the refugee and displacement crisis must be
addressed under resolution 2254 (2015). We continue to
warn against any further displacements in any part of
Syria, as well as against the potential exploitation of such
displacements for the purposes of social or demographic
engineering. Syrian refugees in those neighbouring
countries are still unable to go back home, since the
conditions for their safe, dignified and voluntary return,
in line with the parameters defined by the Office of the
United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees and
in accordance with international law, have not been
fulfilled. It is the responsibility of the Syrian regime to
remove those obstacles, and we will be in a position to
support returns only once those conditions are satisfied.
As we have reiterated numerous times, the Syrian
regime must fully cooperate with the Organization for the
Prohibition of Chemical Weapons and its investigations
of the use of chemical weapons in the conflict, including
the attack in Douma, as well as on the completion of the
dismantling of its chemical-weapon programme. The
EU, as a member of the International Partnership against
Impunity for the Use of Chemical Weapons, will continue
to work to ensure full accountability in that regard.
The European Union welcomed the unanimous
adoption in January of resolution 2672 (2023),
mandating the continuation of United Nations crossborder assistance to Syria. The uninterrupted delivery
of United Nations cross-border humanitarian assistance
remains vital for Syrians living in north-western Syria,
and the EU will continue to advocate for all the parties
to depoliticize the issue and allow the unimpeded and
continued delivery of humanitarian aid to all in need. The
EU noted the United Nations-brokered deal securing the
opening of additional border crossings in the aftermath
of the February earthquakes, and we call for continuing

S/PV.9309 (Resumption 1)

to use all possible measures to secure the delivery of aid
to all in need in Syria. Civilians must be protected at
all times. The European Union echoes the calls by the
Security Council for the implementation of a nationwide
ceasefire. Türkiye’s security concerns with regard to
northern Syria should be addressed through political and
diplomatic means, and with full respect for international
humanitarian law.
Early-recovery projects are important to supporting
resilience, community capacity-building and the selfreliance of the Syrian people and their future. EUfunded projects are intended and designed for those in
genuine need and to strengthen the sustainability and
cost-effectiveness of the humanitarian response. The EU
will not fund early-recovery efforts that could support
social or demographic engineering.
As we reiterated in the Interactive Dialogue on
Missing Persons in the Syrian Arab Republic held on
28 March with the Secretary-General and the High
Commissioner for Human Rights, the European Union
supports the establishment as soon as possible through
the General Assembly of an independent mechanism to
clarify the fate and whereabouts of missing persons in the
Syrian Arab Republic and to provide adequate support to
victims and to the families and survivors of the missing.
The objective of that endeavour is humanitarian, to
alleviate the pain and suffering of families whose have
been living in suspense during the entire time that their
loved ones have been missing. The EU welcomes the
ongoing work of the other actors on the issue, including
Syrian civil society, the International Commission on
Missing Persons, the International Committee of the
Red Cross and the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Human Rights. We emphasize the
need for enhanced cooperation and look forward to
engaging constructively in the upcoming discussions to
establish the new mechanism.
Finally, let me say again that the EU remains
committed to the unity, sovereignty and territorial
integrity of the Syrian State and will continue to call
on all the parties to the conflict, particularly the Syrian
regime and its allies, to advance a credible, sustainable
and inclusive political solution, based on the full and
comprehensive implementation of resolution 2254
(2015), as the only route to sustainable peace in Syria
and the way for Syria to once again become the united,
sovereign, prosperous and free country we all want to see.

23-116397/33

S/PV.9309 (Resumption 1)

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

The President (spoke in Russian): I now give the
floor to the representative of Viet Nam.
Mr. Dang (Viet Nam): Viet Nam is deeply
concerned about the escalating violence in the West
Bank and Israel, as the Special Coordinator highlighted
in his briefing. If that disturbing trend continues, this
year will be the deadliest since 2005. We therefore urge
all the parties to exercise the utmost restraint, maintain
the status quo of the holy sites in Jerusalem and refrain
from unilateral measures and provocations.
We are also greatly troubled by the intensified
settlement activities, as well as the seizures and
demolitions of Palestinian-owned buildings. We urge
the international community to address the ongoing
forced evictions and displacement of Palestinians
in East Jerusalem and to work to prevent a further
escalation of the conflict. In addition, it is important
to maintain access to essential services for Palestinian
refugees, as well as to ensure safety during religious
events and ceremonies.
The Palestinian people’s prolonged deprivation
of their inalienable rights, including the right to selfdetermination and independence, is unacceptable. And
the international community’s inaction on the issue is
regrettable. The consensus on a just, comprehensive and
sustainable solution to the conflict is unquestionable,
and we believe that multilateral, political and diplomatic
tools are available to that end. In that regard, we
acknowledge the recent meetings held between senior
officials from Israel, the Palestinian Authority, the
United States, Egypt and Jordan in Sharm El-Sheikh and
Aqaba. While those discussions have led to agreements
on curbing violence and improving economic conditions
for Palestinians, they need to directly tackle the critical
issues, such as settler violence and demolitions.
In the long term, there is no alternative to a twoState solution, with the establishment of a State of
Palestine that co-exists peacefully alongside the State
of Israel, with East Jerusalem as its capital and secure
and internationally recognized borders based on the
pre-1967 lines and negotiated settlements. Resolution
2334 (2016) outlines the essential requirements
and parameters for achieving that outcome. The
international community should enhance its support for
a resumption of meaningful dialogue between Israelis
and Palestinians. Viet Nam reiterates its call on all
parties to commit to the peace process, abstain from
violence and respect international law. We urge the
8/33

25/04/2023

relevant stakeholders, especially the Quartet, to develop
specific and urgent plans to advance the Middle East
peace process.
Lastly, concerning the other tensions in the
region, we commend the diplomatic efforts to contain
hostilities and prevent escalation along Lebanon’s
southern border. We call on all parties involved to
engage in constructive dialogue and cooperation to
promote peace and stability in the region.
The President (spoke in Russian): I now give the
floor to the representative of the Bolivarian Republic
of Venezuela.
Mr. Pérez Ayestarán (Bolivarian Republic of
Venezuela) (spoke in Spanish): First of all, we are
grateful for the convening of this quarterly open debate,
the briefing by Special Coordinator for the Middle East
Peace Process and the update provided by the Minister
for Foreign Affairs of the State of Palestine, to whom
we convey our respects.
My delegation also endorses the statement to be
made by the representative of the Republic of Azerbaijan
on behalf of the Movement of Non-Aligned Countries.
We meet once again in this Chamber to address
one of the most painful conflicts that has faced
humankind for almost 75 years, during which time the
suffering of an entire people has been prolonged and
during which they have not tired, and will never tire,
of demanding their rights, namely, their inalienable
right to exist, their inalienable right to return to their
homes and their inalienable right to live in a free,
independent and sovereign State of Palestine. Those
inalienable rights, however, are trampled upon day
after day by the occupying Power, which in the face of
the inaction of the international community, especially
that of the Security Council, continues, inter alia, to
pursue its policy of colonial occupation, apartheid
and the commission of war crimes and crimes against
humanity. That reality has resulted from the framework
of impunity that has been maintained over time by the
most faithful protector of the Israeli regime, which is
also a permanent member of this organ, whose mandate
is precisely the maintenance of international peace
and security.
In that context, it is worth recalling that only
yesterday we commemorated the International Day of
Multilateralism and Diplomacy for Peace, an initiative
that my country took the lead on and submitted to the
23-11639

25/04/2023

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

General Assembly in 2018, when resolution 73/127,
which established that important Day, could not be
adopted by consensus owing to the unexpected call for
a vote by the United States. However, the resolution was
adopted by an overwhelming majority, with only two
countries, Israel and the United States, voting against
it. That is no surprise at all, since the resolution was
totally incompatible with their positions, principles and
actions. Both countries have historically been enemies
of multilateralism and diplomacy, let alone peace.
In recent months, we had hoped that the recent
meetings held in Aqaba and Sharm El-Sheikh would
lay the groundwork for immediately resuming the
necessary political dialogue and credible, serious and
direct negotiations between the parties. However, Israel
chose once again to reject an opportunity to achieve
peace, as illustrated by the images that the whole world
recently saw, as the forces of the occupation tainted the
month of April, while disregarding that it coincides with
important dates for the Muslim, Jewish and Christian
faiths. The occupation forces have indiscriminately
attacked worshippers and the civilian population in
general at the entrances to the holy sites, in flagrant
violation of their sanctity and the status quo.
It is clear that the situation on the ground has in no
way improved since we last met (see S/PV.9246) and
that it continues to deteriorate daily, as confirmed in
the reports of the United Nations system, which have
informed us that the occupying Power has no intention of
ending the occupation; that its policies seek to take full
control of the occupied Palestinian territory, including
by attempting to alter its demographic character; that
2022 was one of the deadliest years for the Palestinian
people since 2005; and that the first quarter of 2023
saw four times the number of Palestinians killed by
Israeli forces than in 2022. The barbarity and brutality
of Israel’s forces of aggression continue unabated. The
human rights of the Palestinian people continue to be
systemically violated, with absolute impunity. The
Palestinian people continue to be discriminated against
in their own land. The arbitrary arrest and detention
of innocent Palestinian civilians and journalists also
continue, as do the criminalization and detention
of human rights defenders and the persecution of
Palestinian civil society organizations. The annexation
of Palestinian land, the construction of settlements,
the policy of eviction and the demolition of Palestinian
homes persist unabated. Incendiary speeches inciting
fanatical groups and encouraging the commission of,

S/PV.9309 (Resumption 1)

inter alia, hate crimes and attacks against religious
sites by Israeli settlers and security forces, as well as
instances of collective punishment, such as that in the
Gaza Strip, also persist.
The outlook is definitely not encouraging. And
although there are those who choose not to condemn
it publicly, the reality of the situation is based on
putative facts, constituting a flagrant, systematic and
grotesque violation of the principles enshrined in the
Charter of the United Nations and the most basic norms
of international law. Perhaps that is the best reason for
dismantling the order based on supposed rules that
the United States and its allies seek to impose — an
order based on alleged exceptionalism, unilateralism,
supremacy, double standards and the convenient
interpretation of their international obligations, all of
which have no place in the framework of the founding
Charter of the Organization, which is the sole set of
rules accepted by the entire international community in
governing its actions and relations.
From this Chamber, we call for ending the
prevailing cycle of impunity that for years has only
emboldened Israel to continue with its crimes; bringing
to justice those who are responsible for so much pain
and suffering; providing international protection for
the Palestinian people; guaranteeing respect for the
Charter and the full implementation of all Security
Council resolutions; and ending all unilateral measures
or actions that are likely to escalate tensions, remove
the political horizon and further prolong the conflict.
For its part, the Bolivarian Republic of
Venezuela will continue in its resolute commitment
to all international efforts aimed at facilitating the
achievement of a just, comprehensive and lasting peace
with regard to the Palestinian question, based on a twoState solution, with both States living side by side in
peace and security. It is time for the Palestinian people
to live — not coexist or merely survive — on their own
ancestral land, which is currently illegally and forcibly
occupied. It is time for the promise of peace, justice and
freedom that is enshrined in the Charter to be realized
for those heroic people, who demand their inalienable
right to self-determination and the realization of their
legitimate national aspirations in their free, independent
and sovereign State of Palestine, within the pre-1967
borders, with East Jerusalem as its capital and as a full
Member of the Organization.

23-116399/33

S/PV.9309 (Resumption 1)

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

Lastly, we would like to conclude our statement by
acknowledging the most recent developments in Middle
East dynamics, from the normalization of diplomatic
relations between the Islamic Republic of Iran and the
Kingdom of Saudi Arabia to those between the Syrian
Arab Republic and several countries of the region.
We hope that those positive developments will have
implications for the Israeli-Palestinian conflict, as we
are certain that they will result in the realization of the
aspirations for peace and justice of all the peoples of the
Middle East, including those of the noble Palestinian
people, as well as the withdrawal of Israel from all
Arab territories that continue to be illegally occupied,
including the Syrian Golan.
The President (spoke in Russian): I now give the
floor to the representative of Bangladesh.
Mr. Muhith (Bangladesh): I would like to
commend the presidency of the Russian Federation
for its leadership in the work of the Council in April
and for convening this very timely debate. We thank
Foreign Minister Lavrov for presiding over this
morning’s meeting (see S/PV.9309) and we welcomed
the presence of Palestinian Foreign Minister Al-Malki.
I also thank Special Coordinator Wennesland for his
comprehensive briefing.
Once again, we note with deep regret that the
Israeli occupation forces have continued their pattern
of killing and destruction in the occupied Palestinian
territory. Israel has consistently subverted international
laws and international justice through its illegal
policies and practices designed to establish its illegal
occupation of the Palestinian territory, including
East Jerusalem. The world’s most protracted denial
of collective and individual rights is still under way
in Palestine, including the longest isolation of an
independent territory — the Gaza Strip, which has
been under a blockade for nearly 16 years. Moreover,
since the start of 2023 Israel has increased its military
operations inside the occupied Palestinian territory.
We strongly condemn the heinous attack in Nablus
in February and the constant attacks, killings, ethnic
cleansing and forcible transfers of Palestinians from
their own land, most of them in broad daylight on the
Council’s watch. We deeply deplore the raid by Israeli
occupying forces inside the Al-Aqsa Mosque compound
on 4 April during the holy month of Ramadan, which
resulted in hundreds of Palestinian worshippers being
beaten, injured, humiliated or detained, while also
damaging the building of the Qibli Mosque. We are
10/33

25/04/2023

also very concerned about the continuing violations
of the historic and legal status quo at the holy sites
in Jerusalem.
The international community has regularly
condemned all of Israel’s illegal activities and has
urged Israel to respect international human rights
and humanitarian law and the decisions of the United
Nations. Unfortunately, those condemnations and the
calls of the United Nations have gone unheeded. Israel
has shown no respect for the decisions of the Security
Council and is completely ignoring the international
community’s legitimate call for the implementation of a
two-State solution. Against that backdrop, I would like
to highlight a number of points.
First, I would like to point to the presidential
statement of 20 February (S/PRST/2023/1), in which the
Council expressed deep concern and dismay at Israel’s
12 February announcement of its further construction
and expansion of settlements and legalization of
settlement outposts. We once again urge the Security
Council to take immediate and concrete steps, as the
price of continuing inaction will certainly be higher.
Secondly, we cannot overemphasize the need to
ensure accountability and justice for Israel’s atrocities
and human rights violations to end the culture of
entrenched impunity. In that regard, we welcomed
the General Assembly’s call in its resolution 77/247
for an advisory opinion from the International Court
of Justice on the legal status of Israel’s occupation of
the Palestinian territory and the consequences arising
from it.
Thirdly, we are concerned about the fact that
nearly 5,000 Palestinians, including 31 women and
170 children, are currently arbitrarily and illegally
imprisoned in Israeli jails and detention centres and
being subjected to the most inhumane treatment. We
echo Palestine’s call for the release of all Palestinians
held captive by the Israeli occupying forces.
Fourthly, until we see the establishment of an
independent, viable and sovereign Palestinian State,
with East Jerusalem as its capital, under a two-State
solution based on the pre-1967 borders, we urge the
international community to ensure protection for
Palestinians on their own land and provide the necessary
humanitarian assistance.
Finally, we urge the Security Council to implement
all of its resolutions, including resolution 2334 (2016).
23-11639

25/04/2023

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

I reiterate Bangladesh’s unwavering and steadfast
support for the legitimate aspirations of our Palestinian
brothers and sisters.
The President (spoke in Russian): I now give the
floor to the representative of South Africa.
Ms. Joyini (South Africa): We thank you,
Mr. President, for convening this quarterly debate, and
we are also grateful to Special Coordinator Wennesland
for his briefing.
South Africa aligns itself with the statement to be
delivered by the representative of Azerbaijan on behalf
of the Movement of Non-Aligned Countries.
South Africa is deeply concerned about the
continuing levels of violence and grave attacks directed
at Palestinians in recent months by Israeli settlers and
Israeli occupation forces in the occupied Palestinian
territory. The provocative rhetoric and brutality
directed at Palestinians incites a vicious cycle of
violence, resulting in intimidation and inflammatory
actions. That endemic cycle of violence must be stopped
and the drivers of the conflict addressed if peace is to
prevail. We are therefore perturbed by the fact that
those who are legally obligated to serve and protect are
the initiators inciting harm and stoking the flames of
provocation. As an occupying Power, Israel must abide
by its obligations to ensure the protection, security
and welfare of the Palestinian civilians living under its
occupation in terms of international human rights and
humanitarian law.
We are appalled by and have noted with grave
concern the Israeli occupation forces’ recent assault
on Palestinian worshippers earlier this month at the
Al-Aqsa Mosque during the holy month of Ramadan,
as well as the illegal restrictions on worshippers
praying at the Church of the Holy Sepulchre during
Easter. We condemn those violent and illegal acts by
the Israeli Government and wish to state that such
actions threaten the internationally agreed status quo in
relation to Jerusalem and its sacred sites. The ubiquity
of the attacks and the Israeli military’s participation in
the violence have deepened the atmosphere of fear and
coercion. South Africa strongly condemns every act of
violence and violation of religious freedom.
The actions we have witnessed in the occupied
Palestinian territory since the beginning of the year
do not make for an environment that is conducive to
peace. Instead, they detract from the possibility of a

S/PV.9309 (Resumption 1)

just settlement based on a two-State solution. Israel’s
decision to continue with its settlement agenda in the
West Bank is of grave concern. Settlements are illegal
under international law and the Security Council must
address Israel’s continued disregard for international
law, the Charter of the United Nations and the Council’s
own resolutions.
South Africa maintains that the selective application
of international law undermines the effectiveness of
collective responses to global security threats. As the
organ entrusted with the maintenance of international
peace, the Security Council must strengthen and
uphold its responsibility to ensure accountability when
international law has been violated. Israel must be held
accountable for the structural violence and suffering
that its occupation inflicts on Palestinians, and it
continues to be of pivotal importance to ensure that
the Council’s decisions and resolutions are enforced.
We are therefore encouraged by the decision of the
General Assembly in its resolution 77/247 to request
an advisory opinion from the International Court of
Justice on Israeli practices affecting the human rights
of the Palestinian people in the occupied Palestinian
territory, including East Jerusalem.
As the international community, we have a
responsibility to work tirelessly to support Palestine
and to call for an immediate and unconditional end
to Israel’s illegal occupation. South Africa remains
committed to that just course and to promoting efforts
that will result in the establishment of the two-State
solution, whereby Palestinians and Israelis can live side
by side in peace.
The President (spoke in Russian): I now give the
floor to the representative of Peru.
Mr. Ugarelli (Peru) (spoke in Spanish): Increasing
tensions, systematic violence and the deteriorating
situation in East Jerusalem and several West Bank cities
continue to be of serious concern to the international
community. The all-too-frequent escalations of
hostilities, demolitions, forced evictions and settlement
expansions and the deteriorating plight of Palestinian
refugees persist. As noted, acts of violence, unlawful
restrictions and the widespread, indiscriminate and
unnecessary use of force at the Esplanade of the
Mosques in East Jerusalem have occurred in recent
weeks — precisely during the holy month of Ramadan,
during which a large number of Muslim worshippers
congregate at the mosques for prayer — with Israeli

23-1163911/33

S/PV.9309 (Resumption 1)

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

police violently removing Muslim worshippers. The
firing of rockets into Israel in response must also be
firmly denounced, as it only fuels violence.
Peru condemns all acts of violence against
civilians, including acts of terrorism, regardless of
their origin. In such an unpredictable scenario in which
there is no end to provocations, decisive efforts must
be made to defuse the current situation and above all
to revive the peace process through direct negotiations
between Israel and Palestine, with the participation of
the Quartet and international mediators. We deplore
all acts that violate Security Council resolutions and
the historical and legal status quo of Jerusalem and its
holy sites. The Government of Peru joins the call of
the international community for full respect for the
historical and legal status quo of the Christian and
Muslim holy sites in Jerusalem. It is imperative that the
powers and prerogatives of custodianship and access
over the holy sites conferred by international law on the
Kingdom of Jordan be fully respected. Jerusalem is the
centre of spiritual convergence of the three monotheistic
religions, and its status as a universal meeting point of
religious freedom and for the followers of various faiths
must be respected. Holy sites must not be the scene of
violence or the indiscriminate and illegitimate use of
force by either side.
In 1947, Peru was a member and Vice-Chair of
the Special Committee on Palestine, which proposed
the creation of two States — Palestine and Israel.
Consistent with that historical position, Peru supports
the full implementation of resolution 2334 (2016),
which calls for a halt to all settlement activity and the
establishment of elements for a just and lasting solution
so that the two States can live side by side, within
secure and internationally recognized borders, on the
basis of the 1967 boundaries and in accordance with
the relevant United Nations resolutions. To that end,
we reiterate that it is essential to support the mediation
efforts of the Special Coordinator for the Middle East
Peace Process, Tor Wennesland, and to endorse a
realistic and comprehensive approach to the Middle
East peace process. The main objective of that process
should be to persuade the parties to relax their positions
and sit at the negotiating table, where they can address
their differences in a transparent manner and begin to
seek common ground in a spirit of peace, in accordance
with the principles of the Charter of the United Nations
and international law.
12/33

25/04/2023

The President (spoke in Russian): I now give the
floor to the representative of Indonesia.
Mr. Nasir (Indonesia): Indonesia thanks the
Russian Federation for convening today’s open debate.
We also thank the Special Coordinator for the Middle
East Peace Process for his briefing.
Today we live with the fact that a large number of
Palestinian people are living in catastrophic conditions.
The Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian
Affairs reported that 2.1 million Palestinians across the
occupied Palestinian territory are in need of significant
humanitarian assistance. More than 100 Palestinians
have been killed by the occupying forces since January.
Many of them are children. Sadly, the year 2023 might
be an even bloodier one than 2022.
In the Chamber, we speak loudly of respecting the
principles of human rights, equal rights, freedom of
worship and international law. Yet we often stand idle
while the occupying Power implements apartheid-like
policies, brutally beats worshippers during Ramadan
prayers or violates various norms of international law
and Security Council resolutions. Every day, innocent
Palestinians pay the price for the inaction of the
international community. What message are we sending
to innocent Palestinian women and children? The
international community’s inaction risks being seen by
innocent women and children in Palestine as a double
standard when it comes to their lives. Even worse, if we
continue to fail to act, we may inadvertently create a
perpetual cycle of violence. Innocent children exposed
to continuous violence and injustice may grow up to
become vindictive. We therefore need to strengthen
our commitment to achieving peace in the occupied
Palestinian territory. In that context, allow me to
emphasize the following points.
First, we need to take concrete steps to push for
a de-escalation of violence and ease the suffering of
Palestinians. Unilateral and unlawful measures must
be halted. The Security Council must act when Israel
chooses to ignore its obligations under international law.
We need to ensure that there is no impunity, including
through appropriate accountability mechanisms.
Secondly, we must remain committed to the twoState solution and take concrete steps to that end. The
Security Council cannot remain indifferent when there
is overwhelming international support for the twoState solution. We therefore commend the efforts to
establish a direct dialogue among the relevant parties
23-11639

25/04/2023

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

S/PV.9309 (Resumption 1)

and encourage tangible outcomes. The international
community also needs to push harder for a credible
peace process, including a multilateral process.

international law, let alone oppression, displacement,
detentions, illegal confiscation of their land and most
notably assassinations.

Thirdly, we must not forget the plight of the nearly
6 million Palestinians refugees located in various
camps. It is unacceptable that, 75 years after the Nakba,
the number of people in refugee camps continues to
increase, while Israel continues to expand settlements,
undertake demolitions and confiscations and forcibly
remove Palestinian civilians from their properties.

My country’s delegation is participating in this
meeting today based on the following points.

In the absence of a solution to return the Palestinians
to their rightful home, we must continue to support the
work of the United Nations Relief and Works Agency
for Palestine Refugees in the Near East (UNRWA) and
secure its sustainable and predictable funding. For many
refugees, UNRWA is the provider of last resort. While
we have the ambition to work towards implementing
a New Agenda for Peace, we do not yet have the same
ambition to end one of the longest-standing conflicts in
the world and in the Middle East. In our view, the New
Agenda for Peace will be burdened by our continuing
inability to address the Palestinian question. For its
part, Indonesia remains committed to ensuring just and
lasting peace between Israel and Palestine, based on a
two-State solution.
The President (spoke in Russian): I now give the
floor to the representative of Iraq.
Mr. Fatah (Iraq) (spoke in Arabic): At the outset,
I would like to congratulate the Russian Federation on
its presidency of the Security Council for this month. I
welcome Foreign Minister Sergey Lavrov and wish the
Russian delegation every success in its work for the rest
of April. We value the briefing by Mr. Tor Wennesland,
Special Coordinator for the Middle East Peace Process,
and we welcome the participation in today’s meeting of
the Minister of State of the United Arab Emirates and
the Foreign Minister of the State of Palestine.
My delegation aligns itself with the statements
made by the Group of Arab States and the Movement
of Non-Aligned Countries and would like to make this
statement in its national capacity.
We are meeting here today once again after
numerous meetings to discuss the cause of a people who
legitimately have sought for decades to enjoy their basic
rights, build their State and live in peace. However,
they have been systematically subjected to flagrant
violations of all relevant conventions, resolutions and

First, Iraq is committed to the Charter of the United
Nations and all international organizations as we work
together through various forums and mechanisms to
support, promote and protect humankind, civilization
and the environment throughout the world.
Secondly, we stress the importance of respecting
the status quo of the holy sites in Jerusalem under the
custodianship of the Hashemite Kingdom of Jordan and
the need to respect freedom of worship and access to
the Al-Aqsa Mosque.
Thirdly, we believe in and are committed to the
right of the Palestinian people to self-determination
and to build their contiguous, independent State with
Jerusalem as its capital.
The objective is not only to deliver a statement
of condemnation and express our rejection of the
Israeli violations and crimes against the unarmed
Palestinians, but also to reiterate our calls to the
Security Council to uphold its responsibilities and
implement its resolutions, including resolution 2334
(2016), which calls on the Israeli occupying Power
to end all its settlement activities that undermine
the two-State solution. The occupying Power also
must immediately cease all unilateral, illegitimate,
provocative and escalating measures, as well as the
unabated violations of the occupying Power aimed at
building and expanding its illegitimate settlements.
Moreover, it murders innocent people; repeatedly
invades Palestinian towns and villages; confiscates
territories and property; demolishes Palestinian homes
and installations; displaces inhabitants, including in
East Jerusalem; and flagrantly violates, via the Israeli
occupation army and extremist settlers, the Al-Aqsa
Mosque/Al-Haram Al-Sharif. Those are the violations
that the international community is failing to stop and
are causing the ongoing conflict in the Middle East.
All those who believe in the need to stop the bloodshed
seek peaceful and lasting solutions as they uphold the
right of people to live in dignity.
In conclusion, the Iraqi people and Government
reject and strongly condemn the storming of the
courtyard of the Al-Aqsa Mosque/Al-Quds Al-Sharif,

23-1163913/33

S/PV.9309 (Resumption 1)

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

25/04/2023

the heart of occupied Palestine, by the Israeli occupation
forces. That was accompanied by barbaric aggression
committed against unarmed worshippers while they
prayed during the month of Ramadan. We reiterate the
need to uphold the legal and historical status quo of the
Al-Aqsa Mosque and not manipulate current legal and
historical realities while respecting the religious status
of the Al-Aqsa Mosque as a place for worship.

the escalation and the repercussions thereof. We call
upon the United Nations to condemn and put an end to
those violations and ensure that they are not repeated.
Moreover, we call for Israel, the occupying Power, to be
compelled to implement the resolutions of international
legitimacy related to the Palestinian question and to
enable the Palestinian people to enjoy their legitimate
and inalienable national rights.

The President (spoke in Russian): I now give the
floor to the representative of the Syrian Arab Republic.

It has become clear that the recurrent political
crises within Israel are compelling its failed leaders to
export their internal crisis by launching attacks against
the defenceless Palestinian people and by committing
acts of aggression against Syria and its people, as
well as the people of southern Lebanon. That attests
to Israel’s adoption of the law of force and the law of
jungle, which have been the hallmark of its behaviour
since 1948.

Mr. Sabbagh (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke
in Arabic): The Minister for Foreign Affairs and
Expatriates of the Syrian Arab Republic entrusted
me with delivering this statement on his behalf, as he
was unable to attend this important meeting owing to
the difficulty of travel resulting from the unilateral
coercive measures imposed on Syria.
At the outset, I would like to thank Mr. Sergey
Lavrov, Minister for Foreign Affairs of the Russian
Federation, and his delegation for convening this
important meeting on the situation in the Middle East.
The Russian Federation has always stood in solidarity
with peoples suffering from colonization and injustice.
The delegation of the Syrian Arab Republic
aligns itself with the statement delivered by the
representative of Azerbaijan on behalf of the Movement
of Non-Aligned Countries.
A few days ago, the holy month of Ramadan came
to an end. That holy month witnesses every year a new
criminal escalation on the part of Israel, as well as
aggressive practices committed against the Palestinian
people, which put all humankind to shame.
Unfortunately, the Security Council is a witness
to those crimes against humanity and does not lift a
finger to stop them. Perhaps it is not allowed to do so,
given the umbrella of immunity and unlimited support
for Israel provided by some permanent members of the
Security Council, which are known by all.
The Syrian Arab Republic condemns in the
strongest terms the attacks of the Israeli occupation
forces against worshippers in the Al-Aqsa Mosque and
the desecration by Israel of the Noble Sanctuary. We
deplore the continued international silence regarding
the crimes of the Israeli occupation that aim to ignite
the region and lead it to higher levels of tension and
instability. Syria holds the Israeli occupying authorities
and their supporting countries fully responsible for
14/33

It is unfortunate that the question of Palestine
and its people who have been suffering from the most
heinous crimes on a daily basis for decades has become
a routine matter without any tangible effort undertaken
to compel the occupying Power to stop its multifaceted
aggression and to hold it accountable for its actions.
It is even more unfortunate that some treat the killer
and the victim equally. They treat the occupying Power
and the defenceless people who are subject to that
occupation equally, the defenceless people who are
deprived of their most basic rights, such as the right to
live. Both sides are then required to exercise maximum
restraint. Israel, the occupying Power, was and still is
the only reason for the emergence and the continuation
of the plight and tragedy of the Palestinian people, as
it has expelled Palestinians from their homes through
killings, massacres, intimidation, forced displacement,
the confiscation of property and home demolitions and
turned them into refugees for decades.
The responsibility for the Palestinian refugees is an
international political, legal and moral responsibility
before it is a mere humanitarian responsibility. The
Syrian Arab Republic stresses that the continuation
of the efforts of the United Nations Relief and Works
Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East
(UNRWA) and its support to Palestinian refugees is
indispensable, especially in the light of the continued
Israeli occupation of the Palestinian territories. We
stress the importance of UNRWA continuing to fulfil
its mandate and adequately and sustainably securing
the necessary funding for its budget from the United
Nations and donor countries.
23-11639

25/04/2023

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

The crimes perpetrated by the Israeli occupation
in the Palestinian territories are inseparable from the
practices of that entity in the occupied Syrian Arab
Golan since 1967, which is evident in the continuation
by Israel, the occupying Power, of aggressive policies
against the Syrian people of the Golan and the most
heinous violations of international law and international
humanitarian law, including the arrest, killing and
displacement of Syrians, in the Syrian Golan for
more than five decades. Moreover, that is reflected in
Israel’s systematic expansionist settlement policy in
the occupied Golan, which is aimed at perpetuating
the occupation and increasing the number of settlers,
thereby imposing demographic change and stealing the
natural resources, confiscating lands and establishing
projects on those lands that have catastrophic effects on
the lives of Syrians in the Golan.
In addition, the Israeli occupation forces use the
occupied Syrian Golan as a platform to launch repeated
attacks on the sovereignty of Syrian land by bombing
and carrying out assassinations of innocent civilians and
targeting Syrian infrastructure. The Israeli occupation
forces launched consecutive attacks in March and
April, targeting areas in and around Damascus and
Homs and the surrounding countryside, which resulted
in the martyrdom of innocent civilians, injuries and
material damage.
On 22 March, Israel once again targeted Aleppo
International Airport, which rendered it inoperable,
thereby interrupting United Nations air transport
services and the delivery of humanitarian aid to those
affected by the earthquake that hit Syria on 6 February,
as that airport was a gateway for the delivery of
humanitarian aid. The fact that Israel launched that
terrorist aggression in conjunction with the visits of
United Nations officials to Syria to follow up efforts to
alleviate the country’s difficult humanitarian conditions
after years of war and the devastating earthquake is not
strange for a terrorist entity whose suspicious origin
coincided with the assassinations of United Nations
officials and peace mediators.
The Syrian Arab Republic once again warns Israel
and its sponsors of the dangers of those aggressive
policies, which push the region towards broad escalation
and a new phase of insecurity and instability. We also
call on the Security Council to abandon its silence and
to urgently shoulder its responsibilities to end the Israeli
occupation of Arab territories and to implement relevant
United Nations resolutions, especially resolutions 242

S/PV.9309 (Resumption 1)

(1967) and 338 (1973), as well as resolution 497 (1981),
which considers Israel’s decision to annex the Golan
Heights null and void and with no legal effect.
Before concluding, I would like to point out that the
European Union delegation usually uses the meeting on
the situation in the Middle East to raise issues related
to the situation in Syria that are totally unrelated to
the topic of the meeting, in an open attempt to divert
attention from discussing the crimes committed by
Israel in the region. That also shows that delegation’s
adherence to unrealistic policies that have been
overtaken by developments and events, at a time when
Syria needs concerted international efforts to help it
overcome the negative repercussions resulting from
the erroneous policies pursued by the countries of the
European Union for more than 10 years, especially by
mercilessly imposing, along with the United States of
America, unilateral, immoral and inhumane sanctions
on the Syrian people.
The President (spoke in Russian): I now give the
floor to Mr. Niang.
Mr. Niang: The Committee on the Exercise of the
Inalienable Rights of the Palestinian People welcomes
His Excellency Mr. Sergey Lavrov, Russian Federation
Foreign Minister, and congratulates the Russian
Federation on its able presidency of the Security Council
this month. I also thank the Special Coordinator for the
Middle East Peace Process, Mr. Tor Wennesland, for
his briefing and tireless efforts.
As mandated by the General Assembly, on 15 May
the Committee will commemorate the seventy-fifth
anniversary of the Nakba, which will serve as a reminder
of the historical injustice suffered by the Palestinian
people and the outstanding debt of the international
community towards them and the more than 5.8 million
refugees who are registered with the United Nations
Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in
the Near East (UNRWA). We are also reminded of the
ongoing Israeli occupation, for nearly 56 years with no
end in sight, as reflected in the worrisome debates in
Israel about the possibility of further annexation and
colonization of occupied Palestinian territory.
The Committee expresses its concern about Israel’s
approval, on 21 March, of an amendment to the 2005
disengagement law, which paves the way for Israel to
re-establish the former settlement of Homesh in the
West Bank. The Committee reiterates its calls for a
complete and immediate halt to all settlement activities

23-1163915/33

S/PV.9309 (Resumption 1)

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

and reminds Israel that all settlements are illegal,
regardless of their status under Israeli law, and that
those actions further violate resolution 2334 (2016) and
severely undermine efforts to find a just solution to
the conflict.
This year Ramadan coincided with Passover and
Easter, which should have led to peaceful reflection
and celebration. Unfortunately, tensions rose when
Israeli forces entered the Al-Aqsa Mosque’s Al-Qibli
prayer hall, in East Jerusalem, in order to demonstrate
their power during those holy days. Stun grenades,
batons, rifles and rubber-coated metal bullets were
used by Israeli security forces and armed civilians in
order to dislodge Palestinian worshippers, leading to
the injuring of 44 Palestinian and two Israeli police
officers, in addition to material damage to the holy site.
About 440 Palestinians were arrested and later
released, but banned from the Al-Aqsa for the rest of
Ramadan. On 5 April, the Committee’s Bureau issued a
statement denouncing the raid, which was seen around
the world and drew global condemnation. In addition, as
is customary, Israel imposed restrictions on attendance
on Orthodox Easter on 16 April and used excessive
force against Christian worshippers, citing security
concerns. The Committee condemns the violence
inside the Al-Qibli prayer hall and reminds Israel that
the historic status quo of the holy sites must be upheld,
while respecting the special role of the Hashemite
Kingdom of Jordan and the Waqf.
The Committee strongly condemns the Israeli
Finance Minister’s outrageous statements denying
the existence of the Palestinian people and calling
for wiping out Huwwara, a Palestinian village in the
occupied West Bank, after extremist settlers went
on a rampage — killing one Palestinian and causing
widespread destruction to Palestinian property,
including dozens of homes — in the wake of the
killing of two Israelis. The Committee urges the Israeli
authorities to respect international law, including the
Fourth Geneva Convention and its obligations as the
occupying Power with regard to the protection of the
civilian population.
We call on political, religious and community
leaders on all sides to reject inflammatory rhetoric and
provocative actions and to refrain from steps that could
escalate tensions. The indiscriminate firing of rockets
towards the civilian population is also unacceptable
and must cease. We welcome the United Nations
16/33

25/04/2023

Special Coordinator’s mediation efforts to de-escalate
the situation and urge all parties to work towards
reducing tensions.
While the international community is preparing
to commemorate the Nakba of 1948, Israel continues
to entrench its occupation of Palestinian territory,
including East Jerusalem, with its relentless
establishment of illegal outposts, the advancement of
settlements, seizures and the demolition of hundreds
of structures, including donor-funded structures, and
the displacement of 388 people, including 89 women
and 197 children. In open defiance of the international
community and appeals from its own friends, Israel
advanced plans for over 7,200 settlement housing
units, with approximately 4,000 settlements deep in the
occupied West Bank. Israel’s actions as the occupying
Power in the occupied West Bank, including East
Jerusalem, point to what many have described as an
ongoing Nakba of dispossession and displacement and
denial of the rights of the Palestinian people. We, the
international community, must not wait any further. In
that regard, the Committee welcomes the resolutions on
the question of Palestine adopted on 4 April 2023 at
the 52nd session of the Human Rights Council — one
on Israeli settlements and another on the right of the
Palestinian people to self- determination — and calls
for their implementation.
The Committee praises the participants at the highlevel meetings in Aqaba and hoped that those meetings
would advance security, stability and peace, as outlined
in the joint communiqué, and we expect tangible and
verifiable actions to address the crisis. The Committee
reiterates the need for Palestinian unity based on the
Algiers declaration to advance national aspirations
and facilitate engagement in resolving the question
of Palestine.
On behalf of the Committee, I want to make a
strong appeal to the Security Council to demonstrate
leadership by taking action to protect the Palestinian
people. I call on the Council to protect the Palestinian
people with measures to ensure their human security in
the face of constant acts of aggression and human rights
violations by the occupying Power. In that context,
the Committee also emphasizes its previous call to
all States Members of the United Nations to support
sustainable funding for the United Nations Relief and
Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East,
which is crucial for the well-being and the livelihoods
of Palestine refugees and overall regional stability.
23-11639

25/04/2023

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

The Committee believes that a just and lasting
peace will be achieved only with the end of Israel’s
occupation, the realization of the inalienable rights of the
Palestinian people, including the Palestine refugees, and
the achievement of the two-State solution in accordance
with international law and past agreements, resulting
in the independence of the State of Palestine with East
Jerusalem as its capital.
The President (spoke in Russian): I now give the
floor to Mr. Abdulaziz.
Mr. Abdulaziz (spoke in Arabic): It is a pleasure for
me to begin my statement by congratulating the Russian
Federation on its exceptional presidency of the Security
Council. I would like to welcome Mr. Sergey Lavrov,
Minister for Foreign Affairs of the Russian Federation,
who is presiding over this meeting; Mr. Riad Al-Malki,
Minister for Foreign Affairs of the State of Palestine;
and Mr. Khalifa Shaheen Al Marar, Minister of State at
the Ministry for Foreign Affairs and Cooperation of the
United Arab Emirates. I also would like to thank Mr. Tor
Wennesland, Special Coordinator for the Middle East
Peace Process, for his briefing today.
We align ourselves with the statement made by the
Chargée d’affaires of the Lebanese Republic on behalf of
the Group of Arab States.
The Middle East has seen successive and dangerous
developments recently, in particular ongoing violations
by the new Israeli extremist Government of all the
inalienable rights of the occupied Palestinian people in
the State of Palestine. The Government also supports
the dangerous violations by Israeli settlers in the
context of its abhorrent policies that run counter to all
its commitments under international law, international
humanitarian law and international human rights
law, foremost of which is resolution 2334 (2016).
The most serious acts committed by Israel, the
occupying Power, during the period under review were
the repeated ferocious attacks on the Al-Aqsa Mosque in
Al-Quds Al-Sharif, capital of the Palestinian State. The
most repugnant aspect of them were storming the Mosque
and attacking worshippers, which prevented other
worshipers from gaining access to the Mosque. Israel
supported the settlers who desecrated the Mosque and
its courtyards, and also Christian holy sites in Jerusalem
and the occupied Palestinian territories, in flagrant
violation of the international responsibility mandated
to the Hashemite Kingdom of Jordan, the Custodian of
the Holy Sites, to protect them in Al-Quds Al-Sharif.

S/PV.9309 (Resumption 1)

The most dangerous aspect of those violations is
that they were led by prominent members of the Israeli
Government during the holy month of Ramadan and
concurrent with Christian celebrations, including Easter
Sunday, Great and Holy Saturday, Good Friday and
others. That was a dangerous provocation to the feelings
of Muslims, Christians and other religions, Arabs and
non-Arabs throughout the world. That demonstrates
extremist directives of that Government based on
challenging the entire international community and
disrespect to any holy places, be it Muslim, Christian
or even to Jewish values. That has led to massive
demonstrations in Israel recently to protest laws that
the Government wants to impose to ensure impunity for
some leaders in the State that claims, as we heard in the
statement made by its representative today, to respect
democracy and human rights, which is a barefaced lie.
Undoubtedly, the Security Council does not
oppose those escalating dangerous violations seriously
undermining the credibility of the multilateral
international system. That is particularly true because
Israel is exploiting the world’s preoccupation with
addressing the crisis in Ukraine and the resulting
sharp polarization in the Security Council. Certain
major Powers are also preoccupied with that crisis
and were considered by the Middle East countries fair
negotiators in the peace process and peace seekers
within the Middle East Quartet. That warns of a new
phase of increasing violence and the risk of triggering
a third Palestinian intifada, with significant political,
security and humanitarian implications not only for the
peoples of Palestine and Israel, but also for the peoples
of the entire Middle East. That situation would demand
a more decisive action from the Council
Accordingly, the League of Arab States calls for
the creation of an implementation mechanism to protect
the Palestinian people from the occupation forces
and settlers. The Security Council must not stand
idle until the recurrence of Al-Haram Al-Ibrahimi
massacre of 1994, which led the Security Council to
adopt resolution 904 (1994), which sought to set up a
protection mechanism for the Palestinian people in the
Al-Khalil area. It is clear that the Council is responsible
for protecting the Palestinian people, regardless of
Israeli Governments or different international stances.
The League of Arab States therefore associates
itself with the Secretary-General in his call to expand
current mechanisms to protect the Palestinian people
from the oppression of the Israeli occupation. We see

23-1163917/33

S/PV.9309 (Resumption 1)

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

that it is important for the Secretary-General to issue
a new urgent report similar to the report he issued in
2018 (A/73/84). We urge him to issue specific proposals
on the best ways to protect the Palestinian people
living under occupation from the violations of their
inalienable rights by the Government and settlers. Such
an effort by the Council and the Secretary-General
on that issue is particularly important because the
extremist Israeli Government is now seeking to set up
special militias that would fall exclusively under the
purview of the Minister of the Interior, who stormed the
Al-Aqsa Mosque and has supported and participated in
all the violations against the Palestinian people since
the establishment of that Government. That could
exacerbate the situation at any time and undermine the
credibility of the Security Council.
Given the deteriorating situation since the beginning
of the year, the Ministerial Council of the League of Arab
States, whose role it is to oppose illegitimate policies
and measures taken in the occupied city of Jerusalem,
on 5 January adopted a strong statement that addressed
the impact of escalating violations perpetrated by
the extremist Israeli Government since its formation.
The League of Arab States and its Secretary-General
continue to warn against the consequences of those
violations, which are being carried out with impunity
and no accountability.
We stress that we consider it insufficient that the
Security Council has met seven times since the beginning
of January to discuss those violations and has expressed
its regret in press or presidential statements that include
no effective measures. The League believes that the
Security Council should ensure effective international
protection for the Palestinian people by adopting a
clear resolution and subjecting those responsible for the
blatant violations to international justice.
At the same time, the international community has
a greater responsibility to convince the international
Powers that have lost interest in the Middle East and
are preoccupied with issues in other eastern areas to
refrain from obstructing the possibility of a peaceful
settlement in our region. They should work seriously
on a clear political process for achieving a settlement
through the Quartet and at the ministerial level, with a
view to convening the international conference that the
Palestinian President has been asking for since 2018.
The Palestinian and Israeli sides need to start direct
negotiations on implementing a two-State solution and
the land for peace initiative. We stress that more than
18/33

25/04/2023

20 years later, the Arab Peace Initiative, introduced by
Saudi Arabia and adopted at the Arab Summit is still
a realistic and practical proposal, one that cannot be
replaced by the Abraham Accords or any others, for
establishing just and comprehensive peace in the Middle
East, resolving the Palestinian question and ensuring
the creation of an independent Palestinian State, with
East Jerusalem as its capital, along the borders of 4 June
1967. The League of Arab States emphasizes the need
to make every effort in collaboration with international
actors to implement the Arab Peace Initiative as soon
as possible.
In addition to the Palestinian question, which has
been and will remain the Arabs’ central issue, there
have been positive recent developments in the Middle
East that we believe the Security Council will support
and welcome, including the Arab world’s increased
engagement in resolving the Syrian issue in coordination
with the United Nations and Syria. Intense efforts are also
being made, with Arab support, to ensure the formation of
a new Lebanese Government. The first phase of prisoner
exchanges in Yemen and the start of political discussions
are under way to achieve the political consensus needed
for the desired settlement to be reached. There is also
increased Arab support for the holding of free, fair and
comprehensive elections in Libya by the end of the year.
Many other developments are taking place.
The bloody clashes in our brother nation of the
Sudan are having an impact on the Sudanese people and
on its neighbours on both the political and humanitarian
fronts. However, the League of Arab States is upholding
its regional responsibilities in the Sudan in cooperation
with the African Union, the Intergovernmental Authority
on Development, the United Nations, the European
Union and other international Powers inside and outside
the Security Council, with the aim of reaching an
immediate settlement to the internal Sudanese conflict
with the support of the Sudanese Government and the
country’s leaders. The Secretary-General of the League
of Arab States has been at the forefront of those seeking
to achieve an immediate ceasefire and has appealed twice
to the two parties with a view to initiating a Sudanese
dialogue to resolve the conflict. We hope to have support
from the Council for all the efforts being made regionally
and internationally to reach a political settlement.
At the same time, the League of Arab States will
continue to support the Secretary-General’s proposed
Our Common Agenda (A/75/982). We look forward
to establishing it in order to restore credibility to the
23-11639

25/04/2023

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

international multilateral system and especially the
Security Council. We are convinced that all the great
Powers, along with all the States Members of the United
Nations, will rise above the acute polarization that has
divided them, and that has had a negative effect on the
Security Council’s performance in the maintenance of
international peace and security, so that we can fulfil our
joint interests. We hope that everybody will cooperate to
achieve that goal.
In conclusion, the League of Arab States believes
that the Arab summit to be convened in Saudi Arabia
next month will adopt more decisions promoting
regional Arab relations, with a view to addressing all
the issues pertinent to the Arab region with the support
of the Security Council and other international actors.
The aim is to achieve peace, security and stability in
our region.
The President (spoke in Russian): I now give the
floor to the representative of Mauritania.
Mr. Mohamed Laghdaf (Mauritania): Mauritania
aligns itself with the statement delivered by the
representative of Lebanon, on behalf of the Group of
Arab States (see S/PV.3909), and the statement to be
delivered by the representative of Azerbaijan, on behalf
of the Movement of Non-Aligned Countries. I will be
delivering this statement on behalf of the member States
of the Organization of Islamic Cooperation (OIC) in my
capacity as Chair of the OIC Group.
In recent weeks we have witnessed a dangerous
escalation in the crimes and violations perpetrated by
the Israeli occupation forces and extremist settlers in
the occupied Palestinian territory, particularly in the
cities of Jerusalem, Nablus, Jenin and Jericho, which
have resulted in the deaths of 96 Palestinians, including
children, in addition to hundreds of citizens who have
been injured or arrested since the beginning of the year.
Tensions are high and fear is widespread, as Israel’s
provocations and incitements against the Palestinian
people and their heritage and presence in their homeland
have also escalated, along with violence on the part of
the army and settler militias. The OIC is particularly
concerned about the Israeli occupation forces’ repeated
assaults and the incursions by extremist Jewish settlers
into the blessed Al-Aqsa Mosque, including during the
holy month of Ramadan, as well as the brutal attacks
on worshippers and people in its courtyard, including
women and children, while they were performing
their prayers and rituals. The Israeli occupation forces

S/PV.9309 (Resumption 1)

fired stun grenades and tear gas inside the Mosque,
damaging windows and doors and wounding and
arresting hundreds of worshippers.
In the same vein, Israel’s illegal, oppressive and
destructive policies aimed at further entrenching and
perpetuating the longest belligerent occupation in
modern history, including through violent military
aggression, the construction of colonial settlements,
ethnic cleansing, blockades, displacement and the
confiscation of Palestinian land, have continued
relentlessly, in flagrant violation of international law
and the relevant resolutions of the United Nations.
In that regard, the OIC emphasizes that a lack of
accountability has emboldened Israel to persist with
those illegal policies, which are causing the Palestinian
people enormous suffering and undermining the pillars
on which a just and lasting peace can be realized. Israel’s
continued flagrant breaches are further deepening the
current political impasse and making the achievement
of a two-State solution, on which there has long been
an international consensus, less probable by the day.
We therefore reiterate that the Security Council and
all other key actors in the international arena should
fulfil their responsibility for ensuring accountability,
upholding the rule of international law and ending
those illegal acts. Urgent action is needed to preserve
the possibility of a two-State solution and salvage the
prospects for peace. A dereliction of duty will have
serious consequences on the ground and for the viability
of our international system.
The OIC would particularly like to warn the Council
of the dire consequences of the Israeli occupation
authority’s continued infringement on the sanctity of
the blessed Al-Aqsa Mosque, including its constant
provocations, abuses, daily brutal assaults, incursions
and unprecedented tampering with the Mosque’s
existing historical, legal and religious status as an
exclusive place of worship for Muslims. In that regard,
the OIC stresses that Israel, the occupying Power, has
no sovereignty over the entire Al-Aqsa compound at
Al-Haram Al-Sharif, where Muslim worshippers have
an absolute right to pray freely and safely at any time
and without hindrance. We therefore reaffirm our strong
rejection of Israel’s measures and attempts to alter the
historical and legal status quo of the Al-Aqsa Mosque/
Al-Haram Al-Sharif. We have cautioned time and again
that Israel’s provocative and irresponsible actions hurt
the feelings of Muslims across the globe, violate their
religious rights and eternal attachment to that holy site

23-1163919/33

S/PV.9309 (Resumption 1)

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

and jeopardize stability in the region and beyond. We
underscore that this organ must fulfil its responsibility
and obligations to ensure Israel’s compliance with,
and respect for, international law and United Nations
resolutions, including resolutions 2334 (2016), 476
(1980) and 478 (1980) with regard to East Jerusalem,
the occupied capital of the State of Palestine, which has
endured Israel’s endless attempts to isolate, Judaize,
colonize and subjugate it.
The OIC commends the continued efforts of
King Mohammed VI, Chair of Al-Quds Committee,
in protecting the Islamic holy sites in Al-Quds
Al-Sharif — standing up against the Israeli occupation
authorities’ measures aimed at Judaizing the holy
sites — and praises the concrete role played by
the Bayt Mal Al-Quds Al-Sharif Agency of the
Al-Quds Committee in carrying out development and
steadfastness-building projects and activities for the
inhabitants of the Holy City. The OIC also reaffirms
that, within its total area of 144 dunums, Al-Haram
Al-Sharif is an exclusive place of worship for Muslims
that is protected by international law and its historical
and legal status, and that the Jordanian Administration
Department of Awqaf and Al-Aqsa Mosque Affairs
is the competent authority to manage the affairs of
the blessed Al-Aqsa Mosque/Al-Haram Al-Qudsi
Al-Sharif. The OIC furthermore stresses the role of the
historical Hashemite custodianship over the Islamic
and Christian holy sites in Al-Quds in protecting their
sanctity, identity and historical and legal status.
The OIC appreciates the contribution of the
Algiers declaration, emanating from the Reunification
Conference for Achieving Palestinian National Unity,
to ending division and achieving reconciliation as
a positive step towards national unity; expresses its
heartfelt thanks to the People’s Democratic Republic of
Algeria for sponsoring that conference; and is grateful
for the tireless efforts of President Abdelmadjid
Tebboune of Algeria to ensure the success of that
historic endeavour.
The Israeli extremist Government has proven
that it is more committed to colonialism, annexation,
oppression and violence than to justice, human rights,
peace and stability. The deliberate escalation of Israel’s
aggression against Palestinians and the expansion of its
illegal colonial settlements on the occupied Palestinian
territory, in particular in and around Jerusalem,
constitute war crimes and flagrant violations of
international law. There must be accountability for
20/33

25/04/2023

all such abuses and violations, and protection must be
ensured for the Palestinian people, who are defenceless
against the relentless aggression of that more than
50-year-old foreign occupation, including the 2 million
people trapped by the Israeli blockade in the Gaza Strip.
In conclusion, as we will soon solemnly mark
the seventy-fifth anniversary of the Nakba, the OIC
reiterates its call for justice for the Palestinian people,
including the Palestinian refugees. The OIC affirms
that the establishment of a just and lasting peace
in the Middle East requires firm and prompt action
by the Security Council to ensure an immediate end
to the Israeli occupation of Palestinian territory.
Similarly, the international community should uphold
its responsibilities in enabling the Palestinian people
to achieve their right of return and rights to selfdetermination, sovereignty and independence in their
State and in their territory, which has been occupied
since 1967, with East Jerusalem as its capital, in line
with the relevant United Nations resolutions and the
Arab Peace Initiative.
The President (spoke in Russian): I now give the
floor to the representative of Maldives.
Mrs. Ali (Maldives): I thank you, Sir, for convening
today’s debate, and Mr. Tor Wennesland for providing
his insightful briefing.
My delegation aligns itself with the statement to be
delivered by the representative of Azerbaijan on behalf
of the Movement of Non-Aligned Countries.
It is noteworthy that the Security Council has
received, for the second time in one month, an update
from Mr. Wennesland on the Palestinian question
(see S/PV.9290), including with regard to the ongoing
tensions at Al-Haram Al-Sharif. Israeli forces stormed
the courtyard of the Al-Aqsa Mosque on 4 and 5 April,
assaulting worshippers, making multiple arrests, injuring
worshippers and damaging the Mosque during the holy
month of Ramadan. Sadly, this is not the first year that such
events have taken place. The Government of Maldives
strongly condemns those highly provocative actions.
Our delegation is concerned that such reckless
actions undermine efforts to achieve a lasting resolution
to the conflict, as well as peace and stability in the region.
We commend the adoption of presidential statement
S/PRST/2023/1, of 20 February — the first Council
outcome on this agenda item in more than eight years and
the first of its kind since the adoption of resolution 2334
23-11639

25/04/2023

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

S/PV.9309 (Resumption 1)

(2016). However, mere calls for calm and de-escalation
are insufficient to halt the killing of innocent people.
Expressions of concern and outrage are not enough to
stop settlement activity in the occupied territories or the
seizure and demolition of Palestinian-owned structures
and land.

In conclusion, the Maldives reaffirms its
commitment to collaborate with the Council and
Member States to seek long-term solutions in ensuring
peace and stability in the Middle East and achieving a
just, lasting, comprehensive and peaceful resolution to
the Palestinian question in all its aspects.

In February alone, more than 7,000 housing units
were approved in settlements across the West Bank.
Israel’s actions in occupied territories must not be
exempt from international and humanitarian law or the
authority of the Security Council. We firmly believe that
the rule of law should apply equally to all countries. It is
crucial that those responsible for flagrant violations of
international law and international humanitarian law be
held accountable for their actions.

The President (spoke in Russian): I now give the
floor to the representative of Saudi Arabia.

The Security Council, which is mandated by the
Charter of the United Nations to maintain international
peace and security, must ensure that all countries
respect and uphold its decisions. The Government of
Maldives reiterates its call for the implementation of
resolution 2334 (2016), which offers a viable path to peace
based on the two-State solution, ensuring the fulfilment
of the Palestinian people’s inalienable rights, including
self-determination, and a just resolution for Palestine
refugees. The Maldives reiterates its unwavering support
for the two-State solution, with the establishment of an
independent and sovereign State of Palestine, based on
the pre-1967 borders, with East Jerusalem as its capital.

Mr. Alwasil (Saudi Arabia) (spoke in Arabic): At
the outset, I would like to congratulate the Russian
Federation on its presidency of the Security Council,
and to thank Russia on behalf of my Government for
holding this important meeting on a topic that demands
the attention of the entire international community.
We welcomed the participation of Russia’s Foreign
Minister, Mr. Sergey Lavrov, and the Palestinian
Foreign Minister, Mr. Riad Al-Malki, in this meeting
(see S/PV.9309). We would also like to thank Mr. Tor
Wennesland, Special Coordinator for the Middle East
Peace Process, for his valuable briefing. We appreciate
his pivotal role and constructive efforts in that regard.

We urge the complete lifting of the illegal blockade,
which has caused immense humanitarian, social
and economic suffering for millions of Palestinians,
including women and children, for more than 56 years.
In the absence of a just solution, we must find ways to
enhance relief assistance to the Palestinian people,
including by providing essential support for the United
Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees
in the Near East and other United Nations agencies and
international organizations working on the ground to
assist the Palestinian people.

We are meeting today while our brother people
of Palestine and the entire region are living in critical
conditions, a result of Israel’s continuing practices
against the defenceless Palestinian people, who have
suffered for decades from the consequences of Israel’s
occupation of their territory and control over their
daily lives. Unfortunately, the Israeli Government
has continued its daily acts of aggression against the
Palestinian people and their holy sites and property,
most recently through the provocative actions that
we witnessed at the beginning of this month. The
occupation forces raided the Al-Aqsa Mosque
compound, attacked worshippers and arrested several
Palestinian citizens, causing Muslims all over the world
immense pain. Saudi Arabia condemns that blatant
violation and categorically rejects such practices,
which are undermining peace efforts and contravening
international principles and norms with regard to
respect for the holy sites.

In 2023, Syria’s conflict has continued to rage
after more than 13 years of ongoing civil war. Despite
numerous ceasefire attempts, the conflict has resulted
in the deaths of hundreds of thousands of people, the
displacement of millions of people and the destruction
of entire cities. The Maldives calls on the Council and
the international community to act urgently to end the
suffering and facilitate a resolution for the war-torn nation.

We reiterate our firm position in support of every
effort to end the occupation and arrive at a just and
comprehensive solution to the Palestinian question.
Israel’s measures will inevitably undermine the
prospects for peace in the Middle East and for a twoState solution. We all know that a just and comprehensive
peace will be impossible as long as those aggressive
practices continue, especially the ongoing settlement

23-1163921/33

S/PV.9309 (Resumption 1)

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

activities, the confiscations of Palestinian land and
the evictions of Palestinians from their homes. Peace,
security and justice can be achieved only through a twoState solution and the establishment of an independent
and sovereign Palestinian State along the 4 June 1967
lines, with East Jerusalem as its capital, in accordance
with the resolutions of international legitimacy,
including those of the Security Council, and the Arab
Peace Initiative, launched by Saudi Arabia in 2002.
We therefore renew our call to the Security
Council to shoulder its responsibilities and ensure
that its resolutions are implemented in order to put
an end to all of the illegal, unilateral, provocative and
escalatory measures and violations that Israel continues
to perpetrate relentlessly, including its construction
and expansion of illegitimate settlements. We further
demand that Israel cease targeting the Palestinian
presence in Jerusalem and put a stop to the attempts to
change the city’s legal and demographic composition
and to alter the status quo of the Islamic holy sites and
impose Israeli sovereignty on them. We call urgently
for international protection for the Palestinian people
in accordance with the Secretary-General’s proposals,
which were also welcomed by the General Assembly. In
the light of the General Assembly’s resolution 77/247,
requesting an advisory opinion on this issue from the
International Court of Justice, we must put pressure
on the Israeli Government to immediately rescind
the punitive measures unilaterally imposed on the
Palestinian people and their leadership and civil society.
In conclusion, we call on the new Israeli Government
to respond to the calls for peace and to engage seriously
in efforts to resolve its conflict with the Palestinians.
Settling the conflict is unquestionably in the interests
of the entire region, including Israel itself. We call on
Israel to participate in serious negotiations in good
faith in order to achieve peace on the basis of a twoState solution and in a manner that can ensure stability
in the Middle East. We call for finding a just solution
that will guarantee the Palestinian people’s legitimate
rights, and we underscore the need to mobilize the
international community to resolve the longest-lasting
conflict in the history of the United Nations in a manner
that can assure all the legitimate rights of our brother
people of Palestine in accordance with the pillars and
principles on which the United Nations was founded.
The President (spoke in Russian): I now give the
floor to the representative of Chile.
22/33

25/04/2023

Mr. Vidal (Chile) (spoke in Spanish): We appreciate
the opportunity to participate in this open debate and to
reaffirm the importance we attach to the issue. In the
same vein, we are grateful to the Special Coordinator
for the Middle East Peace Process for his briefing
and to the Minister for Foreign Affairs of the State of
Palestine for his statement (see S/PV.9309).
We reaffirm that the region needs and deserves
peace. The solution lies in productive, direct negotiations
between Palestine and Israel in order to achieve a twoState solution with two free, autonomous, sovereign
and independent States within internationally secure,
definitive and mutually recognized borders, based
on the pre-1967 lines and the relevant decisions and
agreements of the United Nations, including resolutions
adopted by the Security Council itself. That is founded
on support for international law and the Charter of
the United Nations, and concerns the Palestinian
people’s right to self-determination and to constitute
an independent, internationally recognized State.
Likewise, Israel must be able to enjoy secure borders.
We are deeply concerned about the recent increase
in tensions around the holy sites in Jerusalem and
elsewhere, which has resulted in violence, injuries
and deaths. Chile is not indifferent to the worsening
security situation, which will inevitably result in
growing numbers of civilian casualties. Likewise, the
incidents in various settlements and their expansion by
Israel do not contribute to the promotion of a just and
lasting peace or one that is dignified and secure. We
call for a halt to such activities. We reiterate that the
legal, historical and religious status quo of Jerusalem’s
holy sites must be respected and that they must remain
safe places of worship for Christians, Muslims and Jews
alike. We call on the parties to exercise restraint and to
refrain from any act that undermines the well-being of
the entire population. We condemn all violent actions
by Hamas or any armed group that uses violence to
achieve any goal.
We welcomed the adoption of General Assembly
resolution 77/247, requesting the International Court
of Justice to render an advisory opinion on the legal
consequences arising from Israeli policies and
practices affecting the human rights of the Palestinian
people in the occupied Palestinian territory, including
East Jerusalem. In the same vein, we acknowledge
the efforts of the Security Council in its adoption
on Monday, 20 February of a presidential statement
(S/PRST/2023/1) — the first on the issue in more than
23-11639

25/04/2023

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

eight years and the first formal outcome produced
by the Council on this issue since its adoption of
resolution 2334 (2016). In a few months’ time, we will
mark three decades of the Oslo Accords. We hope that
the commemoration of that milestone will encourage
the parties to demonstrate the necessary political will
to set aside radical elements and extremist discourse
and reaffirm their respect for human rights. Needless to
say, we applaud the efforts of the countries in the region
towards reconciliation.
We call for an end to the humanitarian crisis,
which is having a major impact on refugee women and
children in particular. In that regard, we acknowledge
the work of the United Nations Relief and Works
Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East. New
generations can no longer be victims of destitution and
recriminations. Jewish and Palestinian young people
must be able to look to the future with confidence.
The President (spoke in Russian): I now give the
floor to the representative of Qatar.
Mr. Al-Maawda (Qatar) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, I would like to thank the Russian Federation
for holding today’s open debate on the situation in the
Middle East under the presidency of Mr. Sergey Lavrov,
Foreign Minister of the Russian Federation. We would
also like to congratulate Russia on its presidency of the
Council this month. We welcome the participation of
Mr. Riad Al-Malki, Minister for Foreign Affairs and
Expatriates of the sisterly State of Palestine, in today’s
meeting and thank Mr. Tor Wennesland, Special
Coordinator for the Middle East Peace Process, for
his briefing.
We align ourselves with the statements delivered by
the representative of Lebanon on behalf of the Group of
Arab States, the observer of the Organization of Islamic
Cooperation, and the representative of Azerbaijan on
behalf of the Movement of Non-Aligned Countries.
At the last open debate on the situation in the occupied
Palestinian territories, including East Jerusalem
(see S/PV.9246), much concern was expressed about the
unprecedented high levels of violence that occurred in
2022. Calls were made to reverse that dangerous trend
in order to avoid further deterioration. However, since
the beginning of the year, the Israeli Government has
continued its escalatory policies, which compelled the
Security Council to respond by adopting presidential
statement S/PRST/2023/1 of 20 February. At the same
meeting (see S/PV. 9263), the State of Qatar welcomed

S/PV.9309 (Resumption 1)

the presidential statement on behalf of the Arab Group
and expressed its deep concern about the extremist
tendencies of the new Israeli Government. We also
stressed the pivotal role of the Security Council in
addressing those violations. Since then, the occupation
authorities and extremist settlers have continued their
dangerous violations. The most dangerous of those
violations occurred at the holy Al-Aqsa Mosque during
Ramadan, with no consideration for the sanctity of the
place or the time. The current month coincided with
several important religious occasions for Muslims,
Christians and Jews. However, that did not stop the
Israeli occupation forces and extremist settlers from
perpetrating blatant attacks on religious sites and
freedom of worship.
The State of Qatar strongly condemned the storming
of the Al-Aqsa Mosque, the assaults on worshippers,
the actions taken to prevent ambulances from reaching
the injured and evacuating those who were trapped in
the Al-Qibli Mosque, and the restrictions imposed on
Palestinians entering the Mosque. An extremist group
expressed support for the occupation police increasing
the number of hours during which the Al-Aqsa Mosque
could be stormed. Restricting the right of Muslims
and Christians to freely visit places of worship, the
Al-Aqsa Mosque and occupied churches in Jerusalem
in order to perform religious rites is a violation by the
occupying authority of its commitment in accordance
with international humanitarian law, which ensures the
right to worship, the right to protection of worshipers
and the rights of holy sites. It is also a violation of
the relevant United Nations resolutions, including
resolution 2334 (2016). Those recent measures are
an extension of the policy to Judaize Jerusalem and
provoke the 2 billion Muslims around the world. They
could lead to escalation and undermine any hope of a
two-State solution, which the international community
has agreed is the only way to settle the situation in the
Middle East and establish lasting peace. In that regard,
the State of Qatar reiterates its strong condemnation of
any attempts to Judaize the occupied city of Jerusalem
and change its Arab, Islamic and Christian identity.
We stress the importance of respecting the legal
and historical status quo throughout Jerusalem and the
entire Al-Haram Al-Quds compound as an exclusive
place of worship for Muslims, without any attempt to
divide it temporally or spatially. We also stress the
importance of the historic Jordanian guardianship
of the Islamic and Christian holy sites in Jerusalem.

23-1163923/33

S/PV.9309 (Resumption 1)

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

The policies of occupation, settlements and oppression
against the Palestinian people are the main reason for the
lack of stability and the prevalence of violence. In that
context, the State of Qatar voted in favour of General
Assembly resolution 77/247, which included a request
to the International Court of Justice for an advisory
opinion on the legal effects of the Israeli occupation
and settlement activity and measures to change the
demographic composition of Jerusalem. The State of
Qatar continues to uphold its duty to support the steadfast
Palestinian people and meet their humanitarian needs, in
cooperation with the United Nations, especially in the
Gaza Strip, which has been subjected to an unjust siege
for more than 15 years.
The State of Qatar will continue to support
improving the humanitarian situation and efforts to
achieve lasting peace. We reiterate that in order for peace
to prevail, the Israeli occupation of the occupied Arab
territories, including the Syrian Golan and the occupied
Lebanese territories, must end. Moreover, Israel must
immediately and fully halt its settlement activities and
attempts to annex land so that the Palestinian people
can regain their legitimate rights, above all the right to
establish an independent, contiguous and viable State,
within the 1967 borders, with East Jerusalem as its
capital, in accordance with the relevant Security Council
resolutions and the Arab Peace Initiative.
The President (spoke in Russian): I now give the
floor to the representative of Argentina.
Mr. Mainero (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish):
Argentina supports a peaceful, definitive and
comprehensive solution to the Palestinian question and
reaffirms its unwavering commitment to the two-State
solution, while respecting the legitimate aspirations of
Israelis and Palestinians to live side by side in peace and
security. In that regard, Argentina reaffirms its support
for the inalienable right of the Palestinian people to
self-determination and to establish an independent and
viable State, recognized by all nations, as well as the
right of the State of Israel to live in peace alongside its
neighbours, within secure and internationally recognized
borders. On that basis, my country has spoken out on
several occasions because of the worrisome escalation
of violence this year and has repeatedly called on the
parties to avoid further confrontation and clashes.
Argentina reiterates its concern about the persistent
and continuous increase in the number of illegal Israeli
settlements in the occupied Palestinian territories
24/33

25/04/2023

and calls for a stop to their expansion. The gravity of
the situation linked to the Israeli settlements has been
recognized by the General Assembly and by the Security
Council in resolution 2334 (2016), the terms of which
we fully reaffirm. The resolution underscores that the
settlements established by Israel in the West Bank and
East Jerusalem have no legal validity, are contrary
to international law, hinder peace and undermine the
prospects for the achievement of the two-State solution.
In that context, our country expressed its concern in
February about the Israeli Government’s decision to
legalize nine outposts and build 10,000 homes in existing
settlements in the West Bank. Furthermore, Argentina
reiterates its firm condemnation of terrorism in all its
forms and manifestations, and has reiterated its dismay
in recent months about the attacks perpetrated against
Israeli citizens and citizens of other nationalities in the
West Bank, East Jerusalem and Tel Aviv. We again offer
our condolences to the families of the victims.
Argentina considers the indiscriminate launching
of rockets from the Gaza Strip and southern Lebanon
towards Israel unacceptable. Argentina recognizes the
right of Israel to exercise its legitimate self-defence,
emphasizing that the measures taken must be respectful
of international humanitarian law, in particular the
principles of distinction and proportionality.
With respect to the situation in East Jerusalem,
Argentina considers that one of the issues whose
final status should be defined by the parties through
bilateral negotiations, in accordance with relevant
United Nations resolutions, and calls on all parties, in
particular the Israeli authorities, to respect the legal,
historical and religious status of the holy sites.
With regard to the recent events at the Al-Aqsa
Mosque, Argentina expressed its concern at the time
and reiterated that holy sites should be a place of
peaceful and safe prayer and religious reflection. Any
attempt to deny or relativize the historical link of the
holy sites in East Jerusalem with and their profound
significance for any of the three monotheistic religions
is completely unacceptable and does not serve the
objective of finding a solution to the conflict.
Argentina once again urges the parties to return
to the path of negotiations in order to reach a just and
lasting peace, in accordance with international law and
the relevant resolutions of the General Assembly and
the Security Council.
23-11639

25/04/2023

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

The President (spoke in Russian): I now give the
floor to the representative of Malaysia.
Mr. Muhamad (Malaysia): My delegation expresses
its appreciation to you, Mr. President, for convening
this important meeting. We welcome the presence of
Mr. Riad Al-Malki, Minister for Foreign Affairs of the
State of Palestine. We also extend our thanks to Mr. Tor
Wennesland, Special Coordinator for the Middle East
Peace Process, for his briefing.
Malaysia aligns itself with the statement
delivered by Mauritania on behalf of the Organization
of Islamic Cooperation and the statement to be
delivered by Azerbaijan on behalf of the Movement of
Non-Aligned Countries.
Indeed, what we have heard today is disturbing.
Barely four months into the year, already almost 100
Palestinians, including innocent children, are reported
to have died and hundreds more to have been wounded.
The situation is showing no signs of abating. Malaysia
strongly condemns the incursion of Israeli forces into
the Al-Aqsa Mosque and their vicious attacks against
worshippers, especially when Muslims were observing
the holy month of Ramadan. Malaysia remains gravely
concerned with the continued aggression and systematic
oppression of the Palestinians through discriminatory
policies, the denial of basic human rights, the imposition
of harsh living conditions, as well as the confiscation of
their lands and properties.
In line with resolution 2334 (2016), our delegation
urges both parties to exercise maximum restraint
and refrain from acts of provocation, incitement and
inflammatory rhetoric to avoid further escalation of
tensions. Resolution 2334 (2016) is also clear on the
fact that all Israeli settlement activities in the occupied
Palestinian territory, including East Jerusalem, are
illegal under international law and must immediately
and completely cease. Yet Israel remains defiant, which
further deviates efforts towards achieving a peaceful and
lasting two-State solution.
It is extremely frustrating that the apartheid practices
of Israel, including the annexation and illegal occupation,
are routinely ignored. The impunity that Israel continues
to enjoy is partly the failure of the Security Council to
hold Israel accountable for the violations and brutality
it perpetrates. Malaysia, in that regard, calls on the
international community not to condone such practice
of double standards, which severely undermines the
effectiveness and legitimacy of international law.

S/PV.9309 (Resumption 1)

It is incumbent upon the United Nations and
the global community to provide protection to the
Palestinian people from the heinous crimes that Israel
continues to commit. Pursuant to General Assembly
resolution 77/247 adopted in December last year,
Malaysia urges all responsible Member States to
support the request for an advisory opinion on the
question of Palestine from the International Court of
Justice. In addition, Malaysia calls upon Member States
to contribute on a consistent and predictable basis to the
United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine
Refugees in the Near East to support the financial needs
of the Palestinian refugees.
The people of Palestine can count on Malaysia’s
unwavering support in their efforts to create an
independent and sovereign State of Palestine, based on
pre-1967 borders, with East Jerusalem as its capital. In
that regard, we fully support the application of Palestine
to become a full member of the United Nations and call
upon the Security Council and the General Assembly to
favourably consider that legitimate application.
The President (spoke in Russian): I now give the
floor to the representative of the Republic of Korea.
Mr. Kim (Republic of Korea): I thank the Special
Coordinator for the Middle East Peace Process, Mr. Tor
Wennesland, for his timely briefing. I also reaffirm my
Government’s full support for his ongoing efforts and
dedication to bringing peace to the region.
The Republic of Korea is deeply concerned about
the escalation and sustained violence in Palestine
since early this year. It is particularly worrisome
that acts of violence and clashes led to a number of
civilian casualties in the region during Ramadan and
Passover this month. That vicious cycle of violence will
undermine the foundation for a political solution.
My Government reaffirms its position that the
status quo of holy sites in Jerusalem must be respected
and all relevant parties should undertake every effort
to prevent a further deterioration of the situation in
the area. In addition, violence against civilians cannot
be justified under any circumstances. We take this
opportunity to condemn all terrorist attacks in the
strongest terms.
My Government strongly encourages all relevant
parties to maintain crucial momentum for engagement.
In that regard, my delegation commends the recent
meetings among the five parties, including Palestine,

23-1163925/33

S/PV.9309 (Resumption 1)

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

Israel, Egypt, Jordan and the United States, in attempts
to de-escalate tensions on the ground. We express
support for efforts by international parties, including
the joint communiqués issued at Aqaba in Jordan and
Sharm El-Sheikh in Egypt in February and March,
respectively, and hope that it can lead to more concrete
steps in both establishing and maintaining muchneeded stability in the region.
The Republic of Korea supports all diplomatic
efforts by the international community to establish
lasting peace in the region and reaffirms its driving
commitment to continue its constructive role to that
end. My delegation reiterates its firm belief that there
is no alternative to a two-State solution wherein Israelis
and Palestinians live side by side in peace and security
within internationally recognized borders, as enshrined
in the relevant Security Council resolutions.
The Republic of Korea is deeply concerned with the
Israeli Government’s decisions to expand its settlements
in the West Bank this year, which would significantly
undermine the efforts to establish permanent peace
between Israel and Palestine based on a two-State
solution. We urge the Israeli Government to reverse its
settlement activities, demolitions and evictions since
they constitute clear violations of international laws
and relevant Security Council resolutions.
We also remain concerned about the deteriorating
humanitarian situation in the West Bank and the Gaza
Strip as conflict intensifies. The Republic of Korea
expresses its strong support for ongoing efforts by the
international community to meet the humanitarian and
development needs of the Palestinian people. In that
regard, my Government decided to increase our support
to the program budget of the United Nations Relief and
Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East
(UNRWA). We will continue to support UNRWA and
its activities going forward.
The President (spoke in Russian): I now give the
floor to the representative of Tunisia.
Mr. Ladeb (Tunisia) (spoke in Arabic): First of all,
I would like to congratulate the Russian Federation for
presiding over the Security Council for this month.
In that regard, I would like to thank in particular
Mr. Sergey Lavrov, Minister for Foreign Affairs of
Russia for convening this meeting at the ministerial
level. I would also like to welcome the participation of
Mr. Riad Al-Malki, Foreign Minister of Palestine in this
26/33

25/04/2023

session. I appreciate the efforts of Mr. Tor Wennesland,
Special Coordinator for the Middle East Peace Process.
The international community recently witnessed
the flagrant escalation of aggressive practices and
restrictive policies adopted by the Israeli occupation
against the Palestinian people, especially during
the sacred month of Ramadan, as the occupation
authorities deliberately violated the sanctity of the holy
sites and raided the courtyards of the Al-Aqsa Mosque
through settlers and occupation forces. They attacked
worshippers and detained hundreds who were inside
the Mosque in blatant disregard for Muslim sentiment
and a flagrant violation of international conventions
and treaties.
Tunisia strongly condemns the policies of the
occupation and its attempts to change the legal and
historical status quo of the Al-Aqsa Mosque and
Jerusalem, especially through plans for settlements,
home demolitions, the displacement of Palestinians, as
well as flagrant violations of human rights. We hold the
occupation forces responsible for the actions taken in
the occupied Palestinian territories that could impede
peace efforts in the region. We stress the Hashemite
Jordanian historical custodianship of the Islamic and
Christian holy sites in the city of Jerusalem.
Addressing the Palestinian question at the
international level should not consider only the
repeated vicious circles of violence without truly
focusing on the root causes of the situation, namely, the
occupation. In that regard, we call on the international
community to launch serious and effective negotiations
within a specific timetable in order to achieve a just,
comprehensive and lasting peace based on the agreed
terms of reference and international resolutions.
As we approach the seventy-fifth anniversary
of the Nakba, we recall the major sacrifices of the
Palestinian people and their prolonged suffering. We
call upon the international community and the Security
Council to protect the Palestinian people and to compel
the occupying Power to put an end to its aggressive
practices and collective punitive measures taken
against the Palestinian people, as well as to comply
with international law and all relevant United Nations
resolutions. We also call for holding the occupying
Power responsible for all its violations.
In conclusion, Tunisia renews its steadfast
solidarity with the Palestinian people in efforts to
restore their legitimate rights, especially the right
23-11639

25/04/2023

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

to self-determination, by ending the occupation and
establishing their independent and sovereign State
on their land along 4 June 1967 borders, with East
Jerusalem as its capital.
The President (spoke in Russian): I now give the
floor to the representative of Kuwait.
Mr. Alajmi (Kuwait) (spoke in Arabic): First of
all, I would like to thank you, Madam President, for
convening this high-level meeting in order to highlight
the escalation of acts of violence and extremism carried
out by the Israeli occupation and settlers in the occupied
Palestinian territories. We would also like to thank
the Special Coordinator for the Middle East Peace
Process, Mr. Tor Wennesland, for his briefing. We also
welcome the participation of the Minister for Foreign
Affairs of the State of Palestine, Mr. Riad Al-Malki, in
this meeting.
A few days ago, the sacred month of Ramadan
came to an end. During that month we witnessed the
unprecedented escalation on the part of the occupying
Power, with the support of extremist settlers, during
which they desecrated the sanctity of the Al-Aqsa
Mosque and assaulted unarmed worshippers, including
women and children, arresting hundreds of them. This
is a renewed vicious circle of bloody violence and a
provocation of millions of Muslims all over the world.
These actions showed contempt for the appeals of the
international community, especially the calls of the
Security Council for de-escalation during the month
of Ramadan.
It is incumbent on the Security Council to shoulder
its responsibilities by condemning those serious
violations by the occupying Power and compelling it
to refrain from any attempt to change the legal and
historical status quo of the Al-Aqsa Mosque, including
by respecting the sanctity of Al-Quds Al-Sharif. We
also reiterate the right of the State of Palestine to enjoy
sovereignty over the occupied city of East Jerusalem.
Israel, the occupying Power, has no sovereignty over
the occupied city of Jerusalem and its holy sites.
In a few days, the General Assembly will be
commemorating the seventy-fifth anniversary of the
Nakba, which attests to the languishing of successive
generations under the yoke of continued injustice
due to the inability of the international community
to find an active mechanism to implement the
resolutions of various United Nations organs since
1948. Notwithstanding the multiple international and

S/PV.9309 (Resumption 1)

regional efforts and peace initiatives in that regard, as
well as international resolutions, the unprecedented
deterioration of the situation of the steadfast Palestinian
people, especially refugees, continues, along with the
increasing systematic violence and illegal restriction of
their rights, illegal settlement activities, the demolition
of homes, the confiscation of land and the continued
blockade on the Gaza Strip.
All the forgoing only attests to the zero-sum
mentality of the Government of the occupation, which is
patently manifest in the current Administration, one of
the most extreme in recent decades. This Government
disregards international efforts and shirks its
responsibility to comply with international obligations.
Any attempt to communicate with it at the international
level in an effort to de-escalate the situation is in vain.
How can we speak about peace with a Government of
occupation that adopts extremism, violence and racism
as its guiding doctrine?
We therefore call again on the international
community and the Security Council to condemn all
acts of violence perpetrated by the occupying Power
and the extremist settlers against Palestinian civilians
and to hold them accountable in accordance with the
rules of accountability and transparency. Also, we
must urgently provide the Palestinian people with
international protection, pursuant to the SecretaryGeneral’s proposals, which were approved by the General
Assembly. We reiterate that just and comprehensive
peace, security and stability in the Middle East can
be realized only when the free Palestinian people
can exercise their inalienable and legitimate rights,
including the right to self-determination, thus ending
the illegal Israeli colonial occupation and establishing
the independence of the State of Palestine, with full
sovereignty over occupied Palestinian territories since
1967 and with Jerusalem as its capital.
In that regard, we once again welcome
resolution 247/77, which requests an advisory opinion
from the International Court of Justice on the Israeli
colonial occupation of Palestinian territories and its
implications, since such actions are in violation of the
Charter of the United Nations and international law.
We call on the Member States and all countries that
adhere to the values of justice and the principles of
international law to support the State of Palestine in
that endeavour by providing written legal submissions
to the International Court of Justice.

23-1163927/33

S/PV.9309 (Resumption 1)

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

We also urge the International Criminal Court
to finalize the criminal investigation and to hold
responsible and accountable all perpetrators of war
crimes and crimes against humanity committed
by the occupation Power against the unarmed
Palestinian people. Those crimes include annexation,
settlement activities, aggressions, a continuous blockade
on the Gaza Strip, public and deliberate executions of
civilians, journalists and first-aid medical crews, in
addition to compulsory evictions, arbitrary detentions
and the torture of prisoners.
The President (spoke in Russian): I now give the
floor to the representative of Namibia.
Mr. Gertze (Namibia): Allow me to congratulate
the Russian Federation on presiding over the Security
Council this month and for having convened today’s
important meeting. I join speakers before me in
welcoming Foreign Minister Al-Malki to this timely
meeting, and I equally wish to thank the Special
Coordinator for the Middle East Peace Process for
briefing us earlier. I wish to align my statement with
the statement delivered on behalf of the Committee on
the Exercise of the Inalienable Rights of the Palestinian
People and with the statement to be delivered on behalf
of the Non-Aligned Movement.
Today’s open debate takes place against the
backdrop of a year marked by a continuation of injustice,
intensification of conflict and expansion of settlements.
The United Nations has been seized with the question of
Palestine since 1947, when, through General Assembly
resolution 181 (II), the Assembly decided to partition
Palestine into two States, one Arab and one Jewish,
with Jerusalem placed under a special international
regime. In this way, for the past 76 years — I repeat, 76
years — the United Nations has recognized a two-State
solution in accordance with 1967 borders as the path
towards just and lasting peace.
In charting this path to peace, the General Assembly
and the Security Council have adopted a broad range
of resolutions that condemn Israel’s occupation of East
Jerusalem, calling it illegal and calling for a just and
lasting solution that takes into account the legitimate
concerns of both Israelis and Palestinians. The primacy
of the right to self-determination of the Palestinian
people is central to resolving the question of Palestine.
The right of the Palestinian people to selfdetermination is universally established and enshrined
in the United Nations Charter. Our commitment to
28/33

25/04/2023

the United Nations Charter compels us to hold Israel
accountable for the 56-year Israeli foreign occupation,
which is also universally established. This occupation
can be viewed through several prisms, including that
of entrenched and systematic racial discrimination
and persecution.
As a country with a lived experience of colonial
occupation, Namibia has a clear understanding of what
constitutes apartheid, and the illegal colonial occupation
that Israel is committing by all accounts constitutes
apartheid. We are attuned to the realities faced by the
Palestinian people and cannot ignore them. They cause
us deep pain, and it is for this reason that we make yet
another urgent appeal to the international community,
foremost this Security Council, to act. The occupying
Power must be held to account for continued actions
that are in violation of international law, international
human rights law and the resolutions adopted by the
Security Council and the General Assembly.
The Palestinian people should not wait any longer
for their freedom, justice and an opportunity to
peacefully coexist in a contiguous State in accordance
with the pre-1967 borders. As we approach the seventyfifth year since the Nakba, and as a just peace seems
ever more remote due to rising dangers, the Security
Council has a duty to prevent another such catastrophe,
put stop to genocide, protect vulnerable people and
pursue justice before it is too late.
The responsibility of the United Nations towards
the resolution of the question of Palestine is a permanent
one. We therefore support and have full respect for
all United Nations-mandated processes geared to
bringing about a resolution to this complex question.
The consistent flagrant violation of international law
and humanitarian and international human rights law
denies the Palestinian people their most basic rights.
The practice of unabated continued annexation and
expansion of settlements is untenable, and if we well
value the inalienable rights of the Palestinian people,
we must show true and consistent commitment to their
just cause by acting with a sense of urgency.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Azerbaijan.
Ms. Novruz (Azerbaijan): I am honoured to speak
on behalf of the 120 States members of the Non-Aligned
Movement (NAM).
23-11639

25/04/2023

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

At the outset, I congratulate the Russian Federation
on its successful presidency of the Security Council
this month and express appreciation for the opportunity
for the Movement to present its position on the question
of Palestine.
During the NAM Ministerial meeting held on the
sidelines of the high-level week of the seventy-seventh
session of the General Assembly, on 21 September 2022,
the Ministers adopted a political declaration stressing,
inter alia, that a just, lasting and peaceful solution to
the question of Palestine in all its aspects must remain a
priority on the Movement’s agenda and that it remains a
permanent responsibility of the United Nations until it is
satisfactorily resolved in accordance with international
law and the relevant United Nation resolutions and the
internationally endorsed parameters.
In this regard, the States members of the Movement
once again reaffirm that this ongoing historic injustice,
with decades of Israeli occupation of the Palestinian
territory and other Arab territories at its core, continues
to pose a serious threat to regional and international
peace and security. As the Palestinian people continue
to be deprived of their inalienable rights, including to
self-determination and independence, their prolonged
international paralysis on this issue is inexcusable.
The international consensus on a just solution
is firm and clear, and there is a great abundance of
multilateral political and diplomatic tools to promote
the achievement of a just and peaceful resolution. We
must use them responsibly, and we in the NAM are ready
to do so and urge the Security Council to act forthwith
and shoulder its responsibilities in this regard.
The Security Council must uphold its duty under
the Charter to maintain international peace and
security and must act to implement its own resolutions.
The question of Palestine cannot be the exception in
international law and to the authority of the Security
Council. The members of the Movement call on the
Security Council to overcome its paralysis on the
Palestine question to justly resolve this protracted
conflict and tragic injustice. This will not only open a
new era for the people of the occupied territories and
the region, but it will also restore credibility to this
organ and our international system as a whole.
NAM believes that resolution 2334 (2016) provides
a viable path to peace, setting forth the essential
requirement and parameters for the realization of a just
outcome on the basis of the two-State solution based on

S/PV.9309 (Resumption 1)

the 4 June 1967 lines and ensuring the fulfilment by the
Palestinian people of their inalienable rights, including
the right to self-determination, and the independence
of the State of Palestine, with East Jerusalem as its
capital, and a just solution for the plight of the Palestine
refugees in accordance with General Assembly
resolution 194 (III). NAM therefore reiterates its call
for the full respect of resolution 2334 (2016) and for
the effective implementation of its provisions and
obligations, particularly by the occupying Power, and
including, in terms of States, obligations regarding
distinction, which is central to ensuring accountability.
The Movement also underscores the need for
the intensification of international and regional
diplomatic efforts, including by the Security Council,
aimed at bringing an end to the Israeli occupation
that began in 1967 and at achieving a just, lasting and
comprehensive solution. Similarly, the States members
of the Movement continue to call for the full respect for
and the implementation of all other relevant resolutions,
including with regard to the complete cessation of all
Israeli settlement activities and the status of occupied
East Jerusalem. In that regard, NAM expresses its grave
concern about the deteriorating situation on the ground,
which has been marked by rising violence, provocation
and incitement, particularly settler violence and terror,
which has led to the tragic loss of life of more civilians,
including children, as well as the detention of thousands
of Palestinian civilians and countless other human rights
abuses and violations of international law.
Action must be taken immediately to help to
de-escalate that volatile situation. It must include a halt
to all unilateral and unlawful measures by Israel, the
occupying Power, in the occupied Palestinian territory,
including East Jerusalem. Actions that violate the
resolutions of the Security Council, including violations
of the historic and legal status quo of Jerusalem and its
holy sites, are provocative, dangerous and destroy the
prospects for peace. We reiterate our call for full respect
for the historic and legal status quo and for the historical
Hashemite custodianship over the Christian and Muslim
holy sites in the city and the protection of their sanctity
and for all relevant provisions of international law and
Council resolutions.
The Non-Aligned Movement commends the
efforts of King Mohammed VI of Morocco as Chair
of the Al-Quds Committee of the Organization of the
Islamic Cooperation and welcomed the appeal regarding
Al-Quds/Jerusalem signed in Rabat on 30 March 2019

23-1163929/33

S/PV.9309 (Resumption 1)

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

by King Mohammed VI and Pope Francis, stressing
the important role that Al Quds/Jerusalem plays as a
city of tolerance and mutual respect among the people
of the three monotheistic religions, as well as the need
to preserve its specificities and its features as a city of
peaceful coexistence.
In that regard, NAM reiterates its rejection of the
purported annexation by Israel of occupied East Jerusalem
and underscores that the continued threats of annexation
by Israeli officials and the continued settlement activities
and forced displacement of Palestinian families from
their homes and lands must be unequivocally condemned.
Any such measures must be forthwith rejected as null and
void and without any legal effect and must be met with
firm measures of accountability for such grave breaches,
including through lawful countermeasures.
The situation in the Gaza Strip, in particular the grave
humanitarian situation there, remains of great concern to
the Movement. NAM reiterates its call for the complete
lifting of the illegal Israeli blockade, which continues to
inflict dire humanitarian, social and economic suffering
on more than 2 million Palestinian children, women
and men in Gaza. That crisis must be comprehensively
addressed in accordance with international law and the
relevant resolutions of the United Nations, including
Security Council resolution 1860 (2009).
In the absence of a just solution, the NAM member
States also reiterate their call for the continued provision
of the necessary humanitarian and socioeconomic
assistance to the Palestinian people, including the
Palestine refugees. The Movement reaffirms the
continued indispensability of the United Nations Relief
and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near
East (UNRWA), along with other United Nations
agencies and international organizations, in alleviating
their plight, and we urge the international community
to provide the Agency with sufficient and predictable
funding. Ensuring the continuity of UNRWA and its
significant contribution to regional stability must be of
concern to the Council.
As Israel has clearly abdicated on its obligations
as the occupying Power to protect the Palestinian
civilian population, as prescribed by the Fourth Geneva
Convention of 1949, the Movement also reiterates its
long-standing call for international protection for the
Palestinian people in order to deter violations, promote
the human security of the occupied population and
prevent the loss of more innocent lives.
30/33

25/04/2023

In that connection, the Movement reiterates its
grave concern regarding the lack of accountability
for all violations committed by Israel in the occupied
Palestinian territory, including East Jerusalem, many of
which may amount to war crimes. Israel must comply
with international law and must be held to account for its
blatant contempt of the Council and its international legal
obligations. The absence of justice only leads to greater
impunity and the recurrence of crimes and destabilizes
the situation on the ground, diminishing the prospects
for peace. The NAM member States therefore continue
to call for international action to ensure a cessation of
and accountability for the violations being systematically
committed by Israel against the Palestinian people.
With regard to the situation in the occupied Syrian
Golan, the Movement reaffirms that all measures and
actions taken, or to be taken, by Israel, the occupying
Power, such as its illegal decision of 14 December 1981
that purports to alter the legal, physical and demographic
status and the institutional structure, as well as Israel’s
measures to apply its jurisdiction and administration
there, are null and void and have no legal effect. In that
regard, and in line with NAM’s principled position,
the Movement once again demands that Israel abide
by resolution 497 (1981) and fully withdraw from the
occupied Syrian Golan to its 4 June 1967 borders, in
implementation of resolutions 242 (1967) and 338 (1973).
Moreover, the NAM member States emphasize
that Israel must withdraw from all Lebanese territories,
including Sheba’a Farms, the Kfar Shuba hills and the
northern part of the village of Ghajar and an adjacent area
north of the Blue Line, in accordance with the relevant
United Nations resolutions, in particular Security
Council resolution 1559 (2004) and 1701 (2006).
To conclude, the Movement seizes this opportunity
to reiterate its call for collective international efforts to
uphold international law in order to bring an end to this
historic and grave injustice. The NAM member States
reaffirm their commitment to promoting a just, lasting,
comprehensive and peaceful solution to the question of
Palestine in all its aspects, including for the plight of
the Palestine refugees, and reaffirm their support for the
Palestinian people in their struggle to achieve justice
and fulfil their inalienable rights and legitimate national
aspirations, including to self-determination, freedom
and independence in their sovereign and independent
State of Palestine, with East Jerusalem as its capital.
23-11639

25/04/2023

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

The President (spoke in Russian): I now give the
floor to the representative of Sierra Leone.
Mr. Turay (Sierra Leone): I thank you, Madam
President, for convening today’s important open debate.
I also thank the Special Coordinator for the Middle East
Peace Process for his update.
The recent incidents in the Middle East as it relates
to the Israeli-Palestinian conflict are an indication that
until a holistic and comprehensive approach to the
dispute is sought, a recurrence remains inevitable, and
it will continue to pose a serious threat to regional and
international peace and security.
This protracted conflict in the Middle East continues
to undermine every effort of the Security Council to uphold
the principles of the Charter of the United Nations and fulfil
its core mandate of maintaining international peace and
security. At this point, we as a community of nations should
meaningfully engage to stop the deaths, displacement and
loss of property and curb the immense fear that has been
instilled in the minds of both Palestinians and Israelis
in the region. Decades after the General Assembly’s
adoption of the partition plan in its resolution 181 (II), the
Palestinians and Israelis are still exposed to violence and
conflict leading to untold deaths, trauma, displacement and
anguish. In that regard, Sierra Leone calls on the Security
Council to implement its own resolutions pertaining to
the Israeli-Palestinian question and explore all possible
diplomatic and political avenues that can lead to a
peace process geared to achieving a two-State solution,
with Israel and Palestine living side by side in peace.
Sierra Leone urges both Israel and Palestine to
refrain from unilateral actions that could exacerbate
tensions and trigger violence. Our sympathy in that
regard is with the victims of the prolonged violence. We
condemn the rise in violence, incitement and all other
actions that negate peace efforts and that run counter
to international law and the relevant Security Council
and General Assembly resolutions. We acknowledge the
plight of Palestinian refugees and reiterate the need for
continued humanitarian and socioeconomic assistance
to the most vulnerable, especially women, the elderly,
children and young people, through the competent United
Nations agencies, non-governmental organizations and
other international humanitarian organizations that can
ensure their right to life, freedom and prosperity.
In conclusion, Sierra Leone calls on Israel and
Palestine to uphold their shared responsibility to build
mutual trust and advance the potential for a two-State

S/PV.9309 (Resumption 1)

solution based on the pre-1967 borders, in the spirit
of international consensus and founded on a just and
mutually acceptable solution. In that connection, any
solution to the current crisis should be consistent with
international law, the relevant United Nations resolutions,
the Madrid principles, the Arab Peace Initiative and
the work of the Middle East Quartet, guided by the
overarching principles of non-violence, the recognition
of Israel and the acceptance of previous agreements
arrived at in furthering the Middle East peace process.
The President (spoke in Russian): I now give the
floor to the representative of Norway.
Ms. Juul (Norway): I thank Special Coordinator
Wennesland for his briefing.
Norway remains deeply concerned about the security
situation in the Middle East. The tensions we witnessed
recently during Ramadan, Passover and Easter could
have easily spiralled out of control, with far-reaching
consequences for the whole region. We commend the
parties for contributing to de-escalation. The relative
calm that has prevailed at Al-Haram Al-Sharif/Temple
Mount since the end of Ramadan has demonstrated that
even during periods of elevated tension it is possible to
avoid serious escalation. We also recognize the efforts
of the United Nations and actors in the region. That
calming influence will still be needed in the weeks to
come. We welcome the statements made at the Aqaba
and Sharm El-Sheikh meetings and call on the parties
to implement their commitments. We continue to urge
Israel to observe the historical status quo of the holy sites
in Jerusalem, including Jordan’s custodial role.
Seventy-five years have passed since the General
Assembly adopted a partition plan for Palestine through
its resolution 181 (II). Norway voted in favour of the
establishment of the State of Israel in 1947 and recognized
it in 1949. Furthermore, 75 years ago, Norway also voted
in favour of the establishment of a Palestinian State and
has remained committed to a two-State solution ever
since. Although the prospects for a political settlement
right now look bleak, Norway continues to believe that a
two-State solution is the best way to ensure the security
and human rights of both Israelis and Palestinians, as
well as both peoples’ right to self-determination.
As Chair of the Ad Hoc Liaison Committee for the
coordination of international assistance to Palestinians,
Norway continues to work actively with the parties
and the international community to improve economic
conditions and build Palestinian institutions for a

23-1163931/33

S/PV.9309 (Resumption 1)

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

Palestinian State. We remain committed to that work
even in these very difficult times. Next week, Norway
will therefore reconvene the donor group at a meeting
in Brussels, hosted by the European Union. Together
the parties and the international community will review
the Palestinian Authority’s extremely serious financial
situation and set goals to safeguard the viability of a twoState solution.
The President (spoke in Russian): I now give the
floor to the representative of Sri Lanka.
Mr. Pieris (Sri Lanka): I welcome the presence of
Mr. Al-Malki earlier in this meeting (see S/PV.9309).
It is an indictment on all of us that for more than
seven decades we have struggled to find a just and
peaceful solution to the situation in Palestine. Sri
Lanka has long advocated continued support for a
sovereign, independent State of Palestine and calls on
the international community and all parties concerned
to make renewed efforts to achieve a lasting solution,
including by implementing the United Nations
resolutions on a two-State solution, based on the 1967
borders, as soon as possible.
It is said that peace cannot be separated from
freedom because none of us can be at peace unless we
have our freedom. One might observe that that was the
salutary wish expressed through recent statements by
the Secretary-General and representatives of numerous
Member States indicating that any attempt at unilateral
annexation of one State’s territory by another is a violation
of international law. It is clear that the occupation of any
territory by force entails international responsibilities
and makes the occupying force accountable. Regrettably,
we have learned of the unabated, forcible acquisition of
Arab land and natural resources. We have heard about
the 15-year blockade and closure of the Gaza Strip,
which has been described as an open-air prison.
All that has had a serious impact on life for
Palestinians and perhaps even for Israelis. We are
saddened to hear of the damaging impact that the ongoing
aggression has had on children. It was not long ago that
the Security Council adopted presidential statement
S/PRST/2023/1 expressing its deep concern about
the ongoing situation in the occupied Arab lands. The
Council reaffirmed its unwavering commitment to the
vision of a two-State solution whereby two democratic
States, Israel and Palestine, can live side by side in peace
within secure and recognized borders. That commitment
stresses that both peoples are entitled to equal measures
32/33

25/04/2023

of freedom, security, property and dignity, and further
notes that continuing aggression, regardless of its
source, is dangerous and imperils the viability of a twoState solution.
We can only discourage all unilateral measures
that impede peace, and we condemn such actions,
including acts of terrorism, and call on all the parties
to unequivocally condemn such acts and refrain from
incitements to violence. We urge all parties to observe
calm and restraint and refrain from provocative actions,
incitement and inflammatory rhetoric. We must also
discourage discrimination, intolerance and hate speech
motivated by racism or directed against people belonging
to religious communities. We must stand firm in our call
for upholding the status quo at the holy sites of Jerusalem.
Only recently the Council noted the important regional
and international diplomatic efforts that have been made
and called for an urgent halt to any activity that would
be detrimental to the peace process. Regrettably, the
month that is the holiest for both denominations has not
passed peacefully. We therefore reiterate the calls for all
parties to refrain from steps that could escalate tensions
in and around the holy sites. We appreciate that there have
been dramatic changes, not only in Israel and Palestine
in recent years but also in the region as a whole. We
believe there is a need to consider a new discourse about
that unending problem, first and foremost with regard to
the dramatic changes on the ground in recent years.
It would finally appear that the story of Palestine
has been marked, from its beginning to the current date,
with every shade of colonialism and a disposition that the
international community treats as being multifaceted,
difficult to understand and even more difficult to resolve.
We appreciate that it is difficult to challenge established
Powers and interests when they refuse to hear the moral
voices of civil society and their objectives, but we
must continue to encourage peace. There is always a
requirement to think carefully about whether more can
be done in a bid to resolve that long-standing issue. We
have to find a way forward and a way out of the ongoing
catastrophe. It would appear that such a vision must be
clearly based on the desire to be of assistance to the
people of Palestine and on real political considerations
of the other. Many of those who support a two-State
solution as the ideal settlement are perhaps saying so
sincerely, but at the same time it has led us diplomats
and politicians to remain ineffective. That language has
been put in place as the best solution, although it may
not be completely satisfactory. Our hopes and prayers
23-11639

25/04/2023

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

will be in vain if we fail to ignite our hearts for peace in
that once blessed land. We cannot wait much longer; we
cannot permit the issue to escalate any further. Sri Lanka
wishes Palestine a genuine peace, which is long overdue.
The President (spoke in Russian): I now give the
floor to the representative of Bahrain.
Mr. Alrowaiei (Bahrain) (spoke in Arabic): I thank
Mr. Sergey Lavrov, Minister for Foreign Affairs of the
Russian Federation, for presiding over the Security
Council’s meeting this morning. I also thank the
delegation of the Russian Federation for convening this
important open debate on the situation in the Middle
East, including the Palestinian question. I would also
like to welcome Mr. Riad Al-Malki, Minister for Foreign
Affairs of the sisterly State of Palestine, and to thank
Mr. Tor Wennesland, Special Coordinator for the Middle
East Peace Process, for his valuable briefing.
The long-standing conflicts that have ravaged
the Middle East, including with their socioeconomic
repercussions, require unified efforts to resolve them
peacefully and the need for renouncing violence and
intolerance in order to revive the prospects for a just
peace and realize the security and stability of the
region, while meeting the aspirations of the peoples of
the region towards prosperity and comprehensive and
sustainable development.
The Kingdom of Bahrain reaffirms the centrality of
the Palestinian question and the importance of preserving
the peace process and regional and international efforts
aimed at establishing an independent Palestinian State
along the 4 June 1967 borders, with East Jerusalem as
its capital, on the basis of the two-State solution and
in accordance with the principles of international law
and the Arab Peace Initiative. The Kingdom of Bahrain
underscores the importance of continuing to provide
protection for worshippers at the Al-Aqsa Mosque and

S/PV.9309 (Resumption 1)

the other holy sites of Jerusalem and of preserving the
legal and historical status quo there, in accordance
with the relevant international resolutions. We reaffirm
the need to respect the role of the sisterly Hashemite
Kingdom of Jordan as the custodian of the holy sites.
The Kingdom of Bahrain welcomes the joint
trilateral statement by the sisterly Kingdom of Saudi
Arabia and the Islamic Republic of Iran, brokered by
the People’s Republic of China, on the resumption of
diplomatic relations between the two countries. The
Kingdom of Bahrain hopes that the agreement will
constitute a positive step towards resolving differences
and ending all regional disputes through dialogue and
diplomacy, while establishing international relations on
the basis of mutual understanding and respect, goodneighbourliness, non-interference in the internal affairs
of other States and commitment to the principles of the
Charter of the United Nations and international law.
The Kingdom of Bahrain expresses its deep regret
over the armed confrontations taking place in the
brotherly Sudan and its serious implications for the
safety and security of Sudanese citizens and residents.
We call on the Sudanese parties to prioritize wisdom and
reason in order to end the armed clashes, cease escalation
and stop the bloodshed, while resorting to dialogue to
reach a political solution that preserves the security and
stability of the Sudan and protects the interests of the
brotherly Sudan.
In conclusion, the Kingdom of Bahrain reiterates
the need to continue cooperation and coordination to
support all efforts aimed at reaching political solutions
that consolidate peace and stability in that vital and
strategic region, which will benefit all the countries and
peoples of the world.
The meeting rose at 6.20 p.m.

23-1163933/33
