68

General Assembly-Twenty-sixth Session

Having considered the report of the Eoconomic
and Social Council, 411
l. Takes oote of Economic and Social Council
resolution 1621 (LI) of 30 July 1971;
2. Decides to adopt, in accordance with Article 108
of the Charter of the United Nations, the following
amendment to the Charter and to submit it for ratification by the States Members of the United Nations:

"Rule 14746
"The General Assembly -shall each year, in the
course of its regular session, elect eighteen members
of the Economic and Social Council for a term of
three years."
2026th plenary meeting,
20 December 1971.

"Article 61
"1. The Economic and Social Council shall consist of fifty-four Members of the United Nations
elected by the General Assembly.
"2. Subject to the provisions of paragraph 3,
eighteen members of the Economic and Social Council shall be elected each year for a term of three
years. A retiring member shall be eligible for immediate re-election.
"3. At the first election after the increase in the
membership of the Economic and Social Council
from twenty-seven to fifty-four members, in addition
to the members elected in place of the nine members
whose term of office expires at the end of that year,
twenty-seven additional members shall be elected.
Of these twenty-seven additional members, the term
of office of nine members so elected shall expire at
the end of one year, and of nine other members
at the end of two years, in accordance with arrangements made by the General Assembly.
"4. Each member of the Economic and Social
Council shall have one representative.";
3. Urges all Member States to ratify the above
amendment in accordance with their respective constitutional processes as soon as possible and to deposit
their instruments of ratification with the SecretaryGeneral;
4. Further decides that the members of the Economic
and Social Council shall be elected according to the
following pattern:
(a) Fourteen members from African States;
(b) Eleven members from Asian States;
( c) Ten members from Latin American States;
(d) Thirteen members from Western European and
other States;
(e) Six members from socialist States of Eastern
Europe;
5. Welcomes the decision of the Economic and Social Council, pending the receipt of the necessary ratifications, to enlarge its sessional committees to fiftyfour members;
6. Invites the Economic and Social Council, as soon
as possible and not later than the organizational meetings of its fifty-second session, to elect the twenty-seven
additional members from States Members of the United
Nations to serve on the enlarged sessional committees;
such elections should be in accordance with paragraph
4 above and should be held each year pending the
coming into force of the enlargement of the Council;
7. Decides that, as of the date of the entry into
force of the above amendments, rule 147 of the rules
of procedure of the General Assembly shall be
amended to read:

2848 (XXVI). Protein resources

45 Official Records of the General Assembly, Twenty-sixth
Session, Supplement No. 3 (A/8403).

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 2416 (XXIII) of 17 December 1968 and 2684 (XXV) of 11 December 1970,
Economic and Social Council resolution 1640 (LI)
of 30 July 1971, World Health Assembly resolution
WHA22.56 of 25 July 1969 and resolutions 2/69 and
7/71 adopted by the Conference of the Food and
Agriculture Organization of the United Nations on 26
November 1969 and 22 November 1971,
Recalling also paragraphs 18 and 69 of the International Development Strategy for the Second United
Nations Development Decade,
Bearing in mind the Declaration on the world food
problem adopted on 22 March 1968 47 by the United
Nations Conference on Trade and Development at its
second session,
Recognizing that the protein problem is part of the
general problem of food production and supply, which
depends on a great many economic, social, cultural
and political factors, including social and economic
under-development, which is manifested in unemployment and under-employment, extremely low incomes,
poor nutritional habits, poor health and sanitary conditions, low agricultural productivity and serious defects
in marketing,
Recognizing also that protein-calorie malnutrition is
the primary cause of high infant and child mortality,
reaching from 25 to 30 per cent in many developing
countries, that it increases susceptibility to infection
and can permanently impair growth and development
in the survivors, to the detriment of their later physical
and intellectual performance,
Considering that it is in the interests of developing
countries to make increased use of the external-and
particularly multilateral-financial and technical assistance available for dealing with problems of food supply
and nutrition since the direct and indirect costs of malnutrition to national development are often far more
than the amount that would be required for its prevention,
Recognizing that, since the ultimate solution of the
protein problem can only be found over the long term
while immediate action with respect to vulnerable
groups is required if irreversible damage is to be prevented, clear national and international priorities must
be set now in taking remedial action, and that consequently external short-term assistance such as emergency food support must be combined with assistance
for vital long-range projects,
Acknowledging the programme and assistance activities relating to the protein problem being undertaken
46 Formerly rule 146 (see resolution 2837 (XXVI), annex I,
para. 9).
4 7 Proceedings of the United Nations Conference on Trade
and Development, Second Session, vol. I and Corr.1 and 3
and Add.I and 2, Report and Annexes (United Nations publication, Sales No.: E.68.II.D.14), p. 28.

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Second Committee

by various organizations of th~ Unite? Nations system
and particularly by the Protem Advisory. Group _and
its four sponsoring organizations-:--the Umted ~atu:ms
Children's Fund, the Food and Agriculture Organ!za~on
of the United Nations the World Health Orgamzation
and the International' Bank for Reconstruction and
Development-and emphasizing that th~ir efforts ~ust
be further integrated to achieve the maximum effectiveness,
Concerned that increasing awareness of the extent
and implications of the problem of protein-calorie
malnutrition has not led to the type and scope of
national or international response required for an
effective approach to the solution,
1. Urges developing countries to establish ~r emp?asize short-term priorities and undertake special actl~n
and information programmes with r~gard to _Protem
malnutrition in accordance with their respective national plans since the alleviation of the situation in the
short-term ~ust be based upon the improved utilization
of existing national and international resources;
2. Urges the developed countries to reinforce their
support for both bilateral and multilateral projects_ and
programmes dealing with the protein problem i~ a
manner compatible with the requests of the developmg
countries;
3. Urges developing countries:
(a) To draw up comprehensive statements_ of national nutrition policy and related food and agncult~ral
policy to be incorporated, under the 11_1ost appropriate
administrative arrangements, in their development
plans;
(b) To encourage and make the maximum use of
surveys and studies of their food and nutrition
situations and to encourage the training of the necessary professional personnel in science and technology
related to food, agriculture, nutrition and other relevant
fields;
4. Urges Governments to implement as appropriate,
but as soon as possible, the essential elements of the
Strategy Statement on Action to Avert the Protein
Crisis in the Developing Countries 48-prepared by the
Panel to Assist the Secretary-General in the Formulation of a Strategy Statement on the Protein Problem
Confronting the Developing Countries, convened in
pursuance of General Assembly resolution 2684
(XXV)-as set forth in the annex to the present resolution;
5. Requests appropriate United Nations organs,
particularly the United Nations Development Programme, the specialized agencies and the International
Atomic Energy Agency, to assist the developing countries, at their request, in all possible ways to implement the undertakings set out in paragraphs 1, 3 and
4 above;
6. Recommends to the sponsoring agencies that the
terms of reference of the Protein Advisory Group
should be modified as follows so as to enable the Group
to broaden its activities and to play a more active and
stimulative role:
(a) To advise on the technical, economic, educational, social and other related aspects of all the programmes within the United Nations system related to
improving protein nutrition;
48 See Strategy Statement on Action to Avert the Protein
Crisis in the Developing Countries (United Nations publication, Sales No.: E.71.11.A.17), annex.

69

(b) To advise on current programmes and on new
areas of activity;
( c) To provide guidelines for the formulation of
the broad programmes of the Unit~d Nations system
of organizations involved in the vanous aspects of the
protein problem;
.
.
(d) To seek, evaluate and dis~emmate new mformation on all aspects of the protem problem;
( e) To advise on the impr?':~ment o! procedures
for project evaluation and feasibility studies;
(f) To identify, evaluate and advise on probleII?,s
in protein resource development and protem_-calone
malnutrition requiring scientific and technological research;
(g) To advise on such other _matters as the various
United Nations bodies refer to it;
7. Urges the United Nations bodies concerned, in
particular the World Fc_)Od Progra~me, th~ International Labour Organisation, the Umted Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization and the
International Atomic Energy Agency, to becom~ full
sponsors of the Protein Advisory Group so !hat 1t can
effectively carry out its terms of reference m support
of the United Nations system;
8. Requests, to this same end, the Secretary-General in consultation with the Administrator of the
United Nations Development Programme, the SecretaryGeneral of the United Nations Conference on Trade
and Development and the Executive Director. of _the
United Nations Industrial Development Orgamzation,
to study and report to the Economic a?d Social <:;~uncil
at its fifty-second session on the possible ~odahtt~s of
United Nations sponsorship of the Protem Advisory
Group;
9. Commends paragraphs 6 and 7 of Economic and
Social Council resolution 1640 (LI) of 30 July 1971
relating to further discussion of the protein strategy
in other forums and the submission of annual reports
by the Protein Advisory Group;
10. Welcomes the recent establishment by the Council of the Food and Agriculture Organization of the
United Nations, pursuant to resolution 7 /71 adopted
on 22 November 1971 by the Conference ?f that
organization, of a special seven-member comm_1ttee to
review the work of the organization in the protem field;
l l. Requests the Economic and Social Council,
during its discussion of the terms of reference of its
Committee on Science and Technology, 49 to give sympathetic consideration to inviting appropriate . representation of the Protein Advisory Group to sess10ns of
the Committee held to review and focus attention on
the protein problem and to urging Governments, the
United Nations and the specialized agencies concerned
to assign representatives at a high level to attend such
meetings;
12. Requests the Secretary-General, in co-operation
with the Administrator of the United Nations Development Programme and . in _consultation. with the ex~cutive heads of the orgamzations sponsoring the Protem
Advisory Group, to arrange, at the request of Governments, for persons who took part in the Panel convened by the Secretary-General in pursuance of General
Assembly resolution 2684 (XXV) to visit the Governments in order to enhance the establishment of national
policies and arrangements to deal with the protein
49 Established under paragraph 1 of Economic and Social
Council resolution 1621 B (LI) of 30 July 1971.

70

General Assembly-Twenty-sixth Session

problem, and to report as appropriate to the Committee on Science and Technology;
13. Further requests the Secretary-General to seek
the views of Governments on the recommendation of
the Panel and of the Advisory Committee on the
Application of Science and Technology to Development for the establishment of a special protein fund
under the United Nations Development Programme in
order to ascertain the views of Governments on its
feasibility and to ascertain whether significant resources
would be made available to it without prejudice to the
increased resources envisaged for the Programme, and
to report to the General Assembly at its twenty-seventh
session through the Economic and Social Council.
2026th plenary meeting,
20 December 1971.
ANNEX
Essential elements of the Strategy Statement on Action to
Avert the Protein Crisis in the Developing Countries

1. Make every effort to increase the production of food
crops, particularly through the exploitation of new high-yield
varieties, bearing in mind the special need for an expanded
production of protein-rich pulses and oilseeds;
2. Encourage accelerated and expanded research designed
to improve the nutritive value of cereal proteins through genetic
engineering;
3. Encourage accelerated and expanded research designed
to develop high-yielding pulses, legumes and oilseed crops;
4. Encourage the increased production of animal proteins,
particularly through research on increasing forage yields and
production;
5. Make every effort to prevent an unnecessary loss of
protein-containing foods in field, storage, transport and home;
6. Encourage increased production from marine and freshwater fishery resources;
7. Encourage the development, distribution and promotion
of formulated protein foods;
8. Facilitate the application of science and technology to
the development of new protein sources in order to supplement
conventional food resources;
9. Develop and support regional and national centres for
research and training in agricultural technology, food science,
food technology and nutrition;
10. Conduct informational and educational campaigns related to protein production and consumption;
1 1. Improve protein utilization through the control and
prevention of infectious diseases;
12. Review and improve policies, legislation and regulations regarding all aspects of food and protein production,
processing and marketing so as to remove unnecessary
obstacles and encourage appropriate activities;
13. Give special attention to the protein needs of vulnerable
groups;
14. Initiate intervention programmes aimed at ensuring that
vulnerable groups will receive the most appropriate type and
a sufficient quantity of food by the most effective means;
15. Recognize the important relationships between family
size, population growth and the protein problem;
16. Recognize the role of economic development and social
modernization in solving the protein problem.

2849 (XXVI).

Development and environment

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 2398 (XXIII) of 3 December 1968, 2581 (XXIV) of 15 December 1969 and
2657 of 7 December 1970,

Expressing satisfaction for the efforts made and the
results already achieved towards planning action to
be taken by the United Nations system in the field of
the environment in a manner compatible with the
priorities and interests of the developing countries,
Taking note with appreciation, in particular, of the
work done by the regional seminars on development
and environment, held under the auspices of the
Economic Commission for Asia and the Far East, the
Economic Commission for Africa, the Economic Commission for Latin America and the United Nations
Economic and Social Office at Beirut, as well as by
the Panel of Experts on Development and the
Environment, 50
Conscious of the signrificance of the results achieved
in the Symposium on Problems relating to Environment,
convened at Prague by the Economic Commission for
Europe, for a better understanding of environmental
problems,50
Fully conscious of the importance, urgency and universality of environmental problems,
Aware that the rational management of the environment !is of fundamental importance for the future of
mankind,
Convinced that development plans should be compatible with a sound ecology and that adequate environmental conditions can best be ensured by the promotion
of development, both at the national and international
levels,
Fully aware that the environmental problems
generated by the condition of under-development pose
a serious threat to the developing countries,
Cognizant that, aside from environmental disturbances
provoked by human settlements and ecological problems
related to nature itself, pollution of world-wide impact
is being caused primarily by some highly developed
countries, as a consequence of their own high level of
improperly planned and inadequately co-ordinated industrial activities, and that, therefore, the main responsibility for the financing of corrective measures falls
upon those countries,
Convinced that most of the environmental problems
existing in developing countries are caused by their
lack of economic resources for dealing with such
problems as the improvement of unfavourable natural
areas or the rehabilitation of environmental conditions
that have deteriorated through the application of improper methods and technologies,
Conscious that the main objective of developing
countries is integrated and rational development, including industrial development based on advanced and
adequate technologies, and that such development
represents at the present stage the best possible solution
for most of the environmental problems in the developing countries,
Conscious further that the quality of human life in the
developing countries also depends, in large measure, on
the solution of environmental problems which have their
origin in nature and which are the product of underdevelopment itself, within the general framework of development planning and the rational management of
natural resources,
Emphasizing that, notwithstanding the general principles that might be agreed upon by the international
community, criteria and minimal standards of preservation of the environment as a general rule will have
r.o See A/CONF.48/PC/ 13 and Corr. I, chap. III.
