UNITED
NATIONS

S
Security Council
Distr.
GENERAL
S/PRST/1994/51
7 September 1994
ORIGINAL:

ENGLISH

STATEMENT BY THE PRESIDENT OF THE SECURITY COUNCIL

At the 3422nd meeting of the Security Council, held on 7 September 1994, in
connection with the Council’s consideration of the item entitled "The situation
in Mozambique", the President of the Security Council made the following
statement on behalf of the Council:
"The Security Council welcomes the report of the Secretary-General of
26 August 1994 (S/1994/1002) on the United Nations Operation in Mozambique
and notes with appreciation the report (S/1994/1009) and oral briefing of
the mission it sent to Mozambique to discuss with the parties how best to
ensure full and timely implementation of the general peace agreement. It
commends the mission for accomplishing its objectives, as set forth by the
President of the Council on 4 August 1994 (S/1994/931).
"The Security Council is satisfied, at present, with the pace of the
peace process, including demobilization of all forces which will be
completed shortly. It maintains a cautious optimism that Mozambicans will
be able to fulfil the goals of the peace process, achieving democracy,
lasting peace, and responsible, representative government in their country.
"The Security Council welcomes the fact that the leaders of the main
political parties in Mozambique and the National Elections Commission have
confirmed their commitments to take all steps necessary to ensure the
holding of elections on 27 and 28 October 1994, as scheduled. It
underlines the importance of ensuring that the voter registration process
reach as many Mozambicans as possible. Those parties who have concerns
about the implementation of aspects of the electoral process should pursue
them through the National Elections Commission. The Council reiterates its
intention to endorse the results of the Mozambican elections provided the
United Nations declares them as free and fair and reminds all the parties
of their obligation under the General Peace Agreement fully to respect
these results as well as the principles of democracy.
"The Security Council reaffirms the importance of proceeding as
expeditiously as possible with the formation and training of the new
Mozambican Defence Force (FADM). It notes with satisfaction that both the
Government of Mozambique and RENAMO have accepted the fact that the initial
size of FADM will be consistent with training and recruitment constraints
during the pre-election period. It encourages the Government of Mozambique
94-35320 (E)

070994

/...

S/PRST/1994/51
English
Page 2

speedily to complete the transfer of the requisite authority and assets
from the Mozambique Armed Forces (FAM) to FADM. The Council calls upon
Member States to help provide military training and appropriate equipment
to the FADM.
"The Security Council expresses its appreciation to the SecretaryGeneral for providing a detailed revised timetable for the phased
withdrawal of ONUMOZ civilian and military personnel as set out in his
report. The Council concurs with the Secretary-General that ONUMOZ should
be deployed over a wider area of the country, keeping in mind the need to
assist the Government in maintaining security, particularly in the crucial
period before, during and immediately after the elections.
"The Security Council notes the importance of ensuring that the
Mozambican police have the resources required to maintain security in the
country, in particular in the post-electoral period. It urges that the
Mozambican police be provided with these resources, and calls upon Member
States to assist in this regard by contributing to the training and
equipment needs of the police.
"The Security Council expresses concern at the limited progress made
to date in the area of demining. It welcomes efforts to revitalize that
programme and urges all concerned to accelerate training and mine clearance
activities, and work with the relevant Mozambican authorities towards the
establishment of a national demining capability, including the possibility
of leaving demining equipment in Mozambique after the withdrawal of ONUMOZ,
subject to the appropriate arrangements.
"The Security Council invites the Secretary-General to report on the
final disposition of the assets of ONUMOZ within the framework of the
withdrawal of ONUMOZ.
"The Security Council encourages the parties to continue their efforts
in good faith to ensure post-electoral harmony on the basis of the
observance of the democratic principles accepted by them in the General
Peace Agreement as well as on the basis of the spirit and letter of that
Agreement.
"The Security Council notes that the post-election period will be an
important and delicate time, during which the international community will
need to assist the Mozambicans in the rehabilitation and development of
their country, and in this regard calls upon the Secretary-General to
report to the competent United Nations bodies on what further role the
United Nations can perform.
"The Council commends the efforts of the Secretary-General and his
Special Representative in moving the peace process forward. It expresses
its gratitude to the Special Representative of the Secretary-General and
his dedicated staff for the assistance rendered to the mission sent by the
Security Council to Mozambique."

-----
