SECURITY COUNCIL
,

OFfiCIAL RECORDS
SECOND YEAR

CONSEIL DE SECURITE
PROCES-VERBAUX OFFiCIELS
DEUXIEME ANNEE

No. 37

130th and 131st meeting
18 April 1947

130eme et 131eme seances
18 avril 1947

Lake Success
New York
( 5l.t.P·)

TABLE OF CONTENTS

TABLE DES MATIEReS

Hundred and thirtieth meeting

Cent-trentieme seance
Page

Pages

767
133. Provisional agenda
767
agenda
the
of
on
Adopti
134.
135. Continuation of the discussion on the
(}reek question ...... .•.... ...... .. 767

767
133. Ordre du jour provisoire
767
jour
du
l'ordre
de
on
Adopti
134.
135. Suite de la discussion sur la question
767
grecque

Hundred and thirty-first meeting

Cent-trente et unieme seance

136. Continuation of the discussion on the
78G
(}reek .quesnon

136. Suite de la discussion sur la question
786
grecque

NATIONS UNIES

UNITED NATIONS
•

SECURITY
COUNCIL

CONSEIL
DE SECURITE

OFFICIAL· RECORDS

PROCES-VERBAUX OFFICIELS

SECOND YEAR

No. 37

No 37

HUNDRED AND THIRTIETH MEETING

CENT~TRENTIEME SEANCE

Held at Lake Success, New York,
on Friday, 18 April 1947, at 10:30 a.m.

Tenue aLake Success, New-York,
levendredi 18 avril 1947, a 10 h. 30.

President: Mr. Quo Tai-chi (China).

President: M. Quo Tai-chi (Chine).

Present: The representatives of the following countries: Australia, Belgium, Brazil, China,

Colombia, France, Poland,
na, Union of
Soviet Socialist Republics, United Kingdom,
United States of America.

Presents: Les representants des pays suivants:
Australie, Belgique, Bresil, Chine, Colombie,
Etats-Unis d'Amerique, France, Pologne,
Royaume-Uni, Syrie, Union des Republiques
socialistes sovietiques.

133. Provisional agenda
(document S/328/Corr.1)

133. Ordre du iour provisoire
(document S/328/Corr.l)·

1. Adoption of the agenda.

1. Adoption de l'ordre dujour.

2. The' Greek question.

2. La question grecque.

134. Adoption of the agenda

.

DEUXIEME ANNES

134. Adoption de I'ordre du iour

The agenda was adopted.

L'ordre du jour est adopte.

135. Continuation of the discussion
on the Greek question

135. Suite de la discussion sur la
question grecque

At the invitation of the President Mr.
Kahreman Ylli,representati7Je of Albania, Mr.
Athanassov, representative of Bulgaria, Mr.
Dendramis, representative .of Greece, and Mr.
Krasovec, representative of Yugo$lavia, took
their seats at the Council table.

Sur l'invitatzort du President, M. Kahreman
Ylli, representant de l'Albanie, M. Athanassov, representant de la Bulgarie, M. Dendramis; representant de la'Grece, et M. Krasouec, representant
de la Yougoslavie, prennent place a la table du
ConSeil.

. The PRESIDENT: There were two speakers
Le PRESIDENT (traduit de l'anglais): A la
InScribed on my list at the last meeting; they demiere seance. deux orateurs etaient inscrits sur
did not have' an opportunity to speak. This ma liste, mais ils n'ont pu prenclre la parole. Ce
morning I have four other speakers who wish matin, quatreautres orateurs se sont fclt inscrire.
t?•speak. I shall call first upon the representa- Je donnerai d'abord la parole au .representant de
tive of. France.
la France.

4

Mr. PARO~I (France) (tra~slated-fro~---~-~:';:~:I(-~;~ce):Les mm:~res du ~onsell
French): The members of the Security Council de securite ont ici, a mes yeux, une double
have, in my ophrion, a two.;.fold responsibility. responsabilite. Nous n'agissons pas seulement
'We are not acting merely as repN'sentatives of comme representants de nos Gouvernements.
~w...Governments; we h~ve also a direct respon- nous avons au~ une.responsabilite propre
Slbllity of our own, derIved from the fact that directe du seul frot que nous sommes les membres
we are members of the organ of the United de l'organe des Nations TInies qui a le plus
Nations which ic; most directly concerned with directement la charge d'appliquer les prescripthe application ,1f the provisions of the Ohartel' tions de la Charte et, notamment, les prescripand, in particular, of the general provisions of ti()ns generales de l'Arti.cle premier, c'est-a-dire
Article 1, namely, to maintain among the peoples d'entretenirentre les peuples des relations fondees
relations based on justice and to ensure the sur la justice et d'assurer le maintien de la paix.
maintenance of peace.
C'est avec la conscience de cette respnnsabilite .
It is with the full realization of that responque
je veux presenter, sur la question qui :figure a.
sibility that I wish to make the following remarks on the question which is on our agenda notre ordre du jour, les observations suivantes.
today. I am one of the last speakers, and I do Je suis un des demiers a parler, et je ne veux pas
not wish to prolong the debate; I shall there- prolonger le debat; je presenterai donc ces obserfore make theseemarks as concise as possible. vations sous une forme aussi concise que possible.
Je ne pense 'pas qU'il serait bon de dissimuler
I do not tm· Jot. it would be wise to conceal
the concern that the recent policy of the United les inquietudes que la recente polique des EtatsStates may have caused with regro d to the Unis a pu faire naitre, quant a l'autorite et a.
authority and the future of the United Nations. l'avenir de l'Organisation des Nations Unies.
We felt this concern when we saw the Govern- Nous avons eprouve ces inquietudes quand nous
ment of the country whose suppcrt is most avons vu le Gouvernement du pays dont l'appui
necessary to the United Nations taking sides on <>,st le plus necessaire a l'Orgmrisation prendre
the difficulties of the situation in Greece, at parti sur les difficultes de la situation en Grk~
a time when an investigating commission ap.l. alors qu'une commission d'enquete, designee par
pointed by the Security Council was conducting le Conseil de securite, poursuivait UIle enquete
an inquiry on the spot, and without waiting sur place, et sans attendre qu'elle eut presente
for it to submit its report. We felt this concern son rapport; et, aussi, quand une politique d'aide
also when a policy of substantial military aid militaire importante a la Grece et a la Turquie
to Greece and Turkey was being announced at a ete annoncee au moment ou une autre coma time when another commission, also appointed mission, egalement instituee par le Conseil de
by the Security Council, was beginning to study securite, commen~ait a etudier la reduction des
armements.
the reduction of armaments.

aq

et

We should indeed be grateful to the people
and the Government of the United States for
'having understood that concern before it had
been expressed by anyone here. The statements
made at our previous meetings by Mr. Austin
give a sure indication of the place occupied by
this international organization in the conscience
of nations. .The explanations which were provided and the assurance given us that any
arrangements or agreements which might be
made with the Greek and Turkish Governments would be submitted to the Secretariat
for registration, .are important facts in the development of the 'United Nations. Nevertheless,
these statements impose a heavy responsibility
'.
on the Security Council.
I do not wish. to express my opinion without
first associating myself, as I have done on
another occasion, with the tributes which have
been paid here to the Greek people and to the
extreme courage which it has shown. I know,
by personal experience, the effect produced by
Greek resistance in all countries which were
occupied. by Hitler's armies. I need only recall
the thrill which ran through .my country at
the thought that there was, at one end of
Europe, a people, a grea..t people in history,
but numerically· a, small country, which was
too.proud to bow before the armies which were
then the most powerfulin the world. lam glad

Nous devons certainement etre reconnaissants
au peuple et au Gouvernement des Etats-Unis
d'avoir compris ces inquietudes avant que personne id ne les eut exprimees. Les declarations
faites a. nos seances precedentes par M. Austin
marquent a coup sur la place que l'institution
intemationale occupe dans la conscience des
peuples. Les explications qui ontete fournies,
l'assurance qui nous a etedonnee que les arrangements et les accords qui interviendraient avec les
Gouvemements grec et turc seraient communiques au Secreta.1i'iat pour etre enregistres, sont
des faits importants dans le deve10ppement de
l'Organisation des Nations Unies. Ces declarations, toutefois" chargent le Conseil de securite
d'une lourde responsabilite.
Je ne voudrais pas indiquer ma maniere de
voir sans d'abord m'associer, comme je l'ai fait
en une precedente occasion, a l'hommage qui a
ete rendu ici au peuple grecainsi qu~a l'extreme
courage dont il a fait preuve. Je sais, par experience personneUe, queUe resonance la resistance
grecque a fait naitre dans tous·les pays qu'occu-,
paient les armees d'Hitler. Je n'ai qu'a me
souvenir du fremissement qui a parcouru man
pays a la pensee qu'il y avait, a une extremite de
l'Europe, un peuple - un peuple grand dans
l'histoire mais petit par le nombre -- assez fier
pour ne pas s'inclinerdevant les armees qui
etaient alors les plus puissantes dumonde. Je

a-------

..

....
$.--;!!!II,. •,• •---------ilIt.l"M~9~j···$

. . . ._._.
_~"

to find that we were unanimous iD. payi..'1g this ,suis heureux de constater que :F.~, ~ avons ete id
tribute to the resistance of the Greek people. unanimes a rendre hommage a la resistance du
peup1e grec.
, Aussi le principe meme d'une aide economique

Henc'~, the principle of economic aid to Greece

seems to me to be incontesta,b1e, and I do not
think that any member of the Security Council
has contested it. We also know that this aid
is a matter of the greatest urgency and that it
has been requested by the Greek Government.

a la Grece ne me parait-il pas ponvoir etre

conteste, et je ne crois pas qu'i! l'ait ete p~
aucun des membres du Conseil de securite. Nous
savons aussi que cette aide doit etre donnee dans
des conditions de grande urgence, et qu'e11e a ete
demandee par le Gouvernement grec,

On a. suggere que cette aide devrait etre
'It has been suggested that this aid should be
controIee
par un organisme des Nations Unies;
controlled by a body of the United Nations:
c'est
une
proposition qui peut meriter d'etre
that is a proposal which may be worthy of
examinee;
quanta
moi, jene pourrais iacilement
consideration; for my own part, I could not
l'appuyer
si
je
ne
sav~qu'e11e recueille l'adheeasily support it if I d,d not know that it had
sion du Gouvcrnement des Etats-Unis, car nous
received the approval of the United States
ne devons pas oublier qu'il s'agit d'une aide dont
Government-for we must not forget that this
les Etats-U nis d'Amenque sont seuls a assumer
is an aid the burden of which the United States la charge. La situation serait incontestablement
is assuming alone. The situation would un- differente ' si d'autres Gouvernements que celui
doubtedly be different if Governments other des EtatS-Unis etaient disposes a prendre leur
than that of the Unitea. States were prepared part de cette charge, mais nous savons qu'il n'en
to bear their pa..'i: of this burden, but we know est pas ainsi. A mes yeux, en tout cas, l'essentiel
that t.rus is not the case. In my opiillon, at any
est que le peuple grec soit aide comme il merite
rate, the ess~tial point is that the Greek people
de l'etre, et sans perdre de temps.
should be helped as it deserves help, and that,
without loss of time.
Je souhaiterais cependantque la delegation des
Howeyer, I would wish the United States Etats-Unis put aller plUs lom que l'enregistredelegation toga further than the .tegistration ment des accords a mtervenir, et qu'une formule
of agreements to he concluded, and that a for- put etre trouvee par laquellc l'Organisation intermula be found whereby the internatio~al Organ- nationale serait tenue aucourant de l'aidedonnee
ization would be kept informed of the help a la Grece et, des Ses resultats, que ce filt par
to .Greece and ~: its results, whether through l'intermediaire du Conseil de· securite ou du
the Security Council or through the Economic Conseil economique et sodal,' ou des autres Ofand Social Council, or the other international ganismesinternationaux auxquels M. Austin. a
bodies 'to which Mr. Austin has several times
plusieurs fois fait allusion. Je demande a la delereferred. I would ask the United States delegation des Etats·Unis de bien vouloir e.xammer
. gation kindly to examine that suggestion.
cette suggestion.
L'aide qui sera apportee au peup1e grec est de
The help which will be given to the Greek
nature
a justifier une contrepariie. Le regime
people is such as to justify a counterpart. The
actue11ementen
vigueut' en Grece tire sa legitimite
present regime in Greece derives its legitimacy
du
fait
qu'il
prend
appui sur des elections auXfrom the fact that it is based on elections which
took place underinternationa... control. Many' queUes il a ete procede sous. controle internaother Governments might, or should, envy the tional. Cette origine elective, beaucoup .d'autres
Gr~ek.people that elective ori£,in; but it may be Gouvernements pourraient sans doute, ou. deeasIer to hold a single free election than to put vraient, l'envier au peuple grec; mais il pent
really. into .pra~tice the principles of democracy arriver qu'il sait plus facile de proceder une' fois
a des elections libres que de'mettre veritab1ement
and liberty. - .
,
'
en pratique les principes de democratie· et de
liberte.
It is.perhaps a delicate matter for the Security
Council to. formulate art opinion on the distribution of 'aid emanating solely from United
§tates t;;enerosity. Nevertheless, I think that it·
~" within our competence to ask the United
~~ates Government to accompany the aid it will
give to Greece with advice which, I hope~ will
enable the Greek ,Government to appear in'
~e .eyes of. the world as a Government acting
: the n~me ofa truly dem()cr~~c regime, , That.
cerotam1yonc.of the conditions for the reejtablishxnent of mter~al peace and of the unity.
o the Greek people.
~'

I

n est peut-etre d6licat,pour le Conseil de
securite,deformuler un avis quant a la distribution. de secours provenant. de la' seule generosite
des ,Etats-Unis. Je pense cependantquecela
rentre dans nos attributions et qU'il conviendrait
de demander au Gouverncment des Etats-Unis
d'accompagrie~ leconcours qu'il donnera a la
Grete de conseils qui, je le souhaite, permettront
au Gouvernement grec d'apparartr~ a tous les
yeux comme agissant au n.0m d'un regime veritablt:(ment democratique.C'est certainemerit la
une des conditions duretablissement de la paix
interieure et de l'unitedu peuple\grec.

~

444;

I should like to add one remark: It is proJe voudrais ajouter une observation: il est
foundly regrettable to see a people which has profontl6nent douloureux de voir un peuple qui
shed so much blood for the liberty of the world a tant verse de son sang pour la liberte du monde
'engage in internecine strife, as is the Greek se dechirer lui-meme, comme la nation greeque
nation- at present. T~e conditions of reSistance' le fait actuellement. Les conditions de la resisto the invader, which we have become accus- tance a l'envahisseur, de ce que neus avons pm
,tomed to
by the single word, "resistance," l'habitude d'appekr la resistance tout court, ont
have indeed shown common r.haracteristics in sans doute presente des traitscommuns dans tous
all the countries that have suffered invasion, les pays qui ont connu l'invasion, mais elles sont
· and it is perhaps difficult for countries which peut-etre difficiles a comprendre pour les pays qui .
have not been invaded to understand them. I n'ont pas eM envahis. Je souhaite que l'bfluence
hope that the influence of the "C11itedStates du Gouvernement des Etats-Unis s'exerce en
Government will be exercised in ,such aman.'le!" tenant largement compte de I'Mroisme depense
-that full account is taken of the heroism dis- hier contre les armees de l'Axe, de; l'impatienl;e
played again:;t the Axis armies, of the natural naturelle a des hommes qui ont donne beaueoup
impatience of men who have spent themselves d'eux-memes,.d.:: la difficulte qu'ont eprouvee ees
freely, and of the difficulties which these men hommes a accepter certaines desillusions, cornme
have encountered in having to accept certain a se rehabit~er aux dis~iplines de la paix. .
disillusions and in having to become accustomed
once agaili to the discipline of peace.
Si je viens de parler de l'aide a la Greee, je
In speaking of aid to Greece, I pave been
referring only to financial and economic assist- n'ai eu en vue que l'aide financiere et eeono.
ance;. the question of military· aid is more deli- mique; .la 'question de l'aide militatre est plus
cate, and I do not think that we are in a position deIicate,et je. ne pense pas· que no1:'\& SOYOllS en
to consider it at the present stage of our work. etat de !'examiner au stade actuel de nos travaux.

can

We have sent to Greece a commission
instructed to study the question of frontier incidents on the spot. 'Hult, commission ha.~
undertaken a long .and· .certainly a conscien· tious inquiry. It is. in . the process of framing
the conclusions which it will submit to us. Its
report, whethel' unanimous: or 'not,is, in any
event, an element' of appreciation without
which we cannot formulate any serio:us opinion.

Nous avons envoye en Grece unecommission
chargee d'etudier s1L.~. place la question des incidents de frontieres; cette commission a procede
a une longue, et certainement consc:iencieuse,
enquete. Elle met.au point les con.clusions qu'elle
doit nous presenter. Son rapport, qu'il efC.prime
ou non l'avis unanime, est en tout cas un element
d'~ppreciation sans. lequel nous ne pouvons
formuler aucim avis serieux.

Je fais' cependant, des .maintenant, une reNeverthdess,at this time I'shouldlike to make
marque
,de ·caractere tres general sur cette qu~·
a very general remark on this question of military assistance. It has .been said, and unfortun- tion d'aide miliiaire. On a dit, et malheureuseately nghtly so, that the United Nations did mentavec Justesse, que l'Organisationdes
not have sufficiently effective means of action Nations Unies ne disposait pas de moyens cl'acat its disposal to be able
deal usefully with tion suffisamment efficaces pour que nous puis.
certaih situations.. O:lf authority would certain- sions utilement prendre en main certaines situaly . be· greater if the work'of the Military Staff tions. Notre autorite serait certainementplus
Committee. were more advanced, if Article 43 grande si les travaux .du Comite d'etat-major
ofthe Charter had been implemented, and if w~ , etaient plus avancCs, si l'Article 43 de la Charte
had contingents available which might be sent avaitete misen. application et si nousdisposioilS
to' the critical points .of the world. .It would de contingents pouvant etre envoyes auX points
notb.e the size. of '" these contingents or of their nevralgiques du monde., Cen'est pas tant l'im~
· armament that would count most but their portance des effectifs ni de leur arm~Irientqui
status as intemationaLforces which no country compterait que leur caractere de forces inter7
could think of attacking. ·without thereby pro- nationales que nul pays ne pourrait songer a
claimingitseH an aggressur against the United attaquer sans, par cela· meme, se designer. luiNations.
memeco~e l'agresseur des Nations Unies.

to

Thll~; one of the l~ons of the situation in
which \~eare .placed is, once again,. that we
shouldt:Stablish as soon as possible, th~ armed
for(;esprovided for in Article 43 of the Charter.
That is in the interests of all the nations of the
world.' It is the'conditionof an authority wmch
vv,e'cannot claim for the United Nations with0llt .putting th~t I Organiiationinaposition to
exert it.

.Finally,IshouId .like tQsay a few words on

the conservatory measure propoSed by Mr.
Austin in the draft. resolution he;~~bmitted,

dans

Vne des le~ons de la situation
laquelle
nous nous trouvoIls est donc, une- fois de plus,
qu'il est pecessaire d'acceierer la mise sur pied
~esforces visees a l'Article 43 de laCharte. C'est
l'interetde toutes'lesnations du monde. C'estla
coridition d'une autorite que 1'0n ne peut. reven~
diquerpour l'Organisation' des' Nations Unies '
sans la mettre a meme de l'exercer.

,n Iile reste a' dire un mat de la mesure de

caract~re conservatoire proposee par M. Austi.¥ ....

dans le pr~jet de resolutionqu'il a depose, ~t qUi- .

Pit••••

l.1a

'f""ap--..Ollli.l---:.U.'.Ci

._ _. .
••.EI__

•.~:

demander a la Commi;;sbu de mainwhich consists in asking the Commission to consiste a
tenir certains observateurs ~ur place.
.keep some observex-s on the spot.
J'ai deja indique, au cours d'une precedente
I have already said at a preceding meeting
yeux, une mesure
'
thr .. consider' this to be a good .and useful seance, .que c'est, a mes
nollS permettre
doit
'elle
puisqu
utile,
,et
se
us
br
heureu
e
me...;ure, because it will make it possibl
la situation en
de
es
inform
e.,'1t
d.ll:ectem
in
rester
n
de
situatio
to keep directly informed of the
t' toute notre
Greece, while leaving us completely free to Grece et qu'e1le reserve pour l'aveni
liberte de decision.
rpake a decision in the future.
Le PFJ:S:D ENT (traduit de l'ang1ais): L'oraThe PRESID EN'J.: The next speaker on my
ASked
suivant, sur ma l1:;f;e, le repre.sentant de la
has
teur
bia,
Colom
list, the representative of
e la parole plus
to be recognized later, while the representative Colombie, a dern,.;:.ade a prendr
du Bresil a
of Brazil has expressed the wish to be ~alled tard. D'autr e part, le representant
En consenant.
on earlier. Therefore, I now call upon't he rep- expr'me le desir de parler mainte
nt!,)nt du
represe
au
quence, je dorme 'la parole
resentative of Brazil.
Bresil.
M. ARANHA {Bresil) (traduit de l'anglais):
Mr. ARfu"l"H A (Brazi l): The Greek · GovGrece a adresse au
ernment d;recte d, to 'the Government of the Le ,Gouvemement de la
nis une deman de
Etats-U
des
t
rnemen
Gouve
an
lJnited States a request for assistance of
pour lUl perurgen~
re
caracte
d'un
ance
d'assist
in
mainta
.emergency nature to enable it to
menace pax
etait
nir rordre qui
order which was being disturbed. by subversive mettre de mainte
analogu~
de
deman
Une'
ives.
activities. A similar request was advanced by des activites subvers
t de la
rnemen
Gouve
le
par
tee
the Turkish Government, .and both are being a .ete presen
ement
aC~Jell
sont
s
requ~te
deux
ces
et
e,
considered ,. at the present moment by the Con- Turqui
nis.
Etats-U
des
s
Congre
le
par
ees
examin
gress of the United States.
Le representant des Etats-Unis aupres de ce
. The representative of the United States on Conseil a longuement explique la nature de l'aide '
this Council has amply explained the nature of . envisagee. n a affirmequ'elle etait entierement
the contemplated aid, which h~ has -affirmed compatible avec le pl'incipe fondamental de la
to be, entirely compatible with the basic principle
politique etrangere de son pays qui vise a affennir
of the foreign policy of his country, Mlich au:ns
~ation desNa #onsU nies et &. favoriser
at strengthening the United Nations and pro- l'Qrg
de la securite collective.
.
etabli.
.
. '.~ment
moting the organization of collective secUl;ty. ,l'
Nous nous trouvons devant une situation qui
,We are confronted with a situation which is .a
une consequence djrecte de la guerr-e.L'ordre
est
direct outcome of the war. The moral and n).amateriel de,la civilisation ont ete
terial order of civilization has been deeply shaken; moral et l'ordre
s et, dans quelqu..:s regions,
, and in some regions it has guffered actual de- profondement ebranle
detruits. M~IIle.lespays qui ont
structi on.Eve n countries which escaped material ont"en fait, ete
.devastations materielles offrent
, ,devastation present, today, a picture of gravely echappe aux
le d'une structurepolitique,
disturbed social, political, and economic struc- aujour d'hui le spectac
gravem ent ebranlee. Partures. Wherever, as is the' case' with Greece, e~onomique et sociale
a atteint dcs proportions
tion
devastation has attained extraordinary propor- tout ou la devasta
c'est le cas en Grece, la
e
C01'Jl"lIIl
s,
tions, the situation approaches chaos. Hence extraord41aire
D'ou la necessit6
chaos.
au
touche
n
the primal necessity of maintaining order, fail- situatio
, faute de quoi
l'ordre
nir
mainte
de
diale
on
primor
ing which ' it will not be possible to tarry
l'reuvr e de
rsuivre
depou
e
possibl
pas
sera
so
ne
es
il
the work of reconstruction of these countri
rea assurer
manie
de
pays
ces
de
n
trUctio
tranof
'recons
degree
as to ensure for their peoples the
illite et de·
tranqu
de
degre
le
tions
popula
to
ing
leurs'
a
weU-be
social
quility and of economic and
dIes ont
which they a~e. entitled under the hroad scope bien.-etreeconomique et social auquel
et ~ux
me
and purposes of the united Natio:ps. That order droit conformem~nt· au vastep rogram
cordevra
dre
Cetor
will have to correspond to the will and consent, buts des' .Nations Uni~.
la
de
tement
consen
au
et·
.6£ the majority of the population' and of its most respdn drea la·volonte
les
ts:
elemen
ses
de
et
will
majorite de lapopulatio~
enlightened elements. In . other words, it
have to be a democratic order which shall ( plus eclaites. En d'autres tennes, cet ordre devra
respect the human person and create conditions etre un ordre democratique.qui respecte la per..
favourable to the uplift and progress of that sonne humaine et cree leE; conditions favorables
person. While it is true that order springs' from a son elevatioIl morale et a son progres. S'il est
,the demands of conScience and not from force, vrai qu'un ordre de cegen re est impose par lea
it is no less true that certain material conditions exigences de la conscience, et non par la force, .
are essential to t,he maintenance of order. '
il n'en est pas moins vraiqu e certaines' conditions
, materielles sont essentielles pour le mainti en de '
l'ordre.
Les secours d'urgence demand6l par la Grece
The emergency aid requested by Greece and
ie' sont precisement destines ace
Turkey is intended precisely· for such mainte- et la Turqu
l' ordre; Pef?onne ne peut· accuser
de
en
nance of order. No one can accuse the Govern- m:ainti

c,

.

...

_-~

_

772
ments of those countries of being undemocratic lcs Gouvernements de ces pays de ne pas 8tre
nor of concealing aggressive purposes. The re- democratiques ou de dissimuler des intentions
sources asked for are necessary to consolidate d'agression. Les ressources demandees sont necesstate -institutions and safeguard them against saires pour consolider les institutions gouvernesubversive attempts, thus. creating the indisp~­ mentales, les proteger contre des attaques sub.
sable conditions of stability and well-being.
versives et creer ainsi les conditions de stabilite
et de bien-etre indispensables.
Since the agencies of the United Natio~ to
which an appeal could be addressed by Greece
and Turkey are not yet functioning, and in view,
furthermore, of the lack of co-operation with the
Greek Government on the part of the Governments of the neighbouring countries-as it has
been made apparent to this Council- the Governments of Greece and Turkey have decided to
apply to the only country which, in the present
state of affairs, is in a position to supply the
necessary aid.
.

Comme les institutions des Nations Dnies
auxque1les la Grece et la Turquie auraient pu
faire appel ne fonctionnent pas encore et conune,
en outre, les. Gouvernements des pays voisins de
la Grece n'apportent aucune cooperation au
Gouvernement de ce pays - ainsi que le Conseil
a pu s'en rendre compte -les Govrernements
de la Grece et de la Turquie ont decide de faire
appel au seul pays qui, clans l'etat actuel des
choses~ est en mesure de fournir raide necessaire.

The United Nations does not constitute a
State superstructure with derogation of sovereignties. The Charter is a pact between sovereign
nations, intended to promote the ~terests of
the Member States in regard to peace, security,
and general well-being. They are not forbidden
the pursuance of normal relations by means of
bilateral or multi-lateral treaties aiming at the
most varied objectives and interests, includiIig
those ,of military defence.

L'Organisation des Nations Unies ne constitue
pas une sorte de super-Etat dont la structure.
porterait atteinte aux souverainetes nationales.
La Charte est un pacte entre nations souveraines
destine a servir les interets des Etats Membres ~
ce qui touche la paix, la securite et le bien-etre
general. n n'est pas interdit aces Etats d'entretenir des relations nonnales par des traites bilateraux ou multilateraux ayant pour objectif les
interets et les buts, les plus varies, y compris ceux
de la defense mi1itaire•.

There is no disposition in the Charter of the
United Nations that might be invoked directly
or indirectly as being preclusive of the concession of the assistance tinder consideration. On
the contrary, the Charter presupposes, as necessary for the maintenance of peace and security,
the creation in all countries of conditions of
stability and wen-being. Furthermore, under
the tenus- of Article 56, the Members of the
Organization are bound to act, either jointly or
individually, to achieve that purpose.

.11 n'y a dans la Charte des Nations Unies
aucune disposition qui puisse etre directement ou
indiI'ectement invoquee pour empecher l'octroi
de l'aide en question. Au contraire, la Charte
presuppose comme necessaire au maintien de la
paix et de la securite la creation, dans tous les
pays, de conditions de 'stabilite et de bien-etre.
De plus, aux termes de l'Article 56, les Membres
de: l'Organisation sont tenus d'~gir solidairement
ou individuellement pour atteindre ce but.

It should be definitely and clearly understood,
. therefore, that, in our opinion, nations are not
. precluded from requesting or receiving the assistance of other nations, nor from extending such
help to others; and furthec ~nore, that there is
nothing in our Charter to warrant that such requests or the granting of such help should be submitted to any interference of the United Nations
or its agencies. '

n devrait done etre definitivement 'et nettement'entendu qu'il n'est pas, a notre avis, interdit aux nations de demander' oude recevoirl'aide
d'autres nations, ni d'en aider cl'autres: de plus,
que rien, dans notre Charte, ne justifie que ces
requ~tes, ou'l'octroi de cette assistance, doivent
faire l'objet cl'une intervention quelconque de
l'Organisation des Nations Unies ou de ses
institutions.

Cependant, un fait nouveau, qui peut- etre
In the declarations made to this Council by
the representative of the United States however, gros de consequences importantes, ressort de la
anew fact whichniay be fraught with important declaration faite a notre Conseil par le repreconsequences becomes apparent. I am referring sentant des. Etats-Unis. Je fais allusion au desir
to the desire shown b,y the Government of the . manifeste par le ,Gouvernement des Etats-Unis
United States of America, before performing at! d'Amerique, ~tvant d'accomplir une action qui
action which is inherent to its sovereignty and decoule de sa souverainete et qui n'est pas inter- .
which is not forbidden by the Charter, of con- dite par la Charte, de consulter l'Organisation
sulting'the .United Nations and even - asindi- des Nations Unieset meme - comme l'indique
cated.' ill the' amendment' 'proposed by Senator l'amendement propose par le senateur VandenVandenberg and td which Mr. Austin referred in _berg, que M. Austin a mentionne dans sa declahis declaration of 10 April1 - of subordinating, ration du 10 avriP - de subordonner a la decito .-,the'United Nations, the e:l{ecution of the sion de l'Organisation l'execution duprogramme
~ See, Official Records of the Security Council, Second
35.
Year,

No.

~ Voir les Proces-verbaux officiels du Conseil de securite,
Deuxieme Annee, No 35.

...

----------~77~3-------------

intended programme of aid That fact is of great
significance, because it involves an auto-limitation of national sovereignty on the part of a
m~jor Power, in favor of international action,
thus resulting in the strengthening of the prestige
of international collaboration and, consequently,
of that of the United Nations.

d'aide projete. Ce fait est d'une grande importance, car il inlplique une limitation imposee
par une grande Puissance a sa propre souverainete nationale, en faveur d'une action internationale, ce qui renforce le prestige de la
collaboration internationale et, par consequent,
celui de rOrganisation des Nations Unies.

C'est pourquoi la delegation du Bresil desire
For those reasons, the Brazilian delegation
wishes to express its congratulations to the Coun- exprimer au Conseil ses felicitations pour 1'atticil upon the attitude taken by the United States tude prise par les Etats-Unis d'Amenque; mais
of America; but it is the desire of the Brazilian cette delegation desire qu'il soit nettement endelegation to have it clearly understood that it tendu qu'elle ne considere pas cette attitude
does not consider that attitude as a doctrine or comme une doctrine ou une pratique qu'il faille
practice to be followed in the future, our stand suivre a l'avenir, car elle estime que, dans la vie
being that normal and bilateral acts in the life des nations, des actes normaux et bilatex-aux,
of nations, including the right to request, receive, eomprenant le droit de demander, de recevoir et
and extend aid for purposes of order and defence, d'octroyer une aide a des fins d'ordre et de
do not call either for the consent of the other de£ense, n'exigent ni le consentement d'autres
nations or the interference of the United Nations nations, ni 1'intervf'ntion de 1'Organisation des
Nations Unies ou de ses institutions.
or its agencies.
Mr. EL-KHOURI (Syria): I wish to present
the view of the Syrian delegation on the subject
before us.

Syrie sur la question que nous examinons.

The question of the aid proposed by the
United States of America to Greece and Turkey
is now being discussed by the United States Congress in Washington and by the Security Council
at Lake Success. I consider that the development
of the discussion inche United States Congress
at the present moment is not of immediate concern to us here. Nevertheless, it would be appropriate for the United Nations organs to observe
and take note of what is going on there, while
awaiting the final issue which, as Mr. Austin declared at the last meeting, will be presented to
the United Nations in due course. Then, and
only then, will the competent organ of the United
Nations have had ample time and authority to
study and discuss the matter and to take a decision upon it.

La question de l'aide proposee par les EtatsUnis d'Amenque a la Grece et a la Turquie est
en discussion a 1'heure actuelle au Congres des
Etats-Unis a Washington, et au Conseil de securite a Lake Success. J'estime que le cours de
la discussion actuelle au Congres n'est pas pour
nous d'un interet immediat. Malgre tout, il serait
opportun que les organes des Nations Unies
observent ce qui s'y passe et en prennent note,
en attendant le resultat final qui, le moment
venu, sera' communique a 1'Organisation des
Nations Unies, comme M. Austin nous 1'a declare lors de la derniere seance. Alors, et alors
seulement, l'organe approprie des Nations Unies
aura toute la competence et le temps voulus pour
etudier la question, la discuter et prendre une
decision.

M. EL-KHOURI (Syne) (traduit de l'anglais):

Je desire presenter les vues de la delegation de

I stated at a previous meeting on this subject
A une precedente seance, ou etait examinee
that the case was not reported to the Security . cette question, fai declare que le cas n'avait pas
Council for'the purpose of obtaining its approval ete communique' au Conseil de securitepour
or disapproval at the present moment, but simply, obteni,r, maintenant, son approbation ou sa
as Mr. Austin explained, for the purpose of in- desapprobation, mais simplement, comme 1'3forming the Council that a proposal of that explique M. Austin, en vue d'informer le Conseil
nature and to that effect was now under discus- qu'une proposition de cette nature, et a cet effet,
sion in the United States Congress. 1 The Syrian est actuellement en discussion au Congres des
delegation's opinion on this subject is that we Etats-Unis1 • L'opinion de la delegation de la
should wait until the time when the project is Syrie a ce sujet est la suivante: nous devrions
presented to us in its final form.
attendre que le projet nous soit presente sous sa
forme definitive.

As to the principle of extending the proposed'
aid by the United States Government to Greece,
in response to the latter's urgent request, in order
to enable that country and its Government to
carry out the necessary reconstruction in its social, economic, and civic fields, the Syrian de}egation cannot but receive with hearty· appreciation· the highly esteemed intention therein,
whethl~r that' intention is shown by the United

Quant au principe de l'assistance que le
Gouvernement des Etats-Unis se propose d'offrir
a la Greee, en reponse a la' t:.emande urgente d~
cette ,derniere, pour permettre au pays et au
Gouvernement grec de mener a bien la reconstruction necessaire dans les domaines economique, social et civique, la delegation de la Syrie
ne peut qu'applaudir chaleureusement a la noble
intention. dont s'inspire ce principe, que cette

1 See, Official Records of the St'curity Council, Second
year, No. 33.

.1 Voir lesProces-verbaux officiels du Conseil de securite,
Deuxieme Annee, No 33.

Itn· r

..

~-

......

_~~.~.~_

.....__

.
._<.~.

.. __ ,,---"_0
~

774
States or by any other State which may be willing to xp.ake such a liberal endowment.

intention soit manifestee par les Etats-Unis ou
par tout autre Etat qui serait dispose a faire un
dun aussi genereux.

Considering the traditional friendly relations
which have existed between Syria and Greece in
ancient, medieval, and modern times, the Syrian
people has for the Greek people the deepest sympathy and the warmest appreciation. Phcenician,
Byzantine, and Arab history is full of narrations
and events which reflect th~ intimate contact between those two peoples. For three centuries,
they shared the vicissitudes of the great Ottoman
Empire. During this last world war, a large
number of Greek refugees found their way into
Syria and Lebanon, where they were very well
received and treated in the most neighbourly and
brotherly manner. The Syrian people, as a whole,
highly esteems the valour with which the Greeks
defended their country, and greatly admires
their independent, freedom-loving spirit, which
prompted and inspired them as individuals and
as a nation to fight their overwhelming enemies,
the Axis Powers. so bravely and resolutely, thus
proving once more that they are the worthy descendants of the heroes of their history.

Etant donne les relations traditionnelles
d'amitie qui ont existe entre la Syrie et la Greee
dans les temps anciens, au moyen age comme
dans les temps modernes, le peuple syrien a la
plus profonde sympathie et la plus grande estime
pour le peup1e grec. L'histoire des Pheniciens,
l'histoire de Byzance et I'histoire des Arabes sont
pleines de recits et de faits qui refletent le liens
,etroits existant entre ces deux peuples. Trois
siecles durant, ils ont partage les vicissitudes du
grand Empire ottoman. Pendant la derniere
guerre mondiale, un grand nombre de refugies
grecs reussirent a atteindre la Syrie et le Liban,
ou ils furent tres bien re~us et traites en voisins
et en freres. Le peuple syrien tout entier a une
haute estime pour le courage avec lequel les
Grecs ont defendu leur pays; il a une grande
admiration pour cet esprit d'incIependance et eet
amour de la liberte qui les a pousses, en tant
qu'individus et en tant que nation, a com'battre
cet ennemi eerasant, les Puissances de l'Axe, avee
tant'de bravoure et de resolution, prouvant ainsi,
une fois de plus, qu'ils sont les dignes descendants
des heros de I'histoire grecque.

In view of that, we hail any help extended to
these heroic friends, and hope that the generosity
expressed by the United States will be enacted
in a way to attract the appreciation of all Members of the United Nations, rather than to cast
shadows of suspicion and doubt on the international relationships of friendly nations and allies.

Pour ces raisons, nous applaudissons a toute
aide offerte aces amis heroiques. Nous esperons
aussi que la generosite des Etats-Unis se mani·
festera d'un fa~on qui recueille l'approbation de
tous les Membres de I'Organisation des Nations
Unies, au lieu de jeter 1'0mbre de la suspicion et
du doute sur les relations intemationales de
nations amies et alliees.

As to the contemplated help to Turkey, the
Syrian delegation heartily ,desires that the Turkish people should appropriate all means to organize its economy on a solid basis. There is no
doubt that such aid will be of help in ameliorating the genercil Rituation in Turkey and in bringing about many basic improvements. The long
history of the Turkish-Arab collaboration, which
lasted through several cen'~uries, the joint participation of those two }Y.;oples in good and bad
fortune, and their long-lived unity withm the
framework of the' Ottoman Empire make the
Arabs the last to withhold their approval of any
adequate proposal useful, to their close neighbours and previous compatriots.

En ce qui concerne le projet d'aide a la
Turquie, la delegation de la Syrie espere de tout
creuX' que le peuple turc pourra affecter a
l'organisation de son economie sur une base
solide tous les moyens mis a sa disposition. 11 ne
fait pas de doute que cette assistance sera utile
en ce qu'elle permettra d'ameliorer la situation
generale en Turquie et de realiser de nombreux
progres fondamentaux. Le long passe de colla·
boration turco-arabe qui s'etend sur plusieurs
sieclcs, l'union de ces deux peuples dans la bonne
et la mauvaise fortune, et l'unite qu'ils ont reussi
a maintenir dans le cadre de rEmpire ottoman,
font que les Arabes seront les derniers a refuser
de donner leur approbation a toute proposition
adequate utile a leurs proches voisins et anciens
compatriotes.

I need not repeat, perhaps, that the Syrian
delegation welcomes help to any Member State,
within the provisions of the Charter of the
United Nations, compatible with its premises
and devoid of undesirable issues. For we pledge
our loyalty to the Charter and we abide by it.

Je n'ai probablement pas besoin de repeter que
la delegation de la Syrie accueille avec joie toute
aide accordee a un Etat Membre, confonnement
aux dispositions de la Charte des Nations Unies,
compatible avec ses principes et ne pouvant avoir
de suites ind6sirables, car nous affirmons notre
loyaute envers la Charte et nous nous y soumettons entierement.

.Sir Alexander CADOGAN (United Kingdom):
I already indicated at an earlier meeting the
views of His Majesty's Government in the United
Kingdom in regard to the general question of

Sir Alexander CADOGAN (Royaume-Uni)
(traduit de l'anglais): 1'ai deja indique, a. une
seance precedente, la position du Gouvernement
de Sa Majeste pour le Royaume-Uni en ce qui

q

...

775

aid to Gref.ce and in regard to the particular
proposal to maintain a subsidiary group of the
Commission of Investigation in Greece. l I only
wish to say a word today about the Soviet proposal which has since been formulated and submitted to the Security Council, and to explain
that I do not favour it and shall not vote for it.

concerne la question generale de l'aide ala Grece
et la proposition particuliere tendant a maintenir
dans ce pays un groupe $ubsidiaire de la Commission d'enquetel • Je desire simplement aujourd'hui dire quelques mots sur la proposition
sovietique, qui a, depuis, ete redigee et soumise
au Conseil de securite, et declarer que je n'approuve pas cette pro;'Josition et que je ne voterai
pas pour el1e.

The representative of the Union of Soviet
Socialist Republics, in his resolution, proposes
that the Security Council should establish a special commission to supervise the sending of aid
to Greece, in ordel to ensure that the aid should
be used only iri the interests of the Greek people.
I do not think that this is a desirable or a useful
proposal. I am surprised that it should have been
put forward by the Soviet representative. I was
also surprised at certain reflections cast by the
Soviet and Polish representatives on the United
States proposal for aid to Greece.

Le representant de l'Union des Republiques
socialistes sovietiques propose dans sa resolution,
que le Conseil de securite cree une commission .
speciale pour surveiller 1'0ctroi de l'aide a la
Grece afin de garantir que cette aide sera utilisee
dans le seul interet du peuple grec. Je ne pense
pas que cette proposition soit avantageuse ou
utile. Je suis surpris qu'el1e ait ete faite par le
representant sovietique. J'ai ete surpris egalement de certaines critiques formulees par les
representants sovietique et polonais au sujet de la
proposition americaine d'assistance a la Grece.

What the United State.c:; Government is now
proposing to do for Greece, the Soviet Government itself has done for Poland, Yugoslavia, and
other countries. Of course, we are at some disadvantage here: since the Soviet Government has
not, so far as I know, informed the United
Nations of the terms of its agreements with
those countries a') the United States Government
has promised to do, should the United States
Congress eventually approve the proposal for
aid to Greece.

Ce que le Gouvernement des Etats-Unis se
propose de faire a I'heure actuel1e pour la Grece,
le Gouvernement sovietique lui-meme l'a fait
pour la Pologne, la Yougoslavie et d'autres pays.
Avec cette difference a notre desavantage, cependant, que le Gouvernernent sovietique n'a pas,
que je sache, informe 1'0rganisation des Nations
Unies des termes de ses accords avec ces pays,
comme le Gouvernement des Etats-Unis a promis
de le faire si le Congres des Etats-Unis, en fin de
compte, ratifie la proposition d'aide a la Grece.

We are therefore thrown back upon press and
other reports. The Greek representative, it will
be remembered, quoted the other day from a
Swiss newspaper with regard to Soviet aid to
Poland.2 As regards Yugoslavia, I understand
that a Soviet-Yugoslav agreement was concluded
on 8 June 1946. because, on 10 June 1946, the
official Yugoslav news agency stated that the
Soviet Government had undertaken, in the agreement, to supply arms, ammunition, and other
materials to Yugoslavia on a long-term credit,
ahd, as the agency put it, had met, in the most
forthcoming manner, the requirements of Yugoslav economy both with respect to raw materials
and technical and other supplies.

Nous devons donc nous en rapporter a ce que
nous trouvons dans les comptes rendus de presse
et autres. On se souviendra que le representant
de la Grece a cite, l'autre jour, un journalsuisse
au sujet de l'aide sovietique a la Pologne2 • En ce
qui concerne la Yougoslavie, je crois savoir qu'un
accord sovieto-yougoslave a ete conclu le 8 juin
1946, car, le 10 juin 1946, l'agence d'informations officielle yougoslave a declare que le Gouvernement sovietique s'etait, par cet accord,
engage a fournir des armes, des munitions et
d'autre materie1 a la Yougoslavie .sur la base
d'un credit a long terme: l'article ajoutait que le
Gouvernement sovietique avait satisfait avec la
plus grande promptitude aux exigences de
l'economie yougoslave, aussi bien pour les
matieres que pour le materiel technique et autres
fournitures.

On the face of it, there would seem to be no
particular reason why we should agree to the
Soviet contention that United States aid to
Greece should be treated in one way and Soviet
aid to Yugoslavia and other countries in another way.

A la lumiere de ce qui preceq.e, il ne sem)'lerait pas y avoir de raison particuliere de nous
'jer a la these sovietique qui soutient que
l'aide des Etats-Unisa la Grece cieVrait etre
traitee d'une certaine fa~on, et l'aide sovietique
it la Yougoslavie et a d'autres pays, d'une autre.

We did not send a special commission to Yugoslavia to supervise the application of the Soviet
aid which that country received, and it is difficult
tQ see why' we should do so in the case of Greece.

Nous n'avons pas envoye une commission spedale en Yougoslavie pOUf surveiller l'usage fait
pat ce pays des secours sovietiques, et 1'0n voit
difficilement pourquoi nous devrions le faire dans
le cas de la Grece.

1 See Official Records of the Security Council, Second
Year, No. 33.
"Ibid., No. 35.

1 Voir les Proces"verbaux officiels du Comeil de securite,
Deuxieme Annee. No 33.
"Ibid., No 35.

776
I am therefore opposed to the proposal which
has been submitted by the Soviet representative.

Je suis done oppose a la proposition soumise
par le representant sovietique.

Mr. ATHANAssov (Bulgaria): I wish to make
sOtp-e remarks concerning the United States draft
resolution that, pending a new decision of the
Security Council, the Commission shall maintain
in t:;'e area "oncerned a subsidiary group composed of a representative of each of the members
of the Commission.

M. A'rHANAssov (Bulgarie) (traduit de l'anglais): Je voudrais faire quelques observations a
propos du projet de resolution des Etats-Unis
selon lequel la Commission laisserait, dans la
region interessee, un groupe subsidiaire compose
d'un representant de chacun des membres de la
Commission, en attendant une nouvelle decision
du Conseil de securite.

I think that to create a sub-commission to
supervise the Greek border, pending completion
of the Commission of Investigation's report,
would me~ to prejudice the findings of the
Commission.

A mon avis, ce serait prejuger les conclusions
de la Commission d'enquete que de creer une
sous-commi..~on chargee de surveiller la frontiere
grecque en attendant que cette Commission ait
termine son rapport.

The United States draft resolution seems to
be based on the asstLmption that there have been
violations of the Greek border on our part, because the purpose of the proposed sub-commiSsion is obviously to prevent repetition of such
alleged border violations. The establishment of
such a sub-commission would imply that the
Security Council is accepting the Greek allegations as true, or at least as probable, before receiving the report of the Commission of Investigation.

Le projet de resolution des Etats-Unis semble
se fonder sur l'hypothesc qu'il y a eu:, de notre
part, violations de la frontiere grecque; le but
evident de la sous-commission qu'on envisage est
en effet d'eviter le retour de ces pretendues violations de frontiere. La creation d'une telle souscommission impliquerait que le Conseil de
securite tient pour vraies, ou, tout au moins, pour
vraisemblables~ les allegations grecques, avant
d'avoir regu le rapport de la Commission d'enquete.

The proposed sub-commission has been referred to as a conservatory measure. In that
respect, I wish to point out that a conservatory
measure in matters of law is taken when there is,
if not evidence, at least some probability that the
allegations of one of the parties may be true. So
far, the Security Council do~ not have evidence
corroborating the Greek allegations. So far, there
i'Snot the ~1ightest indication of what the report
of the Commission might contain, and that report is the only s~)Urce of relevant information
for the Council.

.........
.",

On a parle de la sous-commission envisagee
comm~ d'une mesure conservatoire. A cet egard,

je tiens a signaler qu'en matiere juridique, on ne
prend une mesure conservatoire que si 1'0n a,
"inon des preuves, du moins certaines raisons de
croire que les allegations de rune des parties sont
peut-etre vraies. Jusqu'a present, le Conseil de
securite ne dispose d'aucune preuve qui vienne
corroborer les allegations grecques. Jusqu'a present, nous n'avons pas la moindre indication sur
ce que pourra contenir le rapport de la Commission, et ce rapport est pour le Conseil la seule
source de renseignements pertinents.

What is the situation at this moment? The
Bulgarian Government maintains that on its
part there have been no violations of the frofluer;
. so do the Yugoslav and Albanian Govemments.
The Greek Government contends the opposite.
At this stage, the Security Council has only mere
statements emanating from the interested parties;
it does not have the facts. Therefore, to establish,
now, a sub-commission whose task would be to
control the frontier would mean that the Council gives more credit to the Greek statements than
to the statements of Bulgaria, Albania, and Yugoslavia. The Council, being impartial, cannot take
su<;h a step now. It would be only logical and
just, as the representative of Syria has pointed
out, that, before taking any further action, the
Security Council should have the facts. .

Quelle est done la situation en ce moment? Le
Gouvernement bulgare maintient qu'il n'ya eu .
de sa part aucune violation de fr~ntiere. Les
Gouvernements yougoslave et albanais font de
meme. Le Gouvernement gt:ec soutient le contraire. Au stade actuel, le Conseil de securite dispose seulementde declarations emanant des
parties 'interessees; il ne dispose pas de faits.
Aussi, instituer rnaintenant une sous-commission
chargee de surveiller la frontiere signifierait que
le Conseil accorde plus de credit aux declarations
de la Grece qu'a celles de la Bulgarie, de rA!banie et de la Yougoslavie. Le Conseil, qui est
impartial, ne peut prendre maintenant pareille
mesure. Par pur souci de logique et d'equite,
ainsi que le repr~sentant de la Syrie l'a fait re·
marquer, le Conseil de securite devrait, avant de
prendre toute nouvelle mesure, etre mis au courant des faits.

For those reasons, it is the opinion of my GovclJlffient that the Security Council should not
consider ~e United States proposal at this early
stage·ofthe dispute, butshouldaw~it 6e findings
of the Commission of Investigation before taking

Pour ces raisons, rran Gouvernement estime
que le Conseil de securite ne devrait pas examiner
la proposition des Etats-Unis a ce stade initial de
l'examen du differend; ildevraitattendre les
conclusions de la Commission cl' enquete avant de

_

__
.* ~~~.

".c_

"•._._..••..•...•_•....••__•.__•....

.

......

1II'S-..--------~77·7------------a
any measures concerning the alleged border prendre quelque mesure que ce soit a propos des
viulations.
Now I wish to say a few words about the accusations made against my country by the Greek
representative during the last meeting of the
Security Council.1 He again blamed Bulgaria
for being the cause of all the misfortunes of
Greece. It is an old practice to blame the neighbours when things go wrong at home. We have
many examples in the past when Governments,
unable to cope with their domestic problems,
have tried to persuade public opinion both at
home and abroad that sinister foreign influences
were the cause of the evils that beset them. Unfortunately for the representative of Greece, 't.'1at
practice is so old and so ti:ite that it is hard to
believe it would succeed.

A civil war of the magnitude of the Greek one
cannot be artificially created from abroad. Tens
of thousands of fighters, carrying on an armed
struggle for more than two years, :first against a
foreign army, then against the regular Greek
army, against the gendarmerie and the police,
cannot be influenced by foreign agents. Such an
explanation of the civil war does not sound very
convincing. The report of the Commission of
Investigation will soon be available, and I hope
it will stop once and for all the slanderous accusations and, diversionary tactics of the Greek
Government.

pretendues violations de frontiere.
Je voudrais maintenant dire quelques mots des
accusations que le representant de la Grece a
portees contre mon pays, au cours de la derniere
seance du Conseil de securite1• n a une fois de
plus rendu la Bulgarie responsable de tous les
malheurs de la Grece. C'est une viei1le habitude
que de s'en prendre a ses voisins lorsque les
choses vont mal chez soi. Nous avons, dans le
passe, de nombreux exemples de Gouvernements
incapables de resoudre leurs probleroes interieurs,
qui ont essaye de persuader 1'0pinion publique, 2L
la fois chez eux et a l'etranger, que des influences etrangeres ne£astes etaient la cause des
maux qui les affligeaient. Malheureusement pour
le representant de la Grece, ce procede est si
vieux et si use qu'on a peme a croire qu'il puisse
reussir.
Vne guerre civile de l'importance de celle qui
sevit en Grecc ne peut etre artificiellement fomentee de l'etranger. Des dizaines de milliers de
combattants qui, depuis plus de deux ans, poursuivent la lutte a main armee, d'abord contre une
armee etrangere, puis contre l'armee reguliere
grecques contre la gendarmerie et la police, ne
peuvent agir s0!1s l'influence d'agents etrangers.
Pareille explication de la guerre civile ne parait
pas tres convaincante. Nous serons bientot en
possession du rapport de la Cammisision d'enquete, et j'espere qu'il mettra fin une fois pour
toutes aux accusations calomnieuses et a ia tac~
tique de diversion du Gouvernement grec.

No danger threatens Greece from Bulgaria,
AUCu:..l danger ven~lt de Bulgarie ne menace
and the people of Greece know it as well as does la Grece, et le peuple grec le sait, comme le sait
the informed public in Europe iilld in America. le publi,c bien informe en Europe et en Amenque.
There have been no newspaper reports about any Les journaux n'ont jamais parle de. preparatifs
military preparations in Bulgaria against any of militaires que ferait la Bulgarie contre l'un ou
our neighbours, including Greece. It is not the l'autre· de ses voisins, la Grece y compris. Ce
Bulgarian Government that spend.. sixty per cent n'est pas le Gouvernement bulgare quidepense
of its budget for the army. Bulgaria is not the soixante pour cent de son budget pour l'armee.
country which has 140,000 men mobilized, Ce n'est pas la Bulgarie qui a 140.000 hommes
armed, and ready for action. We harbour no mobilises, armes et· prets a entrer en action.
hostile designs :'igainst Greece. We are looking Nous ne nourrissons pas de desseins hostiles contre
forward to the development of normal friendly la Grece. Nous esperons developper avec la
relations with Greece, such as we have with all Grece des relations amicales normales, telles que
Our other neighbours. The Bulgarian people are celles que nousavons avec tous nos autres voisins.
bent on the task of. reconstruction which is being Le peuple bulgare s'applique activementa la
carried out without UNRRA relief and loans tache de reconstruction qUl s'accomplit sans sefrom abroad. Since the end of the war, we have cours de l'UNRRA ~t sans pretsde l'etranger.
decreased our military expenditures to a mini- Depuis la fin de la guerre, ilOUS avons reduit a un
mum. We do not receive .armaments from minimum nos .depenses militaires. Nous ne receabroad; how then can Bulgaria be a menace to vons pas· d'armements de l'etranger: comment,
Greece?
dans ces conditions, la Bulgarie pourrait-elle
constittfer une menace pour la Grece?
If anybody in the Balkans is threatened, it is
rather Bulgaria. Indeed, to put weapons in profusion into the hands of irresponsible and warlike
persons, into the. hands of Greek militarists,
would be a very dangerous thing. External military adventure may be very tempting for military
cirCles in Greece, in order to divert public opinion from the real causes of the present Greek

S'il y a dans les Balkans un pays qui est
menace, c'est plutot la Bulgarie. En fait, il serait
tres dangereux demettre des armes a profusion
entre les mains de gens irresponsables et
belliqueux, entre les mains des militaristes grecs.
Vne aventure militaire exterieure peutparai'tre
tres tentante aux milieux militaires en Grece,
car elle servirait· a detourner l'opinion publique

1 See Official Records of the Security Council, Second
Year, No. 36.

1 Voir les Proces~verbaux ofjiciels du Comeil de securite.
Deuxieme Annee, No 36.

-

778
tragedy. That such an adventure is indeed possible, it is evident from the bitter experience
Bulgaria had some twenty-two years ago. The
members of the Council will remember what
happened when the Greek General Pangalos
tried to escape from the internal difficulties which
were fa.cing the Greek Government at that time.
He resorted to diversion by invading Bulgaria,
and nothing short of the intervention of' the
League of Nations was able to stop the aggression. Now the same militarist circles are in power
in Greece. The militarist spirit is not dead; it
manifests itself in various ways, especially in the
doggednes:: with which the same groups prosecute the war against their own countrymen,
shunning every compromise with their adversaries. The propaganda charges levelled against
our country before this Coul1cil, the numerous
border provocations, the violent anti-Bulgarian
campaign of the Greek press, all those facts may
well point towards a new plan for diversion.

des causes reelles· de la tragedie qui se deroule
actuellement dans ce pays. Que pareille aventure
soit possible en fait est deroontre par r epreuve
arnere que la Bulgarie a subie il y a quelque
vingt-deux ans. Les membres du Conseil se
souviennent sans doute de ce qui s'est '{lasseS
lorsque le general grec Pangalos a essaye d'echap.
per aux difficultes interieures devant lesquCilles l~
Gouvernement hellenique se trouvait a ce moo
ment. n a eu recours a une diversion en enva.
hissant la Bulgarie, et seule l'intervention de la
Societe des Nations a pu arrcter l'agression.
Actuellement, les memes milieux militaristes sont
au pouvoir en Grece. L'esprit militaristen'est pas
mort; il se manifeste de differentes f~ons
notamment par l'obstination avec laquelle l~
memes groupes poursuivent la guerre contre leurs
concitoyens, se derobant a tout compromis avec
leurs adversaires. Les accusations de pure propa.
gande portees contre mon pays devant ce ConseiI,
les nombreuses provocations a la frontiere, la
violente campagne antibulgare de la presse
gre!::que, tous ces faits pourraient bien ctre les
indices d'un nouveau plan de diversion.

Bulgaria was saved once from Greek militarism by international intervention. That is why
we put all our faith in the new international Organization - the United Nations. That is why
we hope that the Security Council will prevent
misuse of United States aid by Greek extremists
of the Right. We hope that our security will be
ensured by an international body which will keep
watch on how the Greek Government spends th~
. funds provided by the United States.

Une fois deja, la Bulgarie a ete sauvee du
militarisme grec pw une intervention interna.
tionale. C'est pourquoi nous mettons toute notre
foi dans la nouveUe organisation internationale
-l'Organisation des Nations Unies. G'est pour.
quoi nous esperons que le Conseil de securite
empechera les e.xtremistes grecs de droite de faire
mauvais usage de l'aide des Etats-Unis. Nous
esperons que notre securite sera assuree par un
organisme international qui surveillera de pres
la maniere dont le Gouvernement grec depensera
les fonds fournis par les Etats-Unis.

Peace cannot be built by shipping super-armaments to groups which may easily become a danger to the neighboring countries. If Greece needs
security, so does Bulgaria. The guarantee of our
security can be given only by the Security Council, and therefore the Soviet proposal seems to
me a very wise measure which would create
security for, and serve the interests of, not only
Greece, but all Balkan peoples. That aspect of
the Soviet proposal is a very important one, and
I therefore wish to stress it and beg the members
of the Council to bear in mind that the Greek
Government mav use the United States aid to the
detriment ofth~ security of other Balkancountries. To adopt the Soviet. proposal would hav~
among other things, the result of warding off
such a possibility a.lld, in my opinion, this would
be most important for the Balkan countries.

On ne peut instaurer !a paix en envoyant des
armements du dernier modele a des groupes qui
peuvent facilement devenir un danger pour les
pays voisins. Si la Grece a besoin de securite, il
en est de meme de la Bulgarie. C'est seulement
le Conseil de securite qui peut la lui garantir;
aussi la proposition sovietique me paralt-elle etre
une mesure tres sage qui assurerait la securite et
servirait les interets, non seulement de la Grece,
plais ,de tous les peuples balkaniques. Cet aspect
de la proposition sovietique est tres important;
c'est pourquoi je desire le souligner et demander
aux membres du Conseil de ne pas perdre de vue
que le Gouvernement grec· pourrait se servir de
l'aide des Etats-Unis au detriment de la sccuriteS
des autres pays balkaniques: L'adoption de la
proposition sovietique permettrait, entre autres
resultats, de parer a cette eventualite et, a mon
avis, ce serait le resultat le plus important pour
les pays balkaniques.
.

"
The United States representative did not reject the Soviet proposal; he only asked that any
action on it should be deferred pending. the
deliberations of Congress on aid to Greece. But
the representative of Greece has rejected it, witho~t giving any reasons besides vague and irrelevant generalities. It seems to me that this discrepancy is significant. The United States Government wants to work· in broad light, but the

Le representant des Etats-Unis n~a pas rejete
l~. proposition sovietique; il a seulement demande
que toute decision sur. ce point soit ajournee en
attendant le resultat des deliberations du Congres
sur l'aide a la"Grece. Mais le representant de la
Grece l'a rejetee, sans donner de raison, sinan
des generalites vagues et sans rapport avec la
question. A mon avis, cette difference d'attitude
est significative. Le Gouvernement des Etats.~

p----------:-""""'::'::77~9-------------Greek Government fears international control
and prefers to have freedom to pursue its own
designs.

Unis desire travailler au plein jour, mais le
Gouverncment grec redoute un controle international et prefere etre libre de poursuivre ses
propres desseins.

Mr. LOPEZ (Colu..mbia): I hesitate to offer
an alternative resolution concerning the Greek
question which would attempt to reconcile the
proposals submitted by the delegations of the
United States and the Soviet Union at our previous meetings, although I feel reasonably sure
that neither goes to the heart of the problem.
The Colombian delegation is quite willing to
agree that, pending a new decision of the Security Council, the Commission appointed to investigate border disputes between Greece and the
neighboufmg countries shall maintain, in the
area concerned, a subsidiary group consisting of
a representative of each of the members of the
Commission. In fact, it is our intention to vote
for that proposal.

In our opinion, the Council should go one or
two steps further. One step would· be to examine
the advisability of promoting a general BaThan
convention, in order not only to safeguard the
political mdependence and territorial integrity
of Greece, but also to ensure peace, security, and
orderly development in the Balkan perinsula.
Such an undertaking would go to the core of the
situation, and would be well in keeping with the
aims and duties of the Security Council. Another
step in what the Colombian delegation would
consider to be the right direction, and probably

M. LOPEZ (Columbie) (traduit de I'anglais) :
J'hesite a presenter, relativement a la question
grecque, une autre resolution qui essaierait de
concilier les propositions soumises par la delegation des Etats-Unis et celle de l'Umon
sovietique au cours de nos precedentes seances,
bien que je sois, pour ainsi dire, certain
qu'aucune des deux ne touche au fond meme
du probleme. La delegation de la Colombie
est tout a fait disposee a accepter qu'en
attendant une nouvelle decision du Conseil de
securite, la Commission chargee d'enqueter sur
les incidents de frontiere entre la Grece et les pays
voisins laisse dans la region interessee un groupe
sl1bsidiaire compose d'un representant de chacun
des membre'J de la Commission. En fait, notre
intention est de voter en faveur de cette proposition.
D'autre part, nous n'eprouvons aucune difficulte a appuyer la creation d'une nouvelle·
commission composee de representants des Etats
membres du Conseil de securite, dont la tache
sera de collaborer, au nom de ce Conseil, avec
les agents charges par le Gouvernement des
Etats-Unis de remettre ces secours a la Grece;
ce, dans la mesure oil le permettront les dispositions par lesquelles le Congres des Etats-Unis
donnera force d~ loi a ce projei:, et a la condition,
toutefois, que la redaction de cette proposition
ne contienne rien d'implicitement vexatoire. Si
je ne me trompe, l'amendement Vandenbergl
nous invite clairement a proceder ainsi.
Nous sommes done saisis de deux propositions
que nous sommes disposes a accepter, si elles sont
purgees de tous elements contradictoires; nous
pensons cependant que le Conseil de securite ne
devrait pas se contenter d'etre tenu au courant
p~r ses propres representants de. la guerilla qui se
deroule en Grece, qu'eJle soit ou non soutenue et
encouragee par des Gouvernements etrangers. Le
Conseil ne devrait pas non plus se declarer satisfait de savoir qu'il a des representants a lui pour
surveiller sur place la distribution des secours
americains a la Grece. Cette attitude reduirait
de fa~on deplorable l'intervention et l'influence
du ConseiJ de securite.
A notre avis, le Conseil devr~it aller plus loin
et envisager une ou deux mesures, dont la premiere consisterait a examiner ropportunite de
favoriser l'etablissement d'une convention entre
tous les pay~ balkaniques, afin non seulement de
sauvegarderl'independance politique et l'integrite
territoriale de la. Grece, mais aussi d'assurer la
paix, la securite et un developpement de la~
peninsule balkanique dans l'ordre. Dne telle
mesure permettrait de toucher au fond du sujet
et serait tout a fait conforme aux buts et aux
devoirs du Conseil de securite. De l'avis de la

1 See statement made by the United States representative
at the 128th meeting of the Security Council: Official
~cords of the Security Council, Second Year, No. 85.

1 Voir la declaration faite par le representant des Etats·
Unis it la 128eme seance du ConseU de securite: Procel·
ve7:baux officiels du Conseil de securift!, Deuxieme Annee.
No 35.

We see no difficulty, on the other hand, in
supporting the appointment of a new commission
composed of representatives of the member
States of the Security Council, whose task would
be to co-operate, on behalf of the Council, with
. the agents designated by the United States Government and to hand out this aid to Greece, in so
far as this may be possible in accordance with
the provisions of the enabling act of the United
States Congress, provided, however, that this
proposal is worded without any vexing implications. The Vandenberg amendment1 is a clear
invitation to the Security Council to do so, unless
I am very much mistaken.
We have here two proposals with which we
are willing to concur provided they are freed of
any conflicting elements; but we believe that the
Security Council should not be content to be
kept well informed by its own representatives on
the guerrilla warfare taking place in Greece,
whether or not aided or abetted by foreign Governments. Nor should the Council be satisfied to
know that it has its own representatives supervising, on the spot, the distribution of United
States aid to Greece. That would lamentably
rillnimize the intervention and influence of the
.Security Councill.

780
one of the chief objectives of the Security Council
at this time, would be to ease the increasing tensions of the present international outlook, in trying to get the major Powers to discuss and come
to an agreement amongst themselves, if that is
possible, on the basis.of such a convention. We
mould not let the peace put asunder what tue
war joined together.

delegation de la Colombie, un autre pas dans la
bonne direction, et vers .ce qui est probablement
l'un des buts prinr.ipaux du Conseil de securite a
l'heure actuelle, serait de diminuer la ~ension
croissante de la situation internationale en essayant d'amener les 'grandes Puissances a discuter
et a se mettre d'accord, si cela est possible, sur
les bases d'une convention de ce genre. Nous ne
devrions paspermettre que la paix desunisse ce
que la guerre a uni.
Je tiens a dire que la delegation de la ColomI should like to say that the Colombian delebie
envisage avec anxiete le chailgement d'attigation views with an..~ety the changed attitude
etd'humeur qui s'est manifeste dans
tude
and temper of public opinion in many countries
l'opinioJ;l
publique de nombreux pays depuis que
~ce the United Kingdom Government a..'1le
Gouverne~ent du Royaume-Uni a annonce sa
nounced its decision to withdraw its military
forces and financial assistance from Greece on decision de retirer de Grece ses forces armees et
31 March last. It was indeed an unexpected ac- de suspendre .'lOll assistance financiere a cepays,
tion, although it was perhaps not so important le 31 mars dernier. C'etait, certes, une decision
and far-reaching as the decision taken by the iLattendue, bien que, peut-etre, moins imporGovernment of the United States immediately tante et d'une moindre portee que la decision,
thereafter to supply military and economic aidto prise immediatement apres par le Gouvernement
Greece and Turkey. Both decisions took the des Etats-Unis, de fournir a la Grece et a la
world by surprise, and I think it is not too much Turquie une aide militaire et economique. Ces
to say, in the words of a well-known political deux decisions ont ete pour le monde une surcommentator, that "the real case on which prise, et je ne crois pas exagere de dire, en
. Umted States intervention is based has been de- reprenant les termes employes par un commenta·
fended by disclaimers, denials, apologies, and teur politique bien connu, que "la cause veritable
assurances which have done little but confuse, sur laquelle se fonde l'intervention des Etats-Unis
n'a ete defendue que par des denis, des dementis,
the issue."
des excust'c<: et des assurances qui n'ont guere eu
pourresultat que de brouiller la question".
However, we need not wait until the full
meaning of those two I11omentous international
moves has been well clarified to understand that
• the proposals submitted to the Security Council
by the delegations of the United States and the
Soviet Union barely touch. the surfa.ce of the
Greek question. No sincere advocate of peace
can f~ to be impressed by what has been said rn'
explanation of the "Truman Doctrine" and,
sometimes, in belligerent support of its implementation by the United States Congress; or by
the desirability - we may say necessity - arising
therefrom of giving more thorough and efficient
consideration to the problem of Balkan unrest.

We are so. unfamiliar with world politics
in Colombia, and more particularly. with such
complex questions as the peace settlements which
·are being' discussed in Europe,'or the reaction of
the major Powers to. the shifting changes of
political and economic forces duriIig the last few
years, that, in spite of our earnest desire to· be of
some serVice to the cause of international hartnony, I am naturally loath to take the initiative
,of frammga proposal to fit tht': needs of such a
. situation as we have in Illh'1d. However, I believe t1}.at it c6uld be drafted to read as follows:
UThe Security Cou1!cil
,.uResolves to invite theGovermnen~ ofFrance,
the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, the
- - - -. . . . .
' .- - - - - - - - - - -

...

Toutefois, nous n'avons pas besoin d'attendre
que l'on ait degage toute la signification de ces
deux actions internationales, d'importance capitale, pour comprendre que les propositions presentees au Conseil de securite par les delegations
des Etats-Unis et de l'Union sovietique efileurent
a peine la question grecque. Aucun apotre sincere
de: la paix ne peut manquer d'etre frappe par ce
qui a ete dit pour expliquer la "doctrine de Truman" et, parfois, en appuyer d'une maniere
combative la mise en reuvre par le Congres' des
Etats-Unis; il ne peut manquer d'etre frappe par
l'opportunite - nous pouvons meme dire la necessite - qui en resultait d'examiner de maniere
plus approfondie et plus efficace le probleme que
constitue l'agitation clans les Balkans.
En Colombie; nous sommes si peu au courant
de la polip.que mondiale, et, ,plus particulierement, des questions aussicomplexes que l'etablissementdes traites de paix qui sont actuellement discutes en Europe, ou de la reaction d~
grandes Puissances devant les changements
d'orientation des forces politiques et economiques
au cours de ces dernieres annees, que, malgre
notre sincere desir d'apporter notre contribution
a la. cause de la paix 'internationale, j'hesite
naturellement a prendre l'initiative de formuler
unepropositi'on qui reponde aux besoins d'une
situation telle que eelle qui nous occupe. Je
pense toutefois qu'on pourrait la rediger comme
suit:
.

((Le" Conseil de securite
"Decide d'inviter les Gouvernements des EtatsUnisd'Amenque, de la France, du Royaume-

~"""""~_.

_ _ .. _ _ .. _

....... _

.... t ... , .

11

1IIIJP••----------.,--...

lIi!i7~8~1-1Il.
1II··.IIl,._S
.

United Kingdom, and the United States of
.America to examine jointly, the possibility of a
Balkan agreement, in order to settle all pending
questions which are likely to endanger the security and friendly relations amcng Albania, Bulgaria, Yugoslavia, and Greece.~'

lIaMl*IIiIl
.•._lIIiIlUIlIJIRl_••

I Uni et de l'Union des Republiques socialistes
sovietiques a examiner conjointement la possibilite d'un accord balkanique afin de resoudre
toutes les questions en suspens qui sont de nature
a mettre en danger la securite et les relations
d'amitie entre l'Albanie, la Bulgarie, la Yougoslavie et la Grece."

If our suggestion meets with a favourable reception, perhaps it would be in order to appoint
a committee to act on behalf of 'the Security
Council. The second part of the resolution could
then be worded as follows:

Si notre proposition est favorablement accueillie, peut-etre conviendrait-il de designer un
comite qui agirait au nom du Conseil de securite.
La seconde partie de cette resolution pourrait
alore etre redigee comme suit:

«Further resolves to appoint a committee of
four permanent members and three non-permanent members to be known as the Balkan Committee of the Security Council, the task of which
will be to co-operate with the Governments of
France, the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics,
the United Kingdom l and the ,United States of
America, if they decide to accept the invitation
of the Security Council. The Balkan Committee
will likewise co-operate with the sompetent authorities or agencies appointed by the Government of the United States of America to handk
its aid to Greece.

uDccide en outre d'instituer, sous le nom de
Commission du Conseil de securite pour les Balkans, une commission composee de quatre mem.,.
bres permanents et de trois membres nonpermanents, qui serait chaqee de collaborer avec les
Gouvernements des £tats-Unis d'Amerique, de
la France, du Royaume-Uni et de l'Union des
Republiques socialistes sovietiques, si ces Gouvemements acceptent l'invitation du Conseil de
securite. La Commission pour les Balkans collaborera egalement avec les autorites competentes
ou les organes charges par le Gouvernement des
Etats-Unis d'Amenque de l'execution du programme d'aide a la Grece.

"The Commission appointed by the Security
Council to investigate border disputes between
Greece arid the neighbouring countries shall
maintain in the area concerned a sul-,sidiarygroup
composed of a representative of each of the members of the Commission, which will keep the
Balkan Committee fully informed of its activities
and findings."

"La Commission instituee par le Conseil de
securite pour enqueter sur les incidents de frontiere entre la Grece et les pays voisins laissera
dans la region inte:ressee un groupe subsidiaire
compose d'un representant de chacun de ses
membres 'qui tiendra la Commission pour les
Balkans pleinement au courant de ses travaux et
de ses conclusions."

We realize that this proposal can be amended
to great advantage by the delegations which are
in a better position to envisage the most adequate
.formulation 0f the course which I have ventured
to recommend, if that course is found acceptable
to the Security Council. Therefore, the Colombian delegation will refrain from formally submitting tlie proposal for conside,ration.
.

Nous nous rendons compte que cette proposition peut etre utilement amendee par les delegations qui sont mieux a meme de voir la meilleure
forme a donner a ce que je me suis permis de
recommander, si le Conseil de securite juge ce1a
a~ceptable. La deIegationd::: la Uolombie s'abstiendra done .de soumettre officiellement cette
proposition a l'examen du Conseil de securite.

If uur ideas are not acceptable, we do not
wish to waste the time of the Council unnecessarily, thus complicating this discussion.

Si le Conseil n'acc'epte pas l~ vues que nous
avuns eXllOsees, nous ne desirons pas lui faire
perdre du temps inutilement en compliquant
cette discussion..

Mr. KATZ-SUCHY (Poland): The Po:&h delegation had the opportunity of expressing its attitude towards the United States plan to aid
Greece in a previous meeting. I do not think it
necessary for me to emphasize again that we are
whole-heartedly supporting every possible aid
that Greece may require in order to re-establish
its economy and bring immediate relief to the
Greek people. Our only regret is that such plans
are ,not in existence towards all countries which
have suffered destruction in the war and are
badly in need of help especially after the termination of UNRRA.

M KATz-SUCHY- (Pologne) (traduit de t'anglais):' La delegation polonaise a eu l'occasion,
au cours d'une seance precedente, de faire connaitre son attitude au sl1,jet du plan d'assistance
des Etats-Unisa la Grece. Je crois superflu d'insister a nouveau sur le fait que nous approuvons
chaleureusement l'idee d'apporter a la G:rece
toute l'aide dont elle peut avoir besoin pour relever son economie et fournir a son peuple des
secours immediats. Notre seul -regret estqu'il
n'existe pas de tels plans a l'egard de tous.les pays
qui ont subi des destructions pendant la guerre
et qui ont grand besoin d'aide, surtout apres·la
d.issolution de l'UNRRA

I wish at the moment'to state our attitude towards the two resolutions which are before' us,

Pour le moment, je voudrais indiquer notre
attitude a l'egard des deux resolutions qui nous

~

.

4i

782

a

~'.Ild, at the same time, to answer certain points
raised by some representatives.

sont soumises et, en meme temps, repondre
certaines questions soulevees par quelques representants.

I am rather surprised that Sir Alexander
Cadogan needed the encouragement of the Greek
representative to draw certain wrong conclusions.
When the Greek representative raised certain
points concerning my country and my Govem~
ment, I did not consider it necessary to answer
them. We all understood that it w'as a certain
manoeuvre to draw the attention of the Security
Council to points which were irrelevant to the
question. However, I am surprised, as I stated
already, to see Sir Alexander applying the same
tactics.

Je suis assez surpris de constater que Sir Alexander Cadogan a eu besoin des encouragements
du representant de la Grece pour tirer certaines
conclusions, d'ailleurs erronees. Lorsque le repre.
sentant de la Grece a souleve quelques questions
concernant man pays et mon Gouvernement, je
n'ai pas juge necessaire d'y repondre. Nous avons
taus ('ompris qu'il s'agissait d'une mauceuvre des.
tinee a attirer l'attention du Conseil de securite
sur certains points sans rapport avec la question.
Toutefois, je suis surpris, je ie repete, de voir Sir
Alexander Cadogan employer la meme tactique.

I do not think that anyone will try to compare
the situation of Poland and the relations between
Poland and the Soviet Union with the plan of
United States aid to Greece. Between the Soviet
Union and Poland there exists a treaty of mutual
assistance; there is a close alliance. The Soviet
Union and Poland are two neighbouring countries which faced, and are still facing, the same
enemy. Poland is a country which has a longer
frontier with Germany than any other neighbour
of Germany. Moreover, aid to Poland, in every
form received from the Soviet Union, was always
in the interest of the Polish people; it was never
used for any other purpose than to aid the Polish
people or build up L;'e Polish Army in order to
fight the German invader. The Polish Army was
built on the soil of the Soviet Union, and it was
the first to enter Polish territory and li'Qcrate
Poland. At the time when the first bit of Polish
land was liberated, when people were faced with
hunge!' and starvation, when the economy was
destroyed, the Soviet Union was the first country
to extend its help.

Je ne pense pas que personne essaye jamais de
comparer la situation de la Pologne et les relations polono-sovietiqlles avec le plan d'assistance
des Etats-Unis a la Grece. L'Union sovietique et
la Pologne ont conclu un traite d'assistance
mutueIle; il existe entre ces deux pays une
alliance etroite. L'Union sovietique et la Pologne
sont deux pays voisins qui ont fait face, et iont
toujours face, au meme ennel: i. La frontiere
germano-polQnaise est plus lorgue que toute
autre frontiere de l'All~n.agne avec Ufl pays limi·
trophe. En outre, l'aide foumie par I'Union
sovietique a la Pologne, sous quelque ft one que
ce soit, a toujours ete accordee dans l'interet du
peuple polonais et n'a jamais ete utilisee que pour
secourir le peuple polonais ou pour constituer
l'armee polonaise a:fin de combattre l'envahisseur
allemand. Cette armee polonaise a ete formee
sur le sol de I'Union sovietique et fut la premiere
a penetrer en territoire polonais et a liberer la
Pologne. Au moment ou la premiere pa','ll;e11e de
terre polonaise venait d'etre liberee, ou le penple
etait menace par la famine et les privations,
aIors que l'economie de la Pologne etait detruite,
rUnion sovietique fut le premier pays a lui offrir
son aide.

The Soviet Union and Poland are neighbouring countries. The same cannot be said about the
United States and Greece. Between Poland and
the Soviet Union, there is not even a natural
frontier while between the United States and.
Greece there are at least seven seas.

L'Union sovietique et la Pologne sont des pays
voisins. On ne peut en dire autant des EtatsUnis et de la Grece. Il n'existe meme pas de
frontiere natureIle entre la Pologne et I'Union
sovietique, tandis que sept mers au moins separent les Etats-Unis de la Grece.

The situation in Poland is quite different.
Even arms which have been supplied for the
pmpose of arming the Polish army were never
used. to fight inside the country. Poland never
had a civil war. Certain small gangs, armed from
abroad, have very quickly b~en liquidated, and
today they are even trying to return to normal
life and help PolRlld to rebuild its economy.

La situation en Pologne est entierement differente. Meme les armes qui avaient ete fournies
pour armer les regiments polonais n'ont jamais
ete utilisees dans des luttes intestines. Il n'y a
jamais eu de guerre civile en Pologne. Certaines
bandes peu importantes, armees par l'etranger,
ont ete liquidees tres rapidement; et meme, an- .
jourd'hui, eIles cherchent a rentrer dans la vie
normale pour aider la Pologne a reconstruire son
economie.

No one has come here to say that the situation
in Poland has endangered world peace. No one
has come here to say that the Polish State was in
the process of disintegration. But we have heard
that about· Greece. Greece is therefore an international problem, because, as stated by the
United States representative, the situation in

Personne n'est venu dire ici que la situation en
Pologne mettait en danger la paix du monde.
Personne n'est venu dire id que l'Etat polonais
etait en train de se desagreger. Mais nous l'avons
entendu dire de la Grece. Aussi la Grece constitue-t-eIle un probleme international, car, ainsi
que l'a declare le representant des Etats-Unis, la

.

-iII1lIiIliII

783
Greece endangers international peace. Thus it is
only right for the Security Council, which has
the primary responsibility for maintenance of
peace and security, to act on this situation.

I am very grateful for Sir Alexander Caclogan's reminder concerning the registration and
publication of certain treaties, but it was quite
unnecessary. We know very well what duties the
Charter inve..ts upon us and we are fulfilling
them. Certain treaties have been registered; certain treaties will be registered in the near future j
certain treaties are pending ratification. In any
case, all the treaties are public, and the Government of the United Kingdom knows their full
contents.
Aid to Poland from the Soviet Union, which
came to us during our moments of greatest need,
was in the interest of the Polish people. We are
not objecting - and there is no reason to object
-to United States aid to Greece. Our main concern is that this aid should be used, not as a
political weapon, but in the interest of the Greek
people only.
As regards the resolutions submitted, the Polish
delegation has given both of them very careful
consideration and it judges L.lteir merits according to the measure in which they help to ensure
that aid to Greece is most successful and profitable for the Greek people. My delegation finds
that the United States resolution is not quite satisfactory and, especially, that it does not define
the case clearly.
It is now beyond doubt that the present situation in Greece, which the United States representative described as a disintegration of the
State, has not resulted from the frontier incidents
which are the subject of the Commission's investigation. To maintain some group of L~e Clommission, which had a specific task to accomplish,
.for a longer period, would only lead to the wrong
deduction that the present situation in Greece
had been brought about by the relations of
Greece with her neighbouring countries, and, at
the same time, could cause suspicion regarding
Greece's neighbours.
We believe that we face today a quite different
situation. Many times the Greek question has
come up before this Council in one form or another, but for the first time it is clearly stated that
the internal situation in Greece is disastrous. Will
the group which is to remain be able to deal with
the internal situation? Will that gl'OUp be able to
investigate the causes of the present situation?
I do not think that any part of the Commission
of Investigation will be able to undertake that
task, not to mention the fact that it would be
contrary to its terms of reference.

We would be prepared to accept a resolution
providing that a small body should remain for a
III....-

situation en Grece met en danger la paix internationaIe. Des lors, il n'est que juste que le
ConspU de securite, auquel incombe la responsabilltt. fremiere du maintien de la paix et de la
securite, prenne certaines mesures pour y
remedier.
Je (. . tres reconnaissant a Sir Alexander
Cadogan de nous avoir rappel6 certains traites
qui ont ete enregistres et publies, mais c'etmt bien
inutile. Nous co:unaissons fort bien les obligations
que la Charte nous L'l1pOSe, et nous nous en
acq~ttons. Certains traites ont ete enregistres,
certains traites le seront dans un avenir prochain,
certains autres attendent leur ratification. En tout
cas, tous les traites sont publies, et le Gouvemerl1errt du Royaume-Uni en connait la teneur
complete.
L'aide que rUnion sovietique nous a fournie,
au moment OU notte situation etait le plus critique, a ete accordee dans l'interet de notre
peuple. Nous ne nous opposons pas - et i1 n'y
a pas de motifs de le faire - a ce que les EtatsUnis viennent en aide a la Grece. Notre majeure
preoccupation est que cette aide soit utilisee non
comme une arme politique, mais dans l'interet
exclusif du peuple grec.
En ce qui concerne les resolutions q:Ii nous
sont soumises, la delegation de la Pologne les a
e.''!:a!!'1Tlees avec beaucoup cl'attention. Pour nous,
leur valeur est fonction de la mesure dans laqueUe eUes contribuent a assurer le plein succes
de l'assistance a la Grece, pour le plus grand
profit du peuple grec. Ma delegation estime que
la resolution des Etats-Unis n'est pas absolument
satisfaisante et, en particulier, qu'elle ne definit
pas nettement le probleme.
n est a present hors de aoute que la. situation
actuelle en Urece, que le representant des EtatsUnis a depeinte comme une desagregation de
l'Etat, n'est pas le resultat des incidents de
frontiere qui font l'objet de l'enquete de la
Commission. En maintenant plus longtemps
en Grece un certain groupe de la Commission
qui avait une tache determinee a accomplir,
on donnerait a penser, a tort, que la situation
actuelle en Grece a ete provoquee par les relations de ce pays avec ses voisins et, par la
meme, on rendrait suspects les voisins de la
Grece.
A notre avi,;, la situation devant laquelle
nous nous trouvons aujourd'hui est toute differente. A maintes reprises, sous une forme ou
sous une autre, la question grecque a ete portee
devant ce Conseil, mais, pour la premiere fois,
on declare clairement que la situation interieure en Grece est desastreuse. Le groupe qui
doit y rester sera-t-il en mesure de venir about
de la situation interieure? Ce groupe sera-t-il
en mesure d'approfondir les causes de la situation actuelle? Je ne crois pas qu'auc:un groupe
de la Commission d'enquete soit en mesure cl'entreprendre cette tache, sans compter que cc
serait contraire aux termes de son mandat.
Nous serions disposes a accepter une resolution prevoyant qu'un orga..nisme restreint de-

784
certain specified period, in order that we might
obtain up~to~date information while the report
was being prepared. But then it would be necessary to :fix a certain date, for instance, when the
Commission submits its report or when the Council begins its discussion on that subject. Otherwise, to maintain such a group in Greece would
prejudice the results of the Commission's investigation. Therefo~, the Polish delegation cannot
support the resolution submitted by the representative of the United States, as amended by the
representative of France.

We must avoid here every attempt to prejudice
the results of the Commission's investigations.
Certain attempts of this kind have already be~n
made outside this Council and outside the United
Nations. It is most regrettable that such action
has been taken.

meurera en Grece pour une periode de temps
determinee, afin de nous tenir continuellement
au courant de la situation pendant que la Com.
mission prepare son rapport. Mais il faudrait
fixer une date, par exemple, celle a laquelle la
Commission soumettra son rapport Oll celle
laquelle le Conseil commencera a le discuter.
Sinon, maintenir en Grece un groupe de cc
genre porterait prejudice aux rCstlltats de
renquete de la Commission. C' ~. pourquoi
19 delegation de la Pologne ne peut :J.ppuyer
la resolution soumise par le representant des
Etats-Unis telle qu'elle a ete amendee par le
representant de la France.

a

Nous devons parer ici a toute tentative faite
en vue de porter prejudice aux resultats de la

Commission d'enquete. On s'est deja livre a
certaines tentatives de ce genre en dehors de ce
Conseil, et en dehors de l'Organisation des Nations Unies. Il est extremement regrettable que
fon ait agi de la sorte.

La Commission d'enquete a quitte la Grcce,
The Commission of Investigation has left
(}reece, and we do not see why we should not be et nous ne voyons pas pourquoi nous ne pourable to 'create a new commission for the new .rions pas creer une autre commission chargee
tasks which could immediately proceed to work. de s'acquitter de taches nouvelles et qui pour.
The fact that the United States Senate has not rait entamer ses travaux immediatement. Le
yet taken any decision cannot stop our action. fait que le Senat des Etats-Unis n'a encore pris
The case has been brought before us and we must aucune decision ne peut nous empecher d'agir.
take certain decisions. We have the right to take Nous avons ete saisis de l'affaire, et il faut que
certain measures, because the situation is indeed nous prenions certaines decisions. Nous en avons
such as the representative of the United States le droit, car la situation est bien telle que l'a
described: It is disastrous and it threatens world decrite le representant des Etats-Unis : elle est
desastreuse et menace la paix et la securite du
peace and security.
monde.
The need for a special commission has been
partly dealt with by the resolution of the Soviet
representative. My delegation finds that this resolution does not give all the' necessary assurance
that such aid will not be another form of political
weapon. The word "aid" can be very widely interpreted. Therefore, my delegation suggests an
amendment to the Soviet draft resolution. After
the last word of that resolution, another. paragraph should be added which would read as
follows:

La resolution du representant de l'Union sovietique traite en partie de la necessite de Creel' une
commission speciale. De ravis de ma delegation. cette resolution ne donne pas toute r~u­
rance necessaire que cette aide ne sera pas une
autre forme d'arme politique. Il est possible
de donner au mot "aide" une interpretation
tres large. En consequence) ma delegation propose· un amendement au projet de resolution
sovietique. A la fin de cette resolution, on devrait ajouter un autre paragraphe con~u comme
suit:

"In accordance with the resolution of 'me
fifty-sixth plenary meeting of the General Assembly on 11 December 1946,1 such aid cannot
be used as a political weapon and ~hall be distributed without any discrimination of race,
creed, or political belief."

"Conformement a la resolution adoptee par
l'AssembMe gc;nerale lors de sa cinquantesixieme seance pleniere du 11 decembre 1946\
cette aide ne doit pas ctre utilisee comme arme
politique et doit etre distribuee sans aucune
discrimination du point de vue racial, religieux
ou politique."

Such an amendment is in the spirit of our
Organization. It was unanimously adopted with
exactly the same wording by the General Assembly, and, whenever the question of aid came
up before any of the Councils or organs of the
United Nations, that restriction was always made.
As an example, may I quote the resolution of
28 March 1947 adopted by the Economic and
Social Council, relating to technical and other

Un tel amendement est conforme a l'esprit
de notre Organisation. l'AssembIee generale l'a
adopte a runanimite, exactement, sous la meme
forme, et chaque fois que les Conseils ou d'autres
organismes de l'OrganisatilJ1i des Nations Unics
ant debattu la question d'assistance, cette restriction a toujours ete apportee. A titre d'exemple,
permettez-moi de citer la resolution adoptee le
28 mars 1947 par le Conseil economique et social

1 See Resolutions adopted by the General Assembly
during the, second part of its first session, page 74.

1 Voir les Resolutions adoptees par I'Assembltle gendrale
pendant la seconde partie de sa premiere session, page 74.

~.

p

,v..,

assistance to under-developed countries, where it
is stated again: "The [Economic and Employment] Commission ... should 'be guided by the
principle that such as..C\istance should not be used
for the purpose of exploiting or of obtaining
political and other advantages exclusively for
countries rendering such assistance." l

Looking through every resolution by the
United Nations concerning relief and assistance,
one finds the same spirit and concern that aid
should not become a political weapon.

I do not think that anyone who really wishes
to help Greece, who wants this aid to become an
effective weapon in maintaining peace and security, given in t.he interest of the Greek people
and at the same time in the interest of all COlli}tries which suffered destruction in this war, can
object to this amendment or to the establishment
of a commission which will be. the guardian of
the Security Council ensuring that aid to Greece
is not misused.

et relative a l'assistance, technique et autre, a
iournir aux pays insuffisamment developpes; il
est prevu dans cette resolution. que: "La Commission des questions economique et de
l'emploi .... doit s'inspirer d'" principe selon
lequel cette assistance ne doit pas ctre utilisee a
des fins d'exploitation ou en vue d'obtenir des
avantages polit : :es ou autres au benefice
exc1usif des p,
qui fournissent cette assistancel ."
En examinant chaque resolution de I'Orgam.sation des Nations Unies relative aux secours et
a l'assistance7 on constate qu'elles sont toutes
redigees dans le meme esprit, avec le meme souci
que cette aide ne devienne pas une arme politique.
A mon avis, tous ceux qui veulent reellement
aider la Grece et qui veulent que cette assistance
devienne une arme efficace pour le maL'1tien de
la paix et de la secur~te, ceux qui desirent voir
cette aide distribuee dans l'interet du peuple grec
et, e..ll meme temps, dans l'interet de tous les pays
qui ont subi des destructions pendant la guerre,
ne peuvent qu'approuver cet amendement ou
l'etablissement d'une Commission qui serait le
gardien charge de veiller, au nom du Conseil de
seeurite, a ce que 1'0n ne fasse pas mauvais usage
de l'aide fournie a la Greee.

There is great danger that this aid might be
misusedJ whatever the intention of tt"1e United
States Government may be and even against the
intentions of that Government. We are anxious
that whatever supplies are given should not fall
into the hands of the political adventurers and
buccaneers who today threaten the qt.,iet life of
Greece. We are full of sympathy for the cause
of the Greek people, but we must make a distinction between the latter and certain fascist
gangs. operating-lr.eelyin Greece~gainst the
peaceful population and against those who unfortunately had to flee into the mountains, those
who had been the first to fight for the Allied
cause in the Balkan peninsula.

n est fort a craindre que 1'0n n'e..."1 fasse mauvais usage, que1l~s que puissent etre les intentions
du Gouverne...-nent des Etats-Unis, et meme, a
l'encontre de ces intentions. Nous tenons a eviter
que les approvisionnements fournis, quels qu'ils
soient, ne tombent aux mains d'aventuriers politiques et d'ecumeurs, qui, aujourd'hui, menacent la tranquillite de la Greee. Toute notre
sympathie est acquise a la cause du peuple gree,
mais ilnous.. laut-mstinguer-entre-te-petiplelui:"
rrieme et certaines bandes fascistes operant librement en Grece contre la population pacifique et
contre ceux qui, malheureusement, ont ete obliges
de fuir dans les montagnes, ceux qui furent les
premiers a combattre pour la cause alliee dans
la peninsule balkanique.

It is most unfortunate that such a situation
has been created. As I have said, we welcome the
fact that this case was brought by the United
StatCls Government before the Security Council
and given full consideration here. We are thus
assured that the plan to aid Greece shall not become a repetition of the action taken during the
tragic years which followed the war, when some
other countries which gave aid to Greece played
a role which has not yet been disclosed.

11 est extremement regrettable qu'une situation
de ce genre se soit creee. Comme je l'ai deja di?,
ma delegation ~st heureuse que l'affaire ait ete
portee par le Gbuvernement des Etats-Unis devant le Conseil de securite et quelle y rc!;;oive
toute notre attention. De cette fa~OI.,· nous
sommes assures que le plan d'aide a la Grece ne
deviendra pas unc replique des mesures prises,
au cours des annees tragiques qui ont suivi la
guerre, par certains pays qui, sous pretexte d'aider la Grece, ont joue un role dont la nature
n'est pas revelee a ce jour.

I have not yet read the informal resolution
which will eventually be proposed by the representative of Colombia. However, I wish to state
that we find many sound and good points in that
resolution and especially welcome the spirit in
which the representative of Colombia submitted

Je n'ai pas encore bier. lu le texte du projet
de resolution que le representant de la Colombie
deposera eventuellement. Toutefois, je tiens a
declarer qu'a notre avis, ('ctte resolution contient
de nombreux poins interessants et que nous apprecions particulierement l'esprit dans lequel le
representant de la Oolombie nous l'a soumise.

1 See Resolutions adopted by the Economic and Social Council during its fourth session. No. 27 (IV)

page 2.

1 Voir les Rtlsolution$ adoptees par le Conseil tlconomique
et social pendant sa quatrieme session, page 2, No 27 (IV).

786
it. I believewe shall give this resolution our fullest
consideration if it is submitted before the meet~
ing, and I believe that, subject to certain amendments, it may well create a sound basis for the
solution of the problem under discussion.

Je pense que nous donnerons a eette resolution
toute notre attention si elle nous est presentee;
nous estimons que, sous reserve de eertains amen~
dements, elle peut constituer une base solide pour
la solution du probleme qui fait l'objet de la discussion.

The PRESIDENT: I had hoped that we would
be able to conclude our discussion and would
have been able to vote on the two draft resolu~
tioIl§ before us at this moming's meeting. How~
ever, I still have three speakers on my list. I
therefore propose that we should meet again this
afternoon. Since there is no objection, the meetin~ is adjourned until 3 p.m.

Le PRESIDENT (traduit de l'anglais): J'avais
espere qU'il nous serait possible de clore la discussion et de mettre aux voix les deux projets de
resolutions qui nous ont ete soumis ce matin.
Toutefois, i1 y a encore trois orateurs inscrits. Je
propose done que nous nour reunissions de nouveau cet apres-midi. Puisq'il n'y a pas d'objection, la seance est ajournee a 15 heures.

The meeting rose at 1.10 p.m.

La seance est levee a 13 h. 10.

HUNDRED AND THIRTY-FIRST MEETING

CENT·TRENTE ET UNIEME SEANCE

Held at Lake Success, New York,
on Friday, 18 April 1947, at 3 p.m.

T enue a Lake Success, New York,
le vendredi 18 avri11947, a15 heures.

President: Mr. Quo Tai-chi (China).

President: M. Quo Tai-chi (Chine).

Present: The representatives of the following
countries: Australia, Belgium, Brazil, China, Colombia, France, Poland, Syria, Union of Soviet
Socialist Republics, United Kingdom, United
States of America.

Presents: Lee; representants des pays suivants:
Australie, Belgique, Bresil, Chine, Colombie,
Etats-Unis d'Amerique, France, Pologne,
Royaume-Uni, Syrie, Union des Republiques
socialistes sovietiques.

136. Continuation of the discussion
on the -Gr~ek -quesiion

136. Suite de la discussion sur la
question grecque

At the invitation of the President, Mr.
Kahreman Ylli, representative of Albania, Mr.
Athanassov, representative of. Bulgaria, Mr.
Dendramis, representative of Greece and Mr.
Krasovec, representative of Yugoslavia took
their seats at the Council table.

Sur l'invitation du President, M. Kahreman
Ylli, representant de I'Albanie, M. AthanassoD,
representant de la Bulgarie, M. Dendramis, representant de la Grece, et M. Krasovec, representant de la Yougoslavie, prennent place a la
table du Conseil.

Mr. VAN LANGENHOVE (Belgium) (translated
from French): The conservatory measure proposed by the United States representative,
namely, to keep on the spot a group of the
Commission of Investigation in Greece is wise.
It can only have useful results. The BeIgian
.delegation will vote for this proposal.

M. VAN LANGENHOVE (Belgique): La mesure
conservatoire proposee par le representant des
Etats-Unis, et tendant a maintenir sur place un
groupe de la Commission d'enquete en Grece, est
judicieuse. Elle ne peut avoir qu'un effet utile.
La delegation heIge votera en faveur de eette
proposition.

So far as the financial aid asked for by Greece
and Turkey is concerned, the Belgian delegation
considers that it is not for the Council to pronounce itself on this question.

En ce qUi concerne l'aide financiere sollicitee
par la Grece et la Turquie, la delegation beige
estime que le Conseil n'a pas a statuer a ce sujet.

Le colonel HODGSON (Australie) (traduit de
Colonel HODGSON (Australia): ~ Mr. President, we are not quite sure whether we are I'anglais) : Monsieur le President, nous ne savons
discussing the original statement of the United pas tres bien si nous sommes en train de discuter
States representative, the resolution of the United la declaration primitive du representant des EtatsStates, the resolution of the Soviet Union~ the Unis, la resolution des Etats-Unis, celle de
amendment proposed by the Polish representa- l'Union sovietique, l'amendement propose par le
tive, or the proposal of the representative of- representant de la Pologne ou la proposition du
Colombia. Everybody seems to be dealing with representant de la Colombie. Tout le monde
semble s'oceuper de l'ensemble de ces textes sans
the ~hole lot in any order.
suivre aucun ordre.

DEPOSI~4IRES DES PUBLICATIONS DES NATIONS UNIE

ARGENTINA-ARGENTINE
EdrtonalSudmnerreana
S.A.
Calle Alsina 500
Buenos Aires

AUSTRALIA-AUSTRALIE
H. A. Goddard Pty. Ltd.
255a George Street
Sydney
BELGIUM-.BELGIQUE
Agence et Messageries de la
Presse
14·22 rue du Persil
Bruxelles

BOLMA-BOLIVIE
Lihreria Cientffica y
Literaria
Avenida 16 de Julio, 216
Casilla 972
LaPaz

CANADA-CANADA
The Ryerson Press
299 Queen Street West
Toronto
CIDLE-CHILI
Edmundo Pizarro
Merced 846
Santiago

CIDNA-CHINE
The Connnercial Press Ltd.
211 Bonan Road
Shanghai
COSTARICA

COSTA·RICA
Trejos Hermanos
Apartado 1313
San Jose
ClffiA-CUBA
La Casa Belga
Rene de Smedt
O'Reilly 455
La Haban3
CZECHOSLOVAKIA

TAQUIE
TCHECOSLOVa
F. Topic
Na'rodniTrida 9
Praha 1

DENMARK-DANEMARK
Einar Munskgaard
Norregade 6
Kjobenhavn

DOMINIC.f\N REPUBLIC

NETHERLANDS

REPUBLIQUE
DOMINICAINE

PAYS·BAS

Lihrerfa Dominicana
Calle Mercedes No. 49
Apai'tado 656
Ciudad Trujillo

ECUADOR-EQUA,TEUR
Muiioz Hermr.mos y Cia.
Nueve de Octuhre 703
Casilla 10·24
Guayaquil

FINLAND-FINLAND.F
Akateeminen Kirjakauppa
2, Keskauskatu
Helsinki

FRANCE-FRANCE
Editions A. Pedone
13, rue SoufHot
Paris Ve

GREECE-GRECE
"Eleftheroudakis?'
Lihrairie intern~tio:riale
Plac.e de la Constitution
Athimes
GUATEMALA

GUATEMALA
Jose Gouhaud
Gouhaud & Cia. Ltda.
Sucesor
5a Av. Sur No. 6 y 9a C. P.
Guatemala

HAITI-HAITI
Max Bouchereau
Lihrairie "A la Caravelle"
Boite postale l11·B
Port-an·Prince

INDIA-INDE
Oxford Book & Stationery
Co.
ScindiaHouse
New Delhi

IRAN-IRAN
Bangahe Piaderow
. 731 Shah Avenue
Teheran

IRAQ--IRIlK
Mack enZle
"& Mack enZle
.
The Bookshop
Baghdad.
LEBANON-LIBAIV
Lihrairie universelle
.Beirut

N. V. Martinus Nijhoff
Lange Voo;rhout 9
s'Gravenhage

NEW ZEALAND
NOUVELLE·ZELANDE
Gordon & Gotch
Waring Taylor Street
Wellington

NORWAY-NORVEGE
Norsk Bokimport A/S
Edv. Storms Gate 1
Oslo
SWEDEN-SUEDE
C. E. Fritze's Kungl.
Hofhokhandel A.·B.
Fredsgatan 2
Stockholm

SWITZBRLAND-SUISSE
Lihrairie Payot S. A.
Lausanne

.....................

Hans Raunhardt
Kirchgasse 17
Zurich 1

SYRIA-SYRIE
Lihrairie universelle
DaL.,nscus
UNION OF SOUTH AFRICA,

UNION SUD-AFRICAINE
Central News Agency Ltd.
Commissioner & Rissik Sts.
Johannesburg
UNITED KINGDOM

ROYAUME·UNI
H.M. Stationery Offi.ce
P.O. Box 569
London, S.E. 1
UNITED STATES OF .
AMERICA

ETATS.UNIS D~MERIQUE '

Internation.al Documents
SeI'"'nce
Columbia Universit\, Press
2960 Broadway
New York 27, N. Y.
YlJGOSLAVIA

YOUGOSLAVIE
Drzavno Preduzece
Jugoslovenska Knjiga
Moskovska ill. 36
Belgrade

_.' ~~"i~",,·~~~~~~'#r",,~~~~k'·'~~'';'~/~:i\i~~~~.TI:PS7:'>C''''''':F'·~·f'7=C'~1""'''1~''.<\1"'''''''~~~~~::''"'~';;~;'''''''''''';::'C'T'""'~'i;i;.'.'
