S/2015/983

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
16 December 2015
Original: English

Letter dated 16 December 2015 from the Secretary-General to the
President of the Security Council
I have the honour to refer to the United Nations Organization Stabilization
Mission in the Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUSCO) and to Security
Council resolution 2211 (2015), in which the Council encouraged the Government
of the Democratic Republic of the Congo to take effective steps to enter into a
regular strategic dialogue with the United Nations, building on the assessment
process initiated in 2010 to jointly develop a road map and exit strategy for
MONUSCO.
Pursuant to the letter dated 5 October 2015 from the Permanent Representative
of the Democratic Republic of the Congo to the United Nations addressed to the
President of the Security Council (S/2015/760), I dispatched a small team to visit
the country from 23 to 28 November 2015 to take a fresh look at the situation on the
ground and evaluate progress made by the Government with regard to the security
situation and the development of national capacities to manage the threat posed by
armed groups and prevent violence against civilians. In meetings with MONUSCO
and the team, the Government, while recognizing that the situation in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo remained fragile, reiterated its position that the
situation on the ground does not justify retaining the current number of United
Nations peacekeepers in the country.
The team noted the efforts of the Forces armées de la République
démocratique du Congo (FARDC) to neutralize armed groups, including the Allied
Democratic Forces, the Forces démocratiques de libération du Rwanda, the Forces
de résistance patriotiques en Ituri and, most recently, Mai-Mai Yakutumba, in the
conduct of which the army suffered heavy casualties. FARDC was found to have
enhanced its capacity to deploy quickly and launch operations against armed
groups, despite difficulties in sustaining those operations. The commitment of the
Government to hold perpetrators of violence accountable, combat sexual violence
and end the recruitment of children was also identified as a p ositive development.
Moreover, the team found that the reorganization of the army, the appointment of
new commanders in some areas, enhanced training efforts and the establishment of a
salary payment system had yielded positive results.
Building on the findings of the assessments jointly conducted by the Government
and MONUSCO earlier this year, the team confirmed that there had been some progress
in the security situation in a number of areas, including in the Provinces of Bas -Uélé,
Haut-Uélé, Ituri, South Kivu and Tshopo. The start of the national disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration programme was also identified as an important
development in addressing the threat posed by armed groups.
15-22337 (E)

171215

*1522337*

S/2015/983

Notwithstanding the progress made thus far, it was assessed that more needs to
be done to sustain these gains, in particular with regard to the extension of State
authority and the finding of durable solutions for the reintegration of former
combatants within the context of broader stabilization initiatives. The security
situation in many territories in the eastern Democratic Republic of the Congo
remains volatile, while the implications of the unfolding crisis in Burundi also need
to be monitored carefully, particularly in South Kivu. In addition, political tens ions
and uncertainty centred around the elections persist, with a risk of civil unrest and
violence, should the announced national dialogue fail to reach consensus on the way
forward.
The evaluation included a review of the configuration of MONUSCO troops
and identified a number of inefficiencies, taking into account the Mission’s plans to
transform the Force in order to enhance its effectiveness. Based on projected
capability and efficiency gains from the transformation of the Force, including
rapidly deployable battalions, enhanced mobility and increased information gathering capacity, it was assessed that a further reduction of MONUSCO military
personnel may be envisaged without compromising the Mission’s ability to
implement its mandate to protect civilians, including through the neutralization of
armed groups.
Considering the increasing law-and-order challenges in the context of the
electoral process, MONUSCO will review its configuration, in particular with
regard to the police component, to ensure that it has adequate capacity to implement
its mandate to protect civilians. The findings and recommendations will be included
in my March 2016 report to the Security Council.
In light of the increasingly complex situation in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo and the need for more effective mandate implementation in the coming
months, I believe that the time has come to take concrete steps towards facilitating
the resumption of the strategic dialogue between the United Nations and the
Government, with a view to achieving a common goal: the gradual and progressive
exit of MONUSCO, while preserving the gains and investments made and averting a
major relapse into instability or conflict. The Government of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo expressed its willingness to MONUSCO and the team to
re-engage in discussions on the joint development of an exit strategy for
MONUSCO, as outlined in resolution 2211 (2015), and to enhance cooperation with
the Mission.
Considering the above factors, I recommend that when reviewing the mandate
of MONUSCO, the Security Council consider a further reduction of 1,700
MONUSCO military personnel, in addition to the reduction of 2,000 military
personnel as endorsed by the Council in its resolution 2211 (2015) , taking into
account progress in the development of a joint exit strategy and in addressing the
threat posed by armed groups.
I should be grateful if you could bring the present letter to the attention of the
members of the Security Council.
(Signed) BAN Ki-moon

2/2

15-22337
