202

Stressing the importance of the activities of the United
Nations Trust Fund for Aging to assist countries, at their
request, in formulating and implementing policies and
programmes on aging,
Noting with concern the discrepancies between the
resources of the Trust Fund and the number of requests
received for assistance,
I. Takes note with apprecwtion of the report of the
Secretary-General on the question of aging; ' 1
2. Calls upon Governments to ensure that the question
of aging is incorporated into their nat10nal development
plans in accordance with the t·ulture and traditions of 1.heir
countries;
3. Encourages Governments. to consider convening
regional and subregional meetings on the applicability of
the recommendations of the International Plan of Action
on Aging to their particular needs and conditions;
4. Requests the Secretary-General to continue to promote the exchange of information and experience in order
to stimulate progress on the question of aging, to
encourage the adoption of measures to respond to the economic and social implications of aging and to mt"el the
needs of older persons;
5. Requests the Secretary-General to ensure that due
consideration is given to the question of aging in the work
of the steering committee and the working group to folio"'
up the implementation of General Assembly resolution
39/228 on the International Conference on Population;
6. Requests the Secretary-General, in implementing
the programme on aging, to pay special attention to the
question of elderly women;
7. Invites the United Nattons Development Fund for
Women to give due consideration to pro1ects aimed at
benefiting elderly women.
8. Requests the Secretary-General to respond
favourably to the request of the African Regional Conference on Aging for assistance m establishing an African
gerontological society;
9. Urges the Secretary-General to take immediate and
urgent steps to promote the United Nations Trust Fund
for Aging so that it may effectively continue to provide
assistance to developing countries, at their request;
10. Urges the Secretary-General to include in technical
co-operation programmes, to the extent feasible under the
funding of those programmes, advisory 'iervices to <level
oping countries that request them:
11. Invites Governments and non-governmental
organizations to continue and. where possible, to increase
their contributions to the Uniled Nations rrust Fund for
Aging, and calls upon Governments and non-govern
mental organizations that have not vet done so to consider
contributing to the Trns1 Fund;
12. Invites the United Nations Fund for Population
Activities to consider co-operating with the United
Nations Trust Fund for Aging in providing assistance for
projects received by the Trust Fund that fall within it~
mandate;
13. Requests the Secretary-General to submit to the
General Assembly al its forty-first session a progress report
on the implementation of the ircommendations contained
in the present resolution.
14. Decides to mcludc m the provis10nal agenda of 11,
forty-fir.;t session the item en11tkd .. Question of aging"
•..f1fh , ,,. ·iun; mel:'lm>;
~,,1

:1,,{i1t-rnber

ltV'

40130.

Implementation of the International Plan of
Action on Agin~

I he c;enera! Assembly.
Recalling its resolution 33/52 of 14 December 1978, by
which it decided to organize a World Assembly on Aging
m 1982 as a forum to launch an international programme
of action aimed at ,guaranteeing economic and social sccunt y to older persons, as well as opportunities for them to
, ontribute to national development,
Recalling further its resolution 37 /51 of 3 December
! 982, by which it endorsed the International Plan of
\ction on Aging adopted by consensus by the World
\ssembly on A.ging, 48
Reaffirming the part of the preamble of the Plan of
Action that solemnly recognizes that the quality of life is
•10 less important than longevity and that the aging should
:herefore, as far as possible, be enabled to enjoy in their
11wn families and communities a life of fulfilment, health,
~ecurity and contentment and be appreciated as an integral
part of society,
Well aware that the formulation and implementation of
policies on aging are the sovereign right and responsibility
of each State. and recognizing that the promotion of the
act1vit1es, safety and well-being of the elderly should be an
i:ssential part of an integrated and concerted development
effort,
t ·oncerned that the report of the Secretary-General on
the first review and appraisal of the implementation of the
Plan of Action 53 shows that, in 1985, 55.4 per cent of the
global population of the elderly is living in developing
regions and that. according to projections, by the year
2025 more than 70 per cent of all persons sixty years of age
and over will live in developing countries, which are least
prepared to meet the economic and social consequences of
this drastic shift in population structure,
('onvinced that the elderly must be considered an important and necessary element in the development process at
ail levels within a given society,
Convinced also that increasing longevity is an achievement of mankind and a sign of progress, and that the aged
are an asset and not a liability to society because of the
invaluable contribution they can make by virtue of their
accumulated wealth of knowledge and experience,
Mindful that 1985 is the first year in which the General
Assembly has hact the opportunity to review the progress
made in implem,.:nting the Plan of Action, adopted in
1982,
Noting with concern that contributions pledged to the
United Nations Trust Fund for Aging decreased to
$39 .1 I O in the t"'elve-month period ending in December
1984, despite the repeated appeals of the Secretary-Gen<"ral to increase contributions,
'Voting also wi1h concern that the expenditures of the
l rust Fund are expected to decrease from $450.000 in the
h1ennium 1984-1985 to $150,000 in the next biennium,
Alarmed that the proposed programme budget for the
h1ennmm 1986-1987 shows a projected cut of 30 per cent
m the funds to be allocated from the regular budget to the
Aging Unit of the Centre for Social Development and
Humanitarian Affairs,
Deeply preoccupied with the fact that the Aging Unit
lacks the structural organization, autonomy, funds and
necessary manp0wer 10 Gm)' out t>ffectively its mandate of
1mpkrnen11ng th, Plan .,f .<\<:'tmn
Re,.j11nt1 th<' Se,·retai~ <;i·neral to invite Membe,
'-late~ the speci:di?ed agcncir,; and other orga11izat10ns
- .
'<;., .. f 14X ~ o a,,,

VI.

Resoludou adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

concerned within the United Nations system to comment
on ways and means of implementing the International
Plan of Action on Aging and, in particular, on the desirability and viability of elaborating a United Nations programme for the implementation of the Plan of Action, and
to prepare a report on the basis of these comments for submission to the Economic and Social Council at its first reg:Jlar session of 1986;
2. Further requests the Secretary-General to include in
that report a full analysis of the programmatic and financial aspects of activities undertaken by all organs, bodies
and organizations of the United Nations system under the
Plan of Action since its inception;
3. Invites interested non-governmental organizatiom
in consultative status with the Economic and Social Council to provide, through the Secretary-General, information
and documentation that will facilitate this work;
4. Requests the Economic and Social Council to consider the report at its first regular session of 1986 and to
submit appropriate recommendations to the General
Assembly at its forty-first session;
5. Decides to consider at its forty-first session the recommendations of the Economic and Social Council as a
matter of high priority.
96th plenary meeting
29 November 1985

40/31. Implementation of the World Programme of
Action concerning Disabled Persons and
United Nations Decade of Disabled Persons
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 37/52 of 3 December 1982, by
which it adopted the World Programme of Action concerning Disabled Persons, 54 37/53 of3 December 1982, by
which, inter a/ia, it proclaimed the period 1983-1992 the
United Nations Decade of Disabled Persons, 38/28 of 22
November 1983, in which it recognized the United
Nations Trust Fund for the International Year of Disabled
Persons as an important instrument for the implementation of the World Programme of Action concerning Disabled Persons and the desirability of the continuation of
the Trust Fund throughout the Decade, and 39/26 of 23
November 1984, by which it adopted further specific
measures for implementation of the World Programme of
Action,
Taking note of Economic and Social Council resolution
1985/35 of 29 May 1985, in which, inter a/ia, the Secretary-General was requested, in order to facilitate contributions by Governments, to include, on an annual basis, the
United Nations Trust Fund for the International Year of
Disabled Persons among the programmes for which funds
are pledged at the United Nations Pledging Conference for
Development Activities,
Noting with satisfaction the concrete measures already
carried out by the Governments of Member States, the
bodies and organizations of the United Nations system
and non-governmental organizations to implement the
objectives of the World Programme of Action within the
framework of the United Nations Decade of Disabled Persons,
Noting with appreciation the steps taken by the United
Nations system and by non-governmental organizations
concerned to establish a monitoring procedure and prepare
a consolidated questionnaire to monitor the implementation of the World Programme of Action,
S4 Af37/351/Add.l and Add.1/Corr.L annex. sect. Vlll. recommendat1on
I (IV).

203

Noting with concern that, in spite of a number of contnbutions made by Governments between 198 l and 1985
and constant appeals by the General Assembly and other
United Nations organs to contribute to the financing of
activities for the disabled, progress towards the improvement of the situation of the disabled in the developing
countries has been slow.
Noting with serious concern the alarming situation of
disabled persons in developing countries and the critical
economic situation in a number of countries, in particular
in Africa and Latin America and the least developed
countries,
Mindful that, since developing countries are experiencing difficulties in mobilizing resources, international cooperation should be encouraged to assist national efforts m
implementing the World Programme of Action and the
United Nations Decade of Disabled Persons,
Taking note of the report of the Secretary-General on
the implementation of the World Programme of Action
concerning Disabled Persons and the United Nations Decade of Disabled Persons, 55
Expressing its appreciation to Member States and organizations, in particular to the twenty-five States that have
donated $1.6 million over the past few years,
Expressing its appreciation of the useful role played by
the United Nations Trust Fund for the International Year
of Disabled Persons in implementing the World Programme of Action,
I. Urges all Member States and other donors to consider further generous contributions to the United Nations
Trust Fund for the International Year of Disabled Persons;
2. Expresses its appreciation to Member States that
have established national committees or similar bodies to
co-ordinate activities in the field of disability and encourages all Member States to do so;
3. Invites Member States to reinforce national committees as focal points for the United Nations Decade of
Disabled Persons, to stimulate activities at the national
level, to mobilize public opinion on behalf of the Decade,
to participate in the implementation of disability projects
with regard to the International Year of Disabled Persons
and to assist in monitoring and evaluating the implementation of the World Programme of Action concerning Disabled Persons;
4. Encourages Member States to translate the World
Programme of Action into national languages;
5. Invites Member States, in close collaboration with
the national committees and non-governmental organizations concerned, to submit their replies to the questionnaire for the first round of monitoring and implementing
the World Programme of Action to the Secretary-General
as soon as possible for inclusion in his report on the evaluation of progress at mid-Decade, to be submitted to the
General Assembly at its forty-second session;
6. Urges the Secretary-General to comply with paragraphs 157 and 158 of the World Programme of Action;
7. Invites all States to give high priority to considera-•
tton of projects concerning the prevention of disabilities,
rehabilitation and the equalization of the opportunities of
disabled persons within the framework of bilateral assistance;
8. Reiterates the need to give greater publicity to the
United Nations Decade of Disabled Persons and calls
upon Member States, national committees and non-governmental organizations to assist in publicizing the Decade
by all appropriate means;
5S A/40/728 and Corr. I.
