._
‘.:

UNITED NATIONS

OFFICIAL

RIXCORDS

FORTIETH

YEAR

2616”

MEETING:

UN LBRAR

FE8 1 6 1995

7 OCTOBER 1985

NEW YORK

CONTENTS
Page

Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/2616)

. .. ... .... .. ... ... .... . ... .... ... .. ..

1

Adoption of the agenda . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

1

Complaint by Angola against South Africa:
Letter dated 1 October 1985 from the Permanent Representative of Angola
to the United Nations addressed to the President of the Security Council
(S/175 10) . . . . . . . . . . ..*.............*........*...*...........

1

SjPV.2616

NOTE

,,3

Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined
with figures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United Nations
document.
Documents of the Security Council (symbol S/ . . . ) are normally published in
quarterly Supplements of the Official Records of the Setirity Council. The date of the
document indicates the supplement in which it appears or in which information about it
is given.
The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a system
adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of Resolutions and Decisions of the
Security Council. The new system, which has been applied retroactively to resolutions
adopted before 1 January 1965, became fully operative.on that date.

2616th MEETING
Held in New York on Monday,

7 October

President: Mr. Vernon A. WALTERS
(United States of America).

Mr. Garba (Nigeria), Mr. Sarr4 (Senegal). Mr. von
Schimding (South Africa), Mr. AI-Shaali (United Arab Emirates), Mr. Foum (United Republic of Tanzania), Mr. Le Kim
‘Chtmg (Viet Nam), Mr. GoIob (Yugoslavia), Mr. SikauIu
(Zambia) and Mr. Mangwende (Zimbabwe) took the places
reservedfor them at the side of the Council chamber.

Present: The representatives of the .following States:
Australia, Burkina Faso, China, Denmark, Egypt, France,
India, Madagascar, Peru, Thailand, Trinidad and Tobago,
Ukrainian Soviet Socialist Republic, Union of Soviet
Socialist Republics, United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland, United States of America.

2. The PRESIDENT: I should like to inform members of
the Council that I have received letters from the representatives of Ghana, Morocco and Tunisia in which they
request to be invited to participate in the discussion of the
item on the Council’s agenda. In conformity with the usual
practice I propose, with the consent of the Council, to
invite those representatives to participate in the discussion,
without the right to vote; in accordance with the relevant
provisions of the Charter and rule’37 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure.

Provisional agenda (WAgendaI2616)
1. Adoption

of the agenda

2.

by Angola against South Africa:

Complaint

1985, at 10.30 a.m.

Letter dated 1 October 1985 from the Permanent
Representative of Angola to the United Nations
addressed to the President of the Security Council
(S/175 10)

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Asamoah (Ghana),
Mr. AIaoui (Morocco) and Mr. Bouziri (Tunisia) took the
pIaces reserved for them at the side of the Council chamber.

The meeting was called to order at 11.25 a.m.

3. The PRESIDENT: I should like to inform the Council
that I have received a letter dated 4 October 1985 from the
representatives of Burkina Faso, Egypt and Madagascar,
which reads as follows:

Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted
Complaint by Angola against South Africa:

“We have the honour to request that during the
Security Council’s discussion of the item entitled ‘Complaint by Angola against South Africa’, the Council
extend an invitation under rule 39 of the provisional
rules of procedure to Mr. Mfanafuthi J. Makatini,
Head of International Department and Chief Representative of the African National Congress of South
Africa to the United Nations.*’

Letter dated 1 October 1985 from the Permanent Representative of Angola to the United Nations addressed
to the President of the Security Council (S/17510)
1. The PRESIDENT:
In accordance with the decisions
taken at the previous meetings on this item, I invite the
representative of Angola to take a place at the Council
table; I invite the representatives of Afghanistan, Algeria,
Botswana, Cameroon, Cuba, Ethiopia, the Islamic Republic of Iran, Kuwait, Mozambique, Nicaragua, Nigeria, Senegal, South Africa, the United Arab Emirates, the United
Republic of Tanzania, Viet Nam, Yugoslavia, Zambia and
Zimbabwe to take the places reserved for them at the side of
the Council chamber.

If I hear no objection, I shall take it that the Council
agrees to extend an invitation to Mr. Makatini under rule
39 of the provisional rules of procedure.
It was so decided.
4. The PRESIDENT:
Members of the Council have
before them document S/17531, which contains the text
of a draft resolution submitted by Burkina Faso, Egypt,
India, Madagascar, Peru and Trinidad and Tobago.

At the invitation of the President. Mr. de Figueiredo
(Angola) took a pIace at the Council table: Mr. zarif
(Afghanistan), Mr. TaIeb Ibrahimi (Algeria), Mr. Legwaila
(Botswana), Mr. Engo (Cameroon), Mr. Malmierca Peoli
(Cuba), Mr. Dinka (Ethiopia), Mr. Rajaie-Khorassani (Islamic Republic of Iran), Mr. Abulhassan (Kuwaiti, Mr.’ DOS
Santos (Mozambique), Mr. Chamorro Mora (Nicaragua),

5. The first speaker is the representative of the United
Republic of Tanzania. I invite him to take a place at the
Council table and to make his statement.
1

6. Mr. FOUM (United Republic of Tanzania): First of
all, I should like to congratulate you, Sir, on your assump
tion of the presidency of the Council for this month. May
I take this opportunity also to express our highest appreciation to Sir Geoffrey Howe, of the United Kingdom, for
the efficient manner in which he conducted the commemorative meeting of the Council and to Sir John Thomson
for the way he conducted the affairs of the Council during
the month of September.

12. What is most glaring now is that that very same
South Africa, the regime that has used brute force against
the black people of South Africa and visited death and
destruction on neighbouring independent States, is said to
be the guardian of the highest Western values and the
vanguard against Communism. It is imperative that those
who have fed, sustained and unleashed this monstrous system against the black people of the area ask themselves
some serious questions. Do they not value the lives, the
humanity, the dignity and the freedom of the black people?
Or do they value more highly their own ideological pursuits, which have very little relevance to the people whose
humanity, freedom and dignity are being denied by their
surrogate?
.

7. Like most States Members of the Organization, Tanzania learned with great dismay of the blatant attack by
South African forces against the People’s Republic of
Angola in the province of Cuando-Cubango.
It is to be
recorded that the Council is now meeting for the third time
in less than four months to deliberate on South Africa’s
aggression against the People’s Republic of Angola.

13. Angola has suffered aggression now, just as it has
suffered aggression before and may suffer it again if these
larger issues are not fully addressed. Angola has suffered
aggression because South Africa is determined, in a
manner apparently much admired by those that support it,
to undermine Angola’s freedom and sovereignty. Angola
has suffered aggression at the hands of apartheid South
Africa because, ever since the people of Angola won their
freedom, imperialism has pursued every means available in
an effort to change Angola’s institutions and the very
fabric of the society the Angolan people are trying to forge
for themselves.

8. The Council has accordingly adopted a number of
resolutions condemning South Africa, the latest being
resolution 567 (1985), of June 1985, and resolution 571
(1985), adopted only two weeks ago. What is most obvious
is that all those resolutions, expressing the will of the international community as represented in this body, have
remained unheeded. Those were resolutions aimed at staying the aggressive hand of apartheid South Africa. This
latest act of aggression against the People’s Republic of
Angola is thus another violation of the Charter of the
United Nations and the norms and principles of international law. As such, it poses a threat to international peace
and security.

14. With the aid and comfort afforded it by supporters,
apartheid South Africa today represents all that is dangerous and that threatens peace and security in the region.
Apartheid South Africa has arrogated to itself the role of
regional gendarme and is acting as the surrogate of
imperialism.

9. For almost 10 years now we have all witnessed what
has become institutionalized aggression against Angola by
the fascist forces of South Africa. Thus, what is before the
Council, or what the Council should face, is not merely the
present act of aggression in itself. Certainly, the act of
aggression is in itself an issue that must be universally
condemned. In our view, however, what needs to be fully
examined is the larger issue of what South African aggression against Angola represents, why South Africa is
afforded aid and comfort by some members of the Council, and the dangers attendant upon the motives for which
such aid and comfort are given to the abhorred and condemned regime of apartheid.

15. The representative of Angola has eloquently presented to the Council the facts of the latest attack on
Angola [2612th meeting]. It has thus been shown that even
the spurious excuse of pursuing the SWAP0 militants is
no longer being advanced. That latest act of aggression
was an act directly aimed at assisting the bandits of
UNITA
(National Union for the Total Independence of
Angola), who are South Africa proteges, organized,
financed, armed and launched by the apartheid regime to
undermine the freedom and sovereignty of the People’s
Republic of Angola.

10. South Africa has left no doubt as regards its racial
arrogance and the extent to which it would go to sustain
the system of apartheid. It is within the same context that
the Pretoria regime has continued its colonial occupation
of Namibia and used. that international Territory as a
springboard for aggression.

16. The dangers inherent in such policies and practices
must be clear to all. In seeking to cross borders with a view
to supporting bandits and subverting the institutions of the
Government of the People’s Republic of Angola, South
Africa has acted in much the same way as those that,
acting on the dubious concept of so-called hot pursuit,
have violated the sovereignty, territorial integrity and independence of States in Central America, in the Middle East
and, most recently, in North Africa, where Tunisia suffered a cowardly bombardment.

11. The Council will recall that South Africa has consistently used the so-called excuse of the South West Africa
People’s Organization (SWAPO) or the mirage of Communism to perpetrate aggression against Angola, as it has
done against other neighbouring States. Subterfuge and
double-talk and, above all, brute force have been the mainstays of the regime in its efforts to sustain its abhorred
system and the colonial occupation of Namibia.

17. We consider the latest act of aggression against
Angola to be part of an institutionalized concept of aggression, part of a pattern for the subversion of the region by
imperialism. It is thus a dangerous escalation of the
2

already serious state of tension in the region caused by the
existence of apartheid.

ren, the old and the infirm, who are being crushed by the
brutal war machine of South Africa and Israel in Africa
and the Middle East: in Angola and Mozambique, in Botswana and Zimbabwe, in Lesotho and Namibia, in
Lebanon and Tunisia.

18. In condemning South African aggression we also
need to point out the responsibility shared by those institutions that have consistently and wrongfully persisted in
their association with the apartheid regime. It must be
reiterated that apartheid South Africa has been able to
continue with institutionalized racism and its acts of aggression because of the aid and comfort it draws from the
policy of so-called constructive engagement of the United
States. Suffice it to say that of late that policy has been
the main pillar of the tottering system of apartheid. It is
to a very large extent the main external source of encouragement for the perpetrators of apartheid.

23. I also wish to pay a tribute to your predecessor, Sir
John Thomson, who, with Shakespearian language and
wisdom, handled the Council’s affairs last month.
24. It would be remiss of me not to express my delegation’s gratitude to you and to the other members of the
Council for the opportunity given to me to address it.
25. Africa is once again the victim of barbarous aggression perpetrated by two equally barbarous, blood-thirsty
regimes: the apartheid regime and Israeli regime. The two
regimes shudder at any prospect of peace, for peace would
mean their demise. They fear peace as one fears cyanide,
for it kills in seconds. Aggression is as essential to their
existence as oxygen is to human beings.

19. The United Nations has the duty, through the
Security Council, at this stage, to ensure-the ob&vance
of norms necessary for peace and security. The People’s
Republic of Angola has been before the Council on a
number of occasions demanding action to stay the hand of
the aggressor. The general membership of the Organization has on a number of occasions demanded action to
eradicate the system of apartheid, which is the cause of the
aggression. Apartheid is itself aggression. It is a permanent
assault on the freedom, the dignity and the very humanity
of the blacks of South Africa and of the region as a whole.
The Council is the highest international institution, and
can, given the co-operation of all its members, ensure
observance of the decisions of the Organization for peace
and security and for freedom, sovereignty and territorial
integrity.

26. The cyanide time-bomb has been ticking during the
past several months in the Middle East, and Israel was
thrown into utter confusion, for it was not able to deal
with it effectively. Finally it found a way by throwing it at
innocent people in Tunisia. The target was carefully
chosen in order to arouse the utmost disgust and thus
derail the peace process. Had the attack been carried out
against Lebanon, it would probably not have aroused so
much horror, for the world seems to have accepted such
acts there as a matter of fact.

20. We therefore join those who have done so before us
in demanding that South Africa be made to pay for the
loss of life and damage to property, sustained by Angola.
More important, however, we consider it high time for the
Council to take action to ensure that apartheid South
Africa no longer commits aggression. To that end, it is our
hope that the Council will take appropriate action under
Chapter VII of the Charter and impose comprehensive
mandatory sanctions against the apartheid regime. To do
otherwise, to fail to act firmly and with conviction, can
only send the wrong signals to a regime universally
abhorred and internationally condemned. That would be
tragic. For that reason the Council will take action, we
hope, as already demanded by the People’s Republic of
Angola and as dictated by the real threat to peace and
security caused by the policies and practices of the apartheid regime.

27. The two regimes carried out their aggression almost
at the same time against the same continent, killing almost
the same number of people. Both regimes arrogate to
themselves the right to kill Palestinians and Africans whenever their warmongering fancy takes them.
28. Just a few days ago, the international community
learned with a profound sense of shock of the barbaric and
cold-blooded attack against Palestinians and Tunisians in
Tunisia carried out by the regime of Israel. The attack on
Tunisia constituted a gross violation of the sovereignty and
territorial integrity of Tunisia and a threat to international
peace and security. The international community, rightly,
has strongly condemned that dastardly act. The People’s
Republic of Mozambique vehemently condemns that barbaric act and expresses its solidarity with the people and
Government of Tunisia.

21. The PRESIDENT:
The next speaker is the representative of Mozambique. I invite him to take a place at the
Council table and to make his statement.

29. The People’s Republic of Mozambique reaffirms its
support for and solidarity with the Palestine Liberation
Organization and its legitimate struggle.

22. Mr. DOS SANTOS (Mozambique): Mr. President, I
welcome you to the United Nations. My delegation is
pleased to see you presiding over the affairs of the Council
during the month of October. Your mastery of many
languages-American,
French, Portuguese, Spanish, Brazilian, Russian and others-will,
I am convinced, help you
understand the cries and plight of our women and child-

30. The people of Angola has once again been the victim
of armed aggression perpetrated by the apartheid regime of
South Africa. Once again the sovereignty and territorial
integrity of Angola have been violated. The Charter of the
United Nations, the resolutions and decisions of the Security Council, the organ primarily responsible for the mainte3

nance of international
completely ignored.

peace and security, have been

38. What is involved is not only the acts of aggression
against Angola or the destabilization of southern Africa,
but the threat to international peace and security posed by
the neo-Nazi regime of Pretoria.

31. South African acts of aggression against the sisterly
country of Angola date back to 1975, before the independence of the country, and those against Mozambique date
back to the first year of our armed struggle for national
liberation. Since then, those acts of aggression have continued and have further escalated in intensity. That fact
alone proves that South African aggression against Angola
is not and never was aimed at anything but the undermining of the sovereignty, independence and territorial integrity of Angola. It is against the political and economic
independence of Angola that the apartheid regime is acting, against the legitimate right of the people of the country freely to decide its own fate.

39. .What the people of Angola are expecting from the
Council is not just one more resolution. International
peace and security cannot be safeguarded by a resolution
or by resolutions. It demands concerted and decisive
action to translate into practical steps what the resolutions
contain.
40. The people of Angola, like our people, cherish peace
and reject everything that is against this noble .objective.
For centuries the people of Angola had been subjected to
brutality and colonial violence. To their quest for justice,
freedom and dignity,. the colonial fascist had always
responded with systematic massacres. When the MPLA
(People’s Liberation Movement of Angola) was created, it
gave preference, first and foremost, to dialogue and negotiations as the means to regain the dignity, freedom and
independence of the people of Angola. The armed struggle
that was to be launched later on did not represent a break
with or the abandoning of this desire for dialogue, It came
as the only reasonable and possible alternative, in order to
preserve the people’s lives and their freedom and their.
dignity in the face of the colonial-fascist intransigence.

32. The South African aggression against Angola is also
part of the whole process of destabilization carried out by
South Africa against the countries of southern Africa, particularly the front-line States.
33. South Africa has perpetrated aggression against
Angola, Mozambique, Lesotho, Botswana, Zimbabwe
and Seychelles. Using armed bandits which it itself recruited, trained,. armed and infiltrated, the apartheid
regime is waging an undeclared war against our countries.
34. Armed banditry is an operational weapon .in the
hands of the Pretoria regime to massacre defenceless populations, to destroy the social and economic infrastructures
of the countries of the region and to hinder the economic
development of these countries. The South African Development Co-ordination Conference-the expression of the
countries of the region in regard to economic development
and co-operation-has
fallen victim to systematic
sabotage.

41. After their hard-won independence, the people of
Angola sought nothing but to consolidate their victory and
devote all their efforts to national reconstruction.
42. It is in this context that, despite South African aggression, the People’s Republic of Angola and the People’s
Republic of Mozambique have not abdicated their principles of peaceful coexistence and their search for peaceful
solutions to the problems affecting the region.

35. The latest in the long chain of aggressive acts against
Angola by South Africa came at a moment when the
armed forces of Angola have been inflicting heavy blows
on UNITA on the military front. Indeed, military operations carried out by the Angolan armed forces against the
bandits of UNITA have led to the virtual destruction of
the sanctuaries of the latter. In this context, the recent
South African acts of aggression should be seen as aimed
first and foremost at rescuing UNITA from total annihilation and at supplying these bandits with more military
equipment for them to carry out their massacres against
civilian populations and to destroy the economic and
social infrastructures of Angola. As is well known, these
armed gangs could not survive without the backing of the
Pretoria regime for which they work.

43. As for South Africa, its criminal record is well known
to the international community and, naturally, to the Security Council and the United Nations in general. Apartheid
has been declared a crime against humankind.
44. In southern Africa, the cyanide grenade has been in
place since 1969, when the Manifesto on Southern Africa’
was adopted-a manifesto that proposed a peaceful solution to the apartheid system, thus sparing the region from
cataclysms and bloodshed. The proposals may have been
advanced far ahead of their time. Neither South Africa nor
its friends would accept them. South Africa seemed mighty
strong and was on the verge of becoming even stronger
with its friends’ brotherly counsel and multifaceted and
generous help. A military solution was seen at that time as
the best answer to preserve this last bastion of Western
civilization, with its rich mineral resources, in that part of
our continent. South Africa was armed to the teeth. We
are now reaping the fruits of that policy.
._

36. The aggression .against Angola was most probably
also carried out in order to distract world public opinion
from the crimes apartheid is committing against innocent
and defenceless people in South Africa itself.
37. It is therefore incumbent uuon the Securitv Council
and the United Nations as a whole to act decisively to
bring to an end these systematic acts of war against the
countries of southern Africa.

45. In the last two years, important peace initiatives have
been embarked upon in southern Africa. South Africa was
seen as liking to take all its clothes off before the whole
4

world community of nations. So why not help it to do so,
and to do so as quickly as possible? By 1983 South Africa
had already taken off everything but its. underwear. In
1984 even the underwear was finally taken off, revealing
the ugly, monstrous body of apartheid for everyone to see;
the demented mind of apartheid also became obvious.

bare hands. It is up to the South African regime to decide
whether or not it wants to learn from history. Whatever its
decision may be, one thing is certain: the wheel of history
will inexorably continue to turn, and to roll towards a land
of freedom, independence, justice, peace, a land where the
word apartheid is anathema.
51. Mr. MOHAMMED
(Trinidad and Tobago): The
Council is considering yet another South ‘African armed
attack on the People’s Republic of Angola. This latest
attack, carried out on 28 September 1985, was a particularly vicious one, in that over 200 Angolans were either
killed or wounded by the South Africans. The attack typifies the persistent, hostile, unprovoked acts of aggression
and the sustained armed invasions committed by the racist
regime of South Africa in violation of the sovereignty, air
space and territorial integrity of the People’s Republic of
Angola.

46. We have always known and stated the racist South
African’s true intentions. Now they cannot hide them.
They are now publicly acknowledging their breach of
accords and understandings they have entered into. Acts
of aggression against Angola and Mozambique are no
longer justified in terms of hot pursuit but in terms of
propping up their agents and puppets, the defeat of which
they are not prepared to countenance or accept. They are
now publicly asserting that their aggressive troops .are
likely to continue not only to carry out their aggression but
to occupy any .neighbouring States until what they call
foreign troops are removed.

52. Early in our debate [2622th meeting], the representative of the South African minority regime contended that
the attack was undertaken against Angola in the defence of
liberty, in the context of the East-West ideological confrontation and in order to permit the self-determination and
independence of Angola. Coming from a country which
practices the abhorrent policy of apartheid, with its built-in
system of denial of self-determination to the majority of
the population, such a contention is totally baseless. The
minority Pretoria regime cannot presume to articulate the
will and interests of 31 million oppressed and politically
disenfranchised South Africans and Namibians living
under apartheid. In any event, there is no legal justification
under the Charter for the violation by South Africa of
Angola’s sovereignty and territorial integrity.

47. Now nothing can be hidden even from those who at
one time or another chose to be blind to the true nature of
apartheid. It has finally started the precipitous descent of
the steep slopes of the Himalayan mountain with no possibility of returning to the top, for as it descends the mountain its speed increases at an exponential rate and it can
stop only when it crashes in the valley below, plunging the
area into a bloodbath. Once set in motion, the body cannot stop itself at mid-slope, nor can it be stopped by anyone else. No wonder, then, that racist South Africa seems
to be oblivious of its own interest. In its descent it will
undoubtedly uproot both young sprouts and old trees. As
the apartheid regime becomes more and more desperate in
its attempt to preserve itself, the use of chemical, nuclear
and other weapons of mass destruction will become an
increasing possibility. It may even take to its death some of
the stones that are now desperately trying to cushion its
fall. But keep in mind also that the stones, once they reach
the valley below, cannot go up the slope again; however,
new sprouts will spring up on the entire slope to give life to
new and vigorous plants of freedom and independence.
‘.
_,.‘:
48. The imposition of the state of emergency is nothing
but a desperate attempt by the regime to avoid the
unavoidable. As expected, the state of emergency has not
brought about the results the racist regime expected. It has,
instead, strengthened the people’s detestation of apartheid.

53. South Africa’s attack against Angola was undertaken
as a means of strengthening its hold on Namibia. Namibia
is illegally occupied by South Africa, and South Africa’s
aggression is compounded by its actions taken to maintain
its illegal occupation of the Territory by launching armed
attacks on Angola from Namibia and by occupying parts
of Angola’s territory.
54. South Africa’s premeditated and unprovoked attack
against Angola and its continuing occupation of parts of
the territory of that State constitute a flagrant violation of
the sovereignty and territorial integrity of that country and
ought to be strongly condemned by the Council. My delegation reiterates its call on South Africa to cease its persistent acts of aggression against Angola, to remove forthwith
its military forces from Angolan territory and to respect
the territorial integrity and independence of Angola.

49. Tbe struggle of the South African people is experiencing one success after another. South Africans of all
colours and races come out barehanded to face the apartheid repressive machinery-the
police and the army. The
foundations of a new South African nation are taking
shape.lNo force can deter the determination of the South
African people to free ,themselves from oppression and
brutalization.

55. The deteriorating situation in southern Africa, with
its wider implications for international peace and security,
must be addressed effectively by the Council. The Council
should reaffirm the right of the People’s Republic of
Angola, in accordance with Article 51 of the Charter, to
take all measures necessary to defend and safeguard its
sovereignty, territorial integrity and independence.

50. Namibia’s independence is as inevitable as the rising
of the sun. Justice, freedom, majority rule and democracy
will prevail in South Africa. The People’s-Republic of
Angola is there to stay, whether South Africa likes it or
not. This is not a dream. Nobody can stop’the wind with

56. The Council should also impose mandatory sanctions against South Africa under Chapter VII of the Char5

ter. That would send a clear signal to the Pretoria regime
that its policies of aggression against Angola, and indeed
against other States in southern Africa, would no longer be
tolerated.

tle the Angolan economy by granting assistance of various
kinds to the UNITA puppets and by establishing a policy
of State terrorism. If there is a State that should respect the
principle of the non-use of force or threat of the use of
force against an independent State and non-interference in
the internal affairs of States, it is certainly South Africa.

57. In conclusion, the Trinidad and Tobago delegation
expresses the hope that the Council will take a unanimous
decision against South Africa as a way of demonstrating to
the apartheid regime the Council’s displeasure with that
regime’s consistent violations of the Charter and of the
resolutions of the Council, as exemplified by this latest
attack on Angola.

62. In fact, assured of an unsavory impunity and imbued ”
with its arrogance, South Africa is trying to impose on the
States of the region its wrong view of the world and international events to force them to depend on its military and
economic power. Respect for international law and strict
implementation of the Charter are basic obligations for all
States, and in many resolutions we have recognized Angola’s right to take, in accordance with the relevant provisions of the Charter, in particular Article 51, all necessary
steps to defend and safeguard its sovereignty and its independence. We have also condemned South Africa’s illegal
occupation of Namibia and the use of it as a base for the
launching of armed attacks against Angola.

58. Mr. RABETAFIKA
(Madagascar)
(interprefa~ion
from French): The Security Council has been compelled to
meet again to consider an act of aggression carried out by
the South African armed forces against the People’s
Republic of Angola. Just a week after the adoption of
resolution 571 (1985), in which the Council, inter alia,
strongly condemned “the racist regime of South Africa for
its premeditated, persistent and sustained armed invasions
of the People’s Republic of Angola”, the South African air
force carried out raids into Angolan territory in support of
racist soldiers who had come to the aid of the UNITA
puppets who were experiencing difficulties as a result of
the advance of Angolan Government troops. The facts, as
reported by the representative of Angola and by the press,
are serious: about 60 soldiers of the people’s liberation
armed forces were killed and six helicopters were shot
down.

63. We have seen that the deeds ascribed to the apartheid
regime have not been denied at all, and no attempt at
rational justification has been made, save to give us arguments that have been heard so many times, but never
taken seriously, about what Pretoria thinks about democracy and about the rearguard action conducted against the
irreversible course of history.
64. It is true that because they are shut up in an intellectual and political ghetto they no longer manage to see the
facts, except through the distorting mirror of an obsolete
fundamentalism.

59. South Africa’s latest act of aggression against Angola
is one part of the well-known hostile policy of the racist
regime of Pretoria towards the independent African States
of the region. To entrench its domination in southern
Africa, South Africa has committed many acts of sabotage
and political and economic destabilization. It is supplying
financial and military assistance to so-called liberation
movements ,which are fully in its pay and to dissident
groups to enable them to attempt to overthrow the legitimate Governments, whether of Angola, Mozambique, Botswana or Lesotho. All this is crowned by the systematic
use of direct military aggression against these countries.
All these measures of intimidation unquestionably constitute aggression within the meaning of article 3 of the Definition of Aggression annexed to General Assembly resolution 3314 (XXIX), and pose a real threat to peace and
security in the region, and hence in the world.

65. By what right can South Africa claim to speak for the
aspirations of the Angolan people? What provision of
international law allows it grossly to interfere in the internal affairs of a sovereign, independent State and to advocate the overthrow of a legitimate Government that has
been internationally recognized? What right does South
Africa have to take upon itself the way in which Angola
intends to defend itself, to safeguard its sovereignty and its
territorial integrity and to conduct its policy according to a
system it has freeiy chosen?
66. Again we seem to be hearing the voice of the master
ordering his slave to do what he wants, and only what the
master wants him to do. We should know that South
Africa is a power foreign to Angola, and not yet its tutelar
power. We most. strongly reject South African hegemonism, this new aspect of imperialism, which would undermine peace and stability for its sole advantage. A little
modesty, a little restraint, a little logic would be
appropriate-unless
these concepts are unknown in the
land of apartheid, which would not surprise us.

60. Whatever South Africa’s explanations in its attempt
to justify its latest act of aggression, there is no doubt that
it has yet again carried out a flagrant violation of the
sovereignty and territorial integrity of Angola. The racist
regime’s arrogance and hypocrisy pass beyond tolerable
limits when we hear its representative insult the wisdom of
the Council and dictate to us the conditions for Angolan
national reconciliation and for the withdrawal of foreign
troops from the territory of that country.

67. Naturally we feel solidarity with the people of
Angola, to which we reaffirm our fraternal sympathy. We
unreservedly condemn the latest act of aggression perpetrated by South Africa against Angola. We believe it is
time for the Council to take specific measures to have its
resolutions complied with, particularly at this fortieth

61. It is South Africa, and South Africa alone, which for
the past 10 years has been attempting not only to destabilize the legitimate Government of Angola but also to throt6

anniversary of the Organization. In article 6 and Chapter
VII, the Charter gives us the necessary means to put an
end to the scorn of the racist regime of Pretoria for the
United Nations and the international community. We
should require South Africa to give just compensation to
the People’s Republic of Angola for the loss of life and the
material damage that has resulted from its acts of
aggression.

Africa. During that meeting, Zambia expressed its indignation and disgust at that act of aggression against Angola,
which led to the loss of life and property. We called on the
Council to exercise its functions and powers having regard
to its primary responsibility under the Charter for the
maintenance of international peace and security. We made
it clear then, as we have in the past, that South Africa is
indeed a real threat to international peace and security.

68. It is in this spirit that we, along with the delegations
of Burkina Faso, Egypt, India, Peru and Trinidad and
Tobago, have submitted the draft resolution now before
the Council in document S/17531.

76. Today, the Council is meeting to consider yet
another unprovoked act of aggression by the unrepentant
Pretoria regime. Once again we have South Africa, defiant
as ever, invading a loyal and committed State Member of
the United Nations. More innocent lives have been lost,
more property has been destroyed, and tension in the area
has been heightened.

69. The PRESIDENT: The next speaker is the representative of Zambia. I invite him to take a place at the Council
table and to make his statement.

77. This new act of aggression, much in the pattern of its
predecessor, has been committed in spite of the demand by
the Council that South Africa cease all acts of aggression
against the People’s Republic of Angola and respect Ango
la’s independence, sovereignty and territorial integrity.
Resolution 571 (1985), unanimously adopted by the Council two weeks ago, has been ignored by South Africa. And
this is not the first time that the racist regime in Pretoria
has totally and with impunity ignored the well-intentioned
decisions of the Council.

70. Mr. SIKAULU (Zambia): I should like to begin by
congratulating you, Sir, on your assumption of the presidency of the Security Council for this month. I am confident that, with your rich diplomatic background, you will
preside over the Council with great skill and a sense of
purpose.
71. May I also congratulate the representative of the
United Kingdom, Sir John Thomson, on the able manner
in which he presided over the Council Iast month.

78. The racist South African regime has more than
amply demonstrated that it is determined to continue to
kill innocent men, women and children, not only in South
Africa but also in neighbouring countries, and to continue
to pursue its policy of violence and destabilization in the
region, in defence of its inhuman and satanic system of
apartheid. Yet all of us in the international community,
indeed all the members of the Security Council, with as
much regularity, state our opposition to apartheid. Our
words against apartheid, which have filled volumes, have
not been enough; they have been aimed at an impervious
regime and have had no impact on it at all.

72. It is rather remarkable that until last Friday, when it
adopted resolution 573 (1985), the Security Council was
alternately considering two serious cases of aggression
committed almost at the same time against two African
countries, Angola and Tunisia. The acts of aggression
against Angola and Tunisia have been committed by two
regimes, those of South Africa and Israel respectively,
known to be close friends and collaborators in the military
field.
73. Both regimes are famous for their intransigence, for
their arrogance and utter contempt for the United Nations,
including the Security Council. Indeed, both regimes have
no regard for the norms of international law, which they
break at will, relying heavily on their awesome military
might. Through the use of force, the Pretoria and Tel Aviv
regimes’ delude themselves into believing that they can
evade the fundamental issues of apartheid-and minority
rule in South Africa and the inalienable rights of the Palestinian people in Palestine.

79. The South African regime is clearly not in a position,
to listen to the voice of reason. It has buried its head.in the
sand and deliberately refuses to see the serious repercussions of its policy of apartheid, which propels it to commit
violent actions both inside South Africa and in neighbouring countries. That same policy of apmtheid is responsible
for South Africa’s continued stranglehold over Namibia.
South Africa clings to Namibia illegally in order to continue using it as a buffer for apartheid and a springboard
for committing acts of aggression against independent
African States which oppose apartheid.

74. The challenge before the Security Council is simply
this: does it continue to deal with the effects of the conflicts
in southern Africa and the Middle East, or is it not time
that it became more realistic and found solutions to the
problems of apartheid and minority rule in South Africa
and the inalienable rights of the Palestinian people in the
Middle East, which are the root causes of the conflicts and
which therefore will have to be resolved for justice and
conditions of durable peace and security to prevail in both
regions?

80. The time has come for the Security Council to
ponder seriously about how to deal with the problem
posed by the policies and practices of apartheid of the
South African regime. There must be a credible alternative
to the mere passage of resolutions of admonition or condemnation which are honoured only in the breach by the
Pretoria regime. The Council should tell South Africa in
no uncertain terms that enough is enough, and adopt

75. It is only a few days since the Council met to discuss
the invasion of Angola by the racist regime of South
7

86. The latest attacks against Angola took place eight.
days after the adoption by the Council of resolution 5’71
(1985). While the relevant provisions of that resolution
have not even begun to be implemented for lack of time,
we are here meeting again to deal with a new complaint.
The victim is the same-the People’s Republic of Angola;
the aggressor is the same-racist South Africa; and the.
reason put foreword for the aggression is also the same:
the need to pursue SWAP0 troops into Angolan territory.

action+riented resolutions aimed at the eradication of
apartheid and the elimination of its manifestations, such as
the relentless acts of aggression against independent African countries and the continued illegal occupation of
Namibia.
81. South Africa must no longer be allowed to continue
to feel that, in spite of pronouncements.critical
of apartheid, in reality it continues to enjoy tacit political support
from some major Western Powers. And decisive action
against South Africa would also be the best repudiation by 3
those same major. Western Powers of the all-too-frequent
assertions by ‘the Pretoria regime that it is the annointed
custodian of Western interests in southern Africa. Well, it
would indeed be unwise, if not foolish and short-sighted,
for a regime which is sure,to crumble to be entrusted with
such a responsibility. The Pretoria regime simply has no
future; it will not be there much longer to. protect the
interests of its friends and allies. The opponents of apartheid, the oppressed masses of South Africa, possessthe key
to long-term, fruitful and co-operative relations between
South Africa and the rest of the world.

87. The most varied appeals have been made to racist
South Africa calling upon it to abandon apartheid and to
put .an end to the oppression and repression of the black
majority and to seek a peaceful, just and lasting solution to
the problems of southern Africa, in accordance with the
Charter and the Universal Declaration of Human Rights,
all to no avail. There has been an increase in the acts of :
aggression against independent African States. i
‘
88. For Burkina Faso the underlying meaning of such
violations of the sovereignty and territorial integrity of the
front-line States is to be found in the broader context of
South Africa’s constant defiance of the world, in its
attempt to justify its repression of the black African majority, the continuation of its colonial presence, the exploitation of Namibia’s wealth <and the systematic policy of
destabilization of the countries of the region.

82. While we appreciate the imposition of limited sanctions against South Africa by some countries, we feel that
those sanctions have not gone far enough. What is needed
is the imposition of comprehensive, mandatory sanctions
against South Africa. Only in this way will the intemational community express its real displeasure at the atrocities being committed by South ‘Africa and expect
meaningful change away from apartheid in South Africa.
More than ever before, there is need now for comprehensive, mandatory,. sanctions against South Africa under
Chapter VII of the Charter as an available peaceful means
to bring about change. Let no country pretend otherwise,
for the alternative is a bloodbath in South Africa of unimaginable proportions.

89. What has been happening in South Africa, Namibia,
Botswana, Lesotho, Mozambique and now Angola-in
other words, the terror constantly being inflicted upon
southern Africa by the racist Pretoria regime-is based on
one and the same logic, that of .an apartheid regime
attacked on all sides and now dug into its last remaining
positions, a regime that believes that it can ensure its survival only by blind violence and systematic lying.
90. In the light of these breaches of the norms of intemational law and the Charter of the United Nations, the
international community, and first and foremost the Security Council, must react firmly and resolutely against the
Pretoria racists by adopting against them the necessary
comprehensive mandatory sanctions as provided. for in
Chapter VII of the Charter. Burkina Faso h convinced
that it is high time this was done. Countries that continue
to’ refuse to do this are playing into the hands of South
Africa, which takes advantage of their hesitancy and irresolution in order to violate with impunity the most elementary ,rules of international law ,and the provisions bf the
Charter.’

83. We the people of southern Africa want peace, but
there can be no peace, there can be no stability and there
can be no security in our region until the scourge of apartheid is completely eliminated.
-,
,‘.. 1.
84. Mr. BASSOLE (Burkina Faso) (inrer’retation frdm
French): The racist minority regime of South Africa has
once again drawn ‘itself to the attention of .intemational
public opinion through its policy of systematic and premeditated aggression against the independent countries of
southern Africa. :
I’:.
/
85. Beset from within by movements in opposition to
apartheid, incapable of dealing in a responsible manner
with the legitimate demands of the immense black majority for freedom, justice and equality, the racist authorities
of Pretoria believe that they are gaining time and prolonging their existence by brandishing the spectre of an imaginary external threat. This kind of conduct, which is
peculiar to moribund and practically bankrupt regimes, is
well known; it is no surprise to us, any more than it surprises all those who have been closely following developments in South Africa.’
‘I
.

91, Such contemptuous behaviour by the racist Pretoria
Government is curiously reminiscent of the behaviour of
the Nazi authorities on the eve of the Second World War.
By yielding to Hitler’s whims, the allied Powers of the day
eventually convinced him that he could press ahead with
his expansionist and annexationist aims ,in Europe and
elsewhere in the world. By the time it was realized, that it
was necessary to mobilize and confront the forces of
Hitlerism it was already too late, and, widespread war had
become inevitable.
8

r&rime is now bent on extending the tentacles of its wellknown system of State terrorism deep into the territorial
heartlands of the neighbouring States. Oniy a few months
ago, Botswana was a victim ‘of this nefarious scheme.

92. If they are to be effective, the sanctions we are calling
for today must be accompanied by appropriate assistance
to Angola and the other front-line States to help them
defend themselves against South Africa’s barbarous acts of
aggression and destabilization. Such assistance, which is
requested in paragraph 5 of resolution 571 (1985), must be
both immediate and on a large scale because the scope and
rhythm of the South African attacks show the extent to
which the apartheid regime is prepared to go in spreading
death and destruction in the region.

100. For how long can the African countries neighbouring South Africa live under such a state of terror and
intimidation? For how long are those countries to be victims of arrogant sabre-rattling by the apartheid regime?
101. With the mounting opposition to ‘apartheid, especially in those Western countries whose Governments* collaboration with the racist regime is well known, we had
hoped that those Governments would heed the unequivocal voices of their own populations and prevail upon the
apartheid regime, which they have for long mistakenly perceived as an ally and the bastion of Western civilization.
We had entertained the hope that the time had come for
those. countries to take concrete steps against the’,illegal
conduct of that regime with a view to compelling Pretoria
to desist from such banditry. It seems our hopes were vain.
,
102. It is a sad commentary on the efficacy of the Security Council ‘that the South African regime has found it
expedient to violate the territorial integrityOof a Member
State at a moment when all peace-loving nations are enthusiastically celebrating the fortieth anniversary of the
United’Nations.
”
.,.
,,. .,.
, .:
103. If these unwarranted acts of banditry are allowed to
continue unchecked, the racist regime is bound to intensify
its aggression against the front-line States. It is abundantly
clear that the front-line States cannot face alone the challenges posed by the repeated aggression and the destabilization schemes of Pretoria. All nations committed to the
maintenance of peace and security and loyal to the fundamental principles of the Charter and the basic tenets ,of
international law must join hands in confronting South
Africa and its, belligerent conduct in a credible manner;
> ,.
104. In this tionnection, we appeal once ,again to the
Security Council to take concrete*enforcement measures
against South Africa under Chapter VII of the Charter.
While expressing our solidarity with the Government and
people of the People’s Republic of Angola at this trying
moment, we urge the Council to shoulder its responsibility
in the maintenance of international peace and security.

93. The new act of aggression against Angola testifies to
the survival of the vestiges of the forces of apartheid, racial
discrimination and colonial tyranny, and to their stubborn
resistance to the forces of change.
94. As the international community commemorates the
fortieth anniversary of the end of the Second Worid War,
we should reflect on the lessons it drew therefrom in order
not to repeat the same mistakes. With regard to South
Africa, the mistake would be to continue to believe in any
way in the good faith of the Pretoria leaders and to remain,
silent in’ the face of their deeds.
.’
95. The PRESIDENT: The next speaker is the represenT
tative of Ethiopia. I invite him to take a place at the Coun..
cil table and to make his statement.
96. Mr.. DINKA (Ethiopia): I should like at the outset to
express the gratitude of my delegation to you, Mr. President, and to the other members of the Council for affording us the opportunity to participate in this important
debate. I should also like to congratulate you on your
assumption of the presidency of the Council for the month
of October. We have no doubt that your wide experience
and proven abilities will contribute to meaningful consideration of this item.
97. I also express my appreciation to Sir John Thomson,
representative of the United Kingdom, for the able manner
in which he guided the work of the Council last month.
98. Once again the Council has been convened to con:.
sider South African aggression against the territorial integrity of the People’s Republic of Angola. In spite of the
anger expressed by the international community and the
Council’s condemnation barely two weeks ago of the
cowardly acts perpetrated by the racist regime of Pretoria
against Angola, the same racist regime has again had the
audacity to mount yet another attack against the territory
of the sister Republic of Angola. As in the past, the racist
regime has advanced fr’ rolous excuses to justify the unjustifiable.‘ We are being told that such raids are‘ conducted
with the aim of forestalling any possibiIity.of an attack by
SWAPO, although it is well known to one and all that it is
the oc&pation forces of South ‘Africa which have used
Namibian territory to wage war on the People’s Republic
of Angola, with the express purpose of saving from total
,
defeat the renegade UNITA bandits.

105. Mr. OUDOVENKO
(Ukrainian ‘Soviet Socialist
Republic) (interpretation from Russian): Barely two weeks
have elapsed since the Security Council ,last considered the
question of the acts of aggression by the racist regime of
South Africa against Angola. The Council then adopted a
resolution in which it demanded that South Africa withdraw forthwith and unconditionally all its military forces
from the territory of the People’s :Republic of Angola,
cease all acts of aggression against that State and scrupulously respect its sovereignty and territorial integrity.
:
I<,
106. Yet here we are ‘again today ‘dealing with the gross
acts of armed aggression perpetrated by the South African

99. The truth is that, having failed to reverse the tide of
history within the confines of South Africa, the terrorist
9

army and air force. As the Council knows, at least eight
military aircraft took part in the raid, which was supported
by South African units fighting on the side of the UNITA
gangs. A large number of casualties were caused and material damage was sustained.
107. These latest acts of aggression by Pretoria against
Angola clearly show that because of the racist rigime, a
situation has emerged in southern Africa which is a threat
to the cause of peace.

years. Israel has sold South Africa gunboats and Gabriel
missiles.
113. According to the United Nations Special Committee against Apartheid, Israel is encouraging South African
Jews to visit Israel and to do one month’s military service
there on an annual basis. According to the statement by
the representative of the so-called Council of Volunteers in
support of Israel, over a period of two years more than
3,500 South Africans aged from 20 to 60 have visited Israel
for that very purpose.

108. The latest unprovoked act of aggression must be
added to the long list of crimes by the apartheid regime
against neighbouring States. We still clearly recall the carnage that South African commandos caused in June in
Botswana, where they killed and wounded dozens of
people. At the end of June, South African military units
crossed the border of Angola and invaded the territory of
that country. Again, dozens of people fell victim to that
gangsterish raid. Three months later, there was another act
of aggression against Angola, and again innocent people
died and material damage was sustained. This year alone,
the Council has three times taken up the question of the
tense situation in South Africa, and it has five times dealt
with situations connected to aggression by the Pretoria
regime against independent States.

114. I could give other examples of the collaboration
between South Africa and Israel.
115. We are compelled to agree with the finding of the
Special Committee against Apartheid to the effect that the
violent, oppressive and aggressive actions of the Pretoria
regime
“underline that any form of assistance to the military,
police, intelligence- or other forces in South Africa -is
nothing less than complicity in the crimes of the apartheid regime.” 2
116. There is very good reason why Pretoria’s extremism
has grown precisely now, when the Republic of South
Africa is going through an acute crisis caused by actions by
the oppressed black majority which are unprecedented in
scale and force. The racist regime has lost control of the
situation in the country. In these conditions, the ruling
clique is hoping to reinforce its positions through military
adventures. Attempts are being made to perpetuate their
domination in Namibia, and banditlike aggressive acts
against independent countries by Pretoria are becoming
more frequent and are being intensified.

109. We have stated many times in the Council that the
South African racists are acting in such a defiant and brazen manner merely because they are supported by broadbased and constant political, diplomatic, economic and
military assistance given by the United States and a
number of other Western countries and Israel.
110. “Your goals are our goals. I wish you success and
God bless you.” These are not my words-I
have quoted
them from the message from the United States President to
the mob of ring leaders of the terrorist gangs that met in
June this year near the Angolan border. The question
arises as to how the United States Administration can try
to convince international public opinion about its concern
for a “peaceful solution” to the problems of southern
Africa and other regions while it is fostering terror against
legitimate Governments. The terrorist grouping UNITA
took part in that gathering, as did the anti-Mozambique
gang the MNR (National Resistance Movement). This was
clearly mentioned in the statement by the Minister for
Foreign Affairs of Zimbabwe [261&h meeting].

117. Again, worthy of note is the parallel between South
Africa’s actions and those of Israel. Tel Aviv, which is also
confronting complicated problems caused by its own policy of aggression and occupation in lands which do not
belong to it, is trying to resolve those problems by actions
beyond its own borders. The most recent example of this
took place thousands of kilometres away from Israel.
118. Again, this points to the serious threat posed by the
policies of South Africa and Israel to peace and security
not only in southern Africa and the Middle East but in the
whole world.

111. I should like to draw the Council’s attention to the
growing collaboration between the regimes in South
Africa and Israel, which has virtually led to an alliance
between them, posing a threat to international peace and
security. This has been borne out, for example, by the act
of aggression by Israel against Tunisia, consideration of
which has just been concluded in the Council.

119. To put an end to the crimes of apartheidand its acts
of aggression against neighbouring States, we need decisive
action, including that provided for in Chapter VII of the
Charter. This was mentioned in the special communique
adopted on 1 October 1985 by the Ministers and heads of
delegation of the non-aligned countries, at the fortieth session of the General Assembly [S/17518, annex]. The
Ukrainian SSR strongly supports their demand. The Security Council should do its duty and defend the sovereignty
and territorial integrity of the People’s Republic of
Angola.

112. Of particular danger is the growing scale of the military and nuclear collaboration between these two regimes.
South Africa is a major purchaser of weapons from Israel;
it accounts for 35 per cent of Israeli arms exports in recent
10

applicability of such conditions to the act of aggression
perpetrated by the Pretoria regime against Angola in September were summed up by a United States State Department spokesman, who is reported in T%eNew York Times
of 18 September as follows:

120. The Ukrainian SSR expresses full solidarity with the
courageous struggle of the Angolan people, which has
taken up arms to defend its freedom and independence.
We strongly condemn South Africa’s aggression against
Angola and demand that it be halted immediately and
unconditionally,
that there be an unconditional withdrawal of South African troops from Angola and that acts
of aggression against that country be prevented in future.

“The position of the United States Government is
that any use of force by a State has to be justified under
the doctrine of self-defence. There is no inherent right to
engage in military activity across one’s borders on the
basis that it is a pre-emptive strike.

121. The PRESIDENT: The next speaker is the representative of the United Arab Emirates.-1 invite him to take a
place at the Council table and to make his statement.

“From an international-law
standpoint, the important issue is whether the use of force in question is
justified from the standpoint of self-defence, in that it
must be reasonable and a proportionate response to the
danger posed. South Africa’s raid did not appear to be
justified by a clear and imminent danger to Namibian
territory, and therefore was not reasonable and a proportionate response.“*

122. Mr. AL-SHAALI
(United Arab Emirates) (interpretation from Arabic): It is my pleasure to open my statement
by congratulating you, Sir, on your assumption of the
presidency of the Security Council for this month. We are
convinced that you will preside over the Council’s deliberations with the utmost skill and objectivity.
123. I also wish to thank your predecessor, Sir John
Thomson, representative of the United Kingdom, for his
skilful and wise leadership of the Council during the
month of September.

128. That quotation makes it clear that the act of aggression by the -South African Government against’ Angola
was a flagrant act of aggression, according tti the General
Assembly’s Definition of Aggression adopted by the General Assembly and annexed to resolution 3314 (XXIX),
article 3 of which defines aggression as “The invasion or
attack by the armed forces of a State of the territory of
another State”.*

124. For the third time this year, the Council is meeting
to consider yet another act of aggression perpetrated by
the racist regime in .South Africa against Angola. If this
fact can be said to point to anything, it points to the
disregard and contempt in which this racist regime holds
the meetings and resolutions of the Council.

129. As they have been described, the acts of aggression
perpetrated by Pretoria are such as to require the application of sanctions against South Africa under Article 39 of
the Charter. Any reluctance, any hampering of the implementation of such sanctions will only encourage the
regime to renew its acts of aggression. We must not forget
that this is the third time the regime has perpetrated an act
of aggression against Angola in the past few months, not
to mention previous acts committed against Angola and
other front-line States.

125. The racist regimes in South Africa and Israel have
become the Council’s main preoccupation. No sooner has
the Council adjourned than it is once more convened to
discuss a new act of aggression. One may indeed think it a
remarkable coincidence that the two regimes should perpetrate two acts of aggression against two African countries
at the same time. That is a further indication of the role
entrusted to those racist regimes, which is aimed at undermining the will of peoples, at eliminating national liberation movements and forcing the States of the third world
to submit to the colonialist will imposed on them from
outside.

130. The racist practises of the regime against the black
majority in South Africa, its occupation of the Territory of
Namibia and its acts of aggression against the African
front-line States will not end unless the regime feels the
seriousness of the international attitude to such acts. Such
seriousness will be achieved when States that still deal with
the regime in one way or another put an end to that practice and apply economic sanctions by imposing a comprehensive embargo on South Africa. I refer particularly to
those States that continue to provide the regime with vital
supplies, States that bear a special responsibility for maintaining international peace and security. Those States bear
the international responsibility to look at the regime in
that light, so that international peace and security prevail
over narrow economic interests.

126. The justifications put forward by the Government
of South Africa for perpetrating its acts of aggression, such
as invoking the right to self-defence for intervening in the
internal affairs of Angola, are rejected, because they run
counter to the principles of the Charter and the rules of
international law. International law and jurisprudence provide that two fundamental conditions must be present to
exercise that right. The first is urgent need, and the second
is that the use of force be a proportionate response to the
danger posed. Those conditions were not present at all in
the case of the acts of aggression perpetrated by South
Africa against a small peace-loving State such as Angola,
which presents no danger whatsoever to a strong State
with such huge military arsenals as South Africa possesses.

131. Justice, equality and human rights form an indivisible whole. Africans are entitled to them just as much as
other human beings in any other part of the world, If

127. The concept of international law on the conditions
for the use of the right to self-defence and the non-

*Quoted

11

in English

by the speaker.

international efforts were concerted to ensure the application of international law and the principles of the Charter,
the Council would have no need to meet so often to discuss
these issues.
132. The United Arab Emirates once again stresses its
strong condemnation of South Africa’s act of aggression.
We declare our solidarity with Angola, a member of the
Movement of Non-Aligned Countries, and with the other
front-line States. We reaffkn our support for the national
liberation movements in Namibia and South Africa, which
are fighting for their national rights and their right to selfdetermination.
133. We once again call upon the Council not to cause
the small States of the world to lose their faith in it. At the

time of the fortieth anniversary of the United Nations and
in the light of the recent commemorative meeting of the
Council at the ministerial level, Angola’s complaint is
indeed a test: to see whether the Council can regain its
effectiveness and credibility and shoulder the responsibilities entrusted to it by the Charter, the maintenance of
international peace and security. We hope that the Council
will rise to its responsibilities.
l7te meeting rose at I p.m.

NOTES

’ offia! Records of the General Assembly. Twenty-lourth Session.
Annexes, agenda item 106, document A/7754.
2 Ibid... Fortieth Session, Supplement No. 22, para. 374.

,

:

12

-dI
&Sll~

I+

+I

. ,.JlJl
. cis

.Li

e

3 &lJJ*

3 Ji dJ&

d+5ill

4 &’

rj

&I
,y iLr;tl
4 ull&:

dJ+b

Jc &4LI

,+gI G!,+

Jc. J+l

*
,&

J!~IJl+mJdLd~l

$faJRWm%ElitltJfdiC
a9~~~~~~~~p~g~g~n~~~~~~~
EkmlFBP5lJL

iiwJ#BaH~SE~~?3MaEAKm

HOW TO OBTAIN &TED
NATIONS PUBLICATIONS
United Nations publications may be obtained from bookstores and distributors throughout the
world. Consult your bookstore or write to: United Nations, Sales Section, New York or Geneva.
COMMENT SE PROCURER LES PUBLICATIONS DES NATIONS UNIES
Les publications des Nations Unies sent en vente dans les librairies et les agences &posies
du monde entier. Informez-vous aup+s de votre libraire ou adressez-vous B : Nations Umes,
Section des ventes, New York ou Gentve.
KAK

j

IIoJIYwITb

IT3JJAImsI oPrAHEBAL&iFf
OEbEJWBHHbIx
W
BKHHXCRbIKMafB3liIiaX
06%; ~IXH~MOXCHOQTISfTh
HaaomiTecnpan&uo6 H3JWiSiKKBBaLneMLHIURIIOM
mm rumme no Wtpecy:. Opramt%%mia 06aelUfHeIiHblx
Ha@t. CeKsun HO

kl3mxim
Opramisamisi
HEtEIiTCTI%3XBOBCCKpdiOHttX~i%

bmramie

IlpOAklXCCH3A~,HbKP~OPK

ElEi>KCHCBa.

COMO CONSEGUIR PUBLICACIONRS DE LAS NACIONES UNIDAS
Las publicaciones de las Naciones Unidas estAn en venta en librerfas y casasdistribuidoras en
todas partes de1 mundo. Cons&e a su librero o dirfjase a: Naciones Unidas. Secci6n de Ventas,
Nueva York o Giibra.

Litho in United Nations, New York

90-61439-January

00300

\

19954925
