Resolutions adopted on the report of the
Joint 2nd and 3rd <Ammittee and 5th Committee, meeting jointly

ing so many projects as to exceed the available technical, administrative and financial resources,
Recognizing that the extent of activity is determined
by the programme decisions and by the budgeta~y. appropriations of the United Nations and the specialized
agencies,
Declaring that the resources placed at the disposal
of the United Nations and the specialized agencies
should be applied where they are most needed,
1. Requests each specialized agency to review its
1952 programme during 1951, using the criteria set
forth in the report 8 of the Co-ordination Committee as
approved by the Economic and Social Council ;
2. Requests the Economic and Social Council and
the specialized agencies to indicate, when new projects
are adopted, which current projects may be deferred,
modified or eliminated to ensure that the economic and
social work of the United Nations and the specialized
agencies will be carried on most effectively ;
3. Requests the Economic and Social Council:
(a) To review, during 1951, the 1952 programmes
of the United Nations and the specialized agencies,
using the criteria set forth in the report of the Coordination Committee as approved by the Economic and
Social Council ;
( b) To seek, in reviewing the programmes, the
assistance of the Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions on the administrative and
financial aspects of this matter ;
( c) To report to the sixth session of the General
Assembly on the results of these reviews ;
4. Requests the Secretary-General, in co-operation
with the administrative heads of the specialized agencies, to include in annex IV to the Secretary-General's
budget estimates a summary schedule of the estimated
costs of the projects provided for in the budgets of the
United Nations and of the specialized agencies ; and,
further,
Having noted the steps taken and progress made by
the Economic and Social Council, the SecretaryGeneral, the Administrative Committee on Co-ordination and the specialized agencies,
5. Urges that the efforts which are being made to
ensure the fullest co-ordination of the programmes and
activities of the United Nations and the specialized
agencies be vigorously pursued.
314th plenary meeting,
1 December 1950.
414 (V).

Membership in the specialized agencies

The General Assembly,
Considering the principle of international co-operation as an important condition for the full success of
the activities of the _specialized agencies,
Noting that some of the specialized agencies do not
enjoy participation of all Member States in their work,
8

See documents E/1810 and E/1810/Corr.1.
•See document A/C.1.&J/93-A/C.5/375, annex IL

37

Expresses the hope that those Members not partir:ipating at the present time may find their way to assume
or resume, as soon as possible, full participation in the
specialized agencies.
314th plenary meeting,
1 December 1950.
415 (V). Transfer of functions of the International Penal and Penitentiary Commission

The General Assembly,
Noting resolutions 262 B (IX) and 333 H (XI) of
the Economic and Social Council and the resolution'
adopted by the International Penal and Penitentiary
Commission on 12 August 1950,
1. Approves the plan contained in the report prepared by the Secretary-General, in consultation with the
International Penal and Penitentiary Commission, concerning the transfer of the functions of the Commission
to the United Nations and which is annexed to the
present resolution ;
2. Notes the decision of the Commission with respect
to its residual assets;
3. Expresses its appreciation to the Commission for
donating its library and its archives to the United Nations on the conditions specified in the above-mentioned
plan;
4. N ates that these arrangements do not involve the
assumption by the United Nations of responsibility for
any liabilities of the Commission;
5. Authorizes the Secretary-General of the United
Nations, in consultation with the Secretary-General of
the International Penal and Penitentiary Commission,
to make arrangements for the transfer of the functions
of the Commission and of its library and archives to the
United Nations on a mutually satisfactory date prior to
31 December 1951;
6. Pays tribute to the accomplishments of the Commission, during the long period of its existence, in the
field of the prevention of crime and the treatment of
offenders.
314th plenary meeting,
1 December 1950.
ANNEX

Plan• prepared by the Secretary-General of the
United Nations in consultation with the International Penal and Penitentiary Commission:
(a) All Members of the United Nations, and all existing m~m?ers of the lnt~rnational Penal and Penitentiary
Comn11ss1on (IPPC) which are not Members of the United
Nations, and any other States designated by the Economic
and Social Council, shall be invited by the Council to
appoint one or more representatives of expert qualifications or experience, professional or scientific in the field
of the prevention of crime and the treatment ~f offenders.
The experts so appointed shall act in the first instance as
individual correspondents with the United Nations Department of Social Affairs.

" For the draft plan, see annex I of document A/C.1.&3/93-A/C.5/375.

38

General Assembly-Fifth Session

( b) They shall also be called upon to meet together in
appropriate groups (in the composition of which ethnical,
legislative and customary affinities shall be taken into
account) to consider questions of particular interest to
such groups, as well as those which may be submitted by
the participating governments, by the Economic and Social
Council, the Social Commission or by the SecretaryGeneral of the United Nations. The eYperts so appointed
shall constitute "United Nations consultative groups" in
the field of the prevention of crime and the treatment of
offenders. The groups shall meet biennially, or more often
if required. The first group set up shall be composed of
the present members of the IPPC. Pending the establishment of other groups, new members may be added to the
first group. As other groups are set up, any members of the
first group may join such groups as is most appropriate.
With respect to the composition of groups to study questions of special importance to the less-developed areas it
might be practicable to utilize the procedure employed for
United Nations seminars under General Assembly resolution 58 (I). Findings of fact and recommendations as
to policy approved by the experts appointed under (a) or
by the expert group meeting under ( b) shall be transmitted to the Secretary-General of the United Nations for
publication, for communication in appropriate cases to
the policy-making bodies, or such other action as he considers necessary.
(c) The Secretary-General shall invite each group to
submit names from among its members to assist the Secretary-General in selecting a small international Ad H oc
Advisory Committee of Experts. The purpose of such a
committee would be to advise the Secretary-General and
the Social Commission in devising and formulating programmes for study on an international basis and policies
for international action in the field of the prevention of
crime and the treatment of offenders and also to advise
on the co-ordination of the work of the United Nations
consultative groups. It is hoped that such a committee
will be able to meet annually at the Headquarters of the
United Nations.

(d) The United Nations shall convene every five years
an international congress similar to those previously organized by the IPPC. Resolutions adopted at such international congresses shall be communicated to the Secretary-General and, if necessary, to the policy-making
bodies.
( e) The expenses of attendance of the international

Ad Hoe Advisory Committee of Experts at meetings convened at the Headquarters of the United Nations will
be borne by the United Nations. The expenses of experts
who participate in the biennial group meetings and in
the quinquennial congresses will be borne by the respective governments. The United Nations will be financially responsible for furnishing the services required for

the efficient organization of such meetings when held at
the Headquarters or at the regional offices of the United
Nations. \Vhen such meetings, on the invitation of a government, are held away from the Headquarters and the
regional offices, the financial responsibility for the furnishing of similar services shall be otherwise met.

(f) The United Nations shall publish an international
review which shall include the recommendations and the
findings of the groups mentioned under ( b) and the Committee mentioned under ( c), as well as a legislative and
administrative series on the prevention of crime and the
treatment of offenders.
(g) The United Nations welcomes the transfer of the
library of the IPPC to the Library of the United Nations
in Geneva. Suitable measures will be taken to indicate
that the volumes donated originated from the IPPC, by
arranging· for appropriate markers to be used, and the
preservation of the library as an entity so far as practicable. The archives of the IPPC shall also be transferred to the archives of the United Nations and shall be
available to delegations and to other interested parties.
( h) In view of the enlargement of the functions of
the United Nations, and in order to maintain continuity in
the work, the United Nations shall invite the services of
two professional officers at present employed by the IPPC
One officer specialized in the field of the prevention of
crime and the treatment of offenders shall be detached for
duty at the United Nations Office at Geneva.
( i) While it is for the IPPC to decide as to the disposition of its residual assets, the United Nations would
welcome a decision to transfer those assets to the United
Nations. Such a decision would not, however, involve the
assumption by the United Nations of responsibility for
any liabilities of the IPPC. In the event of the transfer
of the assets or proceeds realized, all such funds would
become part of the general revenue of the United Nations unless the IPPC would prefer that they be added to
the capital of the Library Endowment Fund. The resulting increase in the income of the Library Endowment
Fund would make it possible for the United Nations
Library to become one of the most complete and up-todate libraries in the field of social defence. The setting
aside of the residual assets of the IPPC in a special
fund in the United Nations is not desirable from the
point of view of United Nations policy and practice, nor
is such a fund nece~sary to ensure the continuation within the United Nations of the objectives and purposes
described in article I of the constitutional regulations of
the IPPC.
(j) The transfer shall take place at such time as may
be agreed upon between the Secretary-General of the
IPPC and the Secretary-General of the United Nations
and, in any case, before the end of 1951.
