United Nations

A/RES/59/227

General Assembly

Distr.: General
16 February 2005

Fifty-ninth session
Agenda item 85 (a)

Resolution adopted by the General Assembly on 22 December 2004
[on the report of the Second Committee (A/59/483/Add.1)]

59/227. Implementation of Agenda 21, the Programme for the
Further Implementation of Agenda 21 and the outcomes
of the World Summit on Sustainable Development
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 55/199 of 20 December 2000, 56/226 of 24 December
2001, 57/253 of 20 December 2002 and 57/270 A and B of 20 December 2002 and
23 June 2003, respectively, as well as its resolution 58/218 of 23 December 2003,
Recalling also the Rio Declaration on Environment and Development, 1 Agenda 21, 2
the Programme for the Further Implementation of Agenda 21, 3 the Johannesburg
Declaration on Sustainable Development 4 and the Plan of Implementation of the World
Summit on Sustainable Development (“Johannesburg Plan of Implementation”), 5
Reaffirming the commitment to implement Agenda 21, the Programme for the
Further Implementation of Agenda 21, the Johannesburg Plan of Implementation,
including the time-bound goals and targets, and the other internationally agreed
development goals, including those contained in the United Nations Millennium
Declaration, 6
Recalling the outcomes of the major United Nations conferences and summits,
including the Monterrey Consensus of the International Conference on Financing
for Development, 7

_______________
1
Report of the United Nations Conference on Environment and Development, Rio de Janeiro, 3–14 June
1992 (United Nations publication, Sales No. E.93.I.8 and corrigenda), vol. I: Resolutions adopted by the
Conference, resolution 1, annex I.
2
Ibid., annex II.
3
Resolution S-19/2, annex.
4
Report of the World Summit on Sustainable Development, Johannesburg, South Africa, 26 August–
4 September 2002 (United Nations publication, Sales No. E.03.II.A.1 and corrigendum), chap. I,
resolution 1, annex.
5
Ibid., resolution 2, annex.
6
See resolution 55/2.
7
Report of the International Conference on Financing for Development, Monterrey, Mexico, 18–22 March
2002 (United Nations publication, Sales No. E.02.II.A.7), chap. I, resolution 1, annex.

04-48988

A/RES/59/227

Reaffirming the continuing need to ensure a balance between economic
development, social development and environmental protection as interdependent
and mutually reinforcing pillars of sustainable development,
Reaffirming also that eradicating poverty, changing unsustainable patterns of
production and consumption and protecting and managing the natural resource base
of economic and social development are overarching objectives of and essential
requirements for sustainable development,
Recognizing that good governance within each country and at the international
level is essential for sustainable development,
Noting with satisfaction that the Commission on Sustainable Development at
its twelfth session undertook an in-depth evaluation of progress in implementing
Agenda 21, the Programme for the Further Implementation of Agenda 21 and the
Johannesburg Plan of Implementation, focusing on the thematic cluster of issues on
water, sanitation and human settlements, and identified best practices, constraints
and obstacles in the process of implementation, 8
Noting that the organization of work of the twelfth session of the Commission
included plenary sessions, an interactive plenary dialogue and regional meetings, as
well as a partnership fair, learning centres and side events,
Recalling the decision of the Commission at its eleventh session, endorsed by
the Economic and Social Council in its resolution 2003/61 of 25 July 2003, that the
Commission, at its policy sessions, to be held in April/May of the second year of the
cycle, would take policy decisions on practical measures and options to expedite
implementation in the selected thematic cluster of issues, taking account of the
discussions of the intergovernmental preparatory meeting, the reports of the
Secretary-General and other relevant inputs, 9
Recalling also the decision of the Commission at its eleventh session that the
discussions of the intergovernmental preparatory meeting would be based on the
outcome of the review session and reports of the Secretary-General, as well as other
relevant inputs, and that, on the basis of those discussions, the Chair would prepare
a draft negotiating document for consideration at the policy session,9
Looking forward to the upcoming cycles of the work programme of the
Commission as adopted at its eleventh session and their contributions to the further
implementation of Agenda 21, the Programme for the Further Implementation of
Agenda 21 and the outcomes of the World Summit on Sustainable Development,
Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General on the activities
1.
undertaken in the implementation of Agenda 21, the Programme for the Further
Implementation of Agenda 21 and the outcomes of the World Summit on
Sustainable Development; 10
2.
Reiterates that sustainable development is a key element of the
overarching framework for United Nations activities, in particular for achieving the
internationally agreed development goals, including those contained in the United
Nations Millennium Declaration6 and in the Johannesburg Plan of Implementation;5

_______________
8

See Official Records of the Economic and Social Council, 2004, Supplement No. 9 (E/2004/29).
Ibid., 2003, Supplement No. 9 (E/2003/29), chap. I, sect. A.
10
A/59/220.
9

2

A/RES/59/227

3.
Calls upon Governments, all relevant international and regional
organizations, the Economic and Social Council, the United Nations funds and
programmes, the regional commissions and specialized agencies, the international
financial institutions, the Global Environment Facility and other intergovernmental
organizations, in accordance with their respective mandates, as well as major
groups, to take action to ensure the effective implementation of and follow-up to the
commitments, programmes and time-bound targets adopted at the World Summit on
Sustainable Development, and encourages them to report on concrete progress in
that regard;
Calls for the implementation of the commitments, programmes and time4.
bound targets adopted at the Summit and, to that end, for the fulfilment of the
provisions relating to the means of implementation, as contained in the
Johannesburg Plan of Implementation;
Encourages Governments to participate, at the appropriate level, with
5.
representatives from the relevant departments and agencies in water, sanitation and
human settlements, as well as finance, in the intergovernmental preparatory meeting
and the thirteenth session of the Commission on Sustainable Development;
Recalls the decision of the Commission at its eleventh session to invite
6.
the regional commissions, in collaboration with the secretariat of the Commission,
to consider organizing regional implementation meetings in order to contribute to
the work of the Commission,9 and in this regard urges the regional commissions to
take into account the relevant thematic clusters contained in the programme of work
of the Commission and to provide inputs as specified by the Commission at its
eleventh session;
Recalls also the decision of the Commission at its eleventh session that
7.
activities during Commission meetings should provide for the balanced involvement
of participants from all regions, as well as for gender balance;9
8.
Welcomes the contributions of the regional commissions to the work of
the Commission at its twelfth session, including the regional meetings focusing on
the thematic cluster of issues on water, sanitation and human settlements, and their
inputs to the reports of the Secretary-General;
Invites donor countries to consider supporting the participation of experts
9.
from the developing countries in the areas of water, sanitation and human
settlements in the thirteenth session of the Commission;
10. Takes note with interest of the establishment of the Advisory Board on
Water and Sanitation by the Secretary-General, and looks forward to its contribution
to the mobilization of efforts and resources towards the implementation of the
commitments, goals and targets agreed upon in these areas;
11. Requests the Secretary-General, in reporting to the Commission at its
thirteenth session on the state of the implementation of Agenda 21,2 the Programme
for the Further Implementation of Agenda 213 and the Johannesburg Plan of
Implementation,5 on the basis of appropriate inputs from all levels, to submit
thematic reports on each of the three issues contained in the thematic cluster of
issues on water, sanitation and human settlements, taking into account their
interlinkages, while addressing the cross-cutting issues identified by the
Commission at its eleventh session;9
12. Requests the Commission, in accordance with General Assembly
resolution 47/191 of 22 December 1992 and as specified by the Commission at its
3

A/RES/59/227

eleventh session, to examine the cross-cutting issues related to the thematic cluster
of issues on water, sanitation and human settlements;
13. Stresses the importance of the success of the Commission at its thirteenth
session in:
(a) Taking policy decisions on practical measures and options to expedite
implementation in the thematic cluster of issues on water, sanitation and human
settlements;
(b) Mobilizing further action by all implementation actors to overcome
obstacles and constraints in the implementation of Agenda 21, the Programme for
the Further Implementation of Agenda 21 and the Johannesburg Plan of
Implementation;
14. Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General on inter-agency
cooperation, 11 and requests him to continue his efforts to strengthen system-wide
inter-agency cooperation and coordination for the implementation of Agenda 21, the
Programme for the Further Implementation of Agenda 21 and the Johannesburg Plan
of Implementation, and in this regard to report on such inter-agency cooperation and
coordination activities and their terms of reference to the Economic and Social
Council in 2005;
15. Recalls its resolution 58/291 of 6 May 2004 and Economic and Social
Council resolutions 2004/44 of 22 July 2004 and 2004/63 of 23 July 2004, and in
this regard requests the Commission, without prejudice to the decisions adopted at
its eleventh session, to contribute through the Council to the high-level plenary
meeting of the General Assembly in 2005, in accordance with the modalities to be
set out by the Assembly at its fifty-ninth session;
16. Requests the secretariat of the Commission to make arrangements to
facilitate the balanced representation of major groups from developed and
developing countries in the sessions of the Commission;
17. Notes the convening of the second international expert meeting on a tenyear framework of programmes for sustainable consumption and production, to be
held in Costa Rica in September 2005, and in this regard, while acknowledging their
ongoing support, urges Member States to consider further support for those activities;
18. Encourages Governments and organizations at all levels, as well as major
groups, including the scientific community and educators, to undertake resultsoriented initiatives and activities to support the work of the Commission and to
promote and facilitate the implementation of Agenda 21, the Programme for the
Further Implementation of Agenda 21 and the Johannesburg Plan of Implementation,
including through voluntary multi-stakeholder partnership initiatives;
19. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its sixtieth session the
item entitled “Implementation of Agenda 21, the Programme for the Further
Implementation of Agenda 21 and the outcomes of the World Summit on
Sustainable Development”, and requests the Secretary-General, at that session, to
submit a report on the implementation of the present resolution.
75th plenary meeting
22 December 2004
_______________
11

4

E/2004/12-E/CN.17/2004/3.
