A/57/790–S/2003/431

United Nations

General Assembly
Security Council

Distr.: General
16 April 2003
Original: English

General Assembly
Fifty-seventh session
Agenda item 18
Election of judges of the International Criminal Tribunal
for the Prosecution of Persons Responsible for Genocide
and Other Serious Violations of International
Humanitarian Law Committed in the Territory of
Rwanda and Rwandan Citizens Responsible for
Genocide and Other Such Violations Committed in the
Territory of Neighbouring States between 1 January and
31 December 1994

Security Council
Fifty-eighth year

Identical letters dated 16 April 2003 from the Secretary-General
addressed to the President of the General Assembly and the
President of the Security Council
I am attaching for your consideration and for the consideration of the members
of the General Assembly and of the Security Council a letter, dated 26 March 2003
from the President of the International Tribunal for Rwanda, Judge Navanethem
Pillay (see annex).
In her letter, President Pillay requests extensions of the term of office of four
non-elected permanent judges of the International Tribunal in order to allow them to
dispose of a number of ongoing cases. These requests raise institutional and
budgetary questions pertaining to the status of a judge beyond his or her elected
term of office and to related financial arrangements.
You may recall that the term of office of 11 of the permanent judges who are
currently serving in the Chambers of the International Tribunal for Rwanda will
expire on 24 May 2003. You may also recall that, on 31 January 2003, the General
Assembly conducted elections for 11 permanent judges of the International Tribunal
for Rwanda for a four-year term of office commencing on 25 May 2003. At those
elections, four permanent judges who are currently serving in the Tribunal were not
elected to a new term of office. As matters stand, they will therefore cease to be
permanent judges of the International Tribunal for Rwanda on 24 May 2003.
All four of the permanent judges concerned are currently adjudicating in cases
before the Tribunal which will continue beyond that date. With one exception,
proceedings in the cases in question are well advanced. If the judges concerned were
not allowed to continue to adjudicate in those cases, it would be necessary to start
03-32833 (E)

240403

*0332833*

A/57/790
S/2003/431

the trials anew with fresh panels of judges and to order the rehearing of witnesses
and the representation of arguments. This would have unfortunate legal and
financial consequences, cause serious prejudice to the accused and have a significant
negative impact on the Tribunal’s completion strategy.
The Statute of the International Tribunal for Rwanda does not contain a
provision similar to Article 13, paragraph 3, of the Statute of the International Court
of Justice, whereby judges of that Court continue to discharge their duties until they
are replaced and, thereafter, until they finish any cases which they may have begun.
It is provided in article 12 bis, paragraph 3, of the Statute of the International
Tribunal for Rwanda that the terms and conditions of service of permanent judges of
the Tribunal shall be those of the permanent judges of the International Tribunal for
the Former Yugoslavia. Article 13 bis, paragraph 3, of the Statute of that Tribunal
provides, in turn, that the terms and conditions of service of the permanent judges of
the International Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia shall be those of the judges of
the International Court of Justice. Nevertheless, in the absence of any explicit
provision in the Statute of the International Tribunal for Rwanda providing for the
extension of the term of office of permanent judges of the Tribunal in order to allow
them to complete ongoing cases, an approval of the Security Council, as the parent
organ of the Tribunal, and of the General Assembly, as the organ which elects its
judges, would be highly desirable in order to preclude any question being raised
regarding the legality of such an extension.
As more fully elaborated in President Pillay’s letter, her requests are as
follows.
She requests that the terms of office of both Judge Pavel Dolenc and Judge
Yakov Arkadyevich Ostrovsky be extended so that they might finish the Cyangugu
case. She estimates that, for that purpose, it would be necessary to extend their term
of office for an additional nine months.
She also requests that the term of office of Judge Winston Churchill
Matanzima Maqutu be extended so that he might finish the Kajelijeli, Kamuhanda
and Butare cases. She estimates that, for that purpose, it would be necessary to
extend Judge Maqutu’s term of office for a total of two years and seven months.
She further requests that her own term of office be extended, so that she might
finish the “Media” case. She estimates that it would be necessary to extend her term
of office for seven months for that purpose.
In connection with the first of these requests, President Pillay notes that, on 31
January 2003, the General Assembly elected Judge Serguei Aleckseievich Egorov, a
national of the Russian Federation, as a permanent judge of the International
Tribunal for Rwanda for a four-year term of office commencing 25 May 2003. Judge
Ostrovsky is also a national of the Russian Federation. If Judge Ostrovsky’s term of
office were to be extended, as requested, there would therefore be two permanent
judges who were nationals of the same State serving concurrently in the Tribunal.
She recalls in this regard that article 11, paragraph 1, of the Statute of the
International Tribunal for Rwanda provides that no two permanent judges of the
Tribunal may be nationals of the same State. She nevertheless requests that, in the
particular circumstances of the present case, Judge Ostrovsky’s term of office be
extended, notwithstanding that provision of the Tribunal’s Statute.

2

A/57/790
S/2003/431

President Pillay also notes that, on 4 February 2003, she was herself elected a
judge of the International Criminal Court by the Assembly of States Parties to the
Rome Statute of the International Criminal Court. Her term of office as a judge of
that Court commenced on 11 March 2003. She recalls in this connection that,
pursuant to paragraph 3 of article 12 bis of the Statute of the International Tribunal
for Rwanda, permanent judges of the Tribunal are required to serve on a full-time
basis and so may not engage in any other occupation of a professional nature during
their tenure in office. At the same time, she notes that she is not currently engaged
in any substantive work as a judge of the International Criminal Court and that she
will not be so engaged during the period of time that would be required for her to
complete the “Media” case. She is therefore available to continue serving as a
permanent judge of the Tribunal during that time on a full-time basis. This being so,
she does not consider her status as a judge of the International Criminal Court to be
inconsistent in any way with article 12 bis, paragraph 3, of the Statute of the
International Tribunal for Rwanda. She states that she has brought this matter to the
attention both of the Bureau of the Tribunal and of the other two judges who are
sitting with her on the “Media” case and that they concur in this assessment. She
therefore does not consider article 12 bis, paragraph 3, of the Statute to pose an
obstacle to the extension of her term of office.
The Registry of the International Tribunal has advised me that the budgetary
costs associated with the extension of the four judges’ terms of office are estimated
to be US$ 1,893,800. The Registry has also advised me that it is envisaged that the
Tribunal may be able to meet the estimated costs related to the year 2003 in the
amount of $858,000 from within the 2002-2003 appropriation adopted for the
Tribunal by the General Assembly in its resolution 57/289 of 20 December 2002.
With respect to the estimated costs for the biennium 2004-2005 in the amount of
$1,035,000, these will be taken into account in preparing the budget proposals for
the Tribunal for the biennium 2004-2005.
I should be most grateful if you could bring the present letter and its annex to
the attention of the members of the General Assembly and of the Security Council
for their approval in the manner that they deem fit.
(Signed) Kofi A. Annan

3

A/57/790
S/2003/431

Annex
Letter dated 26 March 2003 from the President of the
International Tribunal for Rwanda addressed to the
Secretary-General
I am writing to you with regard to the extension of the terms of office of the
following judges of the International Tribunal for Rwanda: Judge Pavel Dolenc,
Judge Winston Churchill M. Maqutu, Judge Yakov Ostrovsky and myself, Judge
Navanethem Pillay, so that they can complete cases which they have already begun
and which will not be completed by the time that their terms of office come to an
end on 24 May 2003. I respectfully request that you transmit this letter to the
President of the Security Council and the President of the General Assembly, for
consideration of this matter by those two bodies.
The election of the judges of the International Tribunal for Rwanda took place
on 31 January 2003. Judge Ostrovsky and Judge Pillay did not stand for re-election.
Judge Dolenc and Judge Maqutu were not re-elected. Although the terms of office of
these judges will therefore come to an end on 24 May 2003, the Rules of the
Tribunal place an obligation on a judge to complete the case/s in which he or she is
involved. All four judges are currently sitting on cases that will not be completed by
24 May 2003. For this reason, we request the Security Council and the General
Assembly to extend the terms of office of the judges concerned in order to allow
them to complete the cases described below.
As envisioned by the Rules of the Tribunal, the continuation of ongoing cases
is both more cost-effective and more compatible with the principles of fair trial than
the alternative of commencing de novo trials that have reached an advanced stage.
In addition to the unfortunate legal and financial consequences, and serious
prejudice to the accused, commencing all affected trials de novo would have the
detrimental effect of pushing the completion of the mandate of the Tribunal far
beyond its projected date. I note that under similar circumstances, the Security
Council has authorized the extension of judges’ mandates, both for the International
Tribunal for Rwanda and the International Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia, to
allow them to complete their work.
Judge Dolenc
I request an extension of Judge Dolenc’s term of office until the completion of
the Cyangugu case, a currently estimated to finish by the end of February 2004. In
this joint trial of three accused, the prosecution and two of the accused have
completed the presentation of their respective cases. The third accused is in the
process of presenting his case. He has indicated that he will be calling 16 witnesses
and will also testify in his own defence. The prosecution has indicated its intention
to present rebuttal evidence and there is always the possibility of the defence
requesting leave to present evidence in rejoinder. The presentation of evidence in
this case and the closing arguments are likely to be completed in the second half of
this year. It is the intention of the Trial Chamber to deliver judgement in February
2004.
__________________
a The prosecutor v. André Ntagerura (ICTR-96-10-T), Emmanuel Bagambiki and Samuel

Imanishimwe (ICTR-97-36-T).

4

A/57/790
S/2003/431

Judge Dolenc is also sitting on the “Military” case. b In this case, the trial
proceedings commenced recently and only two witnesses have been heard for the
prosecution. It is contemplated that hundreds of witnesses will testify and that the
trial will continue for more than two years. In consultation with the Bureau, I have
determined that it would be significantly more cost-effective, and not incompatible
with the interests of justice, for this trial to recommence with a new panel of judges.
For this reason, I am not requesting an extension of Judge Dolenc’s mandate for this
case.
Judge Ostrovsky
I request an extension of Judge Ostrovksy’s term of office until the completion
of the Cyangugu case. The details of the status of this case, on which Judge Dolenc
also sits, are set forth above in connection with the request for extension of Judge
Dolenc’s term. The case is currently estimated to finish by the end of February 2004.
In connection with this request for an extension of Judge Ostrovsky’s term of
office, I note that another judge from the Russian Federation, Judge Serguei
Aleckseievich Egorov, has been elected to serve on the International Tribunal for
Rwanda. Article 11, paragraph 1, of the Statute of the Tribunal provides that no two
judges may be nationals of the same State. However, in the light of the particular
circumstances, including the obligation under the Rules for Judge Ostrovsky to
complete the case and the short duration of the extension required to do so, I request
the Security Council and the General Assembly to extend Judge Ostrovsky’s term of
office until the completion of the Cyangugu case, on an exceptional basis
notwithstanding the above-cited provision of article 11 of the Statute of the
Tribunal.
Judge Maqutu
I request an extension of Judge Maqutu’s term of office until the completion of
the Kajelijeli, c Kamuhanda, d and Butare e cases, the longest of which is currently
estimated to finish in December 2005. The progress of trial in these cases can be
summed up as follows:
The Kajelijeli case
This trial of a single accused commenced de novo on 4 July 2001. f Fourteen
witnesses have testified for the prosecution and the defence case is now in progress.
Twenty-four defence witnesses have already testified and a further five witnesses,
including three experts, are expected to testify between 31 March and 24 April 2003.
The Prosecutor may thereafter lead rebuttal evidence. Closing arguments are
__________________
b The Prosecutor v. Theoneste Bagosora (ICTR-96-7-T), Gratien Kabiligi, Aloys Ntabakuze

(ICTR-97-34-T) and Anatole Nsengiyumva (ICTR-96-12-T).
c The Prosecutor v. Juvénal Kajelijeli (ICTR-98-44-T).
d The Prosecutor v. Jean-de-Dieu Kamuhanda (ICTR-99-54-T).
e The Prosecutor v. Joseph Kanyabashi (ICTR-96-15-T); Pauline Nyiramasuhuko and Arsène

Shalom Ntahobali (ICTR-97-21-T); Sylvain Nsabimana and Alphonse Nteziryayo (ICTR-29-T);
and Elie Ndayambaje (ICTR-96-8-T).
f The trial originally commenced on 13 March 2001 and subsequently commenced de novo on
4 July 2001 because of the death of Judge Laity Kama on 6 May 2001 and the assignment of
Judge Mehmet Güney to the Appeals Chamber.

5

A/57/790
S/2003/431

expected to be heard at the end of May or in early June 2003, and the Trial Chamber
expects to render judgement in December 2003.
The Kamuhanda case
This trial of a single accused commenced de novo on 3 September 2001. g
Twenty-eight witnesses have testified for the prosecution and the defence is now
presenting its case. Thirty witnesses have already testified and a further five
witnesses are expected to testify between 28 April and 22 May 2003, which should
complete the presentation of the defence case. The prosecution may present rebuttal
evidence, four witnesses who are expected to testify over a period of five days.
Closing arguments are expected to be heard in September 2003 and judgement is
expected to be delivered in December 2003.
The Butare case
This joint trial of six accused commenced on 12 June 2001. Twenty-three
prosecution witnesses have testified over a period of 104 days. Sixty-seven factual
witnesses and four expert witnesses are expected to testify before the prosecution
closes its case. Trial in this case is being conducted contemporaneously with trials in
the Kamuhanda and Kajelijeli cases. On completion of trials in the latter two cases,
Trial Chamber II will concentrate solely on the trial in the Butare case and not
commence with other trials for the duration of this trial. It is expected that this trial
will be completed in August 2005 and judgement rendered in December 2005.
Judge Pillay
I request an extension of my term of office until the completion of the “Media”
case, h currently estimated to finish no later than the end of 2003. The joint trial of
the three accused in the “Media” case commenced on 23 October 2000. The
prosecution closed its case on 12 July 2002, after 47 witnesses testified. The defence
commenced its case on 18 September 2002. Forty witnesses have testified. Nine
more factual witnesses and six expert witnesses are expected to testify before the
three defence teams close their respective cases. Trial proceedings are scheduled to
finish by the end of May 2003. Closing arguments are scheduled to be heard in
August 2003, and it is anticipated that judgement will be delivered by December
2003.
I have been elected as a judge of the International Criminal Court and my term
of office as such commenced on 11 March 2003. I have been assigned to the
Appeals Chamber of the Court and will not occupy a full-time position until the
workload of the Chamber so requires. I am not currently and will not be engaged in
any substantive judicial work for the Court during the period of time required to
finish the “Media” case. I am therefore available to continue serving as a Judge of
the International Tribunal for Rwanda on a full-time basis. I consider that my status
as a judge of the International Criminal Court is not inconsistent with article 12
bis (3) of the Statute of the Tribunal. The Bureau, as well as the two other judges
__________________
g The trial originally commenced on 17 April 2001 and subsequently commenced de novo on

3 September 2001 because of the death of Judge Laity Kama on 6 May 2001 and the assignment
of Judge Mehmet Güney to the Appeals Chamber.
h Prosecutor v. Jean Bosco Barayagwiza (ICTR-97-19-T), Ferdinand Nahimana (ICTR-96-11-T)
and Hassan Ngeze (ICTR-97-27-T).

6

A/57/790
S/2003/431

serving with me on the “Media” case, have been consulted and all concur with this
view. For the duration of my service on the Tribunal, I have undertaken to waive the
annual allowance due to me from the International Criminal Court.
Budgetary consequences
I have requested the Registrar, Mr. Adama Dieng, to submit to you as soon as
possible, in consultation with the Controller, an estimate of the financial
implications arising from the extension of the terms of office of the four judges,
based on the current projections of the case schedules set forth herein. This will
place you in a position to inform the Security Council and General Assembly of the
budgetary consequences of our requests.
(Signed) Judge Navanethem Pillay

7
