UNITED NA TIONS

S~ECURITY COUNCIL
OFFICIAL

RECORDS

TWENTY-NINTH

YEAR

st

1

MEETING:

24 OCTOBER

NEW YORK

1974

.

CONTENTS
. ..I....................,,....,,..,..

1

Adoption of the agenda 1.1....1..1.1.11,*...,,,111.................I...

1

Relationship between the United Nations and South Africa:
((I) Letter dated 30 September 1974 from the President of the General Assembly
to the President of the Security Council (S/l 1525);
(b) Letter dated 9 October 1974 from the Permanent Representative of Tunisia
to the United Nations addressed to the President of the Security Council
(S/l 1532) .I...........I....ll..,,.I,,..............,.......,..,.,..

1

Provisional

agenda (S/Agenda/l801)

S/PV, 180

NOTE

Prc

Austl
Repu
Iraq,
Sock
Brita
Camr

Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined with figures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United
Nations document.
Documents of the Security Council (symbol S/ , , .) are normally published in
quarterly Supplements of the Official Records oj’ the Security Cotctwil. The date
of the document indicates the supplement in which it appears or in which information about it is given,

1. k

The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a
system adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of Resolirtiotks utd
Decisions of the Security Coutlcil. The new system, which has been applied

2. F
s
6

retroactively to resolutions adopted before 1 January 1965, became fully operative
on that date.

Relet
Afric,
(a) L
01

(b) ;

a1
(!
1. 1

In ar

[17Y6

of th
provi
1 inv
Barb,
Dahu
tihar
Repu

_.-

--

EIGHTEEN HUNDRED AND FIRST MEETING
Held in New York on Thurgday, 24 October 1974, at 3.30 p.m.
~~__~~_ Presidenr: Mr. Michel NJINJ?
(United Republic of Cameroon),

-Nigeria, Qatar, SaudiArabia, Sierra Leone, Somalia,
South Africa, the Syrian Arab Republic, Tunisia,
Uganda, the United Arab Emirates, the United
Present: The representativesof the following States: Republic of Tanzania, Upper Volta, Yugoslavia and
Australia, Austria, Byelorussian Soviet Socialist Zaire to participate, without the right to vote, in
Republic, China, Costa Rica, France, Indonesia, the Council’s discussionof the questionbefore it.
Iraq, Kenya, Mauritania, Peru, Union of Soviet
AI the invitution
of the President,
Mr. Rahal
Socialist Republics, United Kingdom of Great
(Algeriu),
Mr. Karim (Bangladesh),
Mr. WaldronBritain and Northern Ireland, United Republic of
Ramsey
(Barbados),
Mr.
Mondjo
(Congo),
Cameroon-andUnited-States-of-America.
,
Provisionalagenda(S/Agenda/1801)
1. Adoption of the agenda
2. Relationship between the United Nations and
South Africa:
(cr) Letter dated 30 September 1974 from the
President of the General Assembly to the
Presidentof the Security Council (S/l 1525);
(0) Letter dated 9 October 1974 from the
PermanentRepresentativeof Tunisis to the
United Nations addressedto the Presidentof
the Security Cquncil (S/ 11532)
The meeting wus culled to order ut 4 p.m.

Mr. Alarcdn (Cuba), Mr. Vejvodu (Czechoslovakia),
Mr. AdjibadP (Dahomeyy), Mr. Abdel Meguid (Egypt),
Mr. Florin (German Democrutic Republic), Mr. Bouten
(Ghanu),
Mrs. Jeanne
Martin’
Cis&
(Guinea),
Mr. Juckson (Guyuna), Mr. Juipal(Indiu),
Mr. Maghur
(Libyun
Arab
Republic),
Mr.
Rabetqfika
(Mudagascar),
Mr. TraorP (Mali),
Mr. Ramphul
(Muuritius),
Mr. Sluoui
(Mo,;vcco),
Mr.
Ogbrr
(Nigeria),
Mr? Jumal (Qatar), Mr. Buroody (Suudi
Arubiu), Mr. Pulmer (Sierra Leone), Mr. Hussein
(Somalia),
Mr. Bothu (South Afiicu),
Mr. Kelani
(Syriun
Arab
Republic),
Mr.
Driss
(Tunisia),
Mr. Kinene (Uganda), Mr. ,Humaidan (United Arub
Emirates), Mr. Salim (United Republic of Tanzania),
Mr. Yagaibou (Upper Volta), Mr. Petrid (Yugoslavia)
and Mr. Mutuule (Zaire) took the places reserved
for them at the side of the Council chamber.

Adoption of the agenda

2. The PRESIDENT (interoretation
from French):
Furthermore,. wishto info& membersofthe Counck
The ugendu wus adopted.
that I have received a letter from the representative
of Liberia requestingthat his delegationalso should
Relationshipbetweenthe United Nations and South be invited, under Article 31 of the Charter, and the
Africa:
pertinent provisions of the provisional rules of
(a) Letter dated30 September1974from the President procedure, to participate, without the right to vote,
of the General Assemblyto the Presidentof the in the Council’s discussionof the questionbefore it.
Security Council(S/l 1525);
In accordancewith the customary practice, and with
(b) Letter dated 9 October 1974from the Permanent the assentof the Council, I propose to invite this
Representativeof Tunisia to the United Nations representative to participate, without the right to
addressed
to the Presidentof the Security Council vote, in the discussion.
(S/l 1532)
1, The PRESIDENT (i/ltrr/)rptN/i(~/t jiwn French):
In accordancewith the decisions taken previously
[17Y6t11-17YHIh
rr,lt/ INUUIlrnrrctings], under Article 31
of the Charter and in accordancewith the pertinent
provisions of the provisional rules of procedure.
I invite the representativesof Algeria. Bangladesh,
Barbados, the Congo, Cuba, Czechoslovakia,
Dahomey, Egypt, the German Democratic Republic,
Ghana, Guinea, Guyana, India, the Libyan Arab
Republic, Madagascar, Mali, Mauritius, Morocco,

AI the invitation of the President, Mr. Hurmon
(Liberiu) took the pluce resewed jbr him NI the .side
oj‘ the Coancil chamber.

3. The PRESIDENT (interprefation
j&n
French):
The first speakeris the representativeof Madagascar.
1 invite him to take a place at the Council table and
to make his statement.
4. Mr. RABETAFIKA (Madagascar)(ilttopretntiort
,fi~~ French): Mr. President, it is highly significant

for us that you should be presiding over the Security
Council, as it takes up an item which is of crucial
importance both for us, who have grievances against
South Africa, and for the Organization, whose
authority should he reaffirmed as it becomes more
aware of its responsibilities, For we can be sure
that your qualities as a statesman and a diplomat
whose integrity and wisdom we respect will ensure
that the Council does succeed. desoite the difficulties.
in defining, unequivocally and without compromise;
what relationship should be maintained between our
Organization and a Member State which, despite
all appeals and warnings, deliberately and with
impunity puts itself outside, if not above, the
constraints that other Member States have accepted,

the logical consequences of that situation are covered
by Ariiclc 6, conierning exclusion. and Articles 4 I and
42, on sanctions.and the use of force, two Articles
that are not mutually exclusive,
8, The South African rkgime may argue that the
dispute does not exist because there can be no
relinquishing of sovereignty to the United Nations,
which, moreover, is not authorized to intervene in
affairs which fall essentially within the national
jurisdiction of a State; but those who have worked
so hard for the international protection of human
rights after the depredations of the nazi rdgime
must join us in recognizing that the rule of nonintervention ceases to apply when the treatment
accorded by a natidn to its population or a part of its
population violates the dictates of justice and human
conscience.

5, On behalf of my ‘delegation I should like to
thank you, and through you the members of the
Council, for having acceded to our request to
participate in this historic-debate.

9. The Eretoria rdgime also argues that it is essential
to preserve the sovereign rights of a State, particularly
its natural right of self-defence, thus recognizing that,
through its authoritarianism and its excesses, this
rigime has been reduced to defending itself against
what it is still usual to describe as its people. As
for sovereign rights, which are defined in capricious
and often arbitrary terms, we are among those who
believe that those rights should yield to international
obligations freely undertaken.

6. ~The Union of South Africa participated, and we
are told, in a decisive fashion, in the United Nations
Conference on International Organization. It is a
signatory of the Charter; it is a founder Member of
our Organization, and so one might have expected
that the Government of South Africa, if only out of
respect for its formal commitments, would recognize
that there can be no meaningful international cooperation without a minimum of good faith. For
28 years we have now been awaiting some sign of
such a recognition.by it, and despite its intransigence,
which has become more and more absolute and
outrageous, the General Assembly and the Security
Council have made repeated conciliatory gestures
towards that Government, gestures which seemed at
times to r,eflect either our acquiescence or our
confusion.

10. These legal quibbles, which nevertheless have
their place, must not make us forget the situation
at present existing in southern Africa, It has been
described so often that one may well hesitate to
remind members of the Council of what, they know
only too well. The more indignant the international
community becomes, the more tightly does the
South African Government entrench itself in its
ridiculous and lunatic world. It might have been left
to do so, if it had not also dragged in its train
that part of the white population which ,is opposed
to its policies, and the Africans, Asians and
Coldureds-who are the victims of its aberrations.

7. ‘@us the United Nations, after equivocating for
six years, strove in vain from 1952 on to use the good
offices of- two committees, to invoke the mediation
of two Secretaries-General, to call for direct
negotiations, to induce the Government of South
Africa to+o-operate with the Special Committee, to
seek the arbitration of the International Court of
Justice, and all of this in order to reach a peaceful
settlement of the dispute arising from the policies of
rrpur?keid
and racial discrimination in sout.hern Africa.
It should be made clear that this dispute does not
involve only India, or Pakistan, or the African States,
as some would have us believe in order to justify
ambivalent positions. The fact is that once the South
African Government had refused the good offices of
the Organization, attacked the constitutiontility of
our resolutions and decisions, rejected the recommendations under Chapters VI and XI of the
Charter, and ignored the innumerable appeals for
co-operation under Articles 1, 13, 55 and 56 of the
Charter, the Organization itself became a party to
111~dispute, thus creating n situation for which no
express provision is tn;ldc it, the Charter. Nevcrtheleqs,

Il. Before the Se’cond World War the world was
vaguely aware that somewhere in Africa- and Asia
certain forms of segregation and discrimination existed,
but since those forms of ser?regationand discrimination
did not create any particuT;dr&turbance in the world
social and economic order, and since they were
applied only to “subjects” recognized as having only
residual rights, it could be left to a few charitable
souls to try to denounce such practices. ,’
12. Later, when the South African Government
tried to introduce a semblance of coherence into its
discrimination and racial segregation in order to effect
the political subordination and economic domination
of its indigenous and other subjects, indifference
became all the more acceptable since South Africa
was posing as an advanced outpost of civilization
and of the so-called fret world.
2

13, When the Asian and African Members of the
Vnited Nations drew the Organization’s attention to
the fact that the South African Government was
attempting not only to control and regulate the nonwhite population with P view to preserving the
economic privileges of an oligarchy dedicated to
authoritarianism, but also to institute a racist ideology
which would be the very negation of the Charter,
some people began to feel thattthe~-Iimit had been
reached,

to discharge its obligations under the Charter, and

towards

those for

whom

it assumes

a certain

responsibility. We expect it to co-operate with the
international community in all matters concerning the
exercise of human rights and fundamental freedoms,
as well as the rights of peoples. We expect it
accordingly to apply the decisions of the Security
Council and to implement the resolutions of the
General Assembly.
19. There has been no positive reaction from the
Pretoria regime. On the contrary, it is strengthening
its battery of laws intended to perpetuate and
strengthen the policies of apartheid; it is becoming
more and more oppressive towards those who
denounce the injustice of those laws; it is denying
the most elementary rights of the populations of
South Africa; it is defying the Organization by
opposing, if necessary by force, the arrangements
adopted concerning Namibia; it is circumventing the
Security Council’s decisions on Rhodesia; it is
threatening to use force against neighbouring States
and it is refusing to co-operate with the international
community.
--

14. However, the most difficult thing yet remained
to be done. How could an ally be made to understand,
an ally which had for decades enjoyed open or
tacit support from various quarters? How, for that
matter, could such an ally accept a change of attitude
towards itself which was not based on a change of
policy by an alliance in which it still claimed
membership? There wasdisarray on the one hand and
incomprehension on the other, which merely
strengthened the tendency towards gradualism and
temporizing, while at the same time people were only
too happy tr, accuse us of being unreasonable
emxtremists, too easily carried away by words and
out of touch with reality,

20. It would be superfluous to develop further these
grave breaches of the spirit and letter of the Charter,
these multiple transgressions of the purposes and
principles of the Charter, these challenges to the
authority of the Organization. We have before us a
cause where the legal arguments coincide with the
facts, a situation where it is no longer possible to
ignore the provisions of the Charter whose application,
no matter how difftcult it may be, can in no
circumstances be made dependent on the situation.

15. Meanwhile the situation is deteriorating. South
Africa is hastening to make its apartheid policies
irreversible, to rationalize the irrational, to justify
the unjustifiable, as it attempted to do this morning,
and to set up a police state for the purpose of ensuring
for ever for the greater good of the so-called free
world, white privilege, and .white domination in I the
country’s affairs,
16, The awakening of nationalism and the emergence
of indepen’dent nations, particularly in that part of
the world, ‘made it no ldnger possible to consider
apartheid as a mere series of violations of human
rights, or as a legal dispute, in the sense that South
Africa was ‘called upon to act in accordance with
the purposes and principles of the Charter and to
disibtrgeits obligations thereunder.

21. In the case of South Africa, the provisions of
the pertinent Articles of Chapter VI had already
been applied when the Organization set up good
of&es committees, called for meadiation and ordered
inquiries conducted by a group of experts of the
Council. Article 40 was invoked when the Council
decided to institute an arms embargo. That would
leave Article 41 or Article 42 with its immediate
corollary, Article 5, but matters need not stop there
if we agree that-and there is ample evidence of
this-for 28 years the Organization has seen South
Africa persistently infringe the principles of the
Charter, thus incurring the possible application to
itself of Article 6.

17. It cannot be denied that in South Africa we
are confronted with the oppression, repression and
suppression of the mr\jority, or the confiscation of
political and economic power by a minority to the
detriment of groups whose progress, according to the
Charter, it is their duty to assist in all fields. It is
not surprising, therefore, that nations which love
justice, freedom and independence are prepared to
defy the Pretoria regime, a regime which has for long
defied the international community and continues to
do so with impunity.

22. The Security Council is responsible for the
maintenance of international peace and security, and
some may argue that the possible exclusion of South
Africa might affect peace and security in the region,
because South Africa would be deliberately placing
itself outside international law, in which case it would
be much more difficult to bring pressure to bear on
it. But is this not tantamount to saying that we have
little faith in the Charter and in our capacity to
ensure that all States act in conformity with its

18. What, in sum, do we expect of South Africa?
We expect that the principles of equality and nondiscrimination will be respected, pursuant to the
Universal Declaration of Human Rights, the articles
of which specify the obligations undertaken in
accordance with the Charter. We expect South Africa
3

principles? To that I might add what has been said
in General Assembly resolution 377 A (V):
“a genuine and lasting peace depends also upon the
observance of all the principles and purposes
established in the Charter of the United Nations,
.~ upon the implementation of the resolutions ‘of
--the Security Council, the General Assembly and
-other principal organs of the United Nations intended
----to achieve‘ the maintenance of international peace
--and security, and especially upon respect for and
observance of human rights and fundamental
freedoms for all”.
23. Finally, some may say that at a time when the
Organization has become virtually universal it would
be incongruous to expel one of its Members. For
our part, we have always maintained that the
universality of the United Nations should derive from
common objectives and principles, the readiness of
its Members to recognize that common cause, and
the determination of- the Qrgt+ization to ensure that
it is respected.
..-~~
24. ‘Our debates have been invalidated from the
outset because it has always been said that no
concrete action could be taken becabse of the
likelihood of one, two or three vetoes. This matter
had been brought up at earlier meetings of the
Council, particularly by the representatives of Algeria
and Mauritius, .and this morning again by the
representative of Cuba, to mention only those
speakers. When Member States w&e asked to express
their views concerning possible amendments to the
Charter, my delegation was among those that felt
that it was necessary to clarify the scope of Article 27
with a view to applying its provisions in relation to
Chapter VII of the Charter. In strictly legal terms,
it may be difficult to decide to what extent a State
other than the State directly concerned may be
regarded as a party to a dispute. But if we look at it
in political terms-and in what other terms can
we look at the matter here in the Security Councillif one or more States have given diplom&,
poliiical
and military support to South Africa, and perhaps
are prepared to go on doing so, could we not therefore
conclude that they too bear responsibility for the
reprehensible actions of the South African rt5gimel
In that case they become a party to the dispute
and Article 27 could be invoked against them.
Furthermore, it has been said that the veto was
instituted eithor to protect the interests of the
great Powers or to enable them the better to discharge
their responsibilities under the Charter. Must we
conclude from this, if a veto should be cast in this
debate, that certain Powers have identified or are
going to identify their interests with those of South
Africa and that they think that the maintenance of
rrporrheid in the international community’ is one
of their responsibilities?

and the Pretoria rkgime can no longer be the same
as in the past. Over and above the necessities
imposed by alliances, over and above regional or
I particular interests and over and above historical
~considerations which are sometimes ill-founded,
there is an international morality which does not
necessarily call for retribution or vengeance, but
which does require our acts to be in conformity
with the purpose we have Eet for ourselves, namely,
the establishment of a world order based on social
justice for individuals and political justice for peoples.
Let South Africa tell us that its policy of apartheid
is not in conformity with that morality, with all the
consequences to which such an admission may
lead, but let us, I pray, not force the international
community to be false to itself by accepting in
advance a hypothetical act of contrition.
26. The PRESIDENT (interpretation fiotn French):
The next speaker is the representative of Ghana.
I invite him to take a place at the Council table
and to make his statement.
27. -Mr. BOATEN (Ghana): Mr. President, may
I express my sincere gratitude to you and the other
members of. the Security Council for giving my
delegation this opportunity to participate in this
debate on the question of the relationship between
the United Nations and the racist rkgime of South
Africa. I am particularly happy to be participating
in this debate under your distinguished leadership.
Your intimate knowledge of the problems posed by
the institution of apartheid as a political philosophy
by past and present rkgimes of South Africa gives
us the assurance that the issue will receive the urgent
attention which it deserves.
28. The history of racial discrimination and
suppression in South Africa is too long and too well
known to the interantional community to require
recounting in the Council. It should therefore suffice
to remind ourselves that, even before apartheid
became the official Government policy of South
Africa on the assumption of political control by the
National Party in South Africa in 1948, the United
Nations had beenseized of the question. As recalled
by our Folleague, Mr. Driss, when he spoke on
18 October [f 796thmeeting], it was raised at the very
first session of the General Assembly in 1946 on a
complaint by India regarding a law enacted by the
rkgime of South Africa to institute discrimination
against South Africans of Indian crigin in violation
of treaty obligations and the principles enshrined in
the’ Charter of the United Nations. On becoming
independent in 1947,Pakistan joined India in promoting
debates in the General Assembly of that issue. The
Good Offices Committee on South West Africa,
composed of Cuba, Syria and Yugoslavia, was
established by the General Assembly in December
1952 to assist in negotiations between India and
Pakistan, on the one hand, and South Africa, on the
other. This effort collapsed because the South African

25. No riiatter what decision the Council takes it
is clear that the relationship between the Organization
4

’

r&me refused to co-operate, In pursuit of a peaceful
resolution of the matter, Mr. Luis de Faro of
Brazil was designated by the Secretary-General to
intervene, but, again, this mission was frustrated by
the intransigent position adopted by the South African
rhgime,

adoption.The Committee’slatest report indicatesthat
the situation hasinfinitely worsenedin South Africa.
The rbgime in that country has not let up in its
determination to continue the repressionof its nonwhite population. I should like, if I may, to quote
from that report:

29. Since 1962, when the complaint by India and
the question of racial conflict in South Africa were
combined under the item “The policies of apartheid
of the Governmentof the Republicof South Africa”,
the General Assembly has religiously each year
consideredthis evil policy, its practice and effects
on the people againstwhom it is directed. I do not
expect that there is anybody in this room who was
not moved when Mr. Sibeko addressedthe Council
on 22 October [179&/r ,,zeetingl. He talked about a
plight in which he is personallyinvolved; his statement
was a factual description of atrocities perpetratedby
menagainstother menin the twentieth century. ’

“South Africa has remained intransigent despite
the numerousresolutionsof the General Assembly
recognizing that the situation in South Africa is
a matter of grave international concern, and the
strong warnings administeredby the Assembly in
its rejection of the credentialsof the South African
delegationsince 1970”.’

30, In the face of this, South African r&imes have
consistently held the position, against all wisdom,
that aparrheid
is their own domestic affair and
consequentlynot subject to discussionor review by
the international community. The verdict of the
international community as pronouncedin numerous
resolutionsand declarations,including the Universal
Declaration of Human Rights, the International
Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of
Racial Discrimination and the International Convention on the Suppressionand Punishmentof the
Crime of Apartheid, showsthe clear and unequivocal
oppositionof the whole world to both the philosophy
and the practice of apartheid.

33, General Assembly resolution 3055 (XXVIII) of
26 October 1973 called upon the rkgime to grant
forthwith unconditionalreleaseto all personsrestricted
for their opposition to apartheid.
That regime’s
reaction to that call is reflected in a letter dated
12 June 1974 addressedto the Secretary-General
by South Africa’s Foreign Minister. With your
permission,Mr. President,I shouldlike to quote from
that-letter:
“This resolution was adopted in connexion with
an itemwhich touchesupon South Africa’s domestic
affairs. It is, therefore, contrary to the provisions
of Article 2, paragraph 7, of the Charter of the
United Nations, which prohibits the Organization
from intervening in matters which are essentially
within the domesticjurisdiction of any State.”

34. It shouldbe a matter of great concern to all-as
it is to my delegation-that the South African rbgime
is still unable to realize that the application ‘of a
31. ‘My delegationis not unaware of the existence policy which meansdoing violence to the rights of
of racial discrimination and persistent violations of
all non-white peoplesin the world cannot possibly
humanrights inother countries. But these instances be a simple domestic affair. The quotations which
are nothing by comparison with what operates in
I have given, however, convince my delegationthat,
South Africa.‘South Africa is the only country in the
until the South African rhgime changesits policy of
world where racial discrimination, suppressionand apartheid,
its membership in the United Nations
other violations of human rights have been given the
cannot in any way contribute to the strengthening
full force of law. It is only in that country that the
of the Organization,
extent to which the human person is permitted to
enjoy human rights is, by law, dependent on the
35. My delegationbelieves in the principle of the
colour of his skin. The fact that the greater part of
universality of this Organization. South Africa,
the world’s entire population is non-white or of non- however, cannot be allowed to seek the protection
European stock makesit frightening to contemplate and privileges of membershipof the Organization
the repercussionsof such policies on world peace, while adamantlysetting itself on a courseof perpetual
stability and security.
collision with the United Nations. That is whv mv
delegation believes that the time has come f& thk
32. To date, however, every effort that has been Security Council to take some further measures,
madeby the membersof the internationalcommunity,
not excluding expulsion, against the rCgimein that
in both their collective and their individual capacities, country.
to assistin effecting a peaceful changeof policy in
South Africa has been a failure. The General 36. The view is held in some quarters that the
Assembly in 1962establishedthe Special Committee expulsion of the South African rCgime from the
on Apcrrlhcid to carry out a continuousstudy of that
OrKanization is not the answer to the problem.
policy and its applicationand makerecommendations. -__-__
Since then, the Committee has submittedits report
to the General Assembly each year for study and

Efforts involving some violence aimed at effecting a
change in the r6gime’s policy are also looked upon
with disfavour by the same quarters which counsel
against expulsion,

encouraged trade in military equipment with South
Africa. Some of these not only have sold tighter
planes to the ldgime but ‘have gone so far as to
$onclude agreements with the regime for the
production of Gch planes in South Africa, Others
have since co-operated with the rt5gime in the field
of nuclear technology, On 23 July 1970, in its
resolution 282 (1970), the Council voted, by 12 in
favour to none against, with 3 abstentions,to condemn
all such violations of the arms embargo and called
on all States to strengthen the embargo by
implementing it fully, uncondi$onally ~tu@ @out
any reeervations.

37, In his report to the United States Congress in
February 1971, the President of the United States
stated:
“Racism.is abhorrent to the American people, to
-my administration, and to me personally. We cannot
-‘be indifferent to rrpnrrlteid, nor can we ignore the
-tensions created in Africa by the denial of political
self-determination. We shall do what we can to
foster equal opportunity and free political expression
instead.”

42. The Lusaka Manifesto of 1%9, since adopted by
the United Nations, states: “We believe that all the
peoples who have made their homes in the countries
of southern Africa are Africans, regardless of the
colour of their skins; and we would oppose a
racialist majority government which adopted a
philosophy of deliberate and permanent discrimination
between its citizens on grounds of racial origin. We
are not talking racialism when we reject the colonialism
and upartheid policies now operating in those areas;
we are demanding an opportunity for all the people
of these States, working together as . . . individual
citizens, to work out for themselves the institutions
and the system of government under which they will,
by general consent, live together and w$rk together
to build a harmonious society.‘?

Mr, Nixon went on to say:
“We are convinced that the use of violence
muIholds no promise as the solution to the problems
of southern Africa. Neither the military nor’ the
economic strength is available to force change on
=Ir_theYwhite,m&arlty r6gimes .”
38. My delegation views the situation differently.
It is convinced that both the military power and the
economic strength to force the necessary change are
available. The only constraint on their use is the
unfortunate unwillingness to use them of those who
should see it as a duty to mankind and a contribution
to world peace to do so.

43. All over Africa there abounds clear evidence
of the determination of independent African countries
not to pay back citizens and governments of former
colonialist and repressive Powers in th$ir own coin;
Africans have given incontrovertible prqof that they
denounce racism in reverse; they havt?:given every
indication of a desire to co-operate fully with
everybody, of whatever colour, on a baiis of mutual
respect. South African whites do not, thefefore, have
any reason to fear that they will be freated with
discrimination of a nature similar to ‘the viciously
evil one to which they have always f#ected their
non-white population.
1
44. ‘The racist rbgime and its white’ adherents,
however, refuse to see reason; they insiditon carrying
out their rkcial policies even at the risk ofjeopardizing
world peace and security, Sports and other boycotts
have not discouraged them and are unliKely to do SO
in the future so long as they are not total in theit
application. The racist rkgime has, in tact, insulted
the international community at every opportunity.
Not only has it refused to change its policies; it
has even extended them to Namibia; ‘which is a

39. What are the alternatives to complete boycott
-that is, the prescription and enforcement. of total
sanctions and adoption of such violent measures as
may be necessary to induce civilized political, social
and economic policies and practices in South Africa?
That is the question this Council is being called
upon to answer; and if it is to continue to enjoy
the confidence of the United Nations and the world
in general, it must answer that question responsibly,
40. The Council considered the question in August
and then in December 1963, and again in June 1964.
0~ 7 August I%3 the Council,. by its resolution 181
(1%3), soiemnly caiied upon all States to cease the
sale and shipment of arms, ammunition and tnilitary
vehicles to South Africa. By its resolution 182 (1963),
unanimously adopted on 4 December 1963, the Council
urged tllat the arms embargo should be extended to
include equipment and materials for the manufacture
and maintenance of arms and ammunition in South
Africa. On both those occasions and since then,
the Council and the General Assembly have also
exhorted South Africa IO change its policies and
cease suppressing the rights of its non-white
population. On each occasion the South African
r&me has not only I,ejected hut also denounced

Territory

under United Nations administration.

It

has rejected the numerous exhortations of, the General
Assembly and spurned the advisory opmion of the
International Court of Justice on that matter. When

the advice of the international community.

41. Certain well-known countries have also ignored
the resolutions of the Security Council and actively
6

confronted within. the Commonwealth of Nations
with its upwtheid policy, its answer was to withdraw
from~that organization,

,

45, In this intransigence it has never lacked support
from the mt\iority of its white population. In the
elections held recently in South Africa, on 24 April
this .year,--elections in which only whites voted
~~ because non-whites have no right to vote-the
racist ,r&ime’s Prime Minister, Vorster, was returned
with e, greater majority than before; he polled more
votes than any other candidate. If that is not an
endorsement of apartheid by the white population of
South Africa, I do not know what is. Mr. Muller,
the Minister of the Interior in the racist regime, in
giving expression LO the white South African’s
obsessive fear, is said to have stated just before the
election, “I would prefer to live in a paddock npxt
to ~a fenced bull than walk with a black mamba
in my bosom”. That fear underlies the actions of
s~~ssiue~raeist~r~gimes in South-Africa
;~
46, The Sharpeville incident of 21 March 1960 has
~betn followed by other mini-Sharpevilles. ‘Available
recdrds indicate that as of June this year 38 workers
had ‘been brutally massacred by the racist r&me
during peacdful demonstrations over pay and working
conditions in the Orange Free State.
47. My delegation firmly maintains that after nearly
30 years of c&tinuous and adamant refusal by South
Africa to cqmply with the principles of the Charter
of the United Nations and resolutions of the United
Nations, any.excuse we may have had for entertaining
hopes. of a change in attitude on the part of South
-Africa should disappear, Membership in the United
Nations carries with it certain obligations which
all Member8 must accept. Membership in the
Organization; like friendship between two persons,
presumes mufual respect and a community of certain
interests. The, r6gime of South Africa has persistently
shown contempt for the Organization and has given
no indication that it is willing to allow itself to be
bound by the Organization’s fundamental principles.
In my delegation’s view, until South Africa has
revised its &licies it will continue to be a liability
rather than ap asset to the Organization. ‘Ms situation
cannot and rbould not be tolerated. As I said earlier
on in this sfatement, the time has come for this
Council to take appropriate measures, not excluding
expulsion, Against the rdgime in South Africa. The
situation in South Africa could explode to engulf the
whole of mankind. If we act now, we shall avert a
future disaster.
The PK’ESIDENT (itrtcrpretatiolt
fkm Ftwwh):
The next spdaker is the reprcsentarive’ of the United
Arab Emirates. I invite him to take a place at the
Council table and to make his statement,
48.

first of’ all to address to you the warmest

congratula-

tions of my delegntlon on the occasion of the
accession of your country, the United Republic of
Cameroon, to the presidency of the Council, I also
wish to thank you and the members of the Council
for allowing me to participate in this debate,
50. -We are very gratified to have a Security Council
meeting to discuss a problem which we consider to be
of the utmost importance, namely, a review of the
status of South Africa in the Organization. This is
an important problem because it bears directly on the
credibility and prestige .of the Organization. It is not
proper that the policy of upurtheid of the Government
of South Africa should continue at the very time when
the Organization is affirming its universality and its
determination to safeguard human rights and the right
of peoples to self-determination, nor is it proper for
a Member State to continue to be seated among us
while defying the Charter, the fundamental principles
of humall rights and the- whak of w&d JxihliC
opinion.~
51. Was not the Minister for Foreign Affairs of
Somalia, Mr. Ghalib, quite right when he said that
“South Africa’s continued presence as a Member State
makes a mockery of international law and of
international morality” [/7Y6r/t nwelirlg, pcwtc. 521’?
What is more, we believe that the policy of crpcrrtheid
of the Government of South Africa constitutes a
threat to peace and security in Africa and, accordingly,
a threat to international peace and security.
52. In this brief statement 1 do not intend to go into
the details of the disgraceful policy of ccprwrheid
which is practised by the racist Government of South
Africa: most speakers who have preceded me have
already done so. What I wish to express in this
statement is the anxiety and anguish of the people
and Government of the United Arab Emirates on
seeing this policy perpetrated, a policy which in
our opinion is a modern form of slavery. Furthermore,
this anxiety was expressed by our Minister for
Foreign Affairs in the course of his statement on
8 October last before the General Assemblya He
said:
“We are gravely concerned at the inhuman
treatment, by the Gove~m~e~~t
of South Africa. of
the indigenous population of that country,.. The
policies of trpur~//wit/ and the oppressive rule of
minority racist r&$~~es are an intolerable affront
to human dignity and ;I challe~~ge

to

world opinion.”

Our Minister for Foreign Affairs likewise informed the
General Assembly that “We
h;lVr
imposed
ii
tOhI
embargo WI the shipment of oil and arc striclly
applying this policy”.
53.
boycott

our boycott of SOUI~
of Israel btxaus~

Africa I’i ;(s IOtiII as WI
we belisvc: that the two

rkgimes are of the same colonialist and racist nature,
is it nLt true that, by occuping Palestine, I-rsel
drove an entire prople from its country and forced
it to live in wretchedness in refugee camps?
Furthermore, the complete co-operation between the
racist r$gime of South Arrica and Israel is now known
to the entire world. This co-operationextendsto every
field. -military, economicand political. The excellent
addressby the representativeof Egypt, Mr. Abdel
Meguid, on Monday last, leavesme nothing to add,
I only wish to~saythat, like him, we believe that

eliminationof all remnantsof colonialismand racism
in the world,
59. The adoption by the General Assembly of
resolution3207(XXIX), which Czechoslovakiavoted
in favour of, is a logicalconsequenceof the deplorable
position in the United Nations of the Government of
South Africa, which hasrefusedto heedinnumerable
appealsand concrete decisionstaken by t.he United
Nations urging it to fulfil, aA d Mrrrnber State of
the Organization, the fundamentalobligationsarising
from the Charter.

.- “the collaboration betlveen the racist rbgimesin
South Africa arid Israel representsa seriousthreat
to the war of liberation and to international peace
and security,” [1797th~meeting, pura, 311,

60. The whole history of South Africa’s participation
in the Organization has proved that that country
does not intend to change substantially its attitude
towards the United Nations. That is why during the
last four years an overwhelming majority of the
General Assembly has rejected the credentials of
South Africa’s delegation.In spiteof that the Government of South Africa has continued its flagrant and
shamelessviolations of the generally recognized
principles enshrinedin the Charter. During all that
time Members of the United Nations have exerted
great efforts, to convince the rkgime of South Africa
that the policy of apurtheid and racial segregation
is wrcmgand harmful.

54. I should be failing in my duty were I not to
expressthe regret of my Government at the failure
of every effort made to put an end to upurtheid
and to restore their human rights to the non-white
populationof South Africa. Failure is due, above all,
to the continuedco-operationof certain Stateswith the
Governmeat of South Africa. As we seeit, the
list of the main trading partners of Stiuth Africa
should not be consideredonly as a statistical table
but alsoas a bill of indictment againstthosecountries
and as a measureof those countries’ defiwce of the
aimsof the United Nations,
55. Allow me to say, finally, that the time has comr’
for the Security Council to take more effective
measuresto abolishthe policy of upartheid, which is
a flagrant violation of the Charter. For our part,
we believe that the Government of South Africa,
which practisesofficial racist oppression,is no longer
qualiPied~to
be.aYember of_the_Organi_zati~n~
56. I listenedmostattentiveiy to the statementmade
by the rp,i>resi;ntativeof South Africa this morning
[1800th meeting]. I regret to say that his statement
contributed nothing positive: on the contrary, all he
did was to defend thy r&Gist institutions of his
Gogernnpnt.
57. The PRESIDENT (interpretation from French):
The next speaker-isMr. Vejvoda, the Deputy Foreign
Minister of Czechoslovakia. I invite him to take a
placeat the Council table and to make his statement.
58. Mr. VEJVODA (Czech.dslovakia):First, I should
like to c.upressour appreciationof the fact. that our
delegationhasbeengiven an opportunity to participate
in the deliberationsof the Security Council on the
question of the relationship between the United
Nationsand South Africa. The CzechoslovakSocialist.
Republic fully supports the efforts of the African
.Ztatesto review this questionwith all sincerity and
responsibility in the Council. Allow me ‘; jay how
glad we are that these significant deliberationsare
being presided over by you, Mr. President, a
representativeof free Africa, which strugglesfor the
8

61. Among the mostimportantpositive achievements
of the Organizltion is, without any doubt, the fact
that from the very beginningof its existence it has
proclaimed that the I;.)licy of crpartheid and racial
discriminationconstitutes a crime againsthumanity.
This happenedas a result of the experienceof many
nations, including my own, which encountered the
Fascistpolicy of racismandinequality of peopleduring
the Second World War. From that time the actions
emanatingfrom the policy and practice of upmdeid
and from the similar policy and practice of racial
segregationand discrimination constitute crimes in
violation oC international law, becausethey clearly
contradict the aimsandpurposesof the Charter of the
United Nations. Those actions are being justly
describedas threats to international peace sincethey
incite peopleagainstpeopleand so create dangerous
fituatioqs that could lead to uprisingsand wars.
62. Every year the United Nations, in the interest
of e?iminatingthis threat, hasto deal with the policy
of the present regime of South Africa, which has
promotedupwtheid andracial segregationto the level
of a State philosi:hy, thereby causinguntold suffering
td millions of Africans and tens of thousandsof other
peoplewho are different from the so-called‘*governing
race” only becauseof a difference in the shadeof
their skin.
63. This morning [ibid. 1, the representative of the
South African Republic tried to find excusesfor his
Government’s position. In substance,however, he
did not say anything about the intentions of his
Government to fulfil its obligations vis&vis the

Charter,
readines

64. 1t
nearly 2
ignoring
in Artlcl
to promc
freedom,
language
Governn
that it in
in the ac
interest
and thal
of our til
proved t

65, Set
the term
Namibia
African I
rkgime 1
decision,
the Unitt
it hastra
segregat
createsI
means0
In so d
systemat
taken by
purposes
of I-ndep

66. The
towards
favourab
Africa tc
and irrec
and to rj
policy 0
South A
internatic
manner
of the r
we are v
South Al
of South1

67. The
to slrenl
the bzffc
ii consec
Territoric
ticula! ‘y
militaOy 1
Khodesia
natiort;d
proved,
fighting
irreversil

Charter, as a Member State or, above all, about its
readiness to put an end to its policy of qmtlwid.
64, It remains an indisputable fact that fol
nearly 29 years the r8gimeof South Africa hasbeen
ignoring the appealsof the international community
in Article 1, paragraph3, of the Charter with regard
to promotingdndencouragingrespectfor fundamental
freedomsfor all wl,.:~r t distinction as to race, sex,
language,or leligion. For 29 years the Sou!h African
Government has had ample opportunity to prove
that it intendsto participate in a constructive mannel
in the activities of the internationalcommunity in the
interest of strengtheningworld peace and security,
and that it is willing to keep pace wiih the spirit
of our times. However, the South African regimehas
proved the very contrary of this.
65. Security Councilresolution269(1969)confirmed
the terminationof the Mandate of South Africa bver
Namibia and called for the withdrawa! of South
African troopsfrom that Territory, The South African
rkgime has stubbornly refused to ccmply with that
decision. In spite of an emphatic condemnationby
the United Nationsandby broadworld public opinion,
it hastransplantedthe practice of uparrhrid and racial
segregationto the Territory of Namibia, where it
createsbuffer zones and, in so doing, usesextreme
meansof terror against the indigenouspopulation.
In so doing the present r&ime of South Africa
systematically and actively opposesevery decision
taken by the United Nations to achievethe aimsand
purposesset by the Declaration on the Granting
of Independenceto ColonialCountriesand Peoples.
66. The fundamental change in Portugal’s policy
towardsAfrican Territories *hascre.lted a particularly
favourable opportunity for the Government of South
Africa too to embark upon the historically inevitable
and irreversible path of the processof decolonization
and to remove the evil reprecentedby the inhuman
policy of racial segregation. IZS is the only path
South Africa can choose to emergefrom its deep
international isolation and to contribute in a fruitful
manner to the solving of other burning problems
of the present world. On the contrary, however,
we are witnessingan ever closer co-operation of the
South African rdgimewith the minority racist regime
of SouthernRhodesia.
07. Those rCgimes spareno effort hastily to attempt
to slrengthen. with the assistance
of their
allies,
the

buffer
zone that has suffered
a strong
blow
as
a consequence
of the positive
developments
in the
Territories
under
Portuguese administration, particuk’y
in
iV zambique.
South
African
paramilita,y police operatealongthe border, assistingthe
Rhodesian
security
forces
in the struggle
against
the
natiotlnl
liberation
movement.
As history
has already
proved,
there
is no force
which
can stop a people
fighting
for its national
liberation.
It is that
very
irreversibie
fact that the rigimes
of Pretoria
and

Salisbury are afraid of. This close co-operation of
the racist ldgimes flagrantly violates the sanctions
against the Smith regime imposedby the Security
Council under resolution253(1968),with which South
Africa asa Member of the Organizationmustcomply.
68. From the aforementioned,it is clear enoughthat
the present rr5gimeof South Africa continues to
ignore not only United Nations calls for its abandonmentof the policy of upatvheid but also all substantive
decisionstaken by the United Nations in its struggle
againstcolonialism. The South African Government
hampersall stepstaken by the United Nations aimed
at the liquidation of the colonial rt5gimein every
corner of the world, Numerous examples of this
attitude of the South African Government have been
cited by the representativeswho have precededme in
this debate.
69. The negative attitude of the regime of South
Africa towards the United Nations is, however,
becomingmore and more apparent each year also
in all the other fields of the Organization’s activities.
For instance,we may recall the position taken lately
by South Africa on such important initiatives as
General Assembly resolution 2936 (XXVII), entitled
“Non-use nf force in international relations and
permanentprohibition of the useof nuclearweapons”
-only four States, including South Africa, voted
againstit-or resolution 3185 (XXVIII), adopted by
the Assembly on the questionof “Implementation of
the Declarationon the Strengtheningof International
Security”, where one of the ‘two negative votes
was cast by South Africa. Let me mention these
facts only. Everybody who knows the records of the
United Nations well can add many more.
70. Permit me briefly to ponder another aspect
which we regard, in the context of the matter under
discussion, as being important, South Africa is
connectedby thousandsof varied links with someof
the former colonial metropolitan countries, which
provide it with every assistance.In this connexion,
I should like to quote the words of the Minister for
Foreign Affairs of the United Republic of Tanzania,
Mr. Malecela, who said the following in the general
debate of the present session of the General
Assembly:
“Arguments that economicinvestmentsin South
Africa by foreign companies bring anything
other
Afkan

than

increased
misery
to the majority
of the
people
are
wholly fallacious. Such

argumentationis definitely mear:t as a campaign
to mislead the world.
The fact
is that,
as the
economy of South Africa hasexpanded, so has the
misery
of the non-white population
in
that
country.“”

71. Todab, as we speak about the policy pursued
by South Africa, we cannot fail to mention the vast
-__-

finan
of th
Thes
econ
ii%
soutl
that I
Afric
of s
brou,

72, On the grounds I have stated, the Czechoslovak
Socialist Republic fully supports the opinion of the
African States that the time has come for the United
Nations to draw, resolutely and within the possibilities
*provided by the Charter, the necessary conclusions
from the approach by the Government of South
Africa to the obligations resulting from its membership
in the Organization,

financial, trade, economic, military and other contacts
of the Sputh African regime with its Western allies,
These Powers, in the interest of their strategic and
economic aims in the region of the Cape of Good
Hope, are de facto helping South Africa to remain
as the last bastion of colonialism and racism in the
southern part of the African continent, a bastion
that constitutes a permanent danger to the independent
African States, That is why, together with the regime
of South Africa, its generous allies are also being
brought to shame today,

10

Litho in United Nations, New York

__I~
00300

74.82001-May

~__
1983-2,200
