S/2004/331

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
29 April 2004
Original: English

Letter dated 23 April 2004 from the Secretary-General addressed
to the President of the Security Council
The United Nations Tajikistan Office of Peace-building (UNTOP) was
established on 1 June 2000 with the support of the Security Council following the
withdrawal of the United Nations Mission of Observers in Tajikistan. In view of the
important and positive role being played by UNTOP, I decided last May to extend
the mandate of the Office for an additional period of one year until 1 June 2004 and
informed members of the Security Council accordingly.
The Office continues to make an important contribution to addressing the
challenges of the country’s post-conflict transition. It provides the political
framework and leadership for the peace-building activities of the United Nations
system in Tajikistan and works to create and strengthen the political conditions for
the irreversibility of the peace process. Accordingly, UNTOP encourages the
continuation of national dialogue and reconciliation, facilitates the strengthening of
democratic institutions and conflict-prevention mechanisms, promotes the rule of
law and contributes to building national capacity in the area of human rights.
In support of dialogue and national reconciliation, during the past year UNTOP
conducted 11 sessions of the Political Discussion Club on political pluralism,
democratization, and consolidation of peace in Tajikistan. Over 1,300 officials from
the central Government and local administrations, leaders of political parties and
representatives of civil society participated in sessions in all provinces of the
country. As a result of the Club’s catalytic effect, new forms of partnership between
the State and civil society have emerged and conditions have improved for the freer
functioning of political parties. For the first time, representatives of political parties,
including those in opposition, participated in central and district-level election
commissions during the June 2003 constitutional referendum. Besides promoting
political tolerance and dialogue, which has a healing effect on post-conflict
communities, Club meetings produced concrete recommendations for Parliament on
changes to the laws on local governance and parliamentary elections. The Club also
contributed to the improvement of the accountability and transparency of local
Government, allowing citizens to voice their concerns with officials, and the
promotion of social partnership between the State and civil society.
The Office has continued to maintain close contact with the parties to the 1997
General Agreement on the Establishment of Peace and National Accord in Tajikistan
in order to support the spirit of political compromise, facilitate dialogue and
strengthen the still-fragile trust in Tajik society.

04-33192 (E) 290404

*0433192*

S/2004/331

In October 2003, UNTOP initiated a series of training seminars for State
officials, political party functionaries and community leaders on conflict prevention
and resolution. Focusing on strategies for resolving potentially explosive local
issues, the seminars trained 90 participants and contributed to advancing the culture
of political dialogue and debate in the country. Similar issues were addressed by
UNTOP-organized seminars for media representatives and press secretaries of key
government agencies.
With a view to promoting the rule of law in the country, the Office supported
the development of national capacities of law enforcement agencies, seeking to
accelerate their reform, combat corruption, and increase professionalism. The
Office’s civil police adviser worked closely with the Ministry of Interior to facilitate
transition to peacetime policing in the country. UNTOP projects were aimed at
expansion of forensics training and technical assistance as well as training on human
rights standards for law enforcement officials. The Office organized round-table
discussions on the draft “law on militia”, which led to the introduction of provisions
compatible with relevant international legal norms. UNTOP has also continued its
support for the social integration of ex-combatants.
In the context of support to national capacity-building in the area of human
rights, UNTOP implemented projects on treaty reporting and human rights
education. The treaty reporting process has proved to be an important tool for
implementing the country’s international obligations in the field of human rights
through improving national legislation and policies. The UNTOP human rights
education project, which provided training to some 200 schoolteachers, has been an
important instrument in building a culture of respect for human rights, tolerance and
skills in conflict prevention. Mass media campaigns and the activities of the
UNTOP-sponsored human rights information and documentation centre in the
capital city raised awareness of human rights issues in the broader population as
well. The Office continued to monitor closely human rights developments in the
country and successfully intervened with the authorities in politically sensitive
cases. Through its human rights thematic group, UNTOP facilitated coordination of
the human rights activities of the United Nations country team, donors and
international organizations.
During the past year the Office pursued project activities aimed at engaging
youth at risk of involvement in drug trafficking and political extremism. Through
cooperation with local non-governmental organizations, a resource centre was
established in Dushanbe along with four centres for education in conflict prevention
and human rights in those regions of the country where armed conflict had occurred.
The viability of the peace process in Tajikistan and the strength of its
democratic institutions will be tested by parliamentary elections in early 2005. Upon
the request of the Tajik Government, in April 2004 UNTOP facilitated a needs
assessment mission led by the Electoral Assistance Division of the Department of
Political Affairs. The assistance to be provided to Tajikistan aims at contributing to
the improvement of the transparency and credibility of the 2005 parliamentary
elections and at promoting democratization within the framework of the peacebuilding process. The holding of free and non-violent general elections in 2005
would be an important goal for UNTOP and an indicator of the achievement of its
objectives.

2

S/2004/331

In view of the important and very positive role being played by the Office, as
well as the country’s continuing need for support in its post-conflict peace-building
efforts, and at the suggestion of the Government of Tajikistan, it is my intention to
continue the activities of UNTOP for a further period of one year until 1 June 2005.
I should be grateful if you would bring this letter to the attention of the
members of the Security Council.
(Signed) Kofi A. Annan

3
