UNITED NATIONS

FFICIAL

REC

THIRTY-FIFTH

YEAR

th

MEETING:

5 JANUARY

1980

NEW YORK

CONTENTS
Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/2186) . . . . . . . . , , , . , . . . . . . , . . . . . . . , , . . . . . . . .

1

Adoption of the agenda . . . . . . . . , . , . . , . . . . . . . . . . , . , , . . . . . , . . . . . , . . . , . . . .

1

Letter dated 3 January 1980 addressed to the President of the Security Council
by the representatives of Australia, the Bahamas, Bahrain, Bangladesh,
Belgium, Canada, Chile, China, Colombia, Costa Rica, Denmark, the
Dominican Republic, Ecuador, Egypt, El Salvador, Fiji, Germany, Federal
Republic of, Greece, Haiti, Honduras, Iceland, Indonesia, Italy, Japan,
Liberia, Luxembourg, Malaysia, the Netherlands, New Zealand, Norway,
Oman, Pakistan, Panama, Papua New Guinea, the Philippines, Portugal,
Saint Lucia, Samoa, Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Singapore, Somalia, Spain,
Suriname, Sweden, Thailand, Turkey, Uganda, the United Kingdom
Great Britain and Northern Ireland, the United States of America, Urugua
and Venezuela (S/13724 and Add.1 and 2) , . , . . , , , . . . , . . . . . . .

SlPV.2186

NOTE

Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined with figures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United
Nations document.
Documents of the Security Council (symbol S/ . . .) are normally published in
quarterly S~cpple~~~e~~rs of the Ojj%ia/ Record.~ c~f rhe Security Council. The date
of the document indicates the supplement in which it appears or in which information about it is given.
The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a
system adopted in 19G4, are published in yearly volumes of Re.so/utio~~s and
Dccisiorzs
of tlzc Sccwriry Coul?cil. The new system, which has been applied
retroactively to resolutions adopted before 1 January 1965, became fully operative
on that date.

2186th MEETING
Held in New York on Saturday, 5 January
Psesidenr: Mr. Jacques LEPRETTE

1. The PRESIDENT
(intespserufion jh77
French):
In accordance with the decision taken by the Council
at its 2185th meeting, I invite the representatives of
Afghanistan, Australia, Bulgaria, Canada, Colombia,
Democratic
Kampuchea,
Egypt, Japan, Malaysia,
New Zealand, Pakistan, Poland, Saudi Arabia and
Singapore to take the places reserved for them at the
side of the Council chamber.

(France).

Pscsent: The representatives of the following States:
Bangladesh, China, France, German Democratic
Republic, Jamaica, Mexico, Niger, Norway, Philippines, Portugal, Tunisia, Union of Soviet Socialist
Republics, United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland, United States of America, Zambia.
Provisional
1. Adoption
2.

1980, at 5 p.m.

agenda (S/Agenda/2186)

of the agenda

Letter dated 3 January 1980 addressed to the
President of the Security Council by the representatives of Australia, the Bahamas, Bahrain,
Bangladesh,
Belgium,
Canada, Chile, China,
Colombia, Costa Rica, Denmark, the Dominican
Republic,
Ecuador, Egypt, El Salvador, Fiji,
Germany, Federal Republic of, Greece, Haiti,
Honduras,
Iceland,
Indonesia,
Italy,
Japan,
Liberia,
Luxembourg,
Malaysia,
the Netherlands, New Zealand, Norway, Oman, Pakistan,
Panama, Papua New Guinea, the Philippines,
Portugal, Saint Lucia, Samoa, Saudi Arabia,
Senegal, Singapore, Somalia, Spain, Suriname,
Sweden, Thailand, Turkey, Uganda, the United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland,
the United States of America, Uruguay and
Venezuela (S/13724 and Add.1 and 2)

2. The PRESIDENT
(intel.p~Ptrrti~~t7
fi'ot77
Fsench):
I wish to inform the members of the Council that
I have received letters from the representatives of
Costa Rica, Liberia, Mongolia and Somalia in which
they request to be invited to participate in the discussion. In accordance with the usual practice, I propose, with the consent of the Council, to invite those
representatives
to participate
in the discussion,
without the right to vote, in conformity with the
relevant provisions of the Charter and rule 37 of the
provisional rules of procedure.

Adoption of the agenda

Letter dated 3 January 1980 addressed to the President
of the Security Council by the representatives of
Australia,
the Bahamas, Bahrain,
Bangladesh,
Belgium, Canada, Chile, China, Colombia, Costa
Rica, Denmark, the Dominican Republic, Ecuador,
Egypt, El Salvador, Fiji, Germany, Federal Republic
of, Greece, Haiti, Honduras, Iceland, Indonesia,
Italy, Japan, Liberia,
Luxembourg,
Malaysia,
the Netherlands, New Zealand, Norway, Oman,
Pakistan, Panama, Papua New Guinea, the Philippines, Portugal, Saint Lucia, Samoa, Saudi Arabia,
Senegal, Singapore, Somalia, Spain, Suriname,
Sweden, Thailand,
Turkey, Uganda, the United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland,
the United States of America,
Uruguay and
Venezuela (S/13724 and Add.1 and 2)

3. Mr. TROYANOVSKY
(Union of Soviet Socialist
Republics) (irrtespsetcrtion Ji-om Russirrn): The Soviet
delegation, as it has already had occasion to state, is
in principle against having the Security Council discuss the so-called question of the situation in Afghanistan, since we regard such a discussion as an attempt
to carry out direct and completely unwarranted intervention in the internal affairs of Afghanistan,
a
sovereign State Member of the United Nations.
4. However, since it has been decided to initiate
this discussion, despite the clearly expressed position
set forth by the Government of Afghanistan, we deem
it necessary to utilize it in order to reveal the actual
1

intentions of those who have initiated
of today’s meeting.

the convening

5. The victory of the National Democratic Revolution in Afghanistan in April 1978 offered the Afghan
people broad and favourable prospects for the implementation offundamental socio-economic and political
reforms in that country in order to restructure their
society on genuinely democratic and progressive
bases. At the same time, that historic event struck a
powerful blow against the feudal and reactionary
forces ,in Afghanistan and affected the interests of
world imperialism.
6. Breaking off with the old and creating the new is
always a, difficult and complex process, particularly
ifi a country Iike Afghanistan, which, until quite
recently, was one of the most backward States in
central Asia. However, these objective difficulties
which arose because of the age-old domination
of
feudalism in the country greatly increased when the
resistance mounted against the progressive course of
internal reaction was compounded
by active and
growing intervention
from abroad, when outside
imperialist forces and internal counter-revolutionary
circles entered into a plot to put down the young
Republic and to restore the positions which they had
iost. It is no secret to anyone that &mediately
after
the April 1978 revolution in Afghanistan, the United
States and certain other Western Powers, and also the
Chinese leadership, used various sophisticated means
to intervene in the internal affairs of Afghanistan by
fomenting internal counter-revolution
by placing theil
agents there and by training and arming subversive
groups and units and supplying them with various
ways and means of waging war against the armed
forces of the country.
7. Another fact is noteworthy: when we talk about
the Africans who have taken up weapons in order to
struggle for their freedom and independence, or when
we speak about the Palestinians who are waging a
struggle in order to liberate the lands occupied by
Israel, the representatives of the United States and
other Western Powers spare no words, including those
uttered here in the Security Council, to declare how
inadmissible
it is to use force. But when bands of
insurgents rise up against a legitimate Government
which is pursuing a progressive policy, as is in fact
taking place in Afghanistan, then the Western Powers
take them under their wing and do everything
to
justify the use of force. Moreover, they supply them
with weapons,and even try, with the assistance of the
.United Nations, to legalize their activities.
8. The Western press has publicly stated that the
territory of Pakistan not far from the Afghan border
was used in order to set up centres for the training of
thousands of guerrillas, who were then thrown into the
territory of Afghanistan in order to carry out subversive activities against the Government of that country. Those diversionary groups then proceeded to

settle in and re-form their ranks after carrying out
bandit-like
raids against Afghan populated areas and
other localities. One such centre, for example,. was
directly mentioned
in Tile Wmhir7gfon
Po,rf , in its
2 February 1979 edition, in an article captioned:
“Guerrillas trained in Pakistan to oust Afghan Government” .I The article goes on to say: “Afghan dissidents
are undergoing guerrilla training at a base near here in
a bid to intensify armed opposition to the Government
In referring to the statements by the
in Kabul.“*
insurgents the article says that they: “are being trained
at a former Pakistani military base north of here”.“’
9. A former major in the Afghan army who was
involved in training the insurgents said, in an interview
given to the press which is also quoted in that article
in The Wcrshington Post: “We are training them to be
familiar
with all the weapons, and in guerrilla
warfare.“”
10. In the same newspaper, on 16 July 1979, it was
indicated that the counter-revolutionaries:
“apparently
obtained their arms in the tribal area, either on the
black market or from one of the many Pakistani
factories specializing in copying the weapons of other
nations”.”
11. Referring
to the support for the counterrevolutionary
forces from outside, Joseph Harsch
wrote in The Christinr~ Science Monitor of 9 August
has received the backing of
1979 that: “Pakistan
China and the United States. The Afghan rebels have
been trained and armed inside Pakistan, and no
reprisals made by Moscow.“*
12. Those statements-and
many more could be
quoted-show
quite clearly the direct participation
in
the training, arming and supplying of Afghan counterrevolutionaries
by those employed by the American
secret services, as well as by Chinese specialists in
so-called guerrilla operations. As a rule, whenever
the insurgents’ leaders are visited by their patrons,
there has been considerable stepping up of the activities of the counter-revolutionary
forces in Afghanistan
itself.
13. Thus the uprising in Herat in March last year, to
which the Afghan reactionaries, the United States
and China attached particular significance, occurred
immediately
after one of the leaders of the Afghan
counter-revolutionaries
had been received by the
Department
of State of the United States. It is also
known that the leaders of the counter-revolutionary
Afghan groups have also frequently met in London.
14. Such overt interference by external forces in the
internal affairs of Afghanistan did not seem to disturb
any of those who have initiated the present series of
meetings of the Security Council, nor did they regard
it as any violation
of the principles of international
* Quoted in English by the speaker.

co-operation,
although the purposes of such subversive activities were abundantly clear, that is, to
prevent the process of progressive reforms in Afghanistan, restore the r$gime that had been overthrown
and bring about the creation in the country of new
military bastions situated very close to the borders of
the Soviet Union to replace previous ones that had
been lost as a result of the revolution in Iran.
15. During 1978 and 1979, overt interference from
outside in the internal affairs of Afghanistan increased
continually and constant armed attacks and incursions
created serious danger for the young Republic. In this
connection,
the Government
of the Democratic
Republic of Afghanistan frequently turned to the
Soviet Union and asked it for, support, including the
rendering of .military assistance. The Soviet Union
believed that the imperialist forces would, when they
became convinced of the irreversibility of the changes
that were occurring in Afghanistan, face up to the
real facts and not go beyond a certain limit in their
relations with lhat State. At the same time, the
Government of the Soviet Union warned that it would
not allow Afghanistan to be turned into a beach-head
for preparations of imperialist aggression against the
Soviet Union.
16. The President of the Presidium of the Supreme
Soviet of the Soviet Union, Mr. Brezhnev, stated on
11 June 1979:
“The situation in Asia is not improved by the
constant covert and overt attempts to interfere in
the internal affairs of Afghanistan. We rigourously
condemn the subversive activities
undertaken
against the Afghan revolution and we shall not
leave our friend, the Afghan people, in need.”
17. However, those who are hostile to the Democratic Republic of Afghanistan have not ceased their
armed struggle against it. Imperialist intervention has
taken on even broader and more dangerous forms and
dimensions for the Afghan people. In the present
circumstances, the Afghan Government once again
appealed urgently to the Soviet Union to render
immediate assistance and aid in its struggle against
external aggression. The Soviet Union responded
positively to that request, taking into account the
common interests of both countries in questions of
security, as enshrined in the Treaty of Friendship,
Good Neighbourliness
and Co-operation between the
Union of Soviet Socialist Republics and the Democratic Republic of Afghanistan,* and also in an attempt
to preserve peace and stability in that part of the world.
In article 4 of the Treaty, it is stated that:
“The High Contracting Parties, acting in the
spirit of the traditions of friendship and goodneighbourliness, and in the spirit of the Charter of
the United Nations, shall consult with each other
and shall, by agreement, take the necessary steps
to ensure the security, independence and territorial
integrity of the two countries.

“In the interests of strengthening their defensive
capacity, the High Contracting Parties shall continue to develop their co-operation in the military
field.”
18. Supporting and developing such co-operation
falls squarely, under the purview of bilateral agreements concluded between Afghanistan and the Soviet
Union, and no one is entitled to interfere in these
matters. In this connection, limited military contingents were sent to Afghanistan in order to fulfil
those tasks, consisting exclusively in giving them
assistance in repulsing armed intervention
from
outside.
19. The Soviet Union has not set itself any other
task. It has not intended, nor does it intend, to
intervene in matters relating to the State and social
structures of Afghanistan and its domestic and foreign
policies. The statement to the effect that the Soviet
Union is somehow an accomplice in the internal affairs
of that country is fiction and slander from beginning
to end. The request of the Afghan leadership and the
positive response given by the Soviet Union are in
accordance with the provisions of the Charter of the
United Nations to the effect that States enjoy an
inalienable right to individual
and collective selfdefence in order to repulse aggression and also to
restore peace.
20. The Soviet Government has at the same time
clearly and unambiguously stated that, after the causes
which motivated this request made by Afghanistan
to the Soviet Union-the
request which led to the
Soviet action-have
been removed, the Soviet Union
intends fully to withdraw its military contingents from
the territory of the Democratic Republic of Afghanistan. It should be emphasized that allegations that
the presence of Soviet troops in Afghanistan is creating
a threat to the security of other States, and also the
fact that the forum of the United Nations has been
used in order to inflate this contrived issue, are simply
aimed at distracting the attention of international
public opinion from the real facts relating to foreign
interference in the internal affairs of Afghanistan and
at giving assistance to internal and external counterrevolutionary forces.
21. Soviet assistance to and support of Afghanistan
are not aimed at any of its neighbouring countries,
which are also neighbours of the Soviet Union. The
Soviet delegation would like to emphasize clearly that
the Soviet Union is concerned with maintaining
normal friendly relations with them based on the
principles
of equality, mutual respect and nonintervention in internal affairs. We are also convinced
that the peoples of the developing countries and of
the Moslem States will correctly understand the
policy of the Soviet Union, which has always been on
the side of those peoples struggling for their national
liberation and identity, and will not be misled by
attempts to denigrate the nature of our relations with

has refused to demolish its military bases on the island
of Diego Garcia, and in fact has taken steps to expand
and moderuize them. As far as the Persian Gulf is
concerned, the United States quite recently, as the
Council knows, has been concentrating a whole armada
of its naval forces-two multi-purpose aircraft carriers,
two cruisers, three destroyers and other military
vessels.

Afghanistan and slanderously attribute to our country
intentions it does not have-namely,
to invade the
internal life of that country and to intervene in the
national and religious way of life it has chosen for
itself.
22. When it took the decision to render assistance
to Afghanistan-assistance
which was requested-the
Soviet Union took a step fully in keeping with the
traditions underlying the many years of friendship
existing between the peoples of the two countries.
Since it was created in 1917, the Soviet State has
constantly upheld the struggle of the Afghan people
for independence and sovereignty and has given it
comprehensive
assistance and support, including
assistance to help it to repel external aggression.
There have always existed good and friendly rela.tions between the Soviet Union and Afghanistan, and
the boundary between our countries has always been
a boundary of good neighbourliness and co-operation.

27. In order to carry out its police functions in
the Near and Middle East, the United States is now
creating special units which are called “rapid deployment force”.
28. The leaders of the United States are using any
pretext in order to turn the development of international events from detente to tension. Quite recently,
there was a campaign raised about the so-called
Soviet brigade in Cuba. Everyone recalls the inglorious
end of this fiction, which was invented by Washington
and which simply turned out to be a. soap bubble.
Immediately
thereafter, an attempt was made to heat
up the international
atmosphere in connection with the
problem of refugees in South-East Asia. What has
happened to that question now? Or to the question
of food assistance to Kampuchea? We all remember
the agitation raised at the time by the Western Powers,
but now they even refuse to fulfil the obligations which
they took upon themselves in connection with such
assistance. All this has simply served the purpose of
satisfying the interests of those who have laid a wager
on a deterioration
of the international situation and an
increase in the arms race. Now the same circles have
seized on the so-called Afghanistan question in order
to justify, in the eyes of world public opinion, the
attempts which have been made to prevent the Treaty
between the United States of America and the Union
of Soviet Socialist Republics on the Limitation
of
Strategic Offensive Arms (SALT II)’ from coming into
force and to justify a further increase in military
budgets and the initiation of new military preparations.

23. The Soviet Union welcomed the April revolution
in Afghanistan, and, at the request of the Government of the newly formed Democratic Republic of
Afghanistan, gave it unselfish assistance in order to
help it to establish itself, to be strengthened and to
develop. The relationships
of friendship and cooperation between the two countries were legally
enshrined in the Treaty of Friendship, Good Neighbourliness and Co-operation of 5 December 1978.’
24. Those who today have expressed their discontent
with the state of relations existing between Afghanistan and the Soviet Union-and
this is not difficult
to understand-are
doing this because they have seen
that it is impossible for them to pursue their own
designs, which are to undermine the revolution
in
Afghanistan. They would like to shake the foundations of the democratic structure of Afghanistan and
destabihze the situation in that country, creating in it
a state of chaos and disorder. Now, thanks to the
steps which have been taken by the Afghan leadership,
these anti-people plans have been definitely repulsed.

29. The imperialism
of Western Powers is met
halfway by the Beijing hegemonists, who continue to
hatch plans of expansion at the expense of their neighbouring States. The defeat in Viet Nam did not teach
the Chinese leadership any sense. They continue to
foster tension on the Chinese-Vietnamese
border.
Now hardly anyone can be surprised at the hypocrisy
of what has been stated by Beijing.

25. It is typical that the so-called Afghan question
has been artificially encouraged by those circles which
most constantly intervene in the internal affairs of
Afghanistan and other States. Now this matter is
being used by them as a pretext to camouflage the
genuine and actual American military threat which
hangs over Iran and its revolution, in order to distract
attention from the attempts of imperialist forces in
the United States to play the part of a world policeman
in the Middle East, in Latin America, in Asia and in
Africa. Recently, this has taken a very overt form-for
example, the increased American military presence in
the Indian Ocean basin, and particularly
near the
Persian Gulf.

30. Jn its recent statement, the Chinese Government
tried to depict itself as a “friend” of the Afghan people
and as a staunch supporter of peace. But if we refer
to the facts, the picture seems quite different. In the
last two decades, China has either openly or covertly
resorted to military adventures against practically all
its neighbouring
countries. It has provoked conflicts
and it has sowed discord among peoples. It is UpOfl
the conscience of the Chinese leaders that the blood
of millions
of Kampucheans
was shed, and that
Kampucheans
were tortured and perished in the dark

26. The United States, despite the fact that frequent
protests have been voiced and demands have been
made by a number of States in the Indian Ocean basin,
4

years of the Maoist experiment carried out by the
Pol Pot regime on Kampuchean soil. The Maoists
need the false tirades about “Soviet aggression” in
order to justify their policy of militarizing China and
their considerable
military expenditure
inside the
country, in order to mask’ the hegemonistic essence
of Beijing’s foreign policy doctrines.

35. In the last week of December 1979, in defiance
Of world opinion and after meticulous planning and
Preparations,
the Soviet Government
dispatched
several divisions of regular troops of its army and air
force for a massive, flagrant military invasion of a nonaligned sovereign State, Afghanistan, by means of
surprise attack. At present, the invading Soviet forces
are continuing to enter the territory of Afghanistan ia
a steady flow,
blatantly ravaging its soil and brutally
repressing the large number of Afghan people and
armed forces who are firmly resisting Soviet aggression. The undisguised Soviet armed aggression and
intervention against Afghanistan has not only grossly
encroached upon the sovereignty and independence
of Afghanistan but also openly trampled upon the
Charter of the United Nations and the norms guiding
international
relations, thus posing an extremely
Serious
threat to peace and security in Asia and the
whole world. The Soviet armed aggression and intervention also constitute a brazen provocation against
People all over the world. It has evoked the utmost
indignation
and stern condemnation
from various
countries and from world opinion. On 30 December
1979, the Chinese Government
issued a statement
vigorously condemning the hegemonist action of the
Soviet Union and firmly demanding the immediate
cessation of this aggression and intervention
in
Afghanistan and the withdrawal of all Soviet armed
forces.

31. One further fact should be pointed out. Among
the countries which support the United States in its
attempts artificially
to ,inflate the question of the
presence of Soviet troops in Afghanistan are 17 States
on wh,>se territories American troops are located.
One may wonder why the Governments of those countries regard this as a completely normal situation.
When, however, another State, in this particular
case Afghanistan,
invites the troops of a friendly
country to render it assistance, then they consider
that this is illegal and they regard it as a threat to
international
peace. It seems to us that those
developing countries which have found themselves
involved in the present campaigns surrounding the
so-called Afghan question might give some thought
about whose hands they are playing into when they
object to assistance being rendered to the Government
of such a developing country.
32. In conclusion, the Soviet delegation would once
again like to declare that it categorically rejects any
attempts to make use of the Security Council in order
to interfere in the internal affairs of a sovereign country, namely Afghanistan, and an area covered by
bilateral Soviet-Afghan relations.

36. The Soviet military
aggression and intervention against Afghanistan is a most serious development
and a grave step taken by the Soviet Union in furtherance of hegemonism. In quest of world hegemony,
the Soviet Union, apart from stepping up its frontal
military deployment in Europe in recent years, has
accelerated its “southward drive”, sparing no effort
to extend its tentacles of military aggression to the
south in an attempt to reach the Indian Ocean, control
the sea lanes for oil transportation,
seize oil-producing
areas, outflank Europe, -pose a direct menace to
southern Asia and thus dominate the world. Almost
on the same day, in December a year ago, the Soviet
Union instigated the Vietnamese authorities to launch
a large-scale armed aggression against Democratic
Kampuchea
in an attempt to control the whole of
South-Fast Asia, At present, when the Vietnamese
authorities are further expanding their aggression in
Kampuchea with Soviet backing, the Soviet Union
has wantonly initiated its armed aggression against
Afghanistan.
Obviously,
both are important
cornponents of the Soviet global strategy for world
domination.

33. The Soviet Union also strenuously condemns
the attempts of the American politicians and Beijing
leaders artificially
to create the so-called Afghan
problem in order to use this as camouflage, in order
to turn the clock of world affairs back to the time of
the cold war when hostility was rampant among
peoples, and military hysteria prevailed. For its part,
the Soviet Union intends firmly to pursue its unwavering policy of peaceful coexistence and world
detente. We are convinced that this policy, responsive
as it is to the vital interests of all peoples, will make
its way through all barriers which have been created
by those who oppose it and, in the final analysis, Will
triumph.
34. Mr. CHEN Chu (China) (trwnsk~tion from Chinese): ‘Mr. President, first of all, on behalf of the
Chinese delegation, I would like to express warm
congratulations
to you on your assumption of the
presidency for the month of January. At the same time,
we wish to extend a warm welcome to the representatives of the newly elected member States of the
Security Council, the German Democratic Republic,
the Niger, the Philippines and Tunisia, which are
participating in the work of the Council. The Chinese
delegation is looking forward to developing good relations of co-operation with them in the lofty cause of
maintaining world peace and security.

37.

In order to put a fig leaf over its naked acts of
the Soviet Government has the cheek to
concoct a number of clumsy pretexts, which are most
absurd and beneath refutation. The Soviet Union
claims that its aggression against Afghanistan was
undertaken in fulfilment of treaty obligations at the
request of the Afghan Government and that its action
is in keeping with the Charter of the United Nations.
aggression,

5

This is indeed a big mockery of, and provocation
against, both the Charter and common sense. Could
there be any Government in the world which would
invite another country to send troops into its own
territory to overthrow itself?
38. One may recall that a year ago, the same pretext
was invoked by the Soviet Union to incite Viet Nam’s
aggression against Kampuchea. But this monstrous
lie has long since been exploded. It has been pointed
out that the occupation of the capital of the invaded
country by foreign aggressor troops preceded the socalled invitation extended by the puppet Government
fostered by the aggressor troops. Any difference
between the Soviet instigation of the Vietnamese
invasion of Kampuchea and its current armed aggression against Afghanistan consists in the change from
using surrogates behind the scenes to openly and
directly sending its own troops for armed occupation
of a sovereign State to change its Government by
violent means.
39. What calls for serious attention is that the action
by the Soviet Union fully demonstrates its readiness
to repeat the same exercise in the future and to invade
and occupy any country it pleases by using the same
pretext and logic. The Soviet Union has been so keen
about concluding the “treaties of friendship and cooperation” simply because it wants to use them as one
of the means to achieve the aforesaid aim. Looking
back into the past, the occupation of Czechoslovakia
by Soviet troops in 1968 was also carried out by the
same logic. Now the Soviet Union has extended the
use of its notorious “theory of limited sovereignty”
from its “community of nations” to a non-aligned and
Islamic country of the third world. It is an even greater
mockery for the Soviet Union to claim that its armed
invasion of Afghanistan is for the purpose of “repelling
external threat”. In fact, is it not the Soviet Union
itself that has no scruples in interfering in the internal
affairs of Afghanistan by the most brutal means? IS it
not the large number of Soviet regular troops who
have marched into Afghan territory and massacred
Afghan people that constitutes the external aggression
and threat against Afghanistan and its neighbouring
countries?
40. At the thirty-fourth session of the General Assembly, the Soviet Union made a big show of proposing
the inadmissibility of hegemonism in international
relations. However, scarcely had the ink on the
General Assembly resolution against hegemonism
[~solution 34/103] dried when the Soviet Union,
shedding all disguise, launched a naked military aggression, enabling the people to see more clearly that the
self-styled “natural ally” of the third world is, in fact
the most vicious enemy of the third world and ali
peoples.
41. In the short span of the past year, the series of
grave events that have occurred have fully revealed
the extreme insanity and recklessness of the policies

of aggression
and expansion pursucrl by the Soviet
Union, which has been shown to be the biggest
aggressor
and hegemonist of our time LHld which is in
essence not different from the Hitlcrites hefore the
Second World W:W. Its heh:lviotIr ciinnot but elicit
,-Jeep
thought
on the part of i1II Ct~lllltlkS
:lrlli
people
who truly love peace and uphold justice: what attitude
should one take ~~i.s-&i’i.s the reid threat pWed by
intensified

Soviet

i~ggreSSi011

LlIld

CX[~~~llSi0ll

ill1

Over

the world’? If the Soviet Union were condoned and
allowed to have its way, then who would he its next
victim? If the Soviet Union wt’rl: allowed to succeed,
be
its appetite for aggression i\IIJ expansion w~uI~
whetted, and what would be left of international peace
and security? Obviously, IW l~opl~ which huve won
their national
independcrrce
through
protracted,
valiant struggle and which cherish the sovereignty
and security of their countries would ever tolerate
the wanton aggression by Soviet hcgemonism
and
willingly see their countries lose their hi\rd-won independence and sovereignty itnd reduced to being the
vassal and colony of ii Super-Power.
42. There is only one way out: unity is strength.
That is to say, all countries i\nd peoples
subjected
to direct or indirect threats of Soviet aggression and
expansion should unite and tuke pr:lctic:tl actions to
wage an unremitting struggle ;kgainst Soviet hegemonism and firmly oppose ilnll frustrate its aggression
and expansion so as to make u positive contribution
to the maintenance of world peace and the preservation of the independence and sovclreignty of all
peoples.
43. The Security Council must den1 in all seriousness with the Soviet acts of frenzied aggression. The
Chinese delegation holds that the Security Council
should not only condemn the Soviet military aggression and intervention
against Afghilnistitn
in the
strongest terms but should unequivocally cull upon the
Soviet authorities to ceuse immediutely
their aggression and intervention and firmly dcnliind the immediate withdrawal of all Soviet arrnctl forces from
Afghanistan. The Council should also enjoin the
Soviet authorities to put an end to their policies of
aggression and expansion in various p:lrts of the world,
and call upon all Governments and peoples to take all
effective measures to oppose categorically
and
frustrate the acts of aggression and expansion of the
Soviet authorities.
44. As we are entering the 198Os, the people of the
world are confronted with the stark reality of intensified Soviet aggression and expansion in one area
after another in the world. This is an omen that the
international
situation in the 1980s will be more
turbulent than that in the 1970s and that the 1980s
will be a decade of fierce struggle between the forces
of Peace and war, aggression and anti-aggression,
justice and evil. The people of the world are faced
with the common struggle and lofty duty to combat
hegemonism and defend world peace. We are fully

policy of hegemonism in international
relations”.
Hegemonism, we were told, means striving for world
domination, for domination over other countries and
peoples. And that is why we are here today.

convinced that despite the fact that hegemonism may
be temporarily on the rampage, the will of the people
of the world is, after all, the perpetual and decisive
factor. All aggressors in history who were formidable
for a time could not escape the shameful end of being
burnt by the fire which they themselves had lit. It
is the people of all countries, and not the handful of
hegemonists, who will finally decide the destiny of
mankind. The Chinese Government and people will
spare no effort to join all peace-loving and justiceupholding countries and peoples in unremitting struggle
to combat and frustrate the hegemonist policies of
aggression and expansion. and to safeguard world
peace.

49, Over the years we, the British, have detected a
feeling amongst eastern European delegations that
my delegation is less than enthusiastic about these
grandiose gestures. The fact is that my country is
disposed to judge other States by their actions rather
than by their words. We remain unimpressed by highflown rhetoric: the higher-flown the rhetoric, the
more suspicious we are of the motives that lie behind
it. And should we not be suspicious? We forget at our
peril what has been done outside this building by the
proponents of these initiatives even as they have
been disseminating unexceptionable phrases such as
“non-interference”
and “peaceful co-operation”
to
all of us here.

‘4’5). Sir Anthony PARSONS
(United Kingdom):
Mr. President, your predecessor as President of the
Security Council, my colleague from China, was
faced with a particularly heavy and complicated workload during the month of December. We are all
grateful to him for the infallible wisdom with which
he guided our proceedings, and my country for one
was delighted with the outcome of the debate on
Rhodesia.

50. The subject of today’s debate is a stark case in
point. In this year of anti-hegemonism,
under the
cloak-albeit
the P.Yposr J;Clc.lo cloak-of a treaty of
friendship and co-operation. the Soviet Union has
mounted a massive armed intervention into a neighbouring State, an Asian State, a non-aligned State, a
Slate Member of the United Nations, and, for the first
time, a State not directly within the Soviet Union’s
own sphere of influence.

46. The month of January looks to be just as busy,
and given the nature of some of the problems which
confront us, it is a particular pleasure for my delegation
to have you, as representative of a close and respected
ally, in the Chair,

51. It now seems to be universally established that
there are the best part of 50,000 Soviet troops in
Afghanistan. We are asked to believe that this is a
“limited”
military response to an appeal from a
Government of Afghanistan in accordance with the
provisions of the Treaty of Friendship, Good Neighbourliness and Co-operation signed in 1978.’ We are
all familiar with the events in Afghanistan since April
1978 when, after a brief but bloody convulsion,
Mr. Taraki emerged as the President of Afghanistan.
Some four months ago he, in turn, was overthrown in
similar circumstances by Mr. Hafizullah Amin. He,
we are given to understand, like his predecessor,
made repeated appeals for military assistance from
his northern ally in accordance yet again with the
provisions of the Treaty of Friendship. The Soviet
invasion was in response to that call-frequently
repeated, we are asked to believe. Is it not strange and
puzzling that the next development was the overthrow and death of Mr. Amin and his replacement
by Mr. Karmal, who appears to have arrived in the
country only after Soviet forces had made it safe for
him to do so? Mr. Amin, it seems, would have been
wise not to have invoked the Treaty of Friendship,
but he did not live long enough to correct that mistake.
It would take a credulous person to believe that
Mr. Karmal’s Government came to power in response
to the freely expressed wishes of the people of Afghanistan as a whole. If that is the case, why has the
military invasion been necessary? Why has the massive
Soviet military buildup continued even since the
“election”
of Mr. Karma]? Why has it been necessary

47. It would also be appropriate, on this our first
series of meetings of the new year, for me to join with
others of my colleagues in welcoming the new members of the Council, and assuring them of our desire
to work in close co-operation.
Whilst welcoming
them, I should also like to pay a word of tribute to
the departing members, whose familiar faces will be
much missed by all of us.
48. There is a feature of the landscape of the United
Nations which has become only too familiar to all
of us. That is the annual presentation to the General
Assembly by the Soviet Union of an elaborate
proposal on some subject concerning
relations
between nations. These proposals are invariably
deployed in high-sounding
and pious language,
pregnant with sentiments which are, I presume,
fashioned with the object of convincing the membership of the pacific intentions of the Soviet Union and
of its profound attachment to the purposes and principles of the Organization. In the last four years these
initiatives have included, in chronological order: a
proposition aimed at concluding a world treaty on the
non-use of force in international
relations; a draft
declaration concerning the deepening and consolidation of international
dCtente and prevention of the
danger of nuclear war; a proposal that the Committee
on Disarmament
consider appropriate international
arrangements for the strengthening of the security of
non-nuclear-weapon
States; and, this year, a particularly curious item entitled “Inadmissibility
of the
7

to choose their own leadership and to determine their
own future. I urge the Soviet Union to stick by the
principles stated only three months ago in the General
Assembly by the Soviet Foreign Minister, Mr. Gromyko,” namely that the Soviet Union, in its approach
to all continents and countries, does not apply different
yardsticks when it comes to the sovereignty of States,
the freedom of peoples and genuine human rights.
Mr. Gromyko told us then, and rightly, that one cannot
hold aloft the Charter of the United Nations in one
situation and hide it under the table in another.

to dispatch Soviet troops to all parts of Afghanistan
to quell a rebellious people? The facts as they appear
to the world justify to my Government the view that
the Soviet Union has ruthlessly acted with military
force against a small and defenceless neighbour. The
talk of a response to other outside intervention,
including the statement we have just heard from the
representative
of the Soviet union,
strains our
credulity well beyond breaking point. And then we are
told that we, the Security Council, should not be
discussing
the situation in Afghanistan.
Such discussion, we are told, constitutes an unwarranted
interference
in the internal affairs of Afghanistan.
How many foreign-assisted colrps must there be in
Afghanistan
before we, the international community,
are allowed the privilege of even suggesting that all
might not be well there and that events in that country
have wider repercussions? What price these treaties of
friendship and co-operation? The growing awareness
that Moscow abides only by those treaty provisions
which suit its ends has already resulted in two countries revoking such agreements with the Soviet Union.

55. In conclusion, I say this. We live in a dangerous
world, riven by conflicts of view, divergent interests,
deep-seated disputes and widely differing political
systems. It is not a world which can or will be
controlled by the threat or use of force by Powers
great or small. That way lies destruction, death and
human misery. Our only hope is to resolve our
differences peacefully, to subordinate naked national
interest to the wider imperatives of peace and security
amongst nations and peoples. We must abide by the
precepts of the Charter, of which the Security Council
is the ultimate guardian. The Council must express
itself in this grave crisis which we are considering
today. It must do so in plain language, clearly and
without equivocation. Only if the Soviet Union is ready
to right the wrong which it has committed can all of
us feel a sense of confidence and renewed security.
The Soviet Union is a great Power and great Powers
should suffer no complexes or inhibitions
when it
comes to the reversal of actions which are unacceptable
to the international
community.

52, The Soviet invasion of Afghanistan is a direct
and flagrant violation not only of the mass of resolutions brought by the Soviet Union to the General
Assembly, but also of the more sober and compelling
language of the Charter of the United Nations, to
which all of us subscribe. As I said earlier, representatives of the Soviet Union lose no opportunity
in this and other places to remind us of their devotion
to the principles
of non-intervention,
respect for
sovereignty,
non-use of force and non-aggression.
I would ask them to reread, and reread closely,
Chapter I of the Charter that binds us’all.

(itzterprrtcrtion f,otn French):
56. The PRESIDENT
The next speaker is the representative of Colombia.
I invite him to take a place at the Council table and to
make his statement.

53. It is no wonder that the actions of the Soviet
Union in Afghanistan
have created ever-widening
ripples of deep concern throughout the world. Those
feelings must clearly be held most strongly in those
countries neighbouring
Afghanistan and the Soviet
Union. Condemnations
from China, Pakistan and
Iran have been forthright. Many other countries in the
region, incIuding several outside the long list of today’s
petitioners to the Council, have denounced the Soviet
invasion. They must perceive that if the Soviet Union,
without an internationally
acceptable pretext, can
march into a neighbouring country, they themselves
are in danger. It is tempting to speculate about what
concept of its national interests has motivated
the
Soviet Union to act as it has. Students of history
will recall, not without irony, the aims of nineteenth
century Tsarist Russia and the fate of the then independent States of central Asia,

57. Mr.
L&VAN0
(Colombia)
(interpretntiotr
fionl Spntrish): I am pleased that on this occasion the
representative
of France has the honour of being
President of the Security Council. His intellectual
and human qualities, his long diplomatic experience
and great knowledge of the United Nations guarantee
that the Council will enjoy impartial and effective
guidance.

58. I should like also to thank all the members of the
Council for this opportunity to speak to this important
United Nations organ on the subject that is at present
before us. I plan to make a very brief statement.
59. No sooner had the international community,
the
peoples of the third world and the developing nations
begun to believe that the time had passed when
imperialism
would send in its soldiers and tanks to run
over smaller countries and take control of defenceless
peoples militarily,
economically
and monetarily,
than suddenly the same international community found
itself, as during the past few days, confronted with tbc
resurgence of the worst abuses of the powerful against

54. The present situation, in the view of my de]egation, undoubtedly
constitutes a threat to international peace and security, and as such it is entirely
appropriate
that the Security Council should be in
urgent session. The Soviet Union must withdraw its
invading troops from Afghanistan and allow the people
of that beleaguered country democratically and freely
8

the weak. Armed divisions, equipped with the most
modern instruments
of destruction,
invaded the
territory of a small country; the governmental
authorities in power were brutally eliminated and the
defenceless inhabitants
overrun by the lightning
offensive of the invaders’ tanks. How many victims
have resulted from this armed onslaught*? What kind
of treatment is being meted out to the people who live
in the zones occupied by the military forces of a
foreign nation? How do the people of Afghanistan
feel about the satellite authorities forced on them by
the invaders? It is hard to find out very much about
the situation because a new iron curtain has fallen
over the victim of aggression which hides from view
the ordeal of the people who are completely subject to the arbitrary will of those now in command of
the occupying forces.

international community-and
it is an act of aggression which has thus far gone unpunished-it
will surely
spread to other States in the region and open the
door to colonial adventurism, lhreatening once again
the independence and sovereignly of small nations.
63. My country wishes to express solidarity with the
people of Afghanistan, a people which has fought
heroically against all forms of barbarism; a people
which is heir to and bearer of values of a very old
culture-a
culture proudly shared by their blood
brothers and those who share their religious beliefs.
It is our fervent hope that the men and women of
Afghanistan will keep their political, economic and
monetary independence and emerge free from Jhe test
to which they have been put today by the cr8ss
materialism which leads those who profess it to the
arrogant abuse of power.

60. Those developments bear eloquent testimony to
the fact that this is a case of flagrant violation of the
principles of the Charter of the United Nations and
the standards which should govern the proper conduct
of nations in international. life; in addition, they have
also had the effect of dashing the hopes-only
temporarily, we trust-of people all over the world that their
rights and sovereignty will be respected by the major
Powers.

64, The PRESIDENT
(i,zterp,‘c’ttrtio,l .fbon? Frerzch):
The next speaker is the representative of Bulgaria,
whom I invite to take a place at the Council table and
to make his statement.
65.

Mr. YANKOV
(Bulgaria) (intc,prrtlrtio~I
jw~~
Sir, may I first express to you my sincerest
congratulations on your assumption of the presidency
of the Security Council. I am particularly pleased to
be able, through you, to congratulate your country,
France, with which the People’s Republic of Bulgaria
entertains relations which are constantly broadening,
to the mutual advantage of both our peoples.

Fwnch):

61. My country has always upheld the principles of
the legal equality of States and of non-intervention,
and we can hardly remain silent in the face of the
tragedy unfolding at the present time in that small
country; nor can we fail to express in the Council
the deep concern that we feel at this &ii cmm~pli
in Afghanistan. We wish to join our voice of protest
as a developing country with others against this
attempt-which
is unwarranted in 1980-to replace
the rules of civilized international conduct and the
principles of the Charter of the United Nations by this
lightning strike by armoured divisions. The peoples of
the third world, the non-aligned countries, the Arab
and Moslem nations, the Palestinians and the countries recently freed from colonialism and qxwtheiti
are alarmed at the potentially serious consequences
of this effort to go back to the time when the barefaced use of force was condoned and regarded as
legitimate practice in international life.

66. May I also take this opportunity to extend oul
congratulations and best wishes to the newly elected
non-permanent
members of the Security Council,
although it is to be regretted that the Council is now
meeting with a membership which is not in accordance
with the relevant rules laid down in the Charter.

67. I should like at the outset to put on record my
Government’s strong disagreement with the attempts
to involve the Security Council in a matter which falls
within the domestic jurisdiction of a State Member of
the United Nations. As we see it, there is no justification whatsoever to compel the Council to embark on
a debate of the internal situation of a Member State
over the categorical objections of its legitimate Government, communicated to the United Nations. We fully
share the views on this matter expressed by the
Minister
for Foreign Affairs of the Democratic
Republic of Afghanistan, Mr. Shah Mohammad Dost

62. The United Nations,
and in particular the
Security Council, would be ill-advised to sit idly by
while once again the world is ominously threatened
by an attempt to replace the rule of law with aggressive actions of tanks and expose the freedom and
independence of defenceless peoples to the savage
onslaught of new and old forms of imperialism. That
would be a return to the law of the jungle in this
nuclear age, and the least that is expected from the
supreme international Organization is that it deal-and
deal seriously-with
the tragic plight of the people of
Afghanistan, whose land has been trampled underfoot
these past few days. Because, if this act of aggression does not meet with a suitable response from the

[2/85th meeting].

68. Attempts to involve the United Nations in a
consideration of the internal situation of Afghanistan
and its relations with a friendly country are in contradiction with the provisions of the Charter and the
very basic principles on which the Organization
functions. I shall limit myself to explicitly emphasizing
9

that, according to the provisions
graph 7, of the Charter:

of Article

2, para-

“Nothing
contained in [it] shall authorize the
United Nations to intervene in matters which are
essentially within the domestic jurisdiction
of any
State or shall require the Members to submit such
matters to settlement under the present Charter.”
69. Experience has shown that whenever the United
Nations has been involved in similar interference the
results have invariably been negative, not only in
regard to the Organization’s
prestige, but also in
regard to the very problems themselves. Indeed, these
are difficult times for the Afghan nation, and we
listened with great attention to the statement made
this morning by the Foreign Minister of the Democratic Republic of Afghanistan.
But it is up to the
Government
of Afghanistan to take the necessary
measures to solve the problems which that country is
facing. And it is the Afghanistan Government’s
right
to defend the sovereignty, independence
and territorial integrity of the country through individual
or
collective actions.

3314 (Xxix),
adopted by the General Assembly on
14 December 1974. Those continuous armed incursions have acquired dimensions which have violently
disturbed normal life in the country, endangering its
independence and territorial integrity.
74. That is the background of events leading to the
current situation in which the Afghan Government,
in the face of increasing undermining and destabilization, has had to appeal repeatedly to a friendly
neighbouring
country to offer its political, economic
and military assistance in order to repel the armed
attacks and provocations
on its territory, instigated
and perpetrated from outside.
75. The Government
of Afghanistan
has thus
exercized a legitimate
right inherent in its sovereign
power .-a right that is recognized by international
law and enshrined in the Charter of the United Nations.
Moreover, the legal foundations of this appeal were
laid in the Treaty of Friendship, Good Neighbourliness
and Co-operation signed on 5 December 1978.’
76. They ha,ve acted in the spirit and under the
explicit provisions of that Treaty. In the interest of
reinforcing
its defence capabilities,
the Afghan
Government
had to appeal for help-political,
economic and military. Who can deny a sovereign State
and its legitimate Government in a situation of distress
the right: to rely on and to ask for help from its
friends on the basis of a bilateral Treaty in force? Some
other cases involving
such an appeal are legitimized
as a so-called right of reasonable expectation. But a
call for assistance from the Afghan Government and its
acceptance are now being qualified as an invasion.
I think that there is no need for more evidence to
substantiate such hypocrisy and double standard.

70. What is it that has led to the latest events in
Afghanistan? As is well known, in April 1978 a popular
revolution took place in Afghanistan-a
revolution
which set in motion far-reaching political,
social,
economic and cultural transformations.
It is a fact of
political life that sweeping changes of such a nature
may kindle both domestic and foreign reactions. In
this case, the deep revolutionary
changes which have
taken place in Afghanistan and which have been aimed
at the elimination
of feudal backwardness and the
political and social injustice forced upon the people
of that country-the
workers and peasant masses in
particular-have
not met with the approval of some
outside quarters which are interested in the preservation of the old order and the turning of Afghanistan
into another hotbed of tension in Asia.

77. Now that the Security Council has been asked
to consider the situation in Afghanistan, a legitimate
question comes to the fore. Where were those who
now so dramatically
raise their voices against actions
taken in legitimate self-defence by the Afghan Government to protect its sovereignty and territorial integrity
against systematic
encroachments
from outside,
perpetrated by forces hostile to the new rCgime in
Afghanistan, when the situation in that country was
deteriorating
daily under those massive attacks?

71. Subsequently, for nearly two years, Afghanistan has been subjected
to systematic
actions
fomenting social strife, and to armed incursions
instigated and supported by the reactionary
and
imperialist forces. The aim of these provocations has
been to destabilize the country by all means. Resort
has also been had to armed provocations and incitement to insurrection.

78. There are well-known imperialist forces, reactionary and hegemonistic circles which are interested
in stepping up the confrontation with the new regime
in Afghanistan. They have undertaken intensive measures to beef up the military posture of those who allow
their territory to be used as a starting-point for incursions into Afghanistan.
Now it is being openly
declared that there are no more constraints to proceeding with the large-scale supply of weapons to
rebel groups fighting inside Afghanistan.

72. It is well established that a neighbour of Afghanistan has allowed its territory along its border to be’
pIaced at the disposal of anti-Government
groups that
were trained, supplied with weaponry and sent back
into Afghan territory to perpetrate systematic undermining of the Afghan revolution, and thus to become a
springboard for aggression against Afghanistan.
73. Such actions constitute in themselves acts of
aggression, as defined in article 3 of the Definition
of
Aggression, contained in the annex to resolution

79. What all this means is that certain imperialist,
reactionary and hegemonistic circles and those who
10

help them are deliberately taking a course to escalate
tensions in that area, a course fraught with dangers
for peace and security. That is the danger to peace
and security.
80. It should be recognized that the current situation
would not have been created had the enemies of the
Afghan revolution not resorted to systematic encroachments on the sovereignty and independence of that
country. However, they have misjudged the readiness
of Afghanistan’s true friends to come to its rescue
at such a crucial moment for the country’s destiny.
81. Today Afghanistan has become the target of a
well-orchestrated campaign to undermine the achievements of the April 1978 revolution and to unleash
slanderous attacks against the countries which express
their solidarity with Afghanistan and lend their
assistance to repel acts of aggression. Is it not appalling
that this is taking place at a time when the Government has come out with a constructive programme
through which, as clearly stated by the President of
the Revolutionary
Council and Prime Minister of
Afghanistan, Babrak Karmal, on 30 December 1979,
and reiterated today by the Minister for Foreign
Affairs, Mr. Shah Mohammad Dost [ihid.], the new
democratic Government considers as its own national
historic mission the strengthening and fostering of the
progressive social and political foundations of the
Democratic
Republic
of Afghanistan-that
great
achievement of the April revolution-leading
to the
final victory of the democratic anti-feudal and antiimperialist revolution?
82. This constructive programme provides for the
implementation
of a series of democratic reforms,
including respect for civil and political liberties,
freedom of conscience, faith and religious observance,
respect for the inviolability
of citizens and theil
property, freedom to set up political, public and labour
organizations and the right to work and to education.
It is also a blueprint for the reconstruction of the
national economy for the benefit of the working
people and the Afghan people as a whole and the
establishment
of democratic
institutions
in the
country.

atmosphere not only are damaging to the prestige of the
Organization
but may also contribute to inflaming
further the already volatile situation in that area.
85. The Government of the People’s Republic of
Bulgaria has traditionally had friendly relations with
the people of Afghanistan. At this crucial moment for
the Afghan nation and its future, the Bulgarian people
express their total solidarity with the genuine efforts
being exerted by the Revolutionary
Government to
secure a democratic future for its country and for
peace and secul;ity. My Government
resolutely
opposes any attempt to embroil the United Nations,
and the Security Council in particular, in moves
prolonging the difficult situation in Afghanistan.
86. I should like to conclude by quoting from the
message addressed by the Central Committee of the
Bulgarian Communist Party to the People’s Democratic Party of Afghanistan on 1 January 1980:
“The Bulgarian people reiterate their firm conviction that the relations of friendship, fruitful cooperation and solidarity will be further strengthened
for the benefit of our two nations and in the interests
of democracy and socialism and international
peace and security.”
87. I wish here to assure the representatives of the
Democratic Republic of Afghanistan that we stand
firmly by their noble endeavours.
88. The PRESIDENT
(itrte,pl,ctation jk)n~ French):
The next speaker is the representative of Democratic
Kampuchea. I invite him to take a place at the Council
table and to make his statement.
89. Mr. THIOUNN
PRASITH (Democratic Kampuchea) (i/lterpretc~tion jj.0117 Frr~rt~h): Before making
my statement, I would like to make one comment.
If the representatives of the expansionists had the
courage and the honesty to leave Afghanistan and
Kampuchea as hastily as they have just left the dock
here, the new decade would be off to a much better
start.

83. In these days of trial and enormous efforts for
normalization,
the people of Afghanistan need peace
and stability in order to carry out their programme
for national reconstruction
and the setting up of
conditions propitious to the democratic development
of the country. In our view, the proper role of the
United Nations is to assist the people of Afghanistan
in their endeavours and not to become a party to a
hostile campaign orchestrated by those who would
like to divert the attention of the world from a crisis
they are facing in the same area and justify new
measures in the arms race and a return to the course
of the cold war.

90. Mr. President, I should like first of all to thank
you for authorizing me to speak on the vital problem
at present before the Council. I should like also to
address to you our warm, sincere congratulations on
your assumption of the presidency of the Security
Council for this month. It is fortunate that the Council, in this first month of the year, which it would
appear will be filled with increasingly serious threats
to international peace and security, has a man of your
remarkable
intelligence
and your long experience
presiding over its difficult proceedings. We are convinced that your wisdom and your recognized talent
will be an important contribution
towards enabling
the Council to fulfil successfully the task of maintaining international peace and security.

84. The attempts made through this campaign to
involve the United Nations in a return to the cold-war
11

96, The second pretext advanced by Soviet international expansionists is that the purpose of the Soviet
forces of invasion invited into Afghanistan is to help
the “Afghan Government ” to combat the “activities
of the reactionaries and imperialists”.
1 invite the
Council to remember that exactly a year ago, in this
very Council, the Vietnamese regional expansionists
sought
to justify their invasion of Kampuchea
by
saying
that there was a need to foil the “activities
of the reactionaries and imperialists
who were
threatening the security of Viet Nam”. The fact of the
matter is that at the present time the only foreign
troops in Afghanistan are the more than 50,000 Soviet
soldiers who are occupying and devastating the
country, massacring the Afghan people, threatening
the peace and stability of neighbouring countries, of
the Middle East and the South Asian subcontinent,
and world peace; in Kampuchea there are more than
220,000 Vietnamese soldiers who are continuing to
devastate the country, perpetrating their crimes of
genocide after having already massacred more than
2 million Kampucheans by the use of weapons, famine
and toxic chemical products, and threatening the
security and stability of neighbouring countries, of the
region of South-East Asia, and world peace.

91, AS this new year 1980 begins, ushering in a new
decade, it is now, more than ever before, necessary
to express, for all peoples and countries, for all
mankind, our sincerest wishes for peace, justice and
prosperity.
92. The problem at present before the Security COUncil is, in its manifestation and in its essence, similar
to the problem which it had before it almost exactly
a year ago, when, on 25 December 1978, the regional
expansionists in Hanoi had sent on their mission of
aggression and invasion into Kampuchea more than
120,000 Clite troops, supported by a large number of
Soviet heavy artillery and tanks, and assisted by
several thousand Soviet and Cuban advisers and
experts.
93. The fact is that after three days of intense
preparations on 24, 25 and 26 December 1979, when
200 Soviet planes unloaded 5,000 soldiers and more
than 300 armoured cars and tanks at the airport of
Kabul, bringing the Soviet military strength to a
division, the Soviet Union overthrew the Government
of Afghanistan on 27 December in a bloody colq,
and invaded Afghanistan by land. This is another case
of Soviet military intervention, flagrantly violating the
territoriaf integrity of Afghanistan, stamping out its
independence and sovereignty, brazenly trampling
underfoot the Charter of the United Nations, the
principles of non-alignment and the laws which
govern international relations.

97. Just as the puppet of the Vietnamese, Heng
Samrin, was brought into Phnom Penh in Vietnamese
tanks, the new Soviet puppet was brought into Kabul
in Russian tanks a week after the Soviet invasion.
98. In spite of these irrefutable facts, we actually
heard the Soviet representative and his colleagues
preach in the Council the same kind of sermon. They
state that this is a purely internal affair of Afghanistan
and a bilateral issue between the Soviet Union and
Afghanistan. Nearly a year ago to the day, in this same
chamber, the Council heard the representative of the
Soviet Union and his colleagues, and the representative of the Vietnamese
regional expansionists,
brazenly assert that the Vietnamese invasion of
Kampuchea was an internal affair of Kampuchea; and
subsequently,
as the presence of Vietnamese
troops could no longer be concealed, they claimed
that it was a bilateral affair between the Vietnamese
aggressors and their puppets. The same expansionists
who today say there is no “Afghanistan
problem”
last year said there was no “Kampuchean
problem”.

94. The pretexts put forward by Soviet international
expansionism to justify their evil deeds are the same
ones put forward by Vietnamese regional expansionism
when it committed aggression against and invaded
Kampuchea.
95. The first pretext put forward is that the Soviet
troops invaded Afghanistan at the invitation of the
Government in Kabul under a “treaty of friendship,
good neighbourliness and co-operation”. That excuse
is a particularly flimsy one inasmuch as the Soviet
troops had invaded the country, overthrown the Amin
Government and murdered Amin even before the new
Government had been set up, and while the new
“Prime Minister” was still being sheltered in the
Soviet Union. These irrefutable facts are reminiscent
of the invasion of Kampuchea on 25 December 1978
by more than 120,000 Vietnamese troops, on the
pretext that they had been invited by a so-called
Front for National Salvation, created three weeks
earlier by Vietnamese expansionists, on Vietnamese
territory, because it suited them, and then had been
invited by a so-called Government set up two months
after the invasion of Kampuchea under the terms
of a “treaty of friendship and co-operation”, signed
also two months after the invasion. Civilized people
who respect the laws which govern international
relations regard such arguments as a kind of gangster
logic.

99. If I have ventured to draw this parallel between,
on the one hand, the aggression and invasion by
Vietnamese troops against my country, Kampuchea,
and, on the other hand, the aggression and invasion
by Soviet troops against Afghanistan, it is to emphasize two points.
100. The first point is that the invasion of Afghanistan and the invasion of Kampuchea are part of the
same Strakgic
plan: to wit, world domination
by
inkrna~iOnal
hegemonism, and regional dominatidn by
Vk~~a~eSe
hegemonism. Putting Kampuchea in the
“Indo-Chinese federation” under Vietnamese control
12

I
1
il
v
d
V
S

il
s
e
e
C
I
t
‘

i
t
t
I
,
I,
I

104, Nevertheless,
history never repeats itself
exactly. The global and regional expansionists must
deal with the staunch resistance of the peoples of the
world, and in particular the peoples of Kampuchea
and Afghanistan, which are determined to defend their
freedom, independence and national identities and to
live in honour and national dignity. In the end there
can be no doubt that all these global and regional
expansionists will be swept away by the struggling
peoples of the world.

has always been the strategic dream of Vietnamese
regional hegemonism; just as gaining control of SouthEast Asia, South Asia, and the oil-producing Middle
East with its strategic lines of communication
linking
Asia to Europe and Africa has always been the
strategic dream of the Soviet international
expansionists.
101. The second point I should like to make is this.
To implement their strategic plans, the regional and
international
hegemonists
and expansionists
have
with unprecedented cunning been using the art of
distorting the truth. Lies, calumny, sophistry-all
wrapped up in unmatched cynicism with progressive
slogans-have
become their code of conduct in their
international relations. They pay lip-service to peace,
security and international
dCtente, all the while
engaging in aggression, annexation, expansionism and
genocide, Worse, they accuse their victims of the very
crimes they themselves have committed.
It should
now be clear to everyone that the major Power that
took the initiative of placing before the thirty-fourth
session of the General Assembly the question of the
inadmissibility
of the policy of hegemony in international relations, the self-styled “natural ally” of the
non-aligned countries, is precisely the Power that has
for the past year been spending $3 million a day to
help Vietnamese regional hegemonism annex nonaligned Kampuchea
and massacre Kampuchean
people. It is the self-same Power that has been spending
$8 million a day in Cuba, to help spread its regional
hegemonistic
tentacles throughout
Latin America
and Africa. It is the same Power that is now directly
conducting a hegemonistic war against non-aligned
Afghanistan and with napalm and missiles killing
Afghan people who are fighting for their independence
and the fundamental right to choose the kind of society
in which they wish to live with honour and national
dignity.

105. In order to help the peoples in theirjust struggle
and to alleviate their suffering and maintain international peace and security, it is undeniable that the
United Nations, and in particular its supreme body
the Security Council, has an obligation to condemn the
Soviet aggression and invasion in Afghanistan, to
demand its immediate cessation and the withdrawal
of all invading forces from Afghanistan to allow the
people of Afghanistan to determine their own future
without any foreign interference. This should be done
in just the same way that, on 14 November 1979,
the General Assembly adopted resolution 34/22
demanding an end to the Vietnamese aggression against
and invasion of Kampuchea and the withdrawal of all
armed Vietnamese forces from Kampuchea, laying
stress on the right of the people of Kampuchea to
determine their own future without any foreign interference. Aggression must not be allowed to pay; it
must not be encouraged. On 25 December 1978, it
was Vietnamese
aggression against Kampuchea.
Exactly a year later it is Soviet aggression against
Afghanistan. If the international community and its
world Organization fail in their efforts to combat and
deter these acts of aggression and these invasions,
then it will be the law of the jungle in international
relations, and that will be a threat to the existence of
all countries and peoples great and small.
106. It is in that spirit that my delegation wishes to
express its sincere hope that the United Nations and all
the countries that cherish independence, peace and
justice, having learned from the bitter experience of
the League of Nations and the Munich accords,
will join forces and spare mankind a third world
conflagration and see to it that the new decade is one
of peace, security and progress.

102. The 1970s saw nearly all the peoples and countries of the world that had been dominated regain their
freedom, independence,
sovereignty and territorial
integrity after long and bitter struggles for national
liberation. But those years also saw the emergence of
a new world-wide peril: expansionism or global hegemonism, which, by hypocritical manceuvring, and
especially through the use of brute force, has been
striving to destroy the fruits of this national liberation
struggle and to place the newly liberated peoples and
countries under a new form of servitude that is if
anything even more perilous than the earlier form.

107. The PRESIDENT
(inferpwtrrtion
jbonl Fverzc/t):
The next speaker is the representative of Saudi Arabia.
I invite him to take a place at the Council table and
to make his statement.

103. Recent events relating to the aggression against
and the invasion of Kampuchea by the Vietnamese
expansionists and the aggression against and the
invasion of Afghanistan by the Soviet international
expansionists are in many ways reminiscent of the
events, that led to the Second World War-namely,
the invasion and annexation of the territories of
Czechoslovakia and Poland by Hitler’s hordes. The
1980s have dawned with dark clouds hanging over
world peace and security.

108. Mr. ALLAGANY
(Saudi Arabia): Mr. President, I thank you and the other members of the Council for allowing me to participate in these proceedings.
On behalf of my Government I wish to extend to you
warm congratulations
on your
assumption of the
presidency of the Security Council for the current
month.
109. The Government
of the Kingdom of Saudi
Arabia joined the many countries that, in the lettet
_.
13

addressed to the President of the Security Council
dated 3 January 1980, requested an urgent meeting of
the Security Council to consider the situation in
Afghanistan ,and its implications
for international
peace and security. It did so because of its deep
concern regarding the grave developments that have
taken place and continue to take place in a sister
country in clear violation of the Charter of the United
Nations, the Declaration on Principles of International
Law concerning Friendly Relations and Co-operation
among States in accordance with the Charter of the
United Nations, adopted by the General Assembly
in resolution 2625 (XXV) on the occasion of the twentyfifth anniversary of the United Nations, the Declaration on the Strengthening
of International
Security,
contained in Assembly resolution 2734 (XXV), resoJution 31/92, on the implementation
of the Declaration on the Strengthening
of International
Security,
resolution 32/153, on non-interference
in the internal
affairs of States, resolution
34/1,01, I on the same
subject, and resolution 34/103, on the inadmissibility
of the policy of hegemonism in international relations.

113. The duty of observing the rule of law must be
sacred to all countries, of whatever size or system
of government. That is most basic for the preservation
of the United Nations and the elimination of armed
conflicts among nations. When the United Nations
was established, the big Powers conceived of themselves as the guardians of world peace and security
and gave themselves a more important role in the
Security Council by installing themselves as permanent
members and by arrogating to themselves the veto
power. It is therefore incumbent on us to remind those
big Powers that they bear a heavier responsibility
towards the world community to protect and preserve
the rule of law in international
relations and avoid
any action which might endanger world peace and
security. It is also necessary for the big Powers to
avoid the temptation of using their war machinery
directly or indirectly to impose their will on other
countries, to interfere in the right of self-determination
by the peoples of those countries or to coerce any of
those countries into adhering to certain principles
or ideologies.

110. The basic principIes’underIying
all those declarations and resolutions can be summarized to include
the following:
the sovereign equality of all States;
the principle that States shall in their international
relations refrain from the threat or use of force against
the territorial
integrity or political independence of
any State; the duty not to intervene in matters within
the domestic jurisdiction
of any State; the principle of
equal rights and self-determination
of peoples free of
outside coercion; rejection of any acts seeking to
establish zones of influence and domination; rejection
of any form of domination,
subjugation, interference
or intervention
and all forms of pressure, whether
political, ideological,
economic, military or cultural,
in international
relations; and resoIute condemnation
of policies of pressure and the use or threat of use
of force, direct or indirect aggression, occupation,
interference and intervention,
overt or covert, in the
internal affairs of States.

114. According to all the reports received concerning
the events in Afghanistan, large contingents of troops
of the Soviet Union have invaded the country with
heavy armaments and considerable fire-power in order
to subdue opposition to an existing Government and to
install another authority subservient to the Soviet
Union. Those Soviet troops continue to be deployed
in order to quell all resistance to the authority which
was installed against the will of the Moslem Afghan
people, in whom alone lies the right to self-determination,
free from any outside interference. My
Government considers this military action on the part
of the Soviet Union to be a brazen, heavy-handed and
totally unjustified interference in the internal affairs
of a sovereign independent
State, which involves a
grave threat to the peace and security of the country,
the region and the world at large.
115. My Government, and indeed the whole Moslem
world, cannot but condemn that invasion in the
strongest possible terms, and we request the Security
Council to take such measures as may be deemed
appropriate in order to ensure the immediate withdrawal of foreign troops from Afghanistan, and to leave
to the people of Afghanistan the right freely to choose
their own Government
in accordance with the principles of the Charter of the United Nations.

111. Those and other principles have been fully
endorsed and reiterated
in regional conferences,
including the meetings of the Organization of the
Islamic Conference and the conferences of the nonaligned movement.
112. My Government wishes to make its position on
this issue quite clear. In condemning the latest developments in Afghanistan,
we are not taking sides on
political ideologies or in power confhcts. Our view is
based entirely and exclusively on the principles of the
Charter of the United Nations and the necessity of
ensuring the freedom of countries in the choice of their
Governments,
free from coercion or outside interference. We are also deeply concerned to see any
Power, especially any of the big Powers, resorting to
pressure and coercing another country in the exercise
of its right to choose its own Government, thereby
violating the provisions of the Charter and all the
principles of international
law.

116. The PRESIDENT
(interp,‘etation~onz
French):
The next speaker is the representative of Poland.
I invite him to take a place at the Council table and to
make a statement.
117. Mr. JAROSZEK
(Poland): Mr. President, in
thanking the Security Council for affording my delegation the opportunity of speaking on the subject under
consideration,
I also wish-in
the good tradition of
Polish-French
relations-to
express my delegation’s
hope that your able and experienced presidency of
14

the Security Council will contribute to the effective,
and indeed objective, exercise of both its functions
and its powers.

Article 4 of the Treaty, already quoted in the debate
[see para. 17, N/~OVL1) makes it abundantly clear that its
parties shall take, in consultation with each other,
appropriate measures to ensure their mutual security,
independence and territorial integrity. It is not without
dismay that we have noted among the sponsors of the
motion to conirene the Council a number of countries
which, for many years and not temporarily,
under
the terms of their own agreements with other States,
have had foreign troops on their respective territories. But after all, double standards and political
convenience are unfortunately not new to the premises
of the United Nations.

118. It is on exceptional occasions that the Polish
delegation requests to be heard in the Council. We are
doing so today in the face of a most disquieting
situation, whereby this principal organ of the Organization has entered into an open conflict with on’e of
the cornerstone provisions of Article 2 of the Charter
of the United Nations. Article 2, paragraph 7, reads:
“Nothing
contained in the present Charter shall
authorize the United Nations to intervene in matters
which are essentially within the domestic jurisdiction
of any State...”
1
f
S

l3
IS

:h
21
to

et
:d
zh
an
StAY
art

nd
.irs
; a
l-Y,

cm
the
rity
ned
ithnve
lose
brh

t, in
1egaunder
>n of
.i on’s
zy of

121. Last but not least, Afghanistan’s request for
limited Soviet military assistance has come within its
exercise of the sovereign right of every State to judge
a situation covered by article 3, point (K) of the
Definition
of Aggression, as annexed to General
Assembly resolution 33 14 (XXIX).

By having decided to inscribe on its agenda the subject
of the situation in Afghanistan, the Council failed to
live up to the Charter requirement of non-intervention.
A number of speakers before me have given ample
argumentation to that effect. It has also been most
convincingly reaffirmed in the position of the Government of the Democratic
Republic of Afghanistan,
notably in its statement of 31 December 1979 and the
telegram addressed to the President of the Security
Council from Afghanistan’s
Minister for Foreign
Affairs, Shah Mohammad Dost [S/13725].

122. The present debate is politically
wrong and
counter-productive
because its sponsors chose to
address themselves to the effects instead of proceeding
to the causes of the situation; thus they would want the
Council to undertake an unfriendly action vis-ir-vis
a non-aligned country which, like many other States,
in order to overcome it? age-old backwardness, had
entered the road of progressive transformations.
It
should be borne in mind, however, that it was precisely
the hostile actions against Afghanistan,
steadily
increasing
military
incursions from the outside,
mounting provocations and attempts at destabilizing
the internal situation that forced the Government of
the Democratic Republic of Afghanistan to address
repeated requests to the Government of the USSR
for its general assistance, including military aid, as
based on their mutual Treaty of 5 December 1978.

119. In the view of the Government
of Poland,
consideration
by the Council of the situation in
Afghanistan, as seen by the sponsors of the motion
contained in document S/13724 and Add.1 and -2,
is legally unfounded, politically
wrong and counterproductive as well as ineffective on its merits. It is
legally unfounded because it is in violation of at least
three important principles of the Charter. First, it is in
clear contravention
of Article 2, paragraph 7, constituting as it does an inadmissible intervention in the
domestic affairs of a State. Secondly, the circumstances which led to the convening of the Council
constituted a total disregard of Article 51 of the
Charter, which vests every State Member of the
Organization with “the inherent right of individual or
collective self-defence”. Thirdly, it undermines the
letter and spirit of Article 24, which stipulates, inter
~lia, that, in carrying out its duties, the Security
Council acts on behalf of Members of the United
Nations. My delegation is not in a position to subscribe
to such a role of the Council in the case before us.
We are glad to note that our approach coincides fully
with that of the party directly concerned: the Government of the Democratic Republic of Afghanistan,

123. But, in addition to the internal aspects of the
situation in Afghanistan and the present debate in the
Council, there is yet another dimension to the circumstances surrounding the matter. For some time now we
have been witnessing collusion in world affairs by the
most reactionary quarters of imperialism and hegemonism, which resort to all available methods, both
overt and covert, to destabilize the situation in
different parts of the globe, ‘spread tensions on which
they actually thrive, impede processes of dCtente and
seek spheres of influence, including new sites fol
military bases to be used against all the progressive
forces, not necessarily of socialist orientation. Their
attitude towards Afghanistan following the April
revolution was an exact illustration of such destructive
policies. Last year’s brutal aggression against the
Socialist Republic of Viet Nam, deliberate delays in
bringing independence to Namibia and eradicating the
most degrading mass manifestations
of racism and
violation of human rights and the recent decision by
the North Atlantic Treaty Organization
to furthel
increase its armaments
and place hundreds of
medium-range
rockets in most densely populated

120. On the same legal grounds, we cannot accept
charges questioning Afghanistan’s
right to request
help from a State with which it has a legally binding
Treaty of Friendship, Good Neighbourliness
and Cooperation. Also, in the light of the Treaty, the claim
that the temporary presence in Afghanistan of a limited
Soviet military contingent represents a threat to international peace and security has no validity whatsoever.
15

129. New Zealand was one of the countries which
asked the Council to meet to consider the sit.uation
in Afghanistan and its implications
for international
peace and security. We did so because we were
profoundly concerned at the developments in that
country.

countries of Europe seemingly look like different
phenomena of the international
reality, but their
ominous origin rests squarely with the same allied
forces of evil.
124. Finally, the present debate cannot but be ineffective on its merits because in no way does it
give reason to describe the internal situation in
Afghanistan as one affecting international
peace and
security, On the contrary, it is actions like the ones
which necessitated resort to military means and the
tactics which brought this Council together that
aggravate the international
situation and vitiate its
atmosphere.
Neither this debate nor any other
machinations will ever be able to stop the progressive
transformations,
be they in Afghanistan or in the
world at large.

130. The situation that the Council is considering is
complex. There are many elements that are not clear;
but what is beyond doubt is that the Soviet Union
has violated the territorial integrity of Afghanistan
and has occupied that country by force of arms. It
has been instrumental
in forcibly
removing one
Government and installing another in its place. The
Soviet Union has clearly and blatantly interfered in
the internal affairs of a neighbouring
sovereign State.
It is denying the people of Afghanistan their freedom
and their right to decide their own future.
131. The Soviet Union has sought to justify its
invasion of Afghanistan. In the view of my Government, its explanations do not carry conviction. The
Soviet Union and others have alleged that there has
been interference by outside Powers in the internal
affairs of Afghanistan, even including the direct use of
armed forces. Those allegations have not been substantiated. No convincing evidence of outside involvement, apart from that of the Soviet Union, has been
brought to the attention of the Council.

125. It is the considered view of the Government of
Poland that the way to securing the unity and progressive development of the people of Afghanistan
can be achieved neither by inciting and assisting the
forces of feudal rebels in that country nor by groundless consideration in the United Nations of matters
within the exclusive sovereign jurisdiction
of the
Member State concerned; it can be achieved, however, by a posture of understanding
for and cooperation with the Government whose programme is
consonant with both the vital interests of the Afghan
peopleand good-neighbourly relations and stabilization
in the region.

132. Military action by the Soviet Union in Afghanistan is yet another instance in the recent history of
Asia where external intervention not only has violated
the rights of one people but has also posed a wider
threat to peace and stability. New Zealand deplores
the direct military involvement
of the Soviet Union
in Afghanistan. It is an act of aggression; it violates
the basic principles of the Charter of the United
Nations. The Soviet Union, as a permanent member
of the Council, has a special and solemn responsibility
in relation to the maintenance of international peace
and security. Its use of force in Afghanistan brings
into question the degree of the Soviet Union’s commitment to the principles it is sworn to uphold.

126. Except for some instigators of the debate, the
statements by the Government
of Afghanistan,
including the convincing arguments advanced in this
Council by the Foreign Minister
of that country
[2185fli nzcering], as well as the discussion in the
Council, have confirmed that we are dealing here with
a premeditated attempt to engage the United Nations
in an intervention in the internal affairs of the Democratic Republic of Afghanistan. Let us not put the
authority and prestige of the Council, which indeed
suffer greatly because of provocative ventures like
these, to a further test. The Security Council should be
the first to see to it that nations have their exclusive
right to decide their destinies and to enter into relations with other States according to their wishes and
best interests. The sooner the Council ceases to act to
the contrary, the better it will be for the United
Nations and its image among the world community.

133. Afghanistan has had more than its share of armed
conflict, The problems of that strife-torn country
cannot be resolved by force. They can only be made
worse by military intervention
by a super-Power
which seems to be determined to deny the people of a
small and weaker neighbour their right to decide
their own future. The Council must surely condemn
such action. Not until aggression ceases and foreign
forces are withdrawn can the process of bringing
peace, reconciliation
and unity to Afghanistan begin
again. The first step is to get foreign troops out of
Afghanistan now; then the forces of reconciliation
can begin to work.

127. The PRESIDENT
(intcrpretatiou
jhn
Frerzc/7):
The next speaker is the representative of New Zealand,
I invite him to take a place at the Council table and
to make his statement.
128. Mr. FRANCIS
(New Zealand): I thank you,
Mr, President, and the other members of the Council
For allowing my delegation to take part in this discussion. It is very good to have you, Sir, guiding the
Security Council at this critical time,

134. The PRESIDENT
(inte~yretrrtiorz,f,-o/l? Fre~rch):
I should like to inform members of the Council that
I have just received a letter from the representative
of Turkey in which he requests to be invited to
participate in the discussion. In accordance with the
16

.

usual practice, I propose, with the consent of the
Council, to invite that representative to participate in
the discussion, without the right to vote, in conformity
with the relevant provisions of the Charter and rule 37
of the Council’s provisional rules of procedure.

135. The PRESIDENT
(itztelpletrrtioi7.fi.[)t}l
French):
The next speaker is the representative of Turkey.
I invite him to take a place at the Council table and
to make his statement.
136. Mr. ERALP (Turkey): Please allow me in the
first instance to express to you, Mr. President, the
congratulations and, in these critical days of the world
order, our best wishes for your successful leadership
in inspiring a sense of responsibility and con$ciousness
of calamity in this august organ of the United Nations.
I have no doubt, from previous personal experience,
that your qualities as a distinguished diplomat and able
leader are amply sufficient to rise lo this crucial
occasion.

relations of friendship and brotherhood
with grief.”

140. It is with deep distress that my delegation has
had to make this point and stress this unequivocal
attitude. This distress is caused by the fact that the
two countries involved are both nations with which
Turkey has maintained, maintains and hopes to maintain the best of relations on all levels. With Afghanistan we have a history and tradition of friendship and
brotherly
relations over the centuries. Although
Turkey is constitutionally
a secular State, 99 per cent
of the Turks are devout Moslems and cannot be
indifferent to the fate of our Moslem brothers in any
part of the world. Many such nations have had and
may continue to have their internal difficulties, and
it is our belief that they should be allowed to tackle
their troubles in their own way, without outside interference. We would have hoped this could happen
in Afghanistan, and we hope that it will happen.
141. As for our great neighbour to the north, the
Soviet Union, we have established and continue to
aspire to excellent good-neighbourly
relatior?s based
on mutual trust and confidence and non-interference
in internal affairs. It is therefore doubly distressing
for my delegation to point the finger of strong disapproval at the action of Soviel military intervention
in the affairs of a small, neighbouring, independent and
non-aligned country which has followed a policy of
friendship with the Soviet Union. But if law and
order are to prevail in the international c’ommunity,
and if the solemn principles enshrined in the Charter
are to continue to be the basis of international conduct,
any deviation from such sacrosanct principles should
immediately
and without mincing words be blamed
and the restoration of the status of peace and security
be demanded in no uncertain words. It is in that spirit
that my delegation has asked to be allowed to speak to
demand that the Soviet mililary units which are now
operating in the sovereign, independent State of
Afghanistan should be promptly and graciously withdrawn from that country and that the call of the
Security Council, which is responsible for the maintenance of peace and security in the internalional
community, be heeded.

137. I should also like to associate my delegation
with the words of welcome and good wishes expressed
by other speakers to those countries which have just
joined the Security Council. I have no doubt that they
will contribute ably and in good faith to the important
tasks with which this Council is entrusted.
138. I am sure that you, Mr, President, and the other
members of the Council will readily recognize that as
a country adjacent to the sources of turmoil in OUI
area, we are deeply and closely concerned at the events
in which countries which are our neighbours and longstanding friends are directly involved. I wish to refer
now specifically to the events in Afghanistan, which
constitute the item on our agenda.
139. Barely 24 hours after the coup staged in Afghanistan followed by and in co-operation with foreign
troops there, the Turkish Government met and issued
the following statement on 29 December 1979:

142. Turkey has served faithfully the cause of
dCtente, which we hope will become the prevailing
status of order in the world, and we view with alarm
any action which is calculated to deviate from that
course and, wittingly or unwittingly, bring us all to the
brink of the age of the cold war which we all abhor.

“The Council of Ministers examined the situation created by the coup staged in Afghanistan on
the night of 27/28 December 1979 and concluded that
the co~rp carried out with the participation
of a
great number of Soviet military units constitutes
a grave intervention
in the domestic affairs of
Afghanistan, an independent and sovereign country.

/

“This intervention, which is in no way admissible,
is considered as dangerous and alarming because of
its effects on peace and stability in the region and in
the world.

!
k

“This situation faced by the Moslem Afghan
nation with which we have historical and traditional

is followed

17

!
.-.

:

:
)_...T-~

HOW TO OBTAIN

UFITED

NATIONS

PUBLlCAT’IOKS

United Nations
publications
msy be obtained
throughout
the world. Consult
your bookstore
Section, New York or Geneva.
COMMENT

SE PROCURER

LJIS PUBLICATIOSS

from
bookstores
and distributors
or write
to: United
Nations,
Sales

DES NATIONS

UNIES

Les publications
des Nations
Units mnt on venle dnns les librairies
dCpositaires du mondo entier. Informer-voun
ruprPs de votre libraire
a : Nations Unies, Section des ventes, New York ou Gcni?ve.

COMO

CONSEGUIB

PUBLICACIONES

DE LAS

Las publicaciones
de las Naciones
Unidas
e&in
buidorss en todas pa&s
de1 mundo.
ConsuIte
Unidas, Seccibn de Ventas, Nueva York a Ginebra.

Litho

in United

Nations,

New York

004OQ

NACIONES

ou

et les agencas
adressez-vows

UNIDAS

en venta en librerfas
y casas distria su librero
o dirfjase
a: Naciones

83-61462-December

1985-2.425
