S/PV.7844

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-first year

7844th meeting

Monday, 19 December 2016, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. González de Linares Palou . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Spain)

Members:

Angola. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Egypt. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Japan. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Malaysia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
New Zealand. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Senegal . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ukraine. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Uruguay. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Lucas
Mr. Wu Haitao
Mr. Moustafa
Mr. Lamek
Mr. Bessho
Mrs. Adnin
Mrs. Schwalger
Mr. Churkin
Mr. Ciss
Mr. Vitrenko
Mr. Wilson
Ms. Coleman
Mr. Bermúdez
Mr. Ramírez Carreño

Agenda
The situation in Afghanistan
Report of the Secretary-General on the situation in Afghanistan and its
implications for international peace and security (S/2016/1049)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

16-44819 (E)
*1644819*

S/PV.7844

The situation in Afghanistan

The meeting was called to order at 10.10 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in Afghanistan
Report of the Secretary-General on the
situation in Afghanistan and its implications for
international peace and security (S/2016/1049)
The President (spoke in Spanish): In accordance
with rule 37 of the Council’s provisional rules of
procedure, I invite the representatives of Afghanistan,
Australia, Canada, Germany, India, the Islamic Republic
of Iran, Italy, Kazakhstan, the Netherlands, Pakistan,
Sweden and Turkey to participate in this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite the following
briefers to participate in this meeting: Mr. Tadamichi
Yamamoto, Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral for Afghanistan and Head of the United Nations
Assistance Mission in Afghanistan; and Mr. Yury
Fedotov, Executive Director of the United Nations
Office on Drugs and Crime.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite Her Excellency
Ms. Joanne Adamson, Head of the Delegation of the
European Union to the United Nations, to participate
in this meeting.
I wish to draw the attention of the members of
the Council to document S/2016/1049, which contains
the report of the Secretary-General on the situation
in Afghanistan and its implications for international
peace and security.
At this meeting, the Security Council will hear
briefings from Mr. Yamamoto, Mr. Fedotov and
Ambassador Gerard Van Bohemen, Permanent
Representative of New Zealand in his capacity as
Chair of the Security Council Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1988 (2011).
I now give the floor to Mr. Yamamoto.
Mr. Yamamoto: The National Unity Government
marked its second anniversary with a continued effort
towards advancing its reform agenda and enhancing
public services. Despite security challenges and some
political volatility, I continue to see opportunities
and hope in Afghanistan. The Afghan Government
2/38

19/12/2016

demonstrated unity at the recent Warsaw Summit and
at the Brussels Conference, while stressing its shared
commitment to security, development and reform
priorities. Afghan leaders have continued working to
overcome their differences in order to advance the
Government’s reform agenda. The message from the
international community sent at the highest level was
clear: Afghanistan will not stand alone. The significant
international financial commitments, in both security
and development terms, allow Afghanistan to achieve
greater stability and self-reliance.
I welcome the reconstitution of the electoral
management bodies, which must advance electoral
reforms and preparations for elections. It is essential to
restore public confidence in the democratic process in
Afghanistan, which provides an important opportunity
to take steps in that direction. The commencement of
prosecutions by the Anti-Corruption Justice Centre
shows the Government’s seriousness in tackling
corruption. The Citizens Charter was adopted to enable
a more systematic approach to eradicate poverty and
provide services to the people of Afghanistan.
Afghan citizens are returning home in record
numbers. In the past six months alone, the country
has received hundreds of thousands of returnees, from
both Pakistan and Iran. While those returnees are
being welcomed back to Afghanistan, they face an
uncertain future, alongside the internally displaced
persons, including half a million newly displaced just
this year. Over 1.5 million people are on the move
this year. It is likely that the coming year will likely
see similar numbers of people. The sheer scale of
that population movement will necessarily bring with
it strains and pressure on the economy and on social
services and could further swell the number of those
seeking employment.
I welcome the swift response of the international
community to the United Nations appeal for the provision
of immediate lifesaving assistance for displaced persons
and returnees. I also wish to acknowledge the work that
is being undertaken by the Government to put in place
programmes that will enable both displaced persons
and returnees to integrate into the economy and with
their host communities.
The longer-term needs of integration must be
addressed with urgency if we are to prevent more people
sinking into absolute poverty. The scale of return will
require further international support and flexibility in
16-44819

19/12/2016

The situation in Afghanistan

the use of existing funding mechanisms. Meanwhile,
we must make greater efforts to ensure due recognition
of the voluntary nature of return, and for the process of
return to be undertaken with dignity and respect.
Refugees return to Afghanistan with hopes. Despite
all the efforts by the international community and the
Government, a better future is not possible without
peace. In 2016, thousands and thousands of Afghans
have been killed in the conflict, and tens of thousands
more have been wounded. Such human suffering and
tragedy are unacceptable. The conflict also erodes the
living conditions of people and deprives the country
of opportunities for development and growth. This
year, we saw a decrease of approximately 50 per cent
in economic investment, which is needed to achieve
a sustainable future. The international commitments
for development will not be able to deliver their full
potential in the absence of peace. Financial resources
that are spent on the conflict could be utilized for the
economic prosperity of Afghanistan.
We all know that the conflict in Afghanistan has no
military solution. Once again, I call upon the Taliban to
commit to direct talks with the Afghan Government,
without preconditions. The Taliban leadership must
reconsider the notion that their objectives can be
achieved only on the battlefield. At stake is the
future of the Afghan people and the country. Are the
differences really irreconcilable? Are compromise and
accommodation really not possible?
All Afghans must come together and work through
their problems and find ways to accommodate their
differences, for their own joint future. There are issues
of mutual interests and high priorities to all parties,
such as lessening the number of civilian casualties.
Identifying such common interests could be a starting
point for dialogue. The vast majority of Afghans believe
that their country should be a sovereign, united, Islamic
country, free from interference by any foreign Powers.
That basic agreement on fundamental principles should
make it possible to reach a peace agreement, as long as
countries in the region are prepared to play their part in
a positive, supportive way.
It takes courage to enter into a peace process. It is
not an admission of defeat. It is a recognition of reality.
An endless war will ruin the country and harm its
people. The only path to a meaningful peace is through
an intra-Afghan dialogue. The eventual process must
be inclusive, involving Afghans from every stratum of

S/PV.7844

society, including women and young people. Women in
particular can play a crucial role in helping to shape a
lasting peace.
The peace agreement with Hizb-i Islami shows
that the Government is prepared to negotiate on key
issues such as the release of prisoners, the lifting of
sanctions and the group’s integration into the political
life of Afghanistan. The fact that the agreement was
reached is a demonstration of its serious intentions,
and its successful implementation should address any
remaining doubts and help to unite Afghans, and could
pave the way for further peace agreements. I welcome
the Government’s assurances that the rights of Afghans,
including victims of gross violations of human rights,
will not be compromised in the implementation of the
peace agreement.
Peace and stability in Afghanistan are not in
the interest of Afghanistan alone; other countries in
the region will also benefit on both the security and
economic fronts. I am encouraged by their active efforts
to assist Afghanistan with its social, economic and
human-resources development. Impressive investments
are being made in regional infrastructure development.
The progress in that area was reflected in the outcome
of the sixth Heart of Asia Ministerial Conference in
Amritsar, where we also saw the countries of the region
concur on improving cooperation on their counterterrorism efforts. But can we not collaborate and
cooperate more in order to put an end to the conflict
and long-standing human suffering in Afghanistan?
I urge every country of the region to ask itself what
else it can do to help create an environment conducive
to peace in Afghanistan and the region. There are
many possible areas of cooperation and steps that they
can take to improve the prospects for peace, such as
increased consultations, exchanges of information and
people-to-people contacts.
I am encouraged by the positive messages of
support for an Afghan-led peace process from the
countries of the region, and I look forward to seeing
them produce positive results. We, the United Nations,
remain committed to working for peace in Afghanistan
in cooperation with all concerned.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I thank
Mr. Yamamoto for his briefing.
I now give the floor to Mr. Fedotov.

16-448193/38

S/PV.7844

The situation in Afghanistan

19/12/2016

Mr. Fedotov: I am grateful for this opportunity to
update the Council on the work of the United Nations
Office on Drugs and Crime (UNODC) against illicit
drugs in Afghanistan and their impact on health,
development and security. Since my last briefing (see
S/PV.7802), UNODC has published its Afghanistan
Opium Survey 2016, referred to in the report of the
Secretary-General (S/2016/1049), which shows a
worrying reversal of the efforts to combat this persistent
problem. Opium poppy cultivation has grown by 10 per
cent and production by 43 per cent, an increase driven
by a 30 per cent rise in the average opium yield. In the
past year, the number of provinces that are poppy-free
has gone down from 14 to 13, while eradication, which
has dropped by 91 per cent, is in free fall.

UNODC has introduced a networking-the-networks
initiative designed to leverage information-sharing.
Our work forms part of an overall interregional drugcontrol response to illicit trafficking. Its activities
include support, including in the field, for the Paris Pact
Initiative. UNODC recently established an air cargo
unit at the Kabul international airport. Afghanistan is
now one of the first countries in the world to implement
the air-cargo segment of the UNODC-World Customs
Organization Container Control Programme.

The efforts of UNODC and its partners in
Afghanistan are continuing against that background
and that of the bitter ongoing insurgency. The
Brussels Conference on Afghanistan and the resulting
communiqué underlined the importance of these
activities. Countries and organizations committed to
a sustained and integrated approach to dealing with
the production and trafficking of illicit drugs and
precursor chemicals. The Conference highlighted the
importance of fighting organized crime, including
money laundering, corruption and the financing of
terrorism, as well as of treating and rehabilitating drug
users. The communiqué expressed the international
community’s determination to counter all forms of
terrorism and extremism.

Afghan heroin is also linked to terrorism and
the insurgency. The bulk of opium cultivation takes
place in areas controlled by the Taliban, and they
receive tens of millions of dollars through their taxes
on drug trafficking. UNODC welcomes the Afghan
Government’s decision to develop a national action
plan on violent extremism, and we are helping to
implement it. While we appreciate donors’ interest in
alternative development projects being carried out in
Afghanistan in cooperation with other United Nations
agencies and the Government, much more needs to be
done. The adoption of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development is driving momentum for more ambitious
alternative development projects for Afghan farmers
who are currently growing illicit crops. Illicit drugs
fuel corruption. UNODC, as a guardian of the United
Nations Convention against Corruption, is working
with Afghan counterparts to draft a new, comprehensive
anti-corruption law based on international standards
and best practices.

UNODC activities, delivered through our
integrated
and
comprehensive
projects
and
programmes, are targeting those and other challenges.
Our country programme for Afghanistan, linked
to our Regional Programme for Afghanistan and
Neighbouring Countries, is assisting in building the
capacity of the Ministry of Counter-Narcotics and
the narcotics police. Earlier this month, I visited the
Domodedevo Project, supported by Russia and Japan,
which is using professional training to improve the
capacity of Afghanistan’s narcotics police. UNODC
is promoting cooperation in the region through the
Regional Programme, its Triangular and Afghanistan,
Kyrgyzstan and Tajikistan Initiatives, the Central Asian
Regional Information and Coordination Centre and the
Gulf Cooperation Council Criminal Information Centre
to Combat Drugs.
In order to build links between the regional bodies
operating along the major opiate trafficking routes,
4/38

In the essential area of health, UNODC supports
treatment services founded on scientific evidence and
human rights, especially for vulnerable children and
young people exposed to drugs, as well as their families.

Goal 16 of the 2030 Agenda promotes peaceful
and inclusive societies. UNODC is working with the
relevant Afghan authorities to enhance the capacity of
financial intelligence units and regulatory and criminal
justice institutions to analyse, detect, investigate and
prosecute cases of economic crime. The new National
Peace and Development Framework and the national
drug action plan underscore the Afghan Government’s
willingness and determination to counter illicit
production and trafficking and to reduce demand.
UNODC will continue to work over the long term
with partners, including the Afghan Government, to
counter illicit drugs, crime, corruption and terrorism in
Afghanistan and in Western and Central Asia, as well
16-44819

19/12/2016

The situation in Afghanistan

as along the main drug trafficking routes to the rest
of the world. In its pursuit of that strategy, UNODC
is helping to integrate those activities into economic
and national security planning. Afghanistan is hard
pressed under the impact of illicit drugs, and I call on
the international community to remain fully committed
to helping to alleviate that destructive threat.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I thank
Mr. Fedotov for that briefing.
I now give the floor to Ambassador Van Bohemen.
Mr. Van Bohemen (New Zealand): I thank Special
Representative Yamamoto and the United Nations
Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA) for their
support of the work of the Security Council Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1988 (2011). Close
coordination with UNAMA is important to the overall
effectiveness of the 1988 sanctions regime.
The 1988 Sanctions Committee aims to deter the
Taliban and associates through tools such as an assets
freeze, a travel ban and an arms embargo. At the same
time, the 1988 sanctions regime is intended to support
the peace and reconciliation process, including through
the use of the delisting process and the process for
granting exemptions to enable a list of persons to
engage in peace and reconciliation negotiations and
other approved activities.
The existence of the 1988 sanctions regime matters
to the Taliban. Removal from what the Taliban call
the United Nations blacklist is consistently in the top
three demands of the group. The Taliban also follow
developments in the 1988 Sanctions Committee closely,
often issuing statements on reports of the Monitoring
Team and activities of the Committee. However, despite
the sanctions measures, the Taliban have retained the
ability to conduct attacks on Afghan forces, the Afghan
people and the international presence in Afghanistan.
The latest report (see S/2016/842) of the Monitoring
Team, which was presented to the Committee in October,
outlines how the Taliban continue their offensive
against the Government of Afghanistan following the
leadership transfer from Akhtar Mohammad Mansour
and Haibatullah Akhundzada in May of this year.
The Taliban’s positions on peace talks with the
Government of Afghanistan have hardened and clashes
between the Taliban and Government forces have
increased between 10 and 13 per cent, as compared to
those in 2015. Such clashes continue to be funded mainly

S/PV.7844

by the narcotics economy and the illegal extraction of
natural resources. The situation is also complicated by
the presence of the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant
(ISIL) and foreign terrorist fighters in Afghanistan.
While there are many structures and frameworks
in place, the implementation of the sanctions measures
can be uneven. The Committee continues to receive
reports of listed Taliban travelling without approved
exemptions from the Committee. That issue clearly
needs to be addressed. The Committee would also
like to encourage Member States to play a more active
role in providing information that would help to keep
the sanctions list as up-to-date as possible. If Member
States provide that information, it will support their
own implementation efforts. War could also be done
to target narcotics smugglers financially supporting
the Taliban.
The Taliban’s income from narcotics is estimated
at around $400 million per year. Cutting off that
financial stream could have a significant impact
on the Taliban’s ability to resource its offensive
against the Government of Afghanistan. Six of the
Committee’s meetings this year were focused on the
nexus between narcotics smuggling and the Taliban.
The Committee received briefings on counter-narcotics
efforts from Afghanistan’s Deputy Interior Minister,
the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime, the
Collective Security Treaty Organization, the Shanghai
Cooperation Organization and the Monitoring Team.
Such efforts help to identify individuals who may be
suitable for designation on the 1988 list.
The overall effectiveness of the 1988 sanctions
measures also relies on close coordination with the
Government of Afghanistan and with the region. That
is one of the reasons I recently travelled to Afghanistan
as Chair of the 1988 Taliban Sanctions Committee
and the Security Council Committee establishsed
pursuant to resolutions 1267 (1999), 1989 (2011) and
2253 (2015) concerning Islamic State in Iraq and the
Levant (Da’esh), Al-Qaida and associated individuals,
groups, undertakings and entities, to engage directly
with interlocutors and the Afghan Government. I was
pleased with the level of engagement the delegation
received while in Kabul, including meetings with
President Ghani and Chief Executive Abdullah, the
Minister of the Interior and the Governor of the Central
Bank of Afghanistan.

16-448195/38

S/PV.7844

The situation in Afghanistan

The meetings in Kabul showed that there is
potential for greater use of the 1988 sanctions regime
to deter the Taliban and to support the peace process.
The legal frameworks are in place to implement the
sanctions measures, for example, the Central Bank of
Afghanistan outlined a comprehensive framework for
the tracing and freezing of assets of listed individuals
and entities. However, such structures are effective
only against listed individuals, who are identifiable.
There are many associates of the Taliban who are not on
the list and others lacking sufficient identifiers. Such
structures are also effective only within Afghanistan.
Cross-border flows of money, narcotics, arms and
foreign terrorist fighters are challenges that extend to
the wider region.
The Committee therefore welcomes the various
commitments made by the Government of Afghanistan
during the visit to engage more actively with the
sanctions regime, including to provide the names of
narcotics smugglers who financially support the Taliban
and to request the listing of the Taliban leadership. In
turn, the Committee is working on providing forms
to assist with applying for exemptions from the assets
freeze and travel-ban measures and hopes to have
those available on its website shortly. The Committee
looks forward to continued close engagement with
UNAMA, Afghanistan and regional States, under the
chairmanship of Kazakhstan for 2017-2018.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I thank
Ambassador Van Bohemen for his briefing.
On behalf of all the members of the Security
Council, I should like to thank the three briefers for
their useful and informative reports.
I now give the floor to the representative
of Afghanistan.
Mr. Saikal (Afghanistan): Let me congratulate
Spain on its successful leadership of the Security
Council this month. We wish to thank Ambassador
Román Oyarzun Marchesi and his team at the Spanish
Mission for their dedicated efforts as penholder for
Afghanistan during the past two years and welcome
Japan’s assumption of this important task. I thank
the outgoing Secretary-General, Mr. Ban Ki-moon,
for his recent report (S/2016/1049) on the situation in
Afghanistan. We are grateful to Ambassador Tadamichi
Yamamoto, Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral and Head of the United Nations Assistance
Mission in Afghanistan, for his comprehensive briefing
6/38

19/12/2016

and outstanding leadership of the United Nations work
in Afghanistan.
Two years after the three-pronged transition,
with focus on reforms and renewed international
commitments, Afghanistan has defied odds by
standing on its own and managing complex challenges,
notwithstanding a high price in lost lives and denied
opportunities. From the perspective of security, in recent
months our armed forces have proved their strength by
repulsing unprecedented waves of attacks in various
provinces. Economically, Afghanistan’s regional
connectivity has been growing fast. And politically,
our vibrant course of democratization continues with
electoral reform on track. However, with a high rate of
return of refugees, coupled with the increased number
of internally displaced persons resulting from terrorist
attacks, we have fresh humanitarian challenges ahead
of us this winter and beyond.
In 2016, parallel to the challenges, we witnessed
significant developments that reflected strong
international military and civilian support for
Afghanistan. In July, our international partners
at the NATO Warsaw Summit pledged continued
assistance towards the sustainability of our security
forces. In September, the Council reaffirmed its full
support to Afghanistan through presidential statement
S/PRST/2016/14. In October, the Brussels Conference
on Afghanistan renewed the partnership for prosperity
and peace between our country and the international
community. In November, the General Assembly
unanimously adopted resolution 71/9 entitled, “The
situation in Afghanistan”, which reiterated the
commitment of the international community for a
stable Afghanistan. Those developments represent
the clear consolidation of international consensus on
Afghanistan, for which we are deeply grateful. On
behalf of my Government and my people, let me thank
all Member States for their positive contributions to
Afghanistan’s stability and progress. In particular, we
are grateful to the United States, Germany, the United
Kingdom and Turkey for forging the Warsaw Summit
consensus on Afghanistan, and the European Union
for galvanizing renewed international development
commitments for our country.
Effective counter-terrorism requires a clear regional
and global security architecture and constructive
engagement among the relevant stakeholders. For too
long, terror has found a comfort zone in the occasional
tectonic shifts and grinds of security fault lines,
16-44819

19/12/2016

The situation in Afghanistan

along with negative rivalries of regional and global
powers. Scattered, fragmented and slow counterterrorism measures have been exploited by terrorists to
manoeuvre, spread violence and create discord among
people. In the face of growing terrorism worldwide,
we must increase trust, collaboration and coordination
among relevant Member States for a comprehensive
response based on the rule of law and established
international norms.
In that context, any kind of outside contact with
the Taliban or other such groups without the prior
knowledge and approval of the Government of
Afghanistan is seen as a legitimization of terror, a direct
breach of our sovereignty and a clear contravention of
the United Nations sanctions regimes and the Vienna
Convention on Diplomatic Relations, which will not be
tolerated. Fighting terror with terror, no matter what
the justification, is a sign of weakness of the civilized
world and a return to impasse and stagnation. Certainly,
our people will suffer most from this irrational and
reckless policy.
In the campaign against terrorism, Afghanistan
ought to be a symbol of international cooperation.
We welcome the regional and global convergence of
legitimate interests in our security, political stability
and development. The surest way to protect those
interests in Afghanistan is to desist from ill-conceived
attempts at regional orchestration of Afghanistan’s
insecurity, enhance official State-to-State cooperation
and support our national security forces.
At the peak of the international military presence in
2012, the casualty rate of coalition forces was over 400,
and the approximate cost of war amounted to around
$110 billion; in 2016, the casualty rate has dropped to
16, and financial costs are estimated to be less than
one-eleventh of that figure. Hence, today our forces are
at the forefront of countering terrorism on behalf of the
world and need to be fully supported.
It must be noted that in October and November,
various provinces of Afghanistan became the target of
terrorist attacks that are unprecedented in our country’s
modern history. The enemy’s intention was to establish a
parallel geography for the Taliban, but the commitment
and bravery of our security forces prevented terrorists
from realizing their wicked ambitions.
Due to its sensitive geostrategic location,
Afghanistan firmly believes in regionalism and
multilateral diplomacy. The sixth Ministerial

S/PV.7844

Conference of the Heart of Asia-Istanbul Process, held
two weeks ago in Amritsar, acknowledged the support
that terrorism derives in our region and called for the
dismantling of regional terrorist sanctuaries and safe
havens. Further, it called upon all States to take action
against those terrorist entities in accordance with
their respective national counter-terrorism policies,
their international obligations and the United Nations
Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy. The Conference
welcomed and supported Afghanistan’s initiative
in taking the lead in exploring a regional counterterrorism strategy, in keeping with the Charter of the
United Nations. At Amritsar, President Ghani proposed
an Asian and international mechanism to verify crossfrontier activities and terrorist operations. Verification
of nefarious activities would present our neighbour
hard evidence to undercut their plausible deniability
and blame games, and shift the focus to where it should
be — a unified response to countering terrorism.
At the United Nations level, consideration of
new three-tier measures for a more effective counterterrorism strategy is needed. During our debates, we
ought to address the impact of negative State rivalries
and State use of violence in pursuit of political objectives
on the growth of terrorism. At an operational level, we
need to refine and enrich relevant existing resolutions
or adopt new resolutions to target the drivers of such
policies within State structures. At the implementation
level, effectively enforcing the counter-terrorism
resolutions, including the sanctions regimes on the
Taliban, Al-Qaida and Da’esh, and those who use the
State apparatus to nurture them, can have a significant
impact on war and peace in Afghanistan. We want the
timely inclusion of select irredeemable Taliban leaders
on the sanctions list and a review of those delisted so
far. There is an urgent need for increased and more
meaningful interaction between the United Nations
counter-terrorism bodies and Afghan security agencies.
We welcome the Sanctions Committee’s November visit
to Afghanistan, where relevant issues were discussed
with the senior leadership.
Winter in Afghanistan begins in two days. For the
Taliban and their supporters in our neighbourhood,
that usually marks the official end of their fighting
season. Most Taliban militiamen return to the warmth
of madrasas in Pakistan for rest and recuperation and to
refuel for the next fighting season. Often, around this
time of year, the regional orchestrator of violence in
our country reverts to the notion of peace talks. Thus

16-448197/38

S/PV.7844

The situation in Afghanistan

their seasonality and tactical use of war and peace
continues, leaving little room for genuine peace efforts.
Nevertheless, we once again urge all Afghan Taliban
groups and their foreign supporters to enter into genuine
peace talks with the Government of Afghanistan. In
that endeavour, we recognize the importance of the role
of neighbouring countries, in particular Pakistan, and
other regional partners.
We have made some progress towards the
implementation of the peace agreement signed with
Hezb-i-Islami (Gulbuddin) on 29 September. The
cessation of violence with former belligerent members
of the group has held for nearly three months. Their
disarmament and reintegration require careful
planning. The agreement presents an opportunity to
put the future together, not justify the past. Making
the agreement work will necessitate collective and
careful efforts from all stakeholders, across domestic
and international spectrums. Those who want to take
advantage of this historic opportunity should refrain
from all derogatory, divisive and xenophobic activities.
The Government pardon is not a justification of their
past violent activities and should neither be misused
nor abused. It is noteworthy; the people of Afghanistan
have the full right to seek justice, in accordance with
their fundamental rights. We expect the implementation
of the agreement to improve security, strengthen the
political stability and national unity of the Afghan
people and set a good precedent in the peace process.
Recently, President Ghani and Chief Executive
Abdullah have displayed a renewed level of consensus
in the work of the national unity Government, in
particular in relation to the appointment of new
commissioners at the electoral bodies, which marks a
decisive step forward to strengthening the credibility,
transparency and integrity of our future elections.
We expect the Independent Election Commission to
announce the date of our upcoming parliamentary
and district council elections in the near future. Talks
on other subjects are still ongoing to strengthen our
political stability and democratic process.
Afghanistan has progressed steadily on the path of
economic cooperation through regional connectivity
and tangible development projects. The recent
inauguration of the Turkmenistan-Afghanistan railway,
following the arrival of a cargo train from China, and the
construction of the Iran-Afghanistan railway, together
with the forthcoming cargo air corridor between
Afghanistan and India, are reviving centuries-old trade
8/38

19/12/2016

routes that will help revitalize the regional economy.
However, insecurity presents a primary obstacle to our
economic reform and infrastructure-building agenda.
The Taliban’s recent statement of support for
major development projects has no genuine basis. As
mentioned, insecurity created by the Taliban undercuts
economic development in the country and challenges
regional connectivity. On 17 December, just a couple
of days ago, the Taliban targeted five female airport
personnel in Kandahar airport. That is their real nature.
Any expression of support will be deemed legitimate only
when expressed through deeds, such as the immediate
cessation of violence and their genuine joining of the
peace process. Compared to previous years, the rate
of civilian casualties has gone down marginally in
Afghanistan. However, terrorists continue to attack
soft targets mercilessly, as manifested by the rising
percentage of child casualties this year. The recent
targeting of religious gatherings was aimed at stoking
ethnic and sectarian tensions among our people. But let
me reiterate that Afghans stand united in the face of
such divisive strategies.
The Government of Afghanistan, in collaboration
with the United Nations and other international
partners, continues to work on creating equal
opportunities for women, pursuant to resolution 1325
(2000). We have also improved workplace conditions
for women and strengthened the legal framework
for their physical protection. In that regard, the
recently revised penal code is among our other recent
achievements. We are highly determined to bring all
human rights violators to justice, including those in
the highest positions of Government. It is important
that national and international stakeholders further
strengthen the independence of the Afghan judiciary
without politicizing or ethnicizing the course of justice.
During the past 10 months, Afghanistan has
witnessed the return of nearly 1 million of its nationals.
Increased policing and uncertainty over their status
in Pakistan, including the fear of eviction, have led
to a huge surge of returnees. That fact, along with
internal displacements resulting from conflict, might
exacerbate the already difficult humanitarian crisis
as winter approaches. We invite the international
community to support the flash appeal of the Office for
the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs to provide
immediate life-saving assistance while we continue to
work on a comprehensive solution.
16-44819

19/12/2016

The situation in Afghanistan

Recently, we have initiated a string of consultations
with relevant line ministries, United Nations agencies
and other related stakeholders to provide immediate
response packages during the winter season to needy
returnees and internally displaced persons. In the
broader context, we are seeking long-term, viable
solutions for those problems. In that context, the further
assistance of the international community remains of
vital importance.
Our efforts to curb the menace of narcotics and
to break its link with criminality are ongoing. In
October, the Ministry of Counter-Narcotics, along
with the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime,
released the executove summary of the Afghanistan
Opium Survey 2016, which noted an increase in poppy
production. However, our counter-narcotics operations
continue unabated with recent unprecedented seizures.
One thing is clear — insecurity creates fertile ground
for drug production. We maintain the view that a viable
solution to the narcotics problem must be based on the
principle of shared responsibility. A verification regime
of cultivation, production, trafficking and demand
would probably prove that Afghanistan beneficits the
least from drug profits.
We have reached the end of an eventful year,
with key developments that signify an enormous leap
forward for Afghanistan. The regional and international
consensus has reached new heights, as reflected in
the Warsaw NATO Summit, the Brussels Conference
and Heart of Asia Ministerial Conference, and the
unanimous adoption of General Assembly resolution
71/9 on Afghanistan. Together, those events have
established a firm foundation to enhance our strategic
cooperation into the new year.
The Council and the international community are
well aware that terrorism remains a constant threat to
the security of all peoples and societies. That said, let
us approach the coming year with a new confidence
and commitment to secure a stable and self-reliant
Afghanistan. We must not forget that our joint
partnership is in fact a strategic investment for a more
safe and prosperous world order.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I shall now give
the floor to the members of the Security Council. To
enable the Security Council to make good use of the
time available, I ask members to restrict their statements
to five minutes and thank them for their cooperation.

S/PV.7844

Mr. Vitrenko (Ukraine): Ukraine aligns itself with
the statement to be delivered by the observer of the
European Union. Meanwhile, I would like to make a
few points in my national capacity.
Three months ago, the Council discussed the
situation in Afghanistan (see S/PV.7771) and adopted
presidential statement S/PRST/2016/14, in support
of the country’s security, economic and development
challenges. Has it had a positive impact on the ground?
To a certain degree, it has.
First, some encouraging progress has been achieved
in countering corruption and deterring the terrorist
threat. Secondly, the Brussels Conference, held in
October, secured pledges in support of Afghanistan’s
State-building and socioeconomic development.
Thirdly, a peace deal that was signed with one of
moderate armed factions, Hezb-i Islami (Gulbuddin),
became a useful contribution to the restoration of
normalcy and the reconciliation in the territories under
that group’s control. Fourthly, regional cooperation was
strengthened by investment and infrastructure projects
that laid the foundation for improving Afghanistan’s
trade capacities and building a business-friendly
environment. Fifthly, efforts were redoubled to counter
narcotics trafficking and production, in particular by
promoting saffron as a substitute crop for poppies.
Despite those developments, much remains to
be done. Rivalry among high-level Afghan officials
and political tensions between the parliamentary and
legislative branches, as well as another postponement
of long-awaited parliamentary elections, directly
affect the country’s ability to adequately promote good
governance, the rule of law, anti-corruption measures
and human rights. We believe that it is high time for all
Afghan stakeholders to demonstrate real unity in their
efforts to achieve sustainable and comprehensive peace
and national reconciliation.
However, the prospects for those endeavours
remain dim. The repeated flat refusal of the Taliban
leaders to negotiate has undercut attempts of the
Quadrilateral Coordination Group on the Afghan Peace
and Reconciliation Process to create an environment
conducive to a peace process. In that regard, we see the
need for the Quadrilateral Coordination Group to find
common ground with representatives of the Taliban’s
moderate wing.
In this Chamber, we have often heard statements
to the effect that the national reconciliation process

16-448199/38

S/PV.7844

The situation in Afghanistan

must be Afghan-owned and Afghan-led. At the same
time, we have seen continued attempts behind the back
of the Government of Afghanistan to negotiate with
the Taliban and even to grant the terrorists safe haven,
train them and provide them military assistance. In that
light, calls to lift the Security Council sanctions on the
Taliban leadership as an incentive to bring it back to the
negotiations table appear rather unconvincing, to say
the least. That is particularly revelatory when such calls
echo similar demands by the same terrorist organization.
We find it unacceptable that, six months after his
appointment, the new leader of the Taliban is still not
included on the United Nations sanctions list. In that
regard, we support the relevant call just made by the
delegation of Afghanistan. Ukraine believes that the
sanctions are an effective tool in persuading terrorists
to renounce their aggression against the Afghan
nation and earnestly participate in peace negotiations.
Their removal from the list should be possible only
when their deeds match their words. That means the
disarmament of combat units, the restoration of peace,
and non-interference in the functioning of public
institutions, as was the case with the Hezb-i Islami
(Gulbuddin).
Regional cooperation should also focus on finding
ways to effectively disrupt the Taliban and other
terrorist groups’ financing by suppressing the narcotics
trade. With regard to the latter, the recent findings of
the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime, which
are contained in its Afghanistan Opium Survey 2016,
are alarming. Regardless of national and international
efforts to combat the narcotics threat, the total area
of opium poppy cultivation has further increased,
coinciding with a major decrease in activities aimed at
eradicating it. What is also extremely worrying is that,
according to reports, farmers continue to resist such
suppression operations by directly attacking eradication
teams, even within the Government-controlled areas.
The protection of civilians in Afghanistan continues
to be an increasingly complex challenge. Although the
Government announced a national policy to mitigate
civilian casualties, the number of collateral victims,
especially among women and children, is still growing.
And the causes, in particular the indiscriminate shelling
and bombing, are attributable to both parties in the
conflict. Beyond any doubt, fighting the terrorist threat
is a top priority. Yet it can hardly be seen as a victory
when the number of neutralized terrorists equals the
10/38

19/12/2016

number of civilians who have lost their lives in the
course of the counter-terrorist operations concerned.
We urge the Afghan Government to ensure that
all such violations of international humanitarian law
are thoroughly investigated, with the support of the
United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan,
and that the victims and their families are provided
with the appropriate remedies. The implementation
of the national action plan on women and peace and
security is also of paramount importance for ensuring
a stable future for the country through the suspension
of gender-based violence and the elevation of women
as full and equal partners. Moreover, the deteriorating
displacement crisis in Afghanistan requires urgent
attention. The Afghan authorities should address the
needs of internally displaced persons and returnees,
including by urgently scaling up humanitarian aid to
provide them access to basic services and support their
sustainable reintegration.
Without any doubt, there are numerous obstacles
that make it difficult for Afghanistan to resolve on their
own most of the challenges I have mentioned. That
is why the international community has to continue
assisting the country, which is in need. I hope that in
future debates the list of problems that I mentioned
today will be much shorter, as some of them will have
already been addressed by the Afghan Government.
Mr. Churkin (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We are following the security situation in
Afghanistan very closely. We are concerned about
its sudden and growing deterioration, especially in
the north of the country, in which the Taliban has
recently become increasingly active. The elimination
of the Taliban leader, Mullah Mansoor, has led to a
strengthening of the influence of the irreconcilable
radicals, which only exacerbates the current situation in
the country. The recent attacks by militants against the
United States military base at Bagram and the German
Consulate in Mazar-e-Sharif are stark cases in point.
We support the policy of the Government of
Afghanistan aimed at achieving national reconciliation.
We stand ready to provide assistance towards making
progress in the negotiation process, including through
a flexible approach to the possible easing of the
sanctions regime of the Security Council Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1988 (2011), if
that does not run contrary to the national interests of
Afghanistan. We took note that a peace agreement
16-44819

19/12/2016

The situation in Afghanistan

was signed by the Government of Afghanistan and
the Hekmatyar party. Much will depend uon how it is
implemented in practice. The main goal of the national
reconciliation process is to get the Taliban involved in
the process. Thus far, that goal has not been achieved.
The Quadrilateral Coordination Group format has not
arrived at breakthrough.
Unfortunately, the basic problems that have been
facing the international military contingents in the
country for the past 15 years remain unresolved. That
applies to the previous NATO International Security
Assistance Force, which left the country, and the
current Resolute Support Mission. We underscore in
particular that only the Afghan National Defence and
Security Forces can provide for the stabilization of the
military and political situation in the country. For that
reason, we are providing them with multidimensional
support. The Ministry of Internal Affairs of the Russian
Federation has provided 10,000 automatic rifles and
2.1 million cartridges to them at no charge. Russia has
agreed to re-export four Mi-25 helicopter gunships to
Afghanistan from India. The Russian Federation will
continue to provide assistance in forming a capable
Afghan army and police force and continue to train
their personnel through Russian line agencies.
Large-scale drug production in Afghanistan poses a
serious threat to the very stability of Afghanistan itself,
the region and the world in general. Moreover, besides
being nefarious in and of itself, narcotics production
provides substantial financial support for terrorism. In
that regard, we believe that it is necessary to step up the
efforts of the international community in combating the
Afghan drug trade. We are concerned about the sharp
increase in drug crops, including in the north of the
country, and a significant increase in this year’s opium
poppy crop. The fear is that the growth in drug revenue
will lead to an even greater surge in terrorist activity.
We do not wholly understand the attempts to
diminish the threat of the Islamic State in Iraq and
the Levant (ISIL) in Afghanistan. That is at variance
with various assessments, including that of NATO.
Some time ago, the commander of the United States
and NATO Forces in Afghanistan, General Nicholson,
stated that the terrorist group ISIL had intended to
create a caliphate in Afghanistan and that the Islamic
Movement of Uzbekistan had joined that cause to form
what is known as the Wilayat Khorasan. We expect that
that information will be duly reflected and evaluated in
the relevant United Nations documentation, including

S/PV.7844

in the quarterly reports to the Secretary-General.
According to what we were told by the representatives
of the Afghan leadership, the number of ISIL fighters in
their country has reached several thousand. There are
also confirmed reports of links to the Islamic Movement
of Uzbekistan, the Taliban movement, especially in the
north, and the Lashkar-e-Taiba movement. There have
also been reports of the presence of ISIL training camps
and safe havens in Afghanistan, in which people from
the Central Asian States and the Mountainous Republic
of the Northern Caucasus are being trained, and 700
terrorist families from Syria have already arrived. The
intensity of the fighting in Syria and Iraq is leading
insurgents to increasingly turn their attention towards
Afghanistan as a country in which they can find refuge
and establish a new base for expanding their influence
in neighbouring countries.
We are rather perplexed by the recent statement by
General Nicholson with regard to the support that Russia
is allegedly providing the Taliban, thereby undermining
Washington, NATO and Kabul’s efforts to combat
terrorism. That kind of statement reflects an attempt to
shift the blame, as we say in my country. We recall the
facts indicating that some of our partners are not averse
to cooperating with the extremist and terrorist groups in
Afghanistan. We are aware of numerous cases in which
ISIL fighters were redeployed to the northern provinces
of Afghanistan by unmarked helicopters. We must
ascertain who is doing that and why. Many questions
also remain concerning a massive attack by the Taliban
against the administrative centres in the provinces
of Badakhshan, Helmand and Farah. Once again,
we reiterate that Russia is not conducting any secret
negotiations that could undermine the national security
of Afghanistan. Our contacts with the representatives
of the Taliban are limited to the task of providing for
the security of Russian nationals in Afghanistan and
are aimed at moving the Taliban towards joining with
the process of national reconciliation, while making
sure that officials in Kabul maintain a leading role.
We look positively on the fact that the international
community reaffirmed its commitment to support
Afghanistan at the Brussels Conference on Afghanistan
in October. We hope that the new financial package will
play a positive role. At the same time, we note that the
Government of Afghanistan has been presented with a
number of conditions. If those conditions are not met,
then the volume of the assistance could be reduced.
We also note that countries have arrived a better

16-4481911/38

S/PV.7844

The situation in Afghanistan

understanding of the regional context of a settlement
of the Afghan conflict, and there is an increase in the
number of regional forums that are focused on that
issue. At the same time, we think that it is important
to make sure that regional actors should assume the
leading role in the work of those forums.
We are convinced that assistance to Afghanistan
should be carried out through proven existing structures,
primarily the Shanghai Cooperation Organization
(SCO). As is known, Afghanistan received observer
status in the SCO in 2012. In 2015, at the SCO Summit
in Ufa, Afghanistan officially applied to become a
full-fledged member. At this stage, in order to make
that process more dynamic, we think that it would
be advisable to restore the SCO-Afghanistan contact
group. We also see good prospects for strengthening
cooperation between the counter-terrorism and
anti-narcotics operations of Afghanistan and the
Collective Security Treaty Organization.
Ms. Coleman (United States of America): Since
we last met to discuss Afghanistan in September
(see S/PV.7771), we have been encouraged by
notable progress on a number of fronts. Perhaps most
significantly, President Ghani and Chief Executive
Abdullah are working together to strengthen the
cohesion of the National Unity Government. The
transparent and consultative process to select the
members of the Independent Election Commission,
who were sworn into office on 22 November,
demonstrates the commitment of both leaders to build
a merit-based, ethnically inclusive Government that is
committed to promoting peace, stability and prosperity
in Afghanistan.
In spite of the escalating attacks against the Afghan
National Defence and Security Forces, Government
officials and civilians, which were highlighted in Special
Representative of the Secretary-General Yamamoto’s
briefing, we commend the Afghan Government for
its continued commitment to an inclusive, Afghan-led
peace process. The agreement signed on 29 September
between the Afghan Government and Hizb-i Islami
establishes a precedent for the Government to negotiate
a political settlement with armed groups in the interests
of Afghans.
We continue to call upon the Taliban to enter into
negotiations with the Government. Our message to the
Taliban and armed groups is that they will not be able
to derail Afghanistan’s future through terrorist attacks.
12/38

19/12/2016

However, they are welcome to lay down their arms,
negotiate peace and choose to contribute to the future of
their country. Meanwhile, recent strong commitments
made by the international community are encouraging.
The $15.2 billion in development assistance through
2020 that was pledged at the Brussels Conference on
Afghanistan in October is an important example. Also
at the Brussels Conference, President Ghani and Chief
Executive Abdullah underscored their commitment
to establishing a functional, accountable and
sustainable Government through the implementation
of the Afghanistan National Peace and Development
Framework and the Self-Reliance through Mutual
Accountability Framework. We support them in those
efforts. Of course, difficult challenges remain.
We are concerned that continued attacks by the
Taliban, affiliates of the Islamic State in Iraq and the
Levant and other armed groups are undermining security
and hindering the development that Afghanistan so
desperately needs. As we have seen since the beginning
of the conflict, the vast majority of victims in those
attacks are civilians. In the first nine months of 2016,
the United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan
(UNAMA) documented 2,562 civilian deaths and 5,835
injuries. Those are tragic additions to a needless toll
of death and suffering that includes many Government
workers and members of security forces. Since
mid-July, Afghanistan has experienced a spike in the
number of Afghan refugees and undocumented Afghan
migrants returning from Pakistan. To date, 372,000
Afghan refugees have returned from Pakistan and
662,000 undocumented Afghans have returned from
Iran and Pakistan. The number of persons internally
displaced by the conflict in Afghanistan also continues
to increase significantly. We remain concerned by
those numbers and the possibility of a humanitarian
emergency as winter sets in.
We are also aware that returns to Afghanistan may
increase again in the spring, which could potentially
overtax an already stressed humanitarian response
system. In order to avoid a humanitarian emergency,
the return of refugees and migrants to Afghanistan
should be voluntary, humane and in line with applicable
international law. Amid those clear challenges, some
specific steps could help Afghanistan make progress.
The National Unity Government needs to institutionalize
clear, consultative, multi-ethnic selection processes
for ministers and senior officials. Anti-corruption
initiatives must demonstrate the ability to hold officials
16-44819

19/12/2016

The situation in Afghanistan

S/PV.7844

accountable regardless of rank, in order to ensure that
Afghanistan’s resources are used for development,
security and public services.

region will continue to cooperate with Afghanistan
in the security sector so as to jointly build a secure
regional environment.

After the promising progress made in naming an
Independent Election Commission, we look forward
to the completion of key election reforms and credible
parliamentary elections at the appropriate time. Against
that backdrop, UNAMA has played a critical role in
helping Afghanistan build its future. In upcoming
months, we also encourage UNAMA to help prepare
Afghan women to run as political candidates and serve
as community leaders.

The second prong involves steadfastly advancing
the process of national reconciliation in Afghanistan.
The international community should spare no effort to
support an inclusive, Afghan-led and Afghan-owned
reconciliation process and support the efforts of the
parties concerned to settle their differences through
dialogue. The quadrilateral coordination group, which
is made up of Afghanistan, Pakistan, China and the
United States, will continue to play a positive role in
galvanizing that process.

My last point is that my delegation would like to
thank Ambassador Van Bohemen and the delegation of
New Zealand for its able stewardship of the Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1267 (1999)
concerning Al-Qaida and the Taliban and associated
individuals and entities over the past two years. We
consider that Committee an important tool, not just
for countering the threat of the Taliban, but also for
promoting peace and reconciliation in Afghanistan.
Mr. Wu Haitao (China) (spoke in Chinese): China
thanks the delegation of Spain for convening this open
meeting on the situation in Afghanistan. I would also
like to thank Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral Yamamoto, the Executive Director of the
United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime, Mr. Yury
Fedotov, and Ambassador Gerard Van Bohemen for
their briefings.
China applauds the unceasing efforts of the
Afghan Government to safeguard national stability,
promote national reconciliation and advance economic
development. On the other hand, we should be
cognizant of the fact that Afghanistan still faces
grave political, economic and security challenges. The
road to peace and development remains long, and the
mission remains arduous. It is China’s hope that the
international community will continue to treat the
issue of Afghanistan as a priority and will continue its
support and aid to Afghanistan.
The first prong of such an effort involves drastically
improving the security situation in Afghanistan. The
international community should lend strong support to
the capacity-building of the Afghan National Security
and Defence Forces, so as to shore up Afghanistan’s
independent defence and counter-terrorism capabilities
and effectively tackle terrorism, transnational crime
and drug trafficking. We hope that the rest of the

The third prong involves supporting Afghanistan’s
development guided by Afghanistan’s own initiatives.
China commends the Afghan Government for drawing
up the Afghanistan National Peace and Development
Framework. We hope that the international community
will deliver on its aid pledges and provide targeted
assistance in line with the development strategy drawn
up by the Government of Afghanistan and based on the
country’s actual needs on the ground.
The fourth prong involves helping Afghanistan
integrate into regional economic cooperation. Just
recently, the General Assembly unanimously adopted
resolution 71/9, on the situation in Afghanistan. That
resolution refers to the importance of the One Belt,
One Road initiative — the Silk Road Economic Belt
and the Twenty-first century Maritime Silk Road — to
the promotion of Afghanistan’s economic development
and regional cooperation. We hope that the countries
concerned will work, as outlined in the resolution,
to strengthen regional economic cooperation and
connectivity and help Afghanistan join the mighty tide
of regional development.
China commends the work of the United Nations
Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA)
and supports the Mission’s positive role in helping
Afghanistan
safeguard
its
national
security,
promote economic development and improve its
governance capacities.
We will continue to support the work of UNAMA
and Special Representative of the Secretary-General
Yamamoto. China has been consistently supported
the reconciliation process, characterized by Afghan
leadership and ownership, as well as Afghanistan’s
capacity-building in the security sector to combat

16-4481913/38

S/PV.7844

The situation in Afghanistan

terrorism and the Shanghai Cooperation Organization’s
positive role in this area.
China steadfastly supports Afghan integration
in regional development cooperation and will work
with the Afghan Government to implement the
Chinese-Afghan memorandum of understanding on the
One Belt, One Road initiative and to strengthen our
cooperation in areas such as business, trade, energy
and infrastructure.
China is ready to work with the rest of the
international community and continue our tireless
endeavour to help Afghanistan achieve peace, stability
and development as soon as possible.
Mrs. Adnin (Malaysia): I join other Security
Council members in thanking you, Mr. President,
for convening this discussion on Afghanistan. I also
thank Special Representative of the Secretary-General
Yamamoto, Ambassador Van Bohemen and Mr. Yury
Fedotov for their briefings. I also welcome and thank the
Permanent Representative of Afghanistan, Mr. Saikal,
for his statement and participation today.
The briefings we heard today mentioned a number
of serious challenges to the Afghan Government. The
escalation in the number of armed clashes, setting
yet another record level since the United Nations
began recording incidents in 2007, is worrisome. The
United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan
(UNAMA) report on the protection of civilians, which
recorded 8,397 civilian casualties between January and
September this year, underscores the continued gravity
of the situation. Given this high figure, we are deeply
concerned about the significant escalation in the number
of child casualties, which increased by 15 per cent as
compared to the same period last year. Similarly, this
year also saw the highest number of newly internally
displaced persons, totalling more than 500,000 by
the end of November, according to the Office for the
Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs. Children, which
make up 50 per cent of the total numbers, are again the
most disproportionately affected group. We reiterate
the call for all parties to undertake the necessary
measures to uphold their obligations to ensure the
safety, security and well-being of all civilians in the
country, particularly children, who remain the most
vulnerable group.
The continued horrific attacks, for which the
Taliban has claimed responsibility, remain a major
and persistent challenge to the security situation in the
14/38

19/12/2016

country. Furthermore, the Government of Afghanistan
continues to engage in fighting with the Islamic State in
Iraq and the Levant and its affiliates and is challenged
by anti-Government elements. Malaysia strongly
condemns the horrific string of attacks that deliberately
target civilians. We also strongly condemn the recent
attacks on United Nations operations and staff members
in Afghanistan and urge the Government to conduct a
thorough investigation to ensure that the perpetrators
are held accountable.
Despite the persistent political, security and
economic challenges, we commend the Afghan
Government’s continued resilience and commitment
under these difficult circumstances. We are encouraged
by the recent peace agreement reached between
the Government and Hezb-e-Islami, as we believe
the agreement represents a crucial milestone in the
Government’s unwavering commitment to promoting
lasting peace and reconciliation in the country. We hope
that the successful implementation of the agreement
will contribute to confidence-building and encourage
further reconciliation between the Government and
other groups in the country. Since the agreement
was reached among the Afghan people, we are of the
view that the Council should be prepared to support
their decision, including by positively considering
the possible delisting of the Hezb-e-Islami principals
from the sanctions list of the Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1267 (1999), as requested by the
Afghan Government.
Promoting greater social and economic development
is another critical imperative in achieving long-lasting
prosperity, peace and stability in Afghanistan. In that
context, we are encouraged by the recent progress on
multiple initiatives to foster close cooperation among
Afghanistan, regional partners and the international
community. We welcome Afghanistan’s continued
efforts to deepen engagement with regional partners,
including through the Heart of Asia-Istanbul
Process, particularly in the areas of addressing
security challenges in the region and enhancing
infrastructure development.
We are encouraged by the outcome of the Brussels
Conference on Afghanistan, where the international
community pledged $15.2 billion to support
Afghanistan’s development priorities over the next four
years. That is a clear demonstration of the international
community’s commitment to assisting Afghanistan in
16-44819

19/12/2016

The situation in Afghanistan

progress towards self-reliance and improving the wellbeing of its people.
Countering narcotics remains one of the protracted
challenges faced by the Afghan Government. Executive
Director Fedotov noted in his briefing that the area of
opium poppy cultivation increased by 10 per cent in
2016, and potential opium production surged by 43 per
cent compared over the year before. More distressingly,
eradication efforts decreased by 90 per cent as compared
to 2015. All that constitutes a significant reversal of the
marginal gains achieved in countering narcotics last
year. As narcotics continue to pose serious challenges
to the overall security situation and development of
Afghanistan, a comprehensive strategy to address all
aspects of illicit drugs and its economy must be put
in place and fully implemented. In that regard, we are
confident that the intensification of efforts and further
enhancement of cooperation between the Government
and international partners, including the United
Nations Office on Drugs and Crime, the Collective
Security Treaty Organization and the Shanghai
Cooperation Organization, will eventually bring about
success in addressing the issue of illicit drugs in a
comprehensive manner.
Finally, we wish to think Ambassador Van
Bohemen for his briefing on the overall work of the
Security Council Committee established pursuant to
resolution 1988 (2011) and its Monitoring Team, as well
as for his excellent stewardship of the Committee. We
welcome and support the initiative of the Chair, which
would certainly contribute to enhancing the work and
coordination within UNAMA and the 1988 Committee.
In conclusion, I take this opportunity to express
our appreciation to Mr. Yamamoto and the entire
UNAMA team for their tireless efforts under
challenging circumstances. We are convinced that
the United Nations, with full respect for the principle
of the country’s sovereignty, will continue to play
a significant and contributing role in realizing
Afghanistan’s aspirations to achieve national unity and
lasting stability. To that end, Malaysia reiterates its firm
support for the reconciliation and reintegration efforts
undertaken by the Government of Afghanistan within
the context of respect for the country’s democracy and
Constitution, non-violence and respect for the rights of
all Afghan people.
Mr. Wilson (United Kingdom): I join others in
thanking all of our briefers. As Special Representative

S/PV.7844

of the Secretary-General Yamamoto said, Afghanistan
will not stand alone. I also want to join others in
thanking New Zealand for its stewardship of an
extremely important committee and for carrying out its
very important functions extremely well on behalf of
the Council.
The year 2016 has been an important year for
Afghanistan: the Warsaw Summit in July and the
Brussels Conference in October saw the international
community pledge the military and financial support
that Afghanistan will need to meet the considerable
political and economic challenges of the coming
years. We also pledge to support the ambitious reform
commitments of the National Unity Government.
Now that the National Unity Government has a
clear signal of our support, we look forward to 2017 and
to the implementation of the reforms Afghanistan needs
for a brighter future. In all of this, the Government and
people of Afghanistan will have the United Kingdom’s
support. I do not think that anyone in this Chamber
underestimates just how much there still is to do to
ensure that Afghanistan stays on the path to sustained
stability. We should focus on three specific points:
countering extremists; continuing development efforts;
and encouraging regional cooperation.
First, on countering extremists, it is clear that
Da’esh is not just a problem to be dealt with in Syria
and Iraq. They are a global threat, and Afghanistan has
sadly seen that first hand. Less than one month ago,
Da’esh claimed the lives of 30 people and left over 70
injured on the streets of Kabul.
The Taliban are compounding the security situation,
acting as another armed group in a country that has
had more than its fair share. Last week, they stopped a
fourth-year student of Kabul Polytechnic University as
he was driving home to visit his family. They hanged
him in the open, in public, evoking the darkest days
of life under Taliban control. And only last weekend,
five female security staff were murdered on their way
to work in Kandahar. Those are senseless deaths and
show that the Afghan National Defence and Security
Forces, with the NATO Resolute Support Mission, have
a tough road ahead.
For our part, the United Kingdom is working closely
with the Afghan Government as its seeks to overcome
the country’s legacy of conflict. As the coalition’s
leader of the Afghan National Army Officer Academy,
we are proudly helping to train the next generation of

16-4481915/38

S/PV.7844

The situation in Afghanistan

military leaders. As we seek to help ensure security on
the streets, we also recognize that Afghans must also
safe in their own homes. The sad fact is that it is not a
reality for many Afghan women. That is why British
Foreign Secretary Boris Johnson pledged his support
for the elimination of violence against women when he
spoke with Mr. Abdullah recently.
Secondly, security will always be short-lived if
we do not provide a foundation of development for
all Afghan people. So we welcome the Government’s
ambitious Afghanistan National Peace and Development
Framework. The United Kingdom will be a long-term
partner in its delivery. I am proud of our support so far
for 7.2 million children, from Kabul to Kandahar, who
are going to school thanks to the United Kingdom’s
support. Over 3 million of them are girls. I call on all
members of the Council to follow suit and invest in
Afghanistan’s future through development.
Thirdly and finally, Afghanistan and its partners
must continue to bolster regional relations at both the
political and the technical levels. The National Unity
Government is charting a course towards stability. If
it is to succeed, Afghanistan’s neighbours and partners
must further empower it, working in lockstep. We
welcome the recent Heart of Asia Summit, which
reinforced the common interests of Afghanistan and its
neighbours. Promoting cooperation across the region
through investment in infrastructure, overcoming
barriers to trade and pursuing mutually advantageous
economic development opportunities is in the entire
region’s interest.
In conclusion, 2016 has been a year of progress
and challenges in Afghanistan. As it draws to a close,
we look forward to a more peaceful and prosperous
year ahead — a year that sees economic growth and
improvements in the delivery of health, education
and water, and that sees the lives of ordinary Afghans
getting better. All of that will require the sustained
political will of the Government and the effective and
coordinated support of the rest of us. In that effort, the
United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan and
the Council will play a vital supporting role.
Mr. Bessho (Japan): Allow me to thank today’s
briefers for their comprehensive updates on the
situation in Afghanistan. I would also like to thank you,
Mr. President, for Spain’s contribution as penholder in
our discussions on Afghanistan over the past two years.
Japan will try to make a meaningful contribution as
16/38

19/12/2016

penholder, starting in January, by seeking a broad range
of opinions from our Council colleagues, Afghanistan,
the countries of the area, donors and civil society.
We witnessed two crucial international conferences
on Afghanistan this year. At the NATO Summit in July,
the international community reaffirmed its commitment
to standing with the Afghan people on security matters
by providing financial support to the Afghan National
Defence and Security Forces (ANDSF) through the end
of 2020 and sustaining the Resolute Support Mission
beyond 2016. At the Brussels Conference in October,
the international community pledged to continue
assistance to Afghanistan for the next four years based
on the principle of mutual accountability. We sincerely
hope that Afghanistan will soon achieve self-reliance
to the point where donors no longer need to announce
multi-year pledges.
We urge the National Unity Government to make
further efforts to implement its commitments regarding
the Self-Reliance through Mutual Accountability
Framework.I would like to note, however, that the role
of the Security Council is not to oversee progress on the
Framework. What we can do is monitor Afghanistan’s
continued reform efforts and its initiatives to combat
the spread of extremism, and evaluate whether they
are contributing to international and regional peace
and security. The Council should remain united in
supporting Afghanistan as it endeavours to overcome
its many challenges.
Sadly, the Secretary-General’s most recent report
on Afghanistan (S/2016/1049) reveals harsh realities.
Few improvements have been seen in terms of political
developments and security. A positive note can be seen
in the frequent meetings between President Ghani and
Chief Executive Abdullah, as well as the lessening
of public demands to replace the National Unity
Government. We have listened carefully to the briefing
by Special Representative of the Secretary-General
Yamamoto in order to determine what the Council can
do to further support Afghanistan and bring peace and
stability to the region.
Today’s briefing by the United Nations Office
on Drugs and Crime (UNODC) reminds us that
comprehensive solutions are required for Afghanistan.
Japan has been cooperating with UNODC on counternarcotics, and we are encouraged by its integrated
programme approach to addressing narcotics from
a variety of angles. Afghanistan is at its core an
16-44819

19/12/2016

The situation in Afghanistan

agricultural nation. We are providing support to allow
Afghanistan to fight poverty not with poppies, but with
the revival of its legitimate agricultural sector. We
envision regional cooperation in which Afghanistan’s
expanded agricultural productivity allows it to export
products to neighbouring countries and to become
a hub between Central Asia and the Indian Ocean.
That approach is in the spirit of the recent Heart of
Asia Conference.
Afghanistan possesses the potential for selfreliance, making its dire security situation all
the more unfortunate. The unstable environment
impedes opportunities for development, while we see
dangerous signs of growing extremism. Japan provides
$130 million in security assistance each year, but the
increased capacity of the ANDSF will depend not
only on international support but also on strengthened
governance by the National Unity Government, built
on a foundation of economic development. Most of
all, we firmly believe that an Afghan-led peace and
reconciliation process is the determining factor in
achieving a sustainable resolution to the conflict
The many countries that gathered for the Brussels
Conference are eager to witness concrete progress in
development. Similarly, the Council is eager to witness
concrete progress in security. Both the international
community and the National Unity Government
must translate their commitments into action in
order to achieve those concrete results. If security is
strengthened, it will provide a vital foundation for
regional cooperation and economic development. Japan
will deepen dialogue with various stakeholders and
seek progress in the Council going forward.
Mrs. Shwalger (New Zealand): New Zealand
too thanks Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral Yamamoto for his dedication to delivering
on the mandate of the United Nations Assistance
Mission in Afghanistan, particularly in such a difficult
operating environment.
The year 2016 has seen its share of ups and downs
for Afghanistan. As we have heard this morning,
the Taliban’s offensive has intensified over the past
year, with armed clashes at record levels. The cost
of weathering this storm has been considerable. The
Afghan economy has faced severe challenges in 2016,
including a significant drop in investment. A sharp
increase in the number of internally displaced persons,
resulting from ongoing insecurity, and a large increase

S/PV.7844

in returnees from Pakistan will place additional stress
on the already challenging humanitarian situation.
September marked the two-year anniversary of
the National Unity Government. Efforts over the past
few months to provide a more united leadership have
been welcome, but divisions within the Government
remain evident, as witnessed by the Parliament’s recent
dismissal of seven ministers.
The conclusion of a peace agreement with Hezbi-Islami also represented a positive, if modest, step
towards long-term peace and reconciliation. However,
prospects for peace talks with the Taliban appear to
have dimmed in the near term.
On a more positive note, we welcome the
international community’s recommitment of support to
Afghanistan for another four years at the NATO Warsaw
Summit and the Brussels Conference on Afghanistan.
New Zealand stood with others to demonstrate its
enduring commitment to the people of Afghanistan. We
did so without hesitation. The cost of failure would be
too great.
History has shown us that no amount of
international support can by itself bring peace and
security to Afghanistan. As my Minister stressed to
the Council in September (see S/PV.7771), the future
of Afghanistan lies in the hands of its Government
and its people. A unified and effective National Unity
Government — one that puts the interests of its people
first — will be essential for success.
We recognize the scale and complexity of the
challenges the Government faces. Key among them
is tackling an emboldened Taliban insurgency. The
insecurity brought about by the continued offensive
undermines progress across the board. Experience
tells us that peace and reconciliation with the Taliban
demands a multifaceted approach. The Afghanistan
National Defence and Security Forces have a vital role
to play in meeting these challenges.
Beyond the battlefield, the Taliban’s ability to wage
war needs to be constrained. There is an urgent need to
tackle the flow of narcotics, funding and personnel to
the Taliban and other insurgents. The same can be said
of funding from illegal mining.
We also need to see concerted, good-faith efforts
by others in the region to halt the supply of funding,
weapons and personnel to the Taliban and to support the
establishment of a viable peace process. In particular,

16-4481917/38

S/PV.7844

The situation in Afghanistan

the enormous trust deficit between Afghanistan and
Pakistan needs to be bridged. These tensions filter
down to the Security Council Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1988 (2011), where consensus
decision-making regularly allows politically motivated
stalling to prevent the most basic and necessary of
actions from being taken.
The freezing of assets to prevent them from
being used to fund the Taliban’s insurgency has been
blocked. Even proposals to meet with regional States
have been denied. Such behaviour has time and again
frustrated practical action that could support peace and
reconciliation efforts on the ground. It also undermines
the credibility and effectiveness of the 1988 Committee
and, by extension, the Council itself. We urge all
parties to make a concerted effort to rebuild trust. The
alternative will be extremely costly for all involved.
The challenges faced by the National Unity
Government in achieving long-term peace and security
are many and daunting, but it will not have to walk
that road alone, as many have reassured Afghanistan
this morning. For its part, New Zealand will remain a
partner to Afghanistan in 2017 and beyond.
The President (spoke in Spanish): Before I give
the floor to the next speaker, I would like to inform
the Council that, based on news coming in to us, the
Ambassador of the Russian Federation to Turkey,
Mr. Andrey Karlov, has been shot. He is seriously
wounded and is being transferred to a hospital in
Ankara. We have no further details at this point.
Mr. Lamek (France) (spoke in French): I thank you,
Mr. President, for informing us of that terrible incident.
I would like to begin by warmly thanking our
briefers, Mr. Tadamichi Yamamoto, Mr. Yury Fedotov
and Ambassador Van Bohemen and Ambassador Saikal.
France associates itself with the statement to be
delivered on behalf of the European Union.
Two years since the establishment of the Government
of National Unity, it is important to underscore that
progress has been made. The Afghanistan National
Peace and Development Framework was adopted; a road
map that defines priority public policies for the years to
come was developed; and our dialogue aimed at halting
migration towards Europe resulted in the signing
of an agreement. Those efforts must be welcomed,
as they were recently at the Brussels Conference on
Afghanistan. France reiterates its full support for the
18/38

19/12/2016

Afghan Government and encourages it to continue its
efforts to develop and stabilize the country.
The Afghan forces have also made considerable
progress. In that regard, I commend their commitment
and courage. However, the continuing deterioration
of the security situation is extremely worrying. In
addition to the almost daily confrontations, new attacks
by the Taliban and the Khorasan Islamic State — which
is to say, Da’esh — have served to confirm the
fragility of the situation since our previous debate in
September (see S/PV.7771). The recent deterioration
in the humanitarian situation, with the massive inflow
of refugees from Pakistan and Iran, also puts the
Afghan Government in a difficult position. In that
context, the first priority for Afghanistan is to have a
strong and united Government. That national unity is
the prerequisite for dealing effectively with security,
economic and development issues.
As Mr. Yamamoto said moments ago, the conflict
not only prevents Afghanistan from achieving its
economic potential, but it also bears an extremely high
a human cost, especially for children. That is why it is
urgent to relaunch discussions on a peace process led
by and for the Afghan people. France calls on all actors,
in particular the regional Powers, to use their influence
in order to make sure that the end of hostilities and
the resumption of peace negotiations become a reality.
We have a collective responsibility to actively support
the stabilization of Afghanistan and to contribute to
the establishment of lasting peace in the country, with
all the Afghan actors who have demonstrated their
serious commitment.
I would like to take advantage of the presence here
of the Executive Director of the United Nations Office
on Drugs and Crime (UNODC) to consider for a moment
the issue of combating drug trafficking. This is a subject,
as members are aware, which is of great concern to
France. As Mr. Fedotov said earlier, drug trafficking
fuels the illicit economy, corruption and the Taliban
insurgency, while also jeopardizing the health of many
Afghanis. The report prepared jointly by UNODC and
the Government of Afghanistan in October illustrates
the notable and worrying developments, which were
mentioned by Mr. Fedotov. As others mentioned before
me, France is concerned by the 43 per cent increase
in opium production and by the significant reduction
in the eradication of the areas where the opium poppy
is grown. There are enormous challenges in those
areas, whether related to the security situation or to
16-44819

19/12/2016

The situation in Afghanistan

mobilizing the significant resources that those efforts
require. France therefore commends the technical
assistance provided by UNODC and encourages the
Afghan authorities to step up their efforts aimed at
reducing the production and trafficking of drugs.
United Nations support, through the United Nations
Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA), remains
more essential than ever to accompany Afghanistan
in the search for greater peace and stability. Let me
conclude by reiterating my country’s full support to
the Afghan Government and to the work of the United
Nations in support of its efforts. I would also like to pay
tribute to all of the UNAMA personnel for the work
they are undertaking in very difficult conditions.
Mr. Ramírez Carreño (Bolivarian Republic of
Venezuela) (spoke in Spanish): We thank Mr. Yamamoto
for his briefing and for his work, and Mr. Fedotov for
his briefing. Our thanks also go to Ambassador Van
Bohemen of New Zealand for his work at the healm of
the Security Council Committee established pursuant
to resolution 1988 (2011).
As this is our last participation in the Council
dealing with the issue of Afghanistan, we would
like to express our support for the Government of
Afghanistan in its quest for unity, peace and prosperity
in the country given the difficult ongoing political and
security situation. The revival of peace talks with the
Taliban insurgents were affected because of the violent
actions against the Government and against civilians.
Furthermore, we welcome the 29 September peace
agreement between the Government of Afghanistan
and Hizb-i Islami, which has now joined the national
reconciliation process. We hope that important step will
encourage other political forces to join efforts towards
reconciliation and unity.
In that regard, the 1988 Sanctions Committee, on
the Taliban and associated entities, should look into
possible delisting of Hizb-i Islami, since its main leader
has fully rejected any terrorist links and decided to
collaborate with the Government, so as to move forward
in building peace in the context of the agreements
reached between the Afghan Government and that
group. We hope that consensus can emerge among
members of the Committee to proceed in that direction.
Furthermore, in the context of the international
community’s efforts to back peace and reconciliation
efforts in Afghanistan, we welcome the outcome
of the Brussels Conference on Afghanistan and

S/PV.7844

its reaffirmation to assist that country in terms of
development and financial assistance.
The security situation in Afghanistan continues
to be volatile because of armed clashes between the
Taliban and other violent non-State actors against the
Afghan security forces. That has had an adverse impact
on the civilian population, who flee for their lives from
regions of armed conflict. We are concerned about the
22 per cent increase in armed clashes as compared to
last year. That is the highest rate of recent years. We
are also concerned about the civilian casualties caused
by aerial bombardment by the international coalition.
The security situation in the country has worsened
because of the offensive carried out by the Taligan
since September, which is a big challenge to the Afghan
armed forces.
Therefore, the spiral in violence has made civilians
the main victims of those armed clashes. That is borne
out by statistics of the United Nations Office for the
Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs, which state
that 8,000 persons were affected, a figure that includes
dead and wounded, as well as Afghan girls and boys,
who have suffered traumas as a result of being military
targets. There are some 700 dead. which represents a
15 per cent increase as compared to last year, not to
mention the more serious fact that many of those children
continue to be recruited as soldiers by non-State actors,
in flagrant violation of international treaties, including
those concerning the promotion and protection of the
fundamental rights of children. Despite that terrible
reality, we pay tribute to the work carried out by the
Afghan Government aimed at increasing the number of
child-protection units.
In the context of regional cooperation, we
encourage Afghan authorities to continue their talks
with the Government of Pakistan to enhance trust for
the benefit of both peoples and to create a common
front to contribute to stability in the region. Likewise,
we welcome the strengthening of bilateral relations
among Afghanistan, India, Iran and China, among other
countries. That process is key in supporting Afghanistan
in solving its complex political, security, humanitarian
and economic challenges. We harbour hope that
Afghanistan very soon will become a full-fledged
member of the Shanghai Cooperation Organization,
a step that will favour efforts in effectively fighting
terrorism and other security threats to the countries of
the region.

16-4481919/38

S/PV.7844

The situation in Afghanistan

In terms of empowering women in accordance with
Security Council resolution 1325 (2000), we would like
to welcome highlight the work of Afghan authorities to
reinforce the legal framework against the harassment
of women in the workplace and the ongoing progress
in women’s participation in the establishment of peace
and security. Despite all of those advances in promoting
women’s rights, we still see violent acts against this
vulnerable group, such as the one at Kandahar airport
on 17 December when armed men killed five women
employed in the terminal after they had previously
received death threats because they wanted to exercise
their right to work. That is an event that we roundly
condemn and that we believe should be punished.
Drug smuggling continues to be a serious threat
to peace and stability in Afghanistan. The Taliban
insurgency is using illegal drug trafficking to finance
its terrorist activities. As we see in the report of the
Secretary-General (S/2016/1049), there has been an
increase in poppy production and there is a low rate
of crop eradication. That is very worrisome because of
the intense fighting, especially in Helmand province.
In that regard, we would like to acknowledge the joint
efforts by Afghanistan, Kazakhstan, Kyrgyzstan,
Tajikistan and Uzbekistan, as well as the United Nations
Office on Drugs and Crime, with the aim of forming a
common front against that challenge within a regional
cooperation framework. We reiterate that an effective
fight against drugs requires international cooperation,
including from neighbouring countries and destination
countries, as part of a joint responsibility to prevent,
combat and eradicate that scourge.
As our term on the Security Council will come to
an end in just a few days, we would like to acknowledge
the efforts of the United Nations Assistance Mission
in Afghanistan in building peace and stability in the
country. Without a doubt, the Mission plays a crucial
role in supporting initiatives by the Afghan authorities
to face the challenges confronting the country and to
shore up the State and its political institutions.
In conclusion, we would encourage the Government
of Afghanistan to step up its efforts, along with the
constructive support of the international community, to
bring about a broad and inclusive political process that
will lead to enduring peace and to ensure that the State
has more control over all its territory and exercises
greater sovereignty over its resources for the benefit of
its people.
20/38

19/12/2016

Mr. Moustafa (Egypt) (spoke in Arabic): I join
my colleagues in thanking the briefers for the useful
information we heard under this agenda item at the
beginning of the meeting, the scope and diversity of
which were surprising.
Many aspects have been highlighted here with
regard to the current situation in Afghanistan. Egypt
commends the Afghan Government for the major
efforts they made to put together a National Framework
for Peace and Development in Afghanistan. The
international community has welcomed the plan,
which was an important element in the success of the
ministerial-level Brussels Conference on Afghanistan
taht took place at the beginning of October. We also
welcome the commitment displayed by the international
community in order to continue politically and
financially supporting Afghanistan. And we also
welcome the statements made at that Conference with
regard to the intention to provide $15.2 billion between
now and 2020.
We urge the international community to honour
its commitments to support the ambitious reform plan
put together by the Government of National Unity.
In the same vein, we congratulate the people and the
Government of Afghanistan on the positive development
represented by the peace agreement signed at the end of
September between the Government and Hizb-i Islami
(Gulbuddin). We hope that this will be an example
followed by other Afghan factions and that it will lead
to peace throughout Afghanistan.
Terrorism remains the greatest challenge facing
Afghanistan. The Government’s efforts aimed at
countering terrorism along with the international
support it has garnered for that purpose is the most
suitable way to put an end to this phenomenon, as
is the case in many regions of the world — be it in
Central Asia or other regions of the world. The ongoing
activities and spread of Da’esh/Khorasan Province in
Afghanistan is a major danger, and we must be relentless
in our efforts to combat it by pooling the efforts of the
international community.
On the other hand, drug trafficking in Afghanistan
is a parallel threat to that of terrorism. The growth of
this problem, as was highlighted in the report of the
United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime published
in October represents a step back in combating drug
trafficking. The figures in the report show that drug
trafficking fuels illegal activities, central among them
16-44819

19/12/2016

The situation in Afghanistan

terrorist groups and armed militias. It is therefore
essential to encourage international and regional
cooperation in order to fight drug trafficking. In that
regard, we appreciate the convening of the Central
Asian conference on drug trafficking in Afghanistan,
which was recently organized by Tajikistan.
The worsening of the humanitarian situation in
Afghanistan in recent months is an additional challenge
for Afghanistan, and the international community must
shoulder its responsibilities and provide adequate
support to the Afghan Government in order to help
it meet that challenge. The report (S/2016/1049) of
the Secretary-General illustrates how serious the
situation is.
Egypt maintains strong, friendly relations with
the people and the Government of Afghanistan. We
are always ready to support stabilization efforts
throughout the Afghan territory and we are always
ready to support the efforts of the Afghan Government
in combating terrorism.
In addition to its efforts to promote development and
improve the living conditions of Afghans, the Egyptian
Agency for Partnership and Development marshalls
coordination among various Egyptian agencies to
respond to the needs of Afghanistan. Our strategic
training programmes for Afghan armed forces and
police are an example of how successful that cooperation
can be, and they fill an important need in Afghanistan
thanks to Egyptian expertise in those areas. That has
enabled us to train 2,567 Afghan police officers. Egypt
also provided LE1 million Egyptian in humanitarian
assistance, in addition to training for nurses, diplomats
and legal experts, as well as assistance for more than 500
Afghani students at Al-Azhar University. Moreover,
we have deployed efforts in Kabul to raise awareness
among the public with regard to tolerance with regard
to Islam. We promote assistance and cooperation in
other areas as well, especially in the field of energy, in
particular renewable energy.
Lastly, Egypt reiterates its support and solidarity
with the Government of Afghanistan in its attempts to
achieve peace and stability. The goal is the same as the
goal of combating terrorism. In that regard, we would
like to express our appreciation and gratitude to the
Ambassador of New Zealand, who chairs the Security
Council Committee established pursuant to resolution
1988 (2011).

S/PV.7844

Mr. Ciss (Senegal) (spoke in French): My delegation
would like to thank Special Representative of the
Secretary-General Yamamoto and Executive Director
of the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime
Fedotov for their interesting briefings. I would also
like to thank Ambassador of New Zealand, Mr. Gerard
van Bohemen, and his entire team for their outstanding
efforts at the healm of the Security Council Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1988 (2011).
While the Council’s attention is focused on the very
serious situations in other parts of the world, the report
(S/2016/1049) of the Secretary-General on Afghanistan
nevertheless serves to remind us of the huge political,
security and humanitarian challenges that that country
continues to face, in spite of the progress achieved, in
particular by the Afghan Government. As part of that
progress, I want to commend the efforts of Afghan
officials in promoting political dialogue, national unity,
peace and stability in the country. That progress has
lead to a relative easing of tensions on the political
front, as witnessed by the signing of a peace agreement
on 29 September between the Government and Hizb-i
Islami (Gulbuddin). Such momentum towards dialogue
should be encouraged, as it could bring us closer to our
main goal of reducing the number of armed groups that
pose an ongoing threat to Afghanistan.
On the security front, however, much remains to
be done. Armed gangs and terrorist groups continue
to threaten the population and carry out attacks. With
regard to the Taliban, no tangible results have been
achieved so far, unfortunately. In fact, they have
continued, and even stepped up their offensive, with
various attacks in different parts of the country. At the
same time, we should note that the pace of asymmetric
attacks, including killings and abductions, have
increased, along with its trail of tragedy. My delegation
therefore urges that every effort be made to convince
the Taliban of the need to engage in unconditional
dialogue with the Afghan Government.
Also with regard to security, we should welcome
the growing strength of the Afghan security forces. We
should also commend the involvement of international
forces in support of the Afghan army in fighting the
Islamic State.
The security situation I have described and ongoing
challenges in combating drug trafficking,continue to
have devastating consequences on civilians and on
respect for human rights. Evidence of this, according to

16-4481921/38

S/PV.7844

The situation in Afghanistan

the report, is the heavy price paid by civilian victims,
mainly women and children, especially during the
air strikes carried out against the Taliban in the city
of Kunduz.
In the area of human rights, while we welcome
the Government’s legislation to protect women against
harassment, we would like to echo the concerns of the
Ministry of Women’s Affairs with regard the persistent
obstacles that women encounter in participating
and advancing in State institutions. We call on the
United Nations to continue to take into account the
voice of women, who, as emphasized in the report,
play a crucial role in fostering a peaceful society and
challenging radical ideologies, as well as in preventing
violent extremism.
My delegation would also like to commend the
working group established by the Civilian Casualty
Avoidance and Mitigation Boards and would like the
rules of engagement to take into greater account the
safeguarding of the lives and physical integrity of
innocent civilians. I would also like to align myself
with the Secretary-General in solemnly calling for
protecting the increasing number of displaced persons.
Their quality of life undoubtedly depends on their
finding a permanent home, the allocation of land and
the provision of substantial support.
As we have seen, the Afghan Government continues
to embark upon a path of constructive political and
economic development and good governance in spite
of the difficulties that the country faces on the road to
peace and development. At this point, I would like to
make a solemn appeal to the countries of the region,
to the international community as a whole and to
private investors to intensify their efforts and increase
their support to the Government and the people of
Afghanistan in their quest for economic and social
development. In that respect, we need to acknowledge
that the commitments made at the NATO Summit
and at the Brussels Conference offer opportunities
for initiating crucial reforms, particularly in poverty
reduction, governance, establishing the rule of law and
the carrying out of elections.
The surge of international solidarity generated at the
Brussels Conference, which led to pledges by different
partners in the amount of approximately $15.2 billion to
contribute to the development priorities of the country
until 2020, should be praised. Those commendable
pledges must be followed by the disbursement of the
22/38

19/12/2016

funds so that Afghanistan can once and for all turn the
page on this dark chapter in its long and glorious history.
In conclusion, I would like to reiterate Senegal’s
support to Mr. Yamamoto and the entire Mission
and commend the Government of Afghanistan for its
efforts to promote peace, stability and development in
the country.
Mr. Lucas (Angola): We are grateful to the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General,
Mr. Yamamoto, and to the Executive Director of the
United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime (UNODC),
Mr. Fedotov, for their briefings. We are also grateful
to Ambassador Gerard van Bohemen of New Zealand,
Chair of the Security Council Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1988 (2011), and we praise his
outstanding work in steering the Committee over the
past two years.
The security and development assistance
commitments for the next four years made by the
international community to Afghanistan and its
Government during the July 2016 NATO Summit, the
October 2015 Brussels Conference, in which pledges
were made to assist the country in overcoming the
enormous challenges it faces, and the recent Ministerial
Conference of the Heart of Asia/Istanbul Process, which
took a strong stand against terrorism, were instances
where political will and a tangible commitment to
the country were translated into initiatives by the
international community in support of Afghanistan that
are expected to advance the vitally needed stabilization
and reform efforts embodied in the Afghan National
Peace and Development Framework.
However, persistent political tensions, increasing
numbers of security incidents, rising numbers of
internally displaced persons and returning refugees, a
harsh economic environment and a stalled peace process
are some key elements portrayed by the SecretaryGeneral in his report (S/2016/1049). The UNODC’s
Afghanistan Opium Survey 2016 reveals a substantial
expansion in areas of opium poppy cultivation and
exponentially increasing opium production and a
decrease in eradication efforts due to financing
restrictions and the security situation.
Even given the great dependence of the country
on the drugs economy and the latter’s role in fuelling
corruption and in the financing of insurgents and
terrorists, with a view to translating into action the
international community consensus, assistance should
16-44819

19/12/2016

The situation in Afghanistan

be stepped up in the eradication efforts and in finding
alternatives to poppy cultivation and opium production,
by diversifying the country’s economy. We welcome
the establishment of the national drug action plan,
which serves to underscore the Afghan Government’s
willingness and determination to counter illicit
production and trafficking and to reduce demand.
On a different note, despite the immense difficulties,
the measures taken by the Government to promote
women’s rights and their economic empowerment
are very encouraging. The holding of Global Open
Day events throughout the country, in which Afghan
women underlined their role in fostering a peaceful
society, including in preventing violent extremism, and
the need to implement resolution 1325 (2000) and legal
frameworks protecting the rights of women, especially
from violence, are is an example of such measures.
Regretfully, little progress has been made on
the road to peace. We took good note of the peace
agreement between the Government and the Hizb-i
Islami, in the expectation that the agreement would be
fully implemented with a view to reducing violence and
promoting reconciliation, while the Taliban movement
continues to engage in a spree of violence and no progress
has taken place in the search for a peace settlement. In
that regard, we join special the Special Representative
in calling the Taliban to embrace dialogue and a
political process without conditions, which could lead
to the achievement of peace in the country.
The strengthening of regional cooperation is
key to the attainment of progress in the search for
peace. We regret that relations between Afghanistan
and Pakistan remain strained, and it is our hope that
dialogue will proceed positively and bear results, due to
the importance of relations between the two countries
for peace and development in the region. We commend
the renewed commitment of the trilateral cooperation
between Afghanistan, Iran and India, the deepening of
engagement of Gulf States in the pursuit of peace, and
infrastructure and security development with Central
Asian States.
In conclusion, we would like to express our
support for the United Nations Assistance Mission in
Afghanistan, which is operating in such a challenging
environment, and to thank it for its contribution to
peace and stability in Afghanistan. We would also like
to reiterate our solidarity with the Government and the
people of Afghanistan as they face immense challenges.

S/PV.7844

We fully share the view that the country’s main priority
should be to reinvigorate the peace and reconciliation
processes and that the international community must
maintain its commitment to the economic and social
development and the establishment of peace and
stability in Afghanistan.
Mr. Bermúdez (Uruguay) (spoke in Spanish): In
the light of your announcement, Mr. President, I would
first like to express my solidarity with the delegation of
the Russian Federation in the face of the attack suffered
by the Russian Ambassador in Ankara, victim of the
unreasonable and the intolerant.
I am grateful to the briefers for their valuable,
enlightening and complementary briefings, which
described the difficult reality that Afghanistan is
experiencing today. Once again, through the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, Mr. Tadamichi
Yamamoto, we wish to reiterate our gratitude to all
United Nations staff, while underscoring the efforts of
the United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan
in the fulfilment of its mandate and of those involved in
the delivery of humanitarian aid throughout the country,
who, despite working in extremely arduous conditions
and being victims of frequent attacks, continue to bring
a measure of relief to the people who need it so much.
We also welcome and commend the work that has
been done over the past two years by New Zealand as
Chair of the Security Council Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1988 (2011). We wish every
success to Japan, which will take up the position
in January.
Uruguay reiterates its call upon the Afghan
Government and urges its authorities to continue on the
path towards lasting peace. In that respect, I welcome
the activities undertaken by the Government to achieve
the peace so long desired by the Afghan people. The
peace agreement signed recently by the Government
and the High Peace Council with Hezb-i-Islami, on
22 September, represents an important step forward
and reflects the efforts of the Government to initiate
a dialogue. We hope that this step will serve as an
example and as a way to achieve dialogue and direct
talks between the Government of Afghanistan and the
Taliban, so as to create conditions conducive to the
establishment of peace.
Afghanistan continues to face a number of
challenges in seeking political stability and meeting the
needs of its people. Nonetheless, Uruguay welcomes the

16-4481923/38

S/PV.7844

The situation in Afghanistan

Government’s efforts to overcome obstacles, and in that
respect we encourage it to continue to work towards
reconciliation, showing the leadership necessary to
reach an agreement that will ensure stability in the
short, medium and long term and enable Afghanistan
to continue with the reforms necessary to rebuild
the country in an environment of peace, security
and development.
At the recent Brussels Conference on Afghanistan,
commitments were made by the Government, through
the reform agenda, and by the international community,
through the provision of political and financial support,
to address the country’s development priorities
through 2020. It remains key for the United Nations
and the international community to provide support
and assistance to the National Unity Government,
in strict compliance with the principles of national
ownership and leadership. The support of the countries
of the region in achieving economic growth and in
overcoming issues related to peace and security in
Afghanistan is vital.
We are deeply concerned at the worsening
humanitarian situation. Recent reports have indicated
that 5 million people require assistance, some 13 per cent
more than last year. The rapid rise in the number of new
internally displaced persons as a result of intensified
fighting; the increase in the number of refugees and
undocumented Afghans from Pakistan — more than
600,000; the limited resources in a number of sectors,
in particular the health sector; restricted access to aid;
and insufficient supplies to meet existing needs means
that humanitarian aid is urgently needed. We hope that
these obstacles can be overcome quickly.
Quick and unfettered access of humanitarian aid
to conflict areas is absolutely key. Uruguay reiterates
that restricting the delivery of humanitarian assistance
constitutes a violation of international humanitarian
law. In this context, the protection of civilians,
especially women and children, is critical, and Uruguay
therefore deems it imperative to respect international
humanitarian law and international human rights law.
In that context, we call for the full implementation of the
provisions of resolution 2286 (2016), on the protection
of the wounded and the sick and medical facilities and
personnel, adopted last May.
We wish also to refer here to the key role of Afghan
women. Last September, at our previous debate on the
issue, the Special Representative, quoting President
24/38

19/12/2016

Ghani, said, “the face of Afghan poverty is female”
(S/PV.7771, p.3).
We stress the need to redouble the efforts made
to ensure the economic empowerment of women.
Likewise, the role of women in the peace process
and in Afghan society is vital. We therefore urge the
Government of Afghanistan to continue with its ongoing
efforts to empower women and strengthen their role
and active participation in the peace process. As noted
in the report of the Secretary-General (S/2016/1049),
those commitments need to be translated into action,
including continued concrete work and national
financing to implement the national action plan on
Security Council resolution 1325 (2000) and relevant
legal and policy frameworks protecting the rights of
women and especially protecting women from violence.
The President: I shall now make a statement in my
capacity as the representative of Spain.
Spain shares the views expressed by previous
speakers and aligns itself with the statement to be made
later by the observer of the European Union.
We welcome the support for the people of
Afghanistan and for the National Unity Government
and its efforts to promote stability, democracy,
security, human rights and the country’s economic and
social progress. We commend the support provided to
the United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan
(UNAMA), the Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral and the outstanding work that the United
Nations is carrying out in Afghanistan. We share in
the satisfaction at the considerable progress achieved
in Afghanistan in the past decade, while recognizing
that it remains fragile. We also share the determination
to continue to work together to consolidate it. We join
the call on the Afghan authorities to continue to support
the reform process, including electoral reform, good
governance, combating corruption, the promotion and
protection of human rights, in particular the rights of
women and children.
We share the concern at the security situation in
the country and at the growing number of civilian
victims of the conflict, and, of course, the common and
deep outrage of all at the persistence of terrorism and
violent extremism.
The international community is united here, as it is
in very few cases, in its support for Afghanistan, as was
evident once again at the Brussels Conference, convened
16-44819

19/12/2016

The situation in Afghanistan

jointly by the European Union and Afghanistan, and at
the Warsaw NATO summit, both held this past year.
I should like here to highlight three issues.
First, I would refer to the briefing given this
morning by Ambassador Van Bohemen, Chair of the
Security Council Committee established pursuant
to resolution 1988 (2011) and the Security Council
Committee established pursuant to resolution 1267
(1999) concerning Al-Qaida and the Taliban and
associated individuals and entities. Spain supports all
efforts aimed at ensuring an Afghan-led and owned
peace process as the only way to put a definitive end
to the conflict. We trust that the agreement reached by
the Afghan Government with the Hezb-i-Islami will
achieve the desired results and that new agreements for
peace will follow.

S/PV.7844

carrying out the important responsibilities of penholder
in the Council with regard to Afghanistan. That role has
been fulfilling in two ways. As a friendly country to
Afghanistan, we have been able to keep our commitment
in a unique way by coordinating the work of the
Council in the promotion of peace and security within
Afghanistan. As an active and committed member of
the Security Council, we have tried to contribute to
maintaining the unity of the Council in its support for
Afghanistan. I thank the representative of Afghanistan
for the kind words he shared about my country. I want
to assure him that, under different circumstances after
1 January, Afghanistan will continue to have a friend, a
partner and an ally in Spain.
I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.

Secondly, I would underscore the work done on
Afghanistan by the Informal Expert Group on Women
and Peace and Security, co-chaired by Spain and the
United Kingdom. I welcome the commitment of the
Special Representative and his UNAMA team in this
respect, and I reiterate our gratitude for the work begun
by the Government of Afghanistan to implement the
national plan of action on resolution 1325 (2000) and
the national strategy to eliminate violence against
women. We encourage the Government to continue
to translate into reality, in a decisive, tangible and
irreversible manner, the commitment it has undertaken
in terms of ensuring the rights of women and their
increased participation in public life, including in the
peace process and the reconciliation process.

I wish to remind all speakers to limit their
statements to no more than four minutes in order to
enable the Council to carry out its work expeditiously.
To that end, let me take this opportunity to remind
speakers that the presidency will use the flashing lights
on the collars of the microphones to prompt speakers to
bring their remarks to a close. Delegations with lengthy
statements are kindly requested to circulate their texts
in writing or to post them on the PaperSmart web page.

Thirdly, with respect to the humanitarian situation,
the Secretary-General and the Special Representative
have shown us the growing relevance of this issue in the
immediate future. The situation is very disturbing, not
only because of the increase in the number of internally
displaced persons, but also because the situation has
worsened given the new dynamics of the conflict
and given the number of Afghans who are returning,
many of whom are undocumented and in a situation of
extreme vulnerability. We appeal to the Government
of Afghanistan, the United Nations, humanitarian
agencies and the countries of the region to give priority
attention to the situation in the coming months.

Italy aligns itself with the statement to be made by
the observer of the European Union. Italy also supports
the statement to be made by the representative of the
Kingdom of the Netherlands as part of our cooperation
in the framework of our upcoming split term in the
Security Council.

I would conclude by pointing out that today’s
debate is the last one in which Spain will participate
as an elected member of the Security Council for the
2015-2016 biennium. My country has had the honour of

I now give the floor to the representative of Italy.
Mr. Lambertini (Italy): Allow me to express
our deepest condolences to the Russian Federation
delegation for the outrageous attack that killed the
Russian Ambassador in Ankara.

I would like to express my appreciation to Special
Representative of the Secretary-General Yamamoto for
his comprehensive briefing, and for the opportunity
of addressing the Council regarding the situation in
Afghanistan. We appreciate the briefing of the Executive
Director of the United Nations Office on Drugs and
Crime, Mr. Fedotov, and express our tremendous
satisfaction over the work done by the delegation of New
Zealand as Chair of the Security Council Committee
pursuant to resolutions 1267 (1999), 1989 (2011) and
2253 (2015) concerning Islamic State in Iraq and the

16-4481925/38

S/PV.7844

The situation in Afghanistan

19/12/2016

Levant (Da’esh), Al-Qaida and associated individuals,
groups, undertakings and entities.

be followed by further action, such as an agreed
electoral timeline.

The successful outcomes of the Warsaw Summit
and the Brussels Conference are a testament to the
enduring partnership between the international
community and Afghanistan. Together, we will persist
in our joint efforts to create an environment that
allows the Afghan people to envision a future of peace,
economic prosperity and self-reliance.

The fight against corruption must also be a
top priority, and the recent inauguration of the
Anti-Corruption Justice Centre must be quickly
followed up with an effective investigation and
prosecution of cases, in close cooperation with all the
relevant institutions.

Our partnership is essential precisely because
Afghanistan continues to face daunting challenges, first
and foremost in the security arena. Since the previous
debate (see S/PV.7771), Afghan forces have continued
to confront a determined assault from a wide range of
violent extremist groups, which they have faced with
great courage and valour. Italy continues its support in
that area as a framework nation in the Resolute Support
Mission, which provides crucial training, advising
and assistance so that the Afghan security forces can
continue to make important progress in their ability to
counter those threats.
But the situation remains fragile, and we note with
concern that the violence continues to take its heaviest
toll on the innocent and most vulnerable. Civilian
casualties are still at record levels, and I also wish to
call the Council’s attention to reports that, according to
several sources, the conflict has forced the closure of
up to 1,000 schools.
The plight of internally displaced persons (IDPs)
and the general deterioration of humanitarian conditions
require our sustained attention. The dramatically
increased flow of returnees from neighbouring
countries this year is especially challenging, and Italy
is proud to support the Office of the United Nations
High Commissioner for Refugees with a voluntary
contribution of €1 million in order to meet the
humanitarian needs of IDPs and returnees.
Afghanistan must now complement that support
from the international community with an unwavering
commitment to carry out the reform agenda, in line with
the expectations of the donor community, the Afghan
population and the principle of mutual accountability,
reaffirmed at Brussels.
That effort will require a sustained unity of purpose
within the Government. The recent nomination of the
Commissioners of the electoral management bodies
is a positive step in that regard, which we hope will
26/38

The renewed commitment at Brussels to the rights
of women and their empowerment in society is also
crucial. While the improvements made in the past 15
years are important, more must be done. Consider, for
instance, the fact that international lawliteracy rates
for women are still unacceptably high, especially in
rural areas.
We also take this opportunity to acknowledge the
important work by the Security Council’s Informal
Expert Group on Women and Peace and Security.
Together with the United Nations Assistance Mission
in Afghanistan, they continue to assist the Afghan
Government in its commitment to implementing
resolution 1325 (2000). We endorse their recent
conclusions and we welcome the progress made by
Afghanistan thus far, while also encouraging more
focused efforts where gaps still remain, such as
women’s effective participation in the security sector.
The only way for Afghanistan to fully achieve peace and
prosperity is if women become primary stakeholders in
the process.
The same concept applies equally to peace and
reconciliation, where women must play a prominent
role. Italy supports all efforts in that regard, and we
encourage the participation of all actors who can engage
positively in this area.
The involvement of regional partners is a key factor,
and we continue to encourage all initiatives aimed at
establishing a framework of dialogue and collaboration
between Afghanistan and its neighbours.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Germany.
Mr. Thoms (Germany): Germany aligns itself with
the statement to be delivered by the observer of the
European Union.
In his report (S/2016/1049), the Secretary General
highlights some encouraging developments. Germany
welcomes the peace agreement with Hezb-i Islami
16-44819

19/12/2016

The situation in Afghanistan

(Gulbuddin), which gives us new hope that lasting
peace is possible in Afghanistan. I would like to
commend the Government of National Unity for
keeping its doors open for peace negotiations with the
Taliban. A comprehensive peace and reconciliation
process remains the only way to long-term stability
in Afghanistan and the region. We call on all Afghan
parties to seize the moment and to join the peace talks.
Furthermore, we are encouraged by the transparent
recruitment process for the Independent Elections
Commission. That was an important step towards the
holding of early parliamentary and district council
elections. It will now be critically important that the
Government act with resolve and unity of purpose in
implementing the necessary electoral reforms.
We also took note, with appreciation, that the
Anti-Corruption Criminal Justice Centre took up its
work, received its first cases and held its first trials.
Visible progress in fighting corruption is key to
economic development, and we strongly encourage
the Afghan Government to maintain its efforts to fight
corruption and foster the rule of law. The culture of
impunity must be eradicated. To that effect, we have
called for a fair and transparent official investigation
with regard to the allegations of recent gross human
rights violations and abuses by the Vice-President.
The security situation continues to be the main
challenge in Afghanistan. As the Secretary General
points out in his report, the number of armed clashes
rose by 22 per cent. The number of civilian casualties
continues to be very high, and the number of child
casualties has increased by another 15 per cent.
Germany recently assumed the chairmanship of the
local group of friends on children in armed conflict.
We will continue to raise awareness about the suffering
of that most vulnerable group of victims.
The difficult security situation is also one of the
reasons that the eradication efforts on opium poppy
cultivation have decreased by 90 per cent as compared
to last year. The production and trade in illegal
narcotics negatively affects the entire region, as well
as Europe, but it also increasingly has an impact on the
health of Afghan society. We strongly encourage the
Government to step up its efforts to fight opium poppy
cultivation and opium production more decisively.
The volatile security situation in large parts of
the country hampers economic growth and constitutes
an additional challenge to accommodating returning

S/PV.7844

refugees. As has been reported, over 500,000 Afghans
have been displaced internally, and over 600,000
Afghan refugees have returned to Afghanistan from
neighbouring countries during the course of the year.
I would like to commend the long-time host countries,
such as Pakistan and Iran, for the assistance they have
provided Afghan refugees. I also thank the Office of
the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees
and the International Organization for Migration for
their support to the returning refugees. At the same
time, we call upon all parties to ensure that the return of
refugees is conducted in a dignified manner and takes
into account the absorption capacity of Afghanistan.
A stable security situation, economic growth and
job creation will be essential to avoiding a possible
humanitarian crisis. Germany remains committed to
supporting the Afghan Government’s efforts towards a
sustainable reintegration of the returning refugees and
encourages all Member States to join that endeavour.
Afghanistan represents Germany’s single-largest
engagement in a foreign country in both civilian and
military terms. At the Brussels Conference, we pledged
to support the Afghan Government with substantial
financial resources. Germany remains committed to
supporting Afghanistan in close cooperation with the
Government and our international partners.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Pakistan.
Mr. Munir (Pakistan): I would like to begin by
offering our heartfelt condolences to the Russian
delegation in connection with the shooting of the
Ambassador in Ankara.
We thank the Secretary-General for his report
(S/2016/1049) and Special Representative Yamamoto
for his briefing. We appreciate the resolve of the
Afghan leaders to work together to address their
differences in a spirit of cooperation. We agree with the
Secretary-General that a united Afghan Government is
imperative if the country is to effectively address its
multiple challenges.
Afghanistan’s continuing political volatility,
coupled with the uncertain security and economic
situation, remains a cause of concern for the
international community. In Brussels, we collectively
renewed our commitment to supporting Afghanistan
in its efforts to achieve security and economic
development over the next decade and a half. Pakistan
will continue to support regional and international

16-4481927/38

S/PV.7844

The situation in Afghanistan

efforts in that regard. The $500 million commitment we
made in Brussels was an expression of our firm resolve
never to abandon Afghanistan. Our participation in
the Heart of Asia Ministerial Conference in Amritsar,
despite the problems of escalation on the line of control
and the working boundary, testified to our unflinching
commitment to lasting peace in Afghanistan and the
region. While external support is critical, it is no
substitute for internal political stability. The Afghan
Government’s successful implementation of reforms
and active promotion of peace and reconciliation
depend upon it.
The Afghan National Defence and Security Forces
have bravely tried to stand their ground, but the security
situation continues to deteriorate. The presence of large
numbers of terrorist, violent and extremist groups and
organizations in the ungoverned areas of the country
are a continued challenge to the long-term stability of
Afghanistan and its neighbours. The security situation
in Afghanistan is complex. The drivers of the recent
surge in violence lie within Afghanistan, not outside
it. We need to objectively evaluate the efforts to
address the deteriorating security situation. I reiterate
Pakistan’s firm commitment to fighting terrorism
and eliminating every kind of terrorist network. We
reject the unsubstantiated assertion that the Taliban
reorganized in Pakistan during the winter. Terrorist
sanctuaries have in fact shifted to Afghanistan,
owing to our successful counter-terrorism operation
Zarb-e-Azb, the results of which have been widely
acknowledged by the international community.
Nevertheless, as Pakistan has always stressed, robust
border management is critical to countering crossborder movement. We do not understand the logic
behind resistance to operationalizing that much-needed
mechanism. It is somewhat disingenuous to propose a
regional mechanism when Kabul is unwilling even to
work bilaterally with us on the issue.
The peace and reconciliation process has yet to
produce results, and we understand Afghan frustration
about that. But it is not due to lack of effort on our part. We
have continued to persist sincerely and wholeheartedly,
but we can only facilitate. The Afghan parties have to
conclude that military means cannot bring peace and
that reconciliation is the only way to achieve lasting
stability. All our efforts must be directed towards
achieving a politically negotiated settlement through
an Afghan-led and -owned peace process. We believe
that all the members of the Quadrilateral Coordination
28/38

19/12/2016

Group must redouble their efforts to reach that goal.
Efforts that undermine peace and reconciliation must
be avoided. Implementing the agreed-on approaches
faithfully, and maintaining trust among the partners,
continue to be fundamental to furthering peace and
reconciliation. The Afghan Government has signed
a peace agreement with the Hizb-i Islami, and its
implementation could serve as a model for talks with
other groups.
Despite the negative rhetoric, Pakistan has
remained committed to facilitating the transit of
goods to landlocked Afghanistan through its territory.
We believe that the two sides must work together in
order to extend and improve the Afghanistan-Pakistan
Transit Trade Agreement. In that context, I would
like to re-emphasize that the peaceful resolution of
outstanding disputes will further enhance the prospects
for regional cooperation and connectivity.
For almost four decades, we have hosted millions
of Afghan refugees in Pakistan. We remain committed
to helping them return to their homeland with honour
and dignity. We are fully engaged in that regard with
Afghanistan and the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees. We are working on plans
to extend their stay in Pakistan until 31 December 2017,
and to ensure that their voluntary return is smooth and
orderly. International support and the creation of pull
factors in Afghanistan continue to be critical.
The people of Pakistan and the people of
Afghanistan enjoy age-old bonds not only of kinship,
faith and shared history but also of a shared destiny.
We rejoice in their accomplishments and are saddened
by their suffering. We are ready to support them in
every way, and we are with our Afghan brothers and
sisters in their struggle for a better future that can bring
prosperity, health, education and, above all, peace and
stability to the whole region.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of the Netherlands.
Mr. Van Oosterom (Netherlands): On behalf of
the Kingdom of the Netherlands, I would like to thank
the Security Council for the opportunity to speak in
today’s debate. I would like to begin by offering my
deepest condolences to our Russian colleague on the
occasion of the killing of the Russian Ambassador in
Turkey. He has our deepest sympathy.
16-44819

19/12/2016

The situation in Afghanistan

The Kingdom of the Netherlands aligns itself with
the statement to be delivered by the observer of the
European Union. I would also like to underline the
statement just made by the representative of Italy as
part of our cooperation related to our upcoming split
term in the Security Council.
We commend the Secretary-General for his detailed
and thorough report (S/2016/1049). I would also like
to thank Special Representative Yamamoto and my
good friend Mr. Saikal, Permanent Representative of
Afghanistan, for their interesting briefings.
I will focus today on three issues — the Brussels
Conference on Afghanistan, political developments and
the security and human-rights situations.
The Brussels Conference was a key event of the past
couple of months. Ms. Lilianne Ploumen, our Minister
of Foreign Trade and Development Cooperation,
reaffirmed the commitment of the Kingdom of the
Netherlands to Afghanistan. I think the Conference
made it clear that the international community, and the
Netherlands, as part of it, will not abandon Afghanistan.
We welcome the presentation of the 2017-2018 SelfReliance through Mutual Accountability Framework
by President Ghani and Chief Executive Abdullah
Abdullah. We feel strongly that the Framework sets
clear progress indicators for the Afghan Government.
Those declarations, of course, now have to be translated
into concrete action. We urge the Unity Government
to become more of a genuine Government of unity.
Only a united team can bring about progress. In that
context, we welcome the fact that seven members of
the Electoral Commission and five of the Independent
Electoral Complaint Commission have been announced.
They should pursue electoral reforms and prepare for
elections, as was agreed. We also welcome the fact
that the nomination process was transparent. We also
welcome the agreement reached with Hizb-i Islami
(Gulbuddin) and call for its implementation. We hope
it will be an inspiration for other, similar agreements.
One of the priorities of the Afghan Government that
we support is the advancement of the anti-corruption
agenda. The inauguration of the new Anti-Corruption
Justice Centre in October was a welcome step in that
regard. At the same time, however, we must realize
that corruption remains a big problem. We believe it
is important to ensure that the national anti-corruption
strategy can meet the commitments made in the SelfReliance through Mutual Accountability Framework.

S/PV.7844

Secondly, with regard to the security situation and
regional cooperation, armed clashes between the Afghan
National Defence and Security Forces and the Taliban
have intensified. Along with an increasing number
of returning refugees, the humanitarian situation in
Afghanistan is worrying. In order to achieve a truly
stable Afghanistan, we believe it is vital to intensify
the Afghan-led peace process. President Ghani has
stated that the Government is open to peace talks, and
we strongly encourage the Taliban to act accordingly.
The Netherlands stands ready to support an Afghanled peace process in whatever form is agreed on. The
countries of the region have a critical and positive role
to play in supporting Afghanistan. A regional approach
is crucial to achieving structural security and stability,
but regional stability is possible only when all partners
are genuinely engaged and work together, which we
strongly encourage.
With respect to human rights, an EU-Afghanistan
human rights dialogue took place in Kabul three weeks
ago. There we discussed women’s rights, children’s
rights, torture and ill-treatment, access to justice
and the importance of freedom of expression. We are
looking forward to achieving concrete deliverables on
these topics, together, in the coming months, as we have
said. We commend the role of the United Nations, which
has continued its efforts to advance Afghan women’s
equal and full participation in building peace and
security. We also commend the fact that at the Brussels
Conference, both the President and the Chief Executive
stated that gender equality was a top priority for their
Government. Moreover, the First Lady, Rhula Ghani,
has of course repeatedly underlined the importance of
the economic participation of women. We welcome this
full-heartedly. Women are the key to a better future and
we must empower them.
In conclusion, the Kingdom of the Netherlands
has been a long-time partner of Afghanistan and
contributed significantly in the fields of peace, justice
and development. Dutch military personnel have given
their lives in bringing peace to Afghanistan. We must
remember them. The Kingdom of the Netherlands
remains committed to supporting Afghanistan
throughout the transformation decade — a decade
of ever greater Afghan ownership and leadership.
The Afghan people can count on us standing by their
side, in the full knowledge that the road ahead will be
long. The Kingdom of the Netherlands will continue

16-4481929/38

S/PV.7844

The situation in Afghanistan

to be a partner with Afghanistan for peace, justice
and development.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Sweden.
Mr. Thöresson (Sweden): Allow me, too, to
express our deepest condolences to our Russian friends
and colleagues for the heinous crime committed in
Ankara today.
Sweden aligns itself with the statement to be made
by the observer of the European Union.

19/12/2016

The sustained engagement of the countries of the
region also remains essential to Afghanistan’s future.
The constructive engagement of regional partners can
create a regional environment that is conducive and
contributes to security and stability in Afghanistan and
in the region more broadly. A peaceful and sustainable
Afghanistan should be in everyone’s interest. Sweden
calls on all actors to take responsibility and to work
together towards a sustainable peace.

In my national capacity, I would like to begin
by thanking the Secretary-General for his report
(S/2016/1049), which as usual provides a sound and
comprehensive basis for our discussions today. Let me
also thank Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral Yamamoto, Executive Director Fedotov,
Ambassador Van Bohemen and Ambassador Saikal for
their insightful briefings.

In 2016, more than a million Afghans returned
from Pakistan and Iran. These people are joining those
internally displaced in facing the challenging Afghan
winter. All actors should support the humanitarian
community’s efforts to provide life-saving emergency
assistance to vulnerable Afghan families over the
winter. However, an adequate response plan for
returnees is also required, and we urge the Government
of Afghanistan to work with UNAMA and others to
increase efforts in this regard.

Democratic and peaceful development in
Afghanistan remains a priority for Sweden. We
believe that the United Nations Assistance Mission in
Afghanistan (UNAMA), through its work in support of
the Afghan people, continues to play a critical role in
the process of stabilization and in preventing a return to
conflict in Afghanistan. We are particularly pleased to
see the significant attention given to women, peace and
security in the most recent report.

Women’s participation in society and in
peacebuilding is crucial if Afghanistan is to lift itself
out of poverty, war and violence. Sweden welcome’s
UNAMA’s continued efforts to advance Afghan
women’s equal and full participation in building peace
and security within their communities and their country.
Excluding half of the population from the peace process
is not only wrong, but has been proven to lead to less
successful and less sustainable peace agreements.

Peaceful and inclusive societies, as well as effective,
accountable and inclusive institutions, are prerequisites
for sustained economic and social development.
We enourage UNAMA’s efforts to promote the rule
of law, respect for human rights and international
humanitarian law. Afghanistan has made progress.
However, much remains to be done to consolidate the
gains and to create the basis for a lasting transformation.
Unity and cooperation within the National Unity
Government remain key to the continued development
of Afghanistan.

Ensuring that women can fully play their role in
peace and security is a high priority for Sweden. Last
week in Kabul, we conducted dialogue and mediation
training for women from 32 of the 34 Afghan provinces.
This training will continue over the course of the
year, with at least two more gatherings. As a member
of the Security Council for 2017 and 2018, Sweden
will work to advance the women, peace and security
agenda on the ground in all country-specific situations
on the Council’s agenda, including Afghanistan.
From 1 January, Sweden will co-chair the Council’s
informal working group on women, peace and security,
together with Uruguay. We look forward to continued
interactions with UNAMA also within that forum.

While the Government’s agreement with Hizb-i
Islami (Gulbuddin) is welcome, increased political
dialogue with other insurgent groups is also needed.
Sweden underlines the importance of the full
implementation of the economic and political reforms
pledged by the Government at the Brussels Conference
on Afghanistan in October.
30/38

In conclusion, Sweden’s support for Afghanistan
remains firm. We will continue to work hard for
democratic and peaceful development that benefits all
of Afghanistan’s people.
16-44819

19/12/2016

The situation in Afghanistan

The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of the Islamic Republic
of Iran.
Mr. Khoshroo (Islamic Republic of Iran): At the
outset, I should like to express the deepest condolences
of the Government of the Islamic Republic of Iran over
the terrorist act committed against the Ambassador of
the Russian Federation. While extending our sympathy
to the Government and the people of the Russian
Federation, I am sure that these barbaric acts only
strengthen the political will to fight terrorists and
terrorists organizations.
I would like to express my appreciation to Spain for
organizing this debate; to the Ambassador of Afghanistan
for his statement; to the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for Afghanistan and head of the
United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan
(UNAMA); and to the Executive Director of the United
Nations Office on Drugs and Crime for their briefings.
The latest report of the Secretary-General
(S/2016/1049) once again refers to the further
deterioration of the security situation during the
reporting period, with the number of armed clashes
having increased by 22 per cent over last year, reaching
its highest level since the United Nations started
recording incidents in 2007 and surpassing the previous
record year of 2011. Our region continues to suffer
from an alarming surge in extremist violence, while
a dramatic increase in drug production is threatening
our societies. Afghanistan is most affected by these
problems; 2016 has been a very challenging year for
the National Unity Government of Afghanistan as
extremist groups such as Da’esh expand their terror
inside the country.
Today, the Afghan National Unity Government is
at the forefront of fighting terrorism. The sustained
support of the international community is needed even
more to support the Afghan Government in its fight
against terrorism and extremism, as well as to address
its security, economic and political challenges. We
continue to fully support the National Unity Government
and we stand ready to work with its leaders to help them
discharge their responsibilities. We welcome the recent
achievement of the Government in making peace with
Hizb-i Islami (Gulbuddin).
Strengthening our regional cooperation with
Afghanistan is a priority and a major pathway to
consolidating peace and progress in the region. The

S/PV.7844

trilateral transit agreement between Iran, India and
Afghanistan on the development of the port of Chabahar
is one important step in that direction. It makes it
possible for Afghanistan to have access to world
markets, through open seas, making the development
of Afghanistan’s vast and rich mineral resources
economically attractive. We invite interested actors
from the region and beyond to consider participating in
the development and expansion of Chabahar.
The Khawaf-Herat railway project is another key
connectivity project that connects Afghanistan to the
international railway network through Iran. We fully
share the conclusion by the Secretary-General in his
report that regional infrastructure initiatives, including
transport links between Afghanistan and Iran and
Turkmenistan, serve as an important pathway towards
prosperity and stability in Afghanistan.
The challenges facing Afghanistan and our region
are interconnected. Recent reports of the United
Nations Office on Drugs and Crime indicate a 43 per
cent growth in drug production last year. Without drug
proceeds, terrorists cannot finance their operations and
drug producers need militias and warlords to traffic
their deadly commodity. As a front-line country in
the war against narcotics, we have offered alternative
cultivation, as well as alternative livelihood plans to
dissuade Afghan farmers from opium cultivation. The
strong support and commitment of international donors,
Afghan authorities and the United Nations Office on
Drugs and Crime are essential to deterring the menace
of narcotics as a social health challenge and, more
importantly, a major source of income for extremists
and terrorist groups.
For the past 37 years, we have hosted no fewer
than 3 million Afghan nationals at any given time.
They have access to subsidized services available to
Iranian nationals, including basic commodities, public
transportation, public health and public education.
This year alone, we are providing education to nearly
400,000 undocumented Afghan students with minimum
burden-sharing assistance from the international
community. Iran continues to participate in the work
of the Tripartite Commission in order to plan for the
voluntary, safe, dignified and gradual repatriation
of Afghan refugees. We welcome any effort to help
overcome the main reintegration challenges faced
by returnees and to formulate the comprehensive
voluntary repatriation and reintegration strategy. First
and foremost, success in voluntary repatriation depends

16-4481931/38

S/PV.7844

The situation in Afghanistan

on reasonably meeting the needs of repatriated refugees
in Afghanistan and underscoring the necessity for
mobilizing more international support for that purpose.
We support UNAMA and United Nations
agencies in their efforts to provide development and
reconstruction assistance to Afghanistan. Through
genuine commitment by the United Nations to a
sustained partnership with Afghanistan, as set forth in
the final report of the Tripartite Review Commission on
the United Nations in Afghanistan (S/2015/713, annex),
we need to utilize the UNAMA mandate and its good
offices for strengthening national institutes and capacity
in priority areas, as requested by the Government.
Let me conclude by reaffirming the resolve of the
people and Government of the Islamic Republic of Iran
to continue their support for the fraternal people and
Government of Afghanistan, as they move through this
difficult period in their history to a stable, safe and
prosperous Afghanistan.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I would
like to remind speakers to limit their statements to
four minutes.
I give the floor to the representative of India.
Mr. Akbaruddin (India): We live in times
when the shadow of barbarism is never far from us.
That manifests itself sometimes in acts like the one
perpetrated today in the dastardly attack on the Russian
Federation’s Ambassador to Turkey. It is much more
manifest at times in what activities are undertaken by
designated terrorist groups in Afghanistan.
Therefore, I thank you, Sir, for organizing today’s
quarterly debate on the situation in Afghanistan. We also
thank the three briefers for outlining a diverse array of
issues. I take this opportunity to thank the Ambassador
of New Zealand, Mr. Gerard van Bohemen, for his
stewardship of the Committee established pursuant
to resolution 1988 (2011), and wish the Permanent
Representative of Japan, Ambassador Bessho, all the
best as he prepares to take on that chairmanship.
India welcomes the key message of Special
Representative of the Secretary-General Yamamoto,
highlighting the positive and supportive role that
regional countries and neighbours of Afghanistan need
to play. That was never as critical as it is today. Every
time we discuss the situation in Afghanistan, we face the
dilemma depicted by the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General. While the international community
32/38

19/12/2016

recommits to standing by the Afghan people, the number
of casualties among Afghan civilians and security forces
keeps rising. While the Taliban sanctions regime has
remained split for more than five years, the designated
terrorist group makes concerted efforts to capture and
hold territory. Therefore, for numerous Afghan women,
men and children there is no respite from the plague
of terrorism.
We need to ask ourselves whether what we are
working on in Afghanistan is the wrong thing to be
working on, or whether we are working on it in the
wrong way. Since we all agree that supporting the
people of Afghanistan is not the wrong thing, then the
questions we need to ask ourselves should be related
to our ways of going about it. What do we mean when
we say that we stand with the Afghan people? Are we
doing it in the right way? What is it that we are missing
out on?
It is apparent that our efforts at rebuilding
institutions, infrastructure and networks in Afghanistan
are being undermined, schools are being destroyed,
mosques bombarded and religious gatherings targeted.
It is also evident that those who perpetrate such heinous
crimes have survived and thrived only with support and
sanctuaries on the outside.
Experience and academic research provide ample
support for the assertion that conflicts in which foreign
assistance is available to shadowy entities that fight
legitimate State authorities tend to be more severe and
last longer than other types of conflict. Therefore, if we
are to bring sustainable peace to Afghanistan, groups
and individuals that perpetrate violence against the
people and the Government of Afghanistan must be
denied safe havens and sanctuaries in Afghanistan’s
neighbourhood. We need to address, as an imperative,
the support that terrorist organizations like the Taliban,
the Haqqani network, Da’esh, Al-Qaida and its
designated affiliates, such as Lashkar-e-Toiba and the
Jaish-e-Mohammed — which operate entirely outside
the fabric of international law — draw from their
shadowy supporters outside Afghanistan.
The outcome of the Heart of Asia ministerial
meeting held earlier this month in the ancient city of
Amritsar was a showing of the commitment of India
and the international community to Afghanistan. A
key focus during India’s co-chairmanship of the Heart
of Asia Process has been to bring to centre stage the
importance of connectivity for Afghanistan. A well16-44819

19/12/2016

The situation in Afghanistan

connected Afghanistan will be economically vibrant,
prosperous and politically stable. A well-connected
Afghanistan will have great potential to engage the
energies of its youth and attract its talent back from
foreign lands. To deny such an opportunity and
connectivity to Afghanistan is to deny Afghanistan all
the opportunities for prosperity and peace that it entails.
The connectivity that terrorist networks have
established needs to be replaced by that of roads, trade
networks and ideas for peace and prosperity. We need
to remind ourselves of what the great son of Balkhī,
the poet Rumi, once said, to the effect that every leaf
that grows will reveal that what you sow will bear fruit.
Therefore, if you have any sense, he said, do not plant
anything but peace.
Afghanistan’s National Unity Government has
India’s full support in strengthening its defence
capabilities to fight the terrorism directed against it. We
believe that the path to reconciliation in Afghanistan
should be through an Afghan-led and an Afghan-owned
process in adherence to the internationally accepted
red lines, reflecting the aspirations of the people of
Afghanistan. The international community also needs
to send the right message, making it clear that we will
neither roll over in the face of terror nor allow the roll
back of the achievements of the resolute people and
Government of Afghanistan over the past decade and
a half.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the observer of the European Union.
Ms. Adamson: Before I make my statement, let
me express my shock and heartfelt condolences to our
Russian colleagues on the murder of their Ambassador.
I have the honour to speak on behalf of the European
Union (EU) and its member States. The candidate
countries Turkey, The former Yugoslav Republic of
Macedonia, Montenegro, Serbia and Albania; the
country of the Stabilization and Association Process
and potential candidate Bosnia and Herzegovina;
and the European Free Trade Association country
Liechtenstein, member of the European Economic Area;
as well as Ukraine, the Republic of Moldova, Armenia
and Georgia, align themselves with this statement.
I would like to thank the Secretary-General for
his comprehensive report (S/2016/1049). I also thank
Special Representative Yamamoto, the Permanent
Representative of New Zealand and Mr. Yury Fedotov,

S/PV.7844

Executive Director of the United Nations Office on
Drugs and Crime.
Afghanistan has made considerable political,
security, economic and development progress
over the past decade, for which the Government of
Afghanistan and the Afghan people deserve much
credit. But the gains are fragile and major challenges
remain. The international community’s support was
confirmed in October at the Brussels Conference on
Afghanistan, which reiterated its ongoing commitment
to Afghanistan. As noted, the international community
pledged $15.2 billion in support of Afghanistan’s
development priorities for the period 2017-2020.
Showcasing its sustained commitment to Afghanistan,
the European Union, as a whole, pledged $5.6 billion.
Those figures express the continued engagement of the
international community in Afghanistan, based on the
principle of mutual accountability between the Afghan
Government and international donors.
Furthermore, the Conference gave a clear sign of
support for the National Unity Government to continue
along its reform path, including electoral reforms and
reform of the Afghan public administration, economy
and governance, including human rights, the rights of
women and children and the fight against corruption.
As an integral part of the Conference, a high-level event
on women’s empowerment was organized jointly by the
Government of Afghanistan and the EU, which focused
on the ways and means of empowering Afghan women
to build a stable and prosperous Afghanistan, as well
as reinforcing the political and human rights of Afghan
women and how to realize those rights in everyday life.
The EU welcomes the priority the Afghan
Government has placed on fighting corruption, which
remains a major obstacle to development and stability,
and stresses the need to further strengthen the efforts
in tackling corruption. Positive developments have
occurred, but more needs to be done, including at the
legislative level. The EU will continue its support in
view of achieving progress in that important fight.
The international community expects the Afghan
Government to do well on its Brussels commitments. It
is important to establish a well-functioning follow-up
and progress-tracking mechanism at the country level.
We look forward to a first round of high-level stocktaking in about a year. The EU and its member States
welcome the appointments of new commissioners to
the Independent Election Commission of Afghanistan

16-4481933/38

S/PV.7844

The situation in Afghanistan

and the Electoral Complaints Commission, which was
an important step to restore public trust in Afghan
democratic institutions. While early engagement
and assistance to the new electoral institutions are
paramount, the EU, together with other international
donors, will be attentive to ensuring that any support
to the electoral bodies is effectively and sustainably
managed. Meaningful electoral reform should lead to
an improved periodic electoral process.
We also welcome the recent launching of the
Citizens Charter, involving local communities in
development processes. We note that national priority
programmes on women’s economic empowerment are
progressing. The European Union has made a clear
commitment to the request of the Governments of the
Islamic Republic of Afghanistan to its development
partners to shift assistance increasingly towards
country systems. In that endeavour, we have established
a State-building contract as our vehicle to provide
direct, on-budget assistance.
On behalf of the EU and its member States, I would
like to reiterate that joint State-building and development
efforts in Afghanistan can be sustained only if they are
built on reinforced regional cooperation. That is why
the EU believes that regional forums, such as the Heart
of Asia-Istanbul Process or the Regional Economic
Cooperation Conference on Afghanistan, should be used
to facilitate cooperation among all regional actors. In
the margins of the Brussels Conference, the EU hosted
the a high-level political discussion on Afghanistan
with key regional actors. The exchange pointed to an
emerging regional consensus to support an Afghan-led,
Afghan-owned political process aimed at achieving a
negotiated peace settlement in Afghanistan.
Migration continues to represent an important
challenge for both the European Union and Afghanistan,
which reaffirm the common aim to work together within
the United Nations framework to shape a global answer
based on solidarity and shared responsibilities. The EU
and Afghanistan recently took a joint commitment to
stepping up cooperation on addressing and preventing
irregular migration, in full respect for international
law, including the principle of non-refoulement. The
effective and successful implementation of this joint
way forward is key. At the same time, the EU continues
to pay particular attention to developments regarding
the regional dimension of the issue of Afghan refugees.
The EU fully supports the principles contained in the
Sustainable Development Goals, which foresee the
34/38

19/12/2016

promotion of safe, responsible and orderly migration on
the basis of well-managed migration policies.
The number of civilian casualties due to attacks
by all fighting parties has reached record numbers
again in 2016, with insurgency attacks very often
indiscriminately targeting the civilian population and
increasingly affecting women and children. The EU
condemns those insurgent group attacks, which threaten
the stability and progress of Afghanistan. More than
ever, we need to continue to protect the vital role of
humanitarian agencies and to respect their impartiality
and humanitarian space in addressing the most urgent
needs of the most vulnerable.
The EU welcomes the undeterred willingness
of the Afghan Government to engage with all armed
groups in a political process. The only way to a durable
end to the conflict in Afghanistan is through a lasting
political settlement. After the breakthrough of the
Hizb-i Islami (Gulbuddin) peace agreement, for which
the Afghan Government deserves credit, it will now be
important to implement it and open the way for future
peace agreements. The EU remains fully committed
to supporting an Afghan-led and Afghan-owned
peace process.
It is important that the international community
remain strongly committed to accompanying
Afghanistan towards long-term progress and stability.
The consequences of disengagement should not be
underestimated, and we value the critical role of
UNAMA in promoting peace and security for all
Afghans. From our side, the EU will continue to
support the transformation process so as to promote the
emergence of a fully self-reliant, peaceful, democratic
and prosperous society for the benefit of all Afghans.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Canada.
Mr. Blanchard (Canada): Let me first offer
Canada’s most sincere condolences to the family of the
deceased Russian Ambassador to Turkey, the members
of the Russian Federation diplomatic corps, and the
Government and the people of the Russian Federation.
Our thoughts and prayers are with them, and we all
share their pain and sadness.
(spoke in French)
I would like to thank the briefers for laying out the
multiple and complex challenges facing Afghanistan.
16-44819

19/12/2016

The situation in Afghanistan

Canada fully supports an Afghan-led and
Afghan-owned peace and reconciliation process
and acknowledges the efforts made to date by the
Government of Afghanistan, despite the formidable
challenges that it faces. At the recent Brussels
Conference on Afghanistan, Canada renewed its
commitment to supporting Afghanistan’s ambitions.
This year, Canada has committed $465 million for
Afghanistan for the period 2017-2020. That sum
includes $270 million for development assistance and
$195 million in security sector support. Canada will
continue to focus on women’s and girls’ rights in all
our health, education and human rights programmes
in Afghanistan.
We are pleased to see the Afghan Government’s
commitment to the peace, stability and progress
of the country. We commend the constructive role
played by several political leaders in support of the
National Unity Government and the progress made
in the area of electoral reform. Canada welcomes the
peace agreement reached between the Government of
Afghanistan and Hezb-i Islami (Gulbuddin). We hope
that this agreement will be followed by a series of peace
agreements, including with the Taliban. We urge the
latter to renounce violence and come to the negotiating
table in good faith. A negotiated peace must respect
the Afghan Constitution and not be concluded at the
expense of the important gains made by and for Afghan
women. In that regard, Canada unconditionally supports
a meaningful role for women in peace negotiations at
all levels and in all areas.
(spoke in English)
If those present are to remember only one point
from my statement, let it be the role of women in
peace negotiations. I must register Canada’s deep
concern over the continuing deterioration of security in
Afghanistan. We are dismayed by the toll on civilians.
Their displacement, increased vulnerability and losses
are unacceptable. We look to the constructive role that
neighbouring countries have offered to play, including
in General Assembly resolution 71/9 on Afghanistan
and at the sixth Ministerial Conference of the Heart of
Asia. In particular, we call on Afghanistan’s neighbours
to work with the Government of Afghanistan to better
coordinate and manage the return of Afghan refugees.
Finally, I would be remiss if I did not also extend
Canada’s sincere appreciation to the Chair of the
Security Council Committee established pursuant

S/PV.7844

to resolution 1988 (2011), Ambassador Gerard van
Bohemen. His leadership over the past two years
and the Committee’s perspectives on how to advance
prospects for peace and reconciliation in Afghanistan
are invaluable. Canada welcomes the recommendations
made to further curtail the Taliban’s activities. Those
include updating and strengthening the implementation
of sanctions measures, eliminating revenue flows to the
Taliban and engaging closely with the Government of
Afghanistan and regional actors. We look forward to
working with the incoming Chair, the Ambassador of
Kazakhstan, in carrying out those recommendations in
order advance peace and reconciliation in Afghanistan.
Canada stands with the Afghan people, especially
Afghan women and girls, as they strive for a more
secure, prosperous and peaceful future.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Australia.
Ms. Wilson (Australia): I join others in expressing
our sincere condolences to our Russian colleagues for
the sad events of today in Istanbul and for the passing
of their Ambassador. I very much sit with others in
feeling the weight of that awful situation.
We thank the Secretary-General for his report
(S/2016/1049) on Afghanistan and all today’s briefers.
As 2016 draws to a close, we reflect on a year
for Afghanistan of formidable efforts, concrete
commitments and sobering challenges. Under the
leadership of President Ghani and Chief Executive
Abdullah, the National Unity Government continued
progress towards improved governance under
difficult circumstances. The Government has proven
resilient despite the challenges that persist. We urge
perseverance in addressing underlying tensions to build
on the gains of 2016 and ensure that the National Unity
Government remains the sturdy foundation to which
the international community looks.
We commend efforts towards an Afghan-led peace
process and acknowledge the peace agreement as a
historic achievement. Ongoing attention to the success
of that deal is crucial as Afghanistan works towards a
broader peace process as the sustainable path to security
and stability. We are also encouraged by progress in the
anti-corruption agenda and the electoral program, and
urge attention towards the work that is still to be done
on planning for elections in 2017. We also welcome
the continued high-level focus on improving gender

16-4481935/38

S/PV.7844

The situation in Afghanistan

equality in Afghanistan and echo the words of the
representative of Canada with regard to the importance
of such efforts.
The commitments made at the NATO Warsaw
Summit and the Brussels Conference on Afghanistan
hosted by the European Union demonstrate strong
sustained international support for Afghanistan to 2020,
despite competing demands for resources and attention
in response to crises elsewhere. Regional economic
cooperation in support of Afghanistan that has seen
Kabul build close relationships and partnerships with
neighbours is a welcome development as Afghanistan
works towards improving its economic performance.
As others have done, we note also the important
opportunity provided by the Heart of Asia-Istanbul
Process to move forward regional dialogue and create
opportunities for economic growth. And because
external support is necessary but not sufficient, we are
glad that the Afghan-led and Afghan-owned National
Peace and Development Framework is driving the
broader agenda.
Significant challenges remain. Moreover, for
Australia, the deteriorating security situation is of
particular concern. We see the Afghan National Defence
and Security Forces continuing to fight bravely. Australia
is committed to maintaining its strong contribution to
Afghanistan alongside our international partners. We
have extended our deployment of Australian Defence
Force personnel to the NATO-led Resolute Support
Mission into 2017 and committed $750 million to
security-sector sustainment and development over the
next four years.
As winter sets in, we are conscious of the great human
costs of the ongoing conflict, with women and girls
particularly vulnerable. The large number of civilian
casualties in 2016 and the growing needs of returning
refugees and internally displaced persons highlight the
dire humanitarian situation that cannot be ignored. As
we look towards 2017, security, governance and the
reform agenda will remain key priorities for building
Afghanistan. We remain committed to supporting this
agenda in close partnership with the Government of
Afghanistan, NATO and the international community.
We share a collective stake in Afghanistan’s future.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Turkey.
Mr. Begeç (Turkey): At the outset, let me inform the
Security Council of our deepest regret and sorrow that
36/38

19/12/2016

the Ambassador of Russia to Turkey, His Excellency
Mr. Andrei Gennadyevich Karlov, has lost his life after
a gunman’s attack in Ankara. We condemn this attack
in the strongest possible terms. We also express our
condolences to and strong solidarity with the delegation
of the Russian Federation here. Turkish authorities will
do their utmost to ensure justice, including through
a thorough investigation. An official statement
concerning this heinous attack will be released in due
course by the relevant authorities.
At the outset allow me to thank the SecretaryGeneral for his comprehensive report (S/2016/1049),
Special Representative Yamamoto for his briefing and
Ambassador Saikal for his statement. Following the
adoption of General Assembly resolution 71/9 on the
situation in Afghanistan last month, we welcome this
opportunity to discuss developments in the country in
the Security Council.
During the past 14 years, Afghanistan has gone
through a remarkable transition process and achieved
considerable progress in many areas. We welcome
the dedication and determination of the Afghan
Government, security forces and people in making
genuine efforts towards overcoming challenges.
Together with the assistance of the international
community, Afghanistan is moving forward in the
areas of security and development. Today, millions of
Afghans have access to education, health and other
social services. However, there is still much to do.
Accomplishments are still reversible. The security
situation is fragile, and Afghanistan remains at a
critical juncture.
The NATO Warsaw Summit and Brussels
Conference were encouraging. In those meetings, the
international community displayed its commitment
to support Afghanistan. Continuing this assistance to
the security and development efforts of the Afghan
Government during the transformation decade will be
vital. Afghanistan eventually needs to build its own
capacity in many respects. In the meanwhile, we must
extend all the help we can to assist the work of achieving
a secure, stable and prosperous future for Afghanistan.
The stability of Afghanistan, and subsequently that
of the region, will depend on improved security. Lasting
peace in Afghanistan can be achieved only through the
successful conclusion of the peace and reconciliation
process. In that understanding, we welcome the signing
16-44819

19/12/2016

The situation in Afghanistan

of the peace agreement between the representatives of
the Afghan Government and Hizb-i Islami (Gulbuddin).
We welcome and encourage the Afghan
Government’s efforts to bring reforms to life. We
believe that the successful implementation of reforms
will bring further political and social cohesion to the
country. Turkey will continue to support the Afghan
Government in achieving its security and development
agenda as long as our help is needed. We will continue
our bilateral assistance in the areas of security
and development and our contributions to NATO’s
efforts as a framework nation within the Resolute
Support Mission.
Turkey’s official development aid to Afghanistan
in the period of 2002-2015 exceeded $962 million. It
is the single biggest development programme we have
ever undertaken. We mainly focus on projects in the
fields of education, health, infrastructure and capacitybuilding for Government institutions. Furthermore,
Turkey was pleased to announce during the Brussels
Conference our pledge of $150 million for the period
2018-2020.
We believe that genuine dialogue among the
countries of the region is particularly important and
necessary. In that regard, Turkey will also maintain
its contributions to Afghanistan through regional
platforms, such as the Heart of Asia-Istanbul Process.
In this regard, we welcome the holding of the sixth
Ministerial Conference of the Istanbul Process earlier
this month. We are pleased that the Process has provided
a foundation to establish interaction among regional
countries, supporting countries and organizations.
Confidence-building measures in the framework of the
Process also represent significant achievements. As
one of the co-lead countries of the Counter-Terrorism
Confidence-Building Measure Technical Group,
Turkey has hosted multiple training activities in 2016.
We aim to continue with similar training activities in
the upcoming year.
In conclusion, I would like to underline that the
Afghan people deserve a better future. The international
community’s continued commitment will strengthen
the hopes of the Afghan people in this regard. It should
be our joint duty to help Afghanistan reach that goal.
Mr. Abdrakhmanov (Kazakhstan): (spoke in
Russian): We very much regret having to start with this
very sad duty. I would like to offer our very sincere
condolences to our Russian friends in connection

S/PV.7844

with the tragic death of an outstanding diplomat,
Mr. Andrey Karlov. We strongly condemn this barbaric
act, which has taken place in such a tense period for
international relations.
(spoke in English)
As per your request, Mr. President, I will skip the
complimentary part of my statement. However, the
briefers deserve special respect for their performance.
We commend the Government of Afghanistan
for its tireless efforts to advance an Afghan-led and
Afghan-owned peace process. The signing of the peace
agreement between the Government and Hizb-i Islami
(Gulbuddin) set a good example of negotiating peace
to other armed groups. The permanent members of the
Security Council, Afghanistan’s neighbouring countries
and regional partners play a crucial role in this process.
We express our appreciation for their efforts to genuinely
contribute to the peace process in Afghanistan. We also
hope that the Organization of Islamic Cooperation’s
Islamic Summit Conference, which will be held in
Mecca, can make its own contribution.
The illicit production and trafficking of drugs,
which is a key source for financing terrorism,
poses another great threat not just to Afghanistan,
but beyond. Therefore, we will have to adopt a
comprehensive approach that encompasses actions in
countries of origin, transit and destination with respect
to drug consumptiopn. Providing market incentives for
cultivating other agricultural products in Afghanistan
can lead to a substantial decrease of opium production.
We count on the support of the international community
in that regard, together with the support of donor
countries, to the Central Asian Regional Information
and Coordination Centre, in its measures to combat
illicit narcotics.
Trade, economic and technical cooperation among
countries of the region, as well as with regional
organizations, is a prerequesite for the economic
revival of Afghanistan. The various different transport
and infrastructure projects undertaken on a bilteral or
multilateral basis have proven to be most valuable. It
is important to fully implement assistance programmes
and commitments laid out at the Brussels Conference.
Likewise, the full implementation of recommendations
and commitments emerging from the meeting of the
Heart of Asia-Istanbul Process on Regional Security
and Cooperation for a Secure and Stable Afghanistan,
held in Amritsar, India, will be equally critical.

16-4481937/38

S/PV.7844

The situation in Afghanistan

The humanitarian situation, which has been
aggravated by the recent increase of Afghan refugee
returns, poses another grave threat. Therefore, the
greater assistance of donor countries, countries of the
region and international organizations will be vital to
meeting such challenges. Kazakhstan is committed to a
peaceful Afghanistan and provides humanitarian aid and
technical assistance, as well as an extensive scholarship
programme for thousands of Afghan students to study
medical science, engineering and public administration
in Kazakhstan. In cooperation with Japan and the
United Nations Development Programme, we launched
the Gender Equality Project, which provides policy
support and capacity development for gender equality,
in Afghanistan in August. As a new non-permanent
member of the Security Council, we will promote
security in Afghanistan and the wider region of Central
Asia. Kazakhstan will work closely for the effective use
of sanctions mechanisms for the benefit of the peace
process in Afghanistan.
Finally, I would like to reiterate Kazakhstan’s
consistent support for Afghanistan and its determination
to continue along the path of stability, security and
sustainable economic development.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I give the floor
to the representative of Afghanistan, who has asked to
make another statement.

38/38

19/12/2016

Mr. Saikal (Afghanistan): I just want to make
two points.
First, it is a sad day for diplomacy, as evidenced
by the assassination of Ambassador Andrey Karlov, the
Ambassador of the Russian Federation to Turkey. On
this occasion, let me extend the deepest condolences
on behalf of myself, my Government and the people of
Afghanistan to the Government and the people of the
Russian Federation, and in particular to the family of
Ambassador Karlov. Our thoughts and prayers are with
his family and with the Government and the people of
the Russian Federation. The Russian Federation is a
close neighbour to Afghanistan and we have deep ties.
Secondly, let me pay tribute to the work of
Ambassador Gerard van Bohemen of New Zealand, who
has so ably chaired the Committee established pursuant
to resolution 1267 (1999) concerning Al-Qaida and the
Taliban and associated individuals and entities over the
past two years. He has worked with us very closely. I
take this opportunity to welcome the new Chair of the
Committee, Ambassador Kairat Abdrakhmanov, a very
close friend and the Ambassador of a near neighbour.
I wish him all the best and commit myself to working
closely with him to make sure that the sanctions regime
will be working properly.
The meeting rose at 1.40 p.m.

16-44819
