A /67/PV.3

United Nations

asdf

General Assembly

Offi cial Records

Sixty-seventh session

3rd plenary meeting
Monday, 24 September 2012, 9 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Jeremić . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

The meeting was called to order at 9.10 a.m.
High-level Meeting on the Rule of Law at the
National and International Levels
Agenda item 83
The rule of law at the national and
international levels
Draft resolution (A/67/L.1)
The President: I declare open the High-level
Meeting of the General Assembly on the Rule of
Law at the National and International Levels, held in
accordance with resolutions 65/32 of 6 December 2010
and 66/102 of 9 December 2011.
Statement by the President
The President: It is my great honour to welcome
participants to the General Assembly, the chief
deliberative, policymaking and representative organ of
the United Nations. On the eve of the general debate, we
have gathered for this historic High-level Meeting on
the rule of law. It is the first time that this critical issue
is being thematically discussed by heads of State and
Government in the Hall. I am convinced that today’s
deliberations will reaffirm our common faith in the
everlasting moral pre-eminence of justice.
I would like to take this opportunity to voice my
sincere gratitude to the Secretary-General for his
leadership on this issue, and to thank all the statesmen
who will participate in the debate. I would also like to
express my deep appreciation to the co-facilitators, the

(Serbia)

Permanent Representatives of Mexico and Denmark,
for their successful efforts to achieve consensus on the
draft outcome document.
The draft resolution (A/67/L.1) before us reaffirms
the interest of all United Nations Members in the
establishment of fair, robust and enforceable laws.
Within States, the just application of the rule of law
stands at the foundation of responsible governance. In
the international arena, it helps ensure the predictability
of actions and the legitimacy of outcomes. In the
words of the draft text that we are about to adopt, it
has fundamental importance for political dialogue and
cooperation among all States.
International law must not be seen as a utopian
aspiration with little relevance to the conduct of world
affairs. The principles and rules codified by centuries
of treaties and agreements between nations should
serve legitimate State interests rather than trying to
override them. By strictly adhering to the rule of law,
we discourage recourse to war. As one of the founders
of the international legal tradition, Hugo Grotius,
famously wrote, once arms are taken up, all respect for
the law, whether human or divine, is lost, as though by
some edict a fury had been let loose to commit every
crime. When we observe international law, we put
ourselves in the service of preventing that fury from
being unleashed. Upon that fundamental tenet we have
built the United Nations.
I believe this High-level Meeting signals a
new landmark moment in the global peace process.
I am pleased that it is taking place within the

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. Corrections should be submitted to the original
languages only. They should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature
of a member of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room
U-506. Corrections will be issued after the end of the session in a consolidated corrigendum.

12-51904 (E)

*1251904*

A/67/PV.3

overarching theme I have chosen for the work of this
session, “Bringing about adjustment or settlement of
international disputes or situations by peaceful means”.
Throughout the course of our deliberations, I believe
it is critical that we not lose sight of the importance of
fully respecting the equality, sovereignty and territorial
integrity of United Nations States Members. These are
not only some of the most basic precepts of the Charter;
they are, in my view, indispensable to achieving the
first stated purpose of the United Nations, which is to
maintain peace and security.
To be effective, the corpus of international law
must be observed by all Member States, great and
small, rich and poor alike. If our aim is to strengthen
trust between nations, the respect for accepted norms
cannot be ambiguous or selective. Everyone must know
that everyone else will adhere to the same principles
and rules. Today’s draft outcome document recognizes
the importance of national ownership and rule-of-law
activities. It stands at the heart of the social contract
between a State and its citizens. The broad diversity
of legal traditions is brought together in the draft
document that there are common features founded on
international norms and standards. The United Nations
has been central to their establishment. As President,
I will work with Member States to ensure that the
General Assembly sharpens its focus on the effective
implementation of best practices in the area of the rule
of law.
In the discussions to follow, I believe we can draw
inspiration from words that Montesquieu wrote long
ago: “There is no nation so powerful as the one that
obeys its laws not from principles of fear or reason, but
from passion.” As President of the General Assembly
at its sixty-seventh session, it is my great hope that
passion for the rule of law will prevail, and thus
empower all Member States to ensure the equitable
delivery of justice at home in their full adherence to the
tenets of international law abroad. Realizing the scope
of our task and the imperative need for success, I am
confident that we shall proceed with humble resolve, in
a spirit of renewed cooperation, on the righteous path
of peace.
I now give the floor to His Excellency the SecretaryGeneral of the United Nations, Mr. Ban Ki-moon.
The Secretary-General (spoke in French): The rule
of law is like the law of gravity. It is the rule of law that
ensures that our world and our societies remain bound

2

together and that order prevails over chaos. It unites us
around common values and anchors us in the common
good. But unlike the law of gravity, the rule of law does
not arise spontaneously. It must be nourished by the
continuing and concerted efforts of real leaders. Today,
for the first time, heads of Government, ministers of
justice, prosecutors general and representatives of
civil society are meeting in the Hall in order to debate
exclusively on strengthening justice for the citizens of
every country in the world.
It has been a long wait. But the United Nations has
been striving to strengthen the rule of law for decades
now, and today’s meeting reflects an increasingly vast
world movement that is bringing together ordinary
citizens who are demanding justice, respect for the
principle of accountability and an end to impunity.
We know that strengthening the rule of law means
consolidating the three pillars of the United Nations:
peace, development and human rights.
Justice is not an abstract concept. It is a voter’s
card, a contract in good and due form, the badge of a
policeman who inspires trust, and the birth certificate
that guarantees a little girl the right to an official life.
The widow who inherits nothing, the human rights
activist subjected to reprisals, and the victim of sexual
violence all need the rule of law to obtain justice.
(spoke in English)
The Charter of the United Nations — the
“constitution” of the international community — provides
indispensable tools to deepen the rule of law: the
universal standard-setting power of the General
Assembly, the enforcement power of the Security
Council and the judicial power of the International
Court of Justice.
The wider body of international law developed at
the United Nations gives the international community a
basis for cooperation and for the peaceful resolution of
conflicts, along with the means to ensure that there is
no relapse into fighting.
And with the development of accountability
mechanisms, no war criminals should ever find safe
harbour in the modern world.
The rule of law is also fundamental to development
and to achieving the Millennium Development Goals.
Today’s discussion should strengthen our resolve to
ensure that the post-2015 international development
agenda takes full account of the rule of law.

12-51904

A/67/PV.3

I am proud that the United Nations is promoting the
rule of law in more than 150 countries. I am grateful for
the many voluntary pledges being made today. I thank
the Governments that have made commitments. But I
ask for concrete action in five specific areas.
First, I call on all States to commit to the equal
application of the law at both the national and
international levels. There should be no selectivity in
applying resolutions, decisions and laws. We cannot
allow political self-interest to undermine justice.
Secondly, I call on heads of State and Government
to uphold the highest standards of the rule of law in
their decision-making at all times. The rule of law must
be the foundation for every government action.
Thirdly, I call on all heads of State and Government
to accept the jurisdiction of the International Court of
Justice.
Fourthly, I urge Member States to support peace by
strengthening United Nations initiatives in the field of
the rule of law: training police, improving corrections
and enhancing the judiciary in fragile and conflict-torn
countries around the world.
Fifthly, and fundamentally, I urge members to
adopt the solemn draft declaration that is before the
Assembly. Make the most of this truly historic occasion
to international law and justice and to an international
order based on the rule of law.
Civil society plays a crucial role in holding leaders
to account, and I urge the Assembly to keep pushing
for action in all of those action areas. It is not enough
to disperse our rule of law activities across the United
Nations agenda. They deserve a central place in the
structure of our work.
I count on the Assembly to help forge a new,
structured approach to strengthening the rule of law
and delivering justice so that we can achieve peace,
development and human rights.
Strengthening the rule of law is for every country
and is in everyone’s interest. It is as essential within
countries as it is among the family of nations.
Today’s meeting is a milestone, but it is not an end
in itself. Our challenge now is to follow up, generate
momentum and continue to give a high profile to this
essential foundation for a better future.
The President: I thank the Secretary-General for
his statement.
12-51904

The Assembly will now proceed to consider draft
resolution A/67/L.1, entitled “Declaration of the Highlevel Meeting of the General Assembly on the Rule
of Law at the National and International Levels”.
May I take it that the Assembly wishes to adopt draft
resolution A/67/L.1?
Draft resolution A/67/L.1 was adopted (resolution
67/1).
The President: I wish to express my special
appreciation once again to Ambassador Carsten Staur
of Denmark and to Ambassador Luis Alfonso de Alba
of Mexico, who so ably and patiently conducted the
discussions and complex negotiations in the informal
consultations on the resolution. Of course, I also thank
all Member States for their valuable contribution to the
successful completion of the outcome document.
I now give the floor to the President of the
International Court of Justice, His Excellency Mr. Peter
Tomka.
Mr. Tomka (International Court of Justice) (spoke
in French): I welcome the opportunity to address the
General Assembly on behalf of the International Court
of Justice on this important topic, the rule of law at the
national and international levels. I wish to make a few
remarks on the international aspect of this concept.
The Preamble to the Charter of the United Nations
confirms that the founding fathers of the Organization,
when they decided to create the United Nations, in
1945, were determined “to establish conditions under
which justice and respect for the obligations arising
from treaties and other sources of international law
can be maintained”. They also reaffirmed their “faith
in fundamental human rights, in the dignity and worth
of the human person, in the equal rights of men and
women and of nations large and small”.
The concept of the rule of law is, and should be,
at the very heart of the Organization’s mission. All
organs of the United Nations must fully adhere to
applicable international legal rules. Any action that
does not conform to law is devoid of legitimacy. The
international dimension of the concept of the rule of law
was aptly expressed in the draft Declaration on Rights
and Duties of States, prepared by the International Law
Commission in 1949. Article 14 states that “Every State
has the duty to conduct its relations with other States
in accordance with international law and with the
principle that the sovereignty of each State is subject to
the supremacy of international law.”
3

A/67/PV.3

The United Nations has achieved impressive results
in the normative realm; the list of conventions codifying
international law and contributing to its progressive
development is long. The list of United Nations human
rights conventions is also considerable.
Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon has rightly
stressed that, today, the real challenge lies in the
implementation of the existing judicial framework.
The application of international legal rules and the
implementation of international legal obligations are
not always free from controversies and differences,
which leads to open disputes between States.
At the international level, the concept of the rule
of law requires the existence of effective and, insofar
as possible, compulsory adjudicative mechanisms. The
legal maxim nemo iudex in causa sua — no one can be a
judge in one’s own case — confirmed by the Permanent
Court of International Justice in 1925, should also be
applied in relations between States.
The Charter of the United Nations declares as one
of its principles that all Members “shall settle their
international disputes by peaceful means in such a
manner that international peace and security, and
justice, are not endangered”. Judicial settlement of the
disputes between States is one of the methods available
to them in order to resolve their disagreements and to
restore harmony and good relations between them. That
is particularly true as regards disputes that are likely to
endanger the maintenance of international peace and
security, to which the whole Chapter VI of the United
Nations Charter is devoted. I would recall that under
Article 36, paragraph 3, of the Charter of the United
Nations, the Security Council may recommend to the
parties to refer a legal dispute to the International Court
of Justice.
(spoke in English)
Bringing a dispute before the Court usually
contributes to defusing tensions between States,
in particular in situations of competing claims to
sovereignty or maritime zones. If the parties are
unable to resolve such matters through negotiation to
their satisfaction or to find a creative solution, such as
joint management and exploitation regimes, the Court
remains available to assist them by adjudicating the
dispute on the strength of their legal arguments and
evidence in accordance with international law.
The international community now has over 90
years of experience with the judicial settlement of
4

disputes. The key role in that regard was assigned by
the Charter to the International Court of Justice, which
is one of the six main organs of the Organization and
its principal judicial organ. Through its activities,
the Court is an important agent for upholding and
promoting the rule of law at the international level in
relations between States. It has the important and noble
role of determining existing law and rendering justice
between States.
There were periods when States more frequently
referred their disputes to it; there were also periods, in
particular in the 1960s and 1970s, when judges were
sitting rather idly in the Peace Palace. I am glad to report
that, over the past two decades, we have witnessed a
renewed willingness of States from all corners of the
world to submit cases to the Court for adjudication. In
the last 22 years of its activities, since 1990, the Court
has rendered more judgements than during the first 44
years of its existence — 60 as compared to 52. Just this
year, in addition to one advisory opinion, the Court has
rendered three judgments and has advanced its work on
a fourth, and is planning to hold hearings in two further
important cases, one concerning a boundary dispute
between two African States and the other regarding a
maritime dispute involving two countries from Latin
America.
The jurisdiction of the Court is based on the
consent of the States involved in a dispute before it.
While all 193 States Members of the United Nations
are parties to the Statute of the Court, only 67 of them
have made a declaration under Article 36, paragraph 2,
of the Statute recognizing as compulsory ipso facto and
without special agreement, in relation to any another
State accepting the same obligation, the jurisdiction of
the Court in all legal disputes. Therefore, just slightly
more than one third of the States Members of the United
Nations have such a declaration in force, which is no
reason to be satisfied. In fact, we are far from realizing
the hope, Mr. President, which your most distant
predecessor, the President of the General Assembly at
its very first session, Mr. Paul-Henri Spaak, expressed
on 18 April 1946 when he represented the Assembly
at the solemn inaugural sitting of the then newly
established Court. He wished that one day the Court’s
jurisdiction would become compulsory for all countries
and for all disputes without exception.
In the early years of the United Nations, there was
stronger adherence to the compulsory jurisdiction of
the Court than what we see today. In 1948, out of 58

12-51904

A/67/PV.3

States Members of the United Nations, 34, including
four out of the five permanent members of the Security
Council, recognized the compulsory jurisdiction of
the Court, or some 59 per cent of the United Nations
membership at that time, as compared to today’s rate of
34 per cent, or 67 States, including only one of the five
permanent members of the Security Council, out of 193
Member States. I therefore welcome and commend the
decision of the Secretary-General to launch a campaign
to increase the number of Member States that accept as
compulsory the jurisdiction of the International Court
of Justice.
On behalf of the Court, I wish to reassure Member
States that the Court will continue in its efforts to
adjudicate disputes that may be submitted to it in
the future with dedication, the utmost impartiality,
independence and, in accordance with international law,
within the bounds of the jurisdiction conferred upon it.
Hopefully, the Court will have further opportunities to
contribute, through its activities, to the strengthening
of the rule of law at the international level.
The President: I now give the floor to His
Excellency Mr. Guido Westerwelle, Minister for
Foreign Affairs of the Federal Republic of Germany
and current President of the Security Council.
Mr. Westerwelle (President of the Security
Council): It is an honour to address the General
Assembly on behalf of the Security Council at its
first-ever plenary meeting devoted exclusively to the
rule of law. Today’s meeting and the representation of
States at the highest level attests to the international
community’s firm commitment to the rule of law. Let
me therefore pay tribute to the General Assembly,
which has set the normative framework on which we
all base our common efforts, and express the Council’s
appreciation to the Secretary-General for his activities
in promoting both the peaceful settlement of disputes
and the rule of law.
Today, the rule of law is an important concept
in the work of the Security Council. Since 2003, the
Council has held several thematic debates on the rule of
law in the context of international peace and security,
and several presidential statements have recognized
the crucial relevance of the rule of law across the
full spectrum of the Council’s agenda. Thematic and
country-specific resolutions adopted by the Council
since 2003 have regularly addressed issues related to
the rule of law, both in its international and national
dimensions.
12-51904

As a principal organ of the United Nations, the
Security Council remains firmly committed to the
Charter of the United Nations and international law
as indispensable foundations of a more peaceful,
prosperous and just world. The Council attaches
vital importance to universal adherence to, and the
implementation of, the rule of law. The promotion of
justice and the rule of law are essential for peace, the
prevention of armed conflict and cooperation among
States. The Council is convinced that international law
plays a critical role in fostering stability and order in
international relations. International law also provides
a framework for addressing common challenges, and
thereby contributes to the maintenance of international
peace and security.
The Security Council is committed to, and actively
supports, the peaceful settlement of disputes. It has
consistently called upon Member States to settle their
disputes by peaceful means, as set forth in Chapter VI
of the Charter.
The International Court of Justice, the principal
judicial organ of the United Nations, plays a key role
in adjudicating disputes among States. Let me therefore
call upon all States that have not yet done so to consider
accepting the jurisdiction of the Court, in accordance
with its Statute.
Sustainable peace requires an integrated and
coherent approach. In that regard, the rule of law is
one of the key elements of conflict prevention and
peacekeeping, as well as of conflict resolution and
peacebuilding. That is why the Security Council has
included support for the rule of law in the mandates
of many peacekeeping and special political missions
worldwide.
The Security Council is committed to ensure
that all United Nations efforts to restore peace and
security themselves respect and promote the rule
of law. Especially after the end of peacekeeping and
other relevant missions, a coordinated approach among
all parts of the United Nations system must include
capacity-building support to assist national authorities
to uphold the rule of law. In that context, the Council
has recognized the importance of national ownership
in rule-of-law assistance activities, including the
strengthening of accessible and responsive justice and
security institutions.
The Security Council remains strongly opposed
to impunity for serious violations of international

5

A/67/PV.3

humanitarian law and human rights law. States must
therefore comply with their relevant obligations to
end impunity. They must thoroughly investigate and
prosecute persons who are responsible for crimes such
as genocide, crimes against humanity and other serious
violations of international humanitarian law. Those
who are responsible for sexual or other violations
against women and girls must be held accountable.
It is only through those means that violations can be
prevented, their recurrence be avoided and sustainable
peace, justice, truth and reconciliation be achieved.
The Council has repeatedly noted the contributions
of the International Criminal Court, ad hoc and mixed
tribunals, and chambers of international tribunals to
the fight against impunity for the most serious crimes
of concern to the international community. And it has
reiterated the importance of State cooperation with
those Courts and tribunals in accordance with States’
respective obligations.
The Security Council has expressed concern about
the threat posed by transnational organized crime and
drug trafficking to international security in different
regions of the world. It has called for coordinated
action by the United Nations and its States Members
to fight those threats by implementing national and
international applicable norms through long-term
capacity-building efforts and regional initiatives.
Sanctions remain an important tool in the
maintenance and restoration of international peace and
security. The Council has stressed the need to ensure
that sanctions are carefully targeted in support of clear
objectives, and designed carefully so as to minimize
possible and worst consequences and to ensure that
they be implemented by Member States. The Council
is committed to fair and clear procedures for placing
individuals and entities on sanctions lists and for
removing them, as well as for granting humanitarian
exemptions.
Today’s debate represents a milestone in the
promotion of the rule of law through the United Nations.
The Security Council remains fully committed to
contributing its share to strengthening the rule of law
at both the national and international levels. Both are
inherently linked, for every nation that proclaims the
rule of law at home must respect it abroad and every
nation that insists on it abroad must enforce it at home.

6

The President: I now give the floor to
Ms. Navanethem Pillay, United Nations High
Commissioner for Human Rights.
Ms. Pillay (Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Human Rights): The rule of law
constitutes the backbone for the legal protection of
human rights. In addition, the rule of law itself must be
grounded in human rights. Growing up in South Africa,
I experienced how the apartheid regime created a veneer
of a rule of law based on legislation that institutionalized
injustice and procedures that embodied unfairness.
My experience has shown me that rule of law without
human rights is only an empty shell.
My Office, including through its 58 field presences,
works with national stakeholders in building strong and
responsive institutions that constitute prerequisites
for any legitimate and effective system of governance
based on the rule of law and respect for human rights.
We also support the establishment and functioning of
comprehensive accountability frameworks to address
human rights violations, including transitional justice
mechanisms that comply with international standards
and norms.
Based on our experience in the field, I cannot stress
enough the importance of national ownership of rule-oflaw principles. National action as well as international
support to strengthen the rule of law on the ground
must be based on the body of international human
rights law developed mainly under the auspices of the
United Nations. The International Court of Justice has
contributed to national ownership of that body of law
through its jurisprudence that sheds light on the scope
of States’ legal obligations deriving from international
human rights instruments. Further clarification of those
obligations is provided by treaty bodies and special
procedures of the Human Rights Council, both of which
are supported by my Office.
In that context, I urge States to use the opportunity
of the High-level Meeting on the Rule of Law at
the National and International Levels to commit,
if they have not yet done so, to becoming a party to
all international human rights treaties, withdrawing
remaining reservations and accepting the jurisdiction
of the International Court of Justice and treaty body
individual complaints procedures.
Respect for the rule of law also demands full
compliance with the principles of equality before the
law, equal protection of the law and the prohibition

12-51904

A/67/PV.3

of discrimination on any ground such as race, colour,
sex, sexual orientation, gender identity, disability,
language, religion, political or other opinion, national
or social origin, property, birth or other status. States
must examine their laws and repeal those that are
discriminatory in their intent or effect.
In addition, respect for the rule of law requires
putting in place effective accountability mechanisms
for human rights violations. No one is above the law.
Combating impunity requires that international crimes
and other gross human rights violations must not be
subject to amnesties or functional immunities. I urge
States to ensure accountability, notably by ratifying the
Statute of the International Criminal Court (ICC), and
to ensure strong domestic judicial systems to properly
implement the principle of complementarity pursuant
to the ICC.
Accountability, however, must extend beyond the
criminal law realm to include responsive civil and
administrative policies and procedures to address
grievances and, when required, effective vetting
processes. Also, we must ensure respect for victims’
rights to effective remedies and reparations for human
rights violations.
In that regard, special consideration must be given
to the groups most affected, especially those too often
excluded, such as victims of sexual and gender-based
violence.
Furthermore, the right to access justice and legal
aid should be respected and ensured. Civil society
organizations play a crucial role in empowering people.
States should strengthen their support to them and make
sure that everyone can enjoy the rights to freedom of
expression, association and peaceful assembly. Allow
me to conclude by saying that the rule of law is best
served when all individuals are empowered to claim
their rights.

therefore highly appropriate that the General Assembly
has dedicated a special high-level meeting to the rule
of law.
In the work of the United Nations Development
Programme (UNDP) around the world, we witness how
fundamental the rule of law is to the quality of people’s
lives and to the success of national development
efforts. Where laws protect women from violence and
discrimination, providing a basis for full empowerment
and equality, their lives are immeasurably improved.
In places where poor and marginalized citizens know
their rights and can have wrongs redressed, there
is less discrimination, fewer human rights abuses
and more effective service delivery. Where citizens
overall are free from the debilitating fear of violence
or intimidation, strategies for inclusive growth and the
other components of sustainable human development
can flourish.
The rule of law is therefore at the very heart
of what is needed to advance human development.
Conversely, shortcomings in the rule of law underlie
the exclusion, suffering and poverty of many people.
It is not surprising that governing institutions that do
not enable the rule of law become a target of citizen
grievances. UNDP welcomes the call of Member
States in the declaration just adopted at this meeting
(resolution 67/1) to consider the links between the rule
of law, sustainable development, poverty reduction
and human rights in the context of a post-2015 global
development agenda.

The President: I now give the floor to Ms. Helen
Clark, Administrator of the United Nations Development
Programme.

In response to the requests of Member States,
UNDP works on rule-of-law-related programmes in
more than 100 countries. We have specifically been
working, and continue to work, to strengthen the rule
of law in more than 40 countries that have been affected
by conflict in the past decade. We work with national
institutions to strengthen their ability to enforce and
implement the law in a fair, effective and inclusive
manner. We also work with the citizenry to expand
access to justice and to empower individuals to make
effective use of the law.

Ms. Clark (United Nations Development
Programme): The rule of law underpins achieving
the mission of the United Nations: to advance peace,
human rights and development. In our rapidly changing,
unequal and, at times, dangerous world, implementing
the rule of law is critical to establishing the justice,
stability and inclusive growth required for sustained
human development and poverty eradication. It is

Establishing and strengthening the rule of law is a
long-term endeavour. It requires sustained and proactive
partnerships and investment. Short-term responses
will result in failure. Efforts to strengthen justice and
security systems and to legally empower the poor need
to be embedded in national development planning and
policy. We hope that Member States will agree to work
in partnership and to support nationally led processes

12-51904

7

A/67/PV.3

to strengthen the rule of law. We see inspiration in the
impressive strides made by so many nations that have
made the rule of law a national priority.
We will play our part. We have heard the call
of Member States for greater coherence in United
Nations rule of law work. UNDP and the Department
of Peacekeeping Operations combine efforts as cluster
leads of United Nations efforts to strengthen justice,
police and corrections rule-of-law assistance in postconflict and crisis contexts. Drawing on the skills of the
entire United Nations system and other stakeholders,
we aim to rapidly respond to country needs in a wellcoordinated way.
We look forward to working with Member States
on development approaches to securing the benefits
of the rule of law both now and through the post-2015
global development agenda.
The President: I now give the floor to Mr. Yuri
Fedotov, Executive Director of the United Nations
Office on Drugs and Crime.
Mr. Fedotov (United Nations Office on Drugs and
Crime): I am grateful for this opportunity to add my
voice to those of the President of the General Assembly
and the Secretary-General, as well as my colleagues
Helen Clark and Navi Pillay, in support of the rule
of law as a central building block at the national and
international levels. The declaration just adopted
(resolution 67/1) provides a solid road map in that
direction.
In a globalized world, illicit drug trafficking and
transnational organized crime represent a growing
challenge to the rule of law and good governance. Once,
such billion-dollar industries were a problem primarily
for law enforcement and for national authorities. Today,
they have grown in ambition, scale and sophistication.
The link between the rule of law and its role in
improving stability is indisputable. Over the past 10
years, violent crime has decreased in countries where
the rule of law has been improved. The rule of law,
development and security are therefore interdependent
and keystone elements of the United Nations mandate
under the Charter. For example, the achievement of
the Millennium Development Goals and the post-2015
agenda are essential to the lives of millions of people in
order to underpin the rule of law and to ensure access
to justice, in particular.

8

In recent years, the United Nations Office on Drugs
and Crime (UNODC) has witnessed a large increase
in the need for technical assistance under our justice
programme. Our country and regional programmes
undertake a wide range of practical activities, including
police reform, strengthening prosecution services and
access to legal aid, as well as human rights and justice
for children, among many other areas. The approach
rests on creating inter-agency relationships and other
partnerships, while working through integrated regional
programmes and delivering technical assistance at
the grass-roots level. As the United Nations office
specifically mandated to promote the United Nations
Convention against Transnational Organized Crime
and its Protocols and the United Nations Convention
against Corruption, we need to assist Member States
in the full implementation of those legal instruments.
In the area of counter-terrorism, UNODC views
respect for the rule of law and the promotion and
protection of human rights as the core of efforts to fight
terrorism. However, if we are to make inroads into such
multiple threats, our strategy must be aimed at both the
international and the local levels simultaneously. The
local strategy must be connected to the global. We also
need to develop a collective vision of what the criminal
justice system in the early twenty-first century looks
like.
UNODC believes that such a system must be
informed by the highest international standards and
delivering fair, effective and humane criminal justice
policies. Today’s meeting is another step forward in
ensuring that we continue to uphold that universal
benchmark.
The President: We will now continue the Highlevel Meeting of the General Assembly on the Rule of
Law at the National and International Levels.
Before we begin with the list of speakers, I would
like to turn to some organizational matters pertaining
to the conduct of the meeting.
The list of speakers was established on the
understanding that statements will have a time limit of
up to five minutes per statement. In the light of that
given time frame, I would like to appeal to speakers
to deliver their statements at a normal speed so that
interpretation may be provided properly.
To assist speakers in managing their time, a light
system has been installed at the speaker’s rostrum.

12-51904

A/67/PV.3

May I appeal to all speakers for their cooperation in
observing the time limits of their statements, so that
all those inscribed on the list of speakers for a given
meeting will be heard at that meeting.
Finally, in order to avoid disruption for the next
speaker, I would like to seek the cooperation of
representatives, who should remain in their seats after
a statement has been delivered.
The Assembly will now hear an address by His
Excellency Mr. Boni Yayi, President of the Republic of
Benin.
President Yayi (spoke in French): The organization
of this High-level Meeting on the Rule of Law at the
National and International Levels is an excellent
initiative. I would like to thank the Secretary-General
for his report (A/66/749) on the matter, which was
indeed edifying.
In and of itself, the rule of law represents the
optimal framework for the functioning of democracy.
It is up to States to define the shape of it and to put
in place sound institutions that are credible and stable
enough to support democracy. The United Nations has
a vocation to help States in that endeavour by providing
the necessary know-how as needed.
The debate on democratic formalism and the daily
practice of the rule of law remain at the very heart of the
issue before us. Formal democracy can make it possible
for a leader who does not subscribe to the values of the
rule of law to accede to power. In doing so, such leaders
become the very ones to dig its grave. The formal
principle of the separation of powers is not always an
operational concept when the actors behind institutions
that exercise powers are not imbued with the highest
ethical, and even spiritual, values and confirmed moral
rectitude.
The very foundation of the rule of law is therefore
equitable justice whereby actors are endowed with
irreproachable professional ethics. Corruption of the
judiciary thus becomes one of the main impediments to
entrenching the rule of law in that the feeling of injustice
becomes a source of social disorder and institutional
political instability.
For ordinary citizens, particularly in young
democracies, the prevailing tendency is to believe that
they have no rights and no obligations vis-à-vis the
community to which they belong — nothing but rights,
without obligations.

12-51904

Those ominous trends call upon us to work to teach
the culture of democracy and the rule of law so that
their progress cannot be reversed. That must include
fighting corruption, the lack of civic mindedness,
disorder, anarchy, poor institutional governance and
the ensuing impunity.
Against that backdrop, over the past two decades
Benin has made considerable progress in the areas of
electoral governance, the protection of human rights
and the establishment of stable institutions. However,
there are still many challenges before us, especially in
the area of respect for the principles of professional and
social ethics that are compatible with the requirements
of the rule of law and the supremacy of institutions
above and beyond the people running them.
Benin fully adheres to the fundamental principles
enshrined in the United Nations Charter as the basis
for the relations between States and for the mechanisms
for the peaceful settlement of international disputes.
This premise provides us with a sound basis for global
peacebuilding, which must be the ultimate purpose of
the rule of law at the international level.
In that regard, everything must be done to make
the collective security system established by the
international community more credible. Equality
among States, regardless of their size or power, must
be a cardinal principle guiding international relations.
No State must be above international law. Moreover, we
must not accept that, under the cover of international
law, interference in the internal affairs of other States
is justified. We must work together towards a better
world, where there is concerted governance and where
the law is not discriminatory and the conditions for
enjoying fundamental rights are recognized by all and
for all.
That collective aspiration requires reform at the
level of world governance, including reform of the
Security Council, and the re-establishment of equity in
international economic relations, which must include
the elimination of abject poverty and promoting the
right to development.
The President: The Assembly will now hear an
address by His Excellency Mr. Demetris Christofias,
President of the Republic of Cyprus.
President Christofias: Today’s meeting is being
held against the backdrop of the recent worrying
developments in the world and massive abuses of
human rights.
9

A/67/PV.3

The rule of law is a fundamental principle upon
which the European Union (EU) is based. As the
country currently holding the rotating presidency
of the Union, I would like to highlight that this is a
guiding principle of all EU member States, in both
their internal and external action. The EU’s position
will be presented later by Mr. Barroso, President of the
European Commission.
Lack of respect for the rule of law leads to bad
governance, civil unrest and political instability, with
serious security implications at both the national and
international levels. It is crucial, therefore, that we all
focus our efforts on the universal promotion of the rule
of law and the strict monitoring of its application. That
is an enormous challenge for both the United Nations
and its States Members. It requires close cooperation
among the United Nations, regional actors, Member
States and non-State actors for the constant exchange of
relevant data and other useful information, in order to
allow for the close monitoring of areas of crisis and early
coordination for the purpose of conflict prevention.
The Republic of Cyprus, having fully subscribed
to the pledges made by the European Union and its
member States, commits itself to reinforcing the rule
of law through national policy and to upholding the
Charter of the United Nations, in order to strengthen
the main pillars of the Organization’s work: peace and
security, human rights and development.
At the national level, Cyprus retains constitutionally
a separation of powers, ensuring the independence
of the judiciary and access to justice for all. Cyprus
is fully committed to the protection of human rights
and gender equality. In the context of the labour market
it has been the goal of consecutive Governments of
Cyprus for gender equality to be incorporated into the
social and economic policy of the State.
Cyprus acknowledges that the fight against impunity
concerns all of us. It is a stepping stone in establishing the
rule of law in post-conflict societies. The International
Criminal Court is the competent institution to fight
impunity in the world, and we welcome the increased
participation in the Rome Statute. At the same time,
Cyprus, pursuant to the complementarity principle of
the Statute, has incorporated into its national penal code
crimes of genocide, crimes against humanity and war
crimes, which are punishable with life imprisonment.
Cyprus has also initiated the internal process for the
amendments to the Rome Statute with regard to the

10

crime of aggression, adopted in 2010 at the Review
Conference of the Rome Statute in Kampala.
The international community is sending a strong
message today by organizing this first high-level meeting
on the rule of law. Most important, the adoption of the
Political Declaration (resolution 67/1) demonstrates the
international community’s commitment and paves the
way for the future.
In a divided world, the concept of the rule of law
is one of the greatest unifying factors, perhaps the
greatest, the nearest we are likely to come to a universal
principle.
The President: The Assembly will now hear an
address by His Excellency Mr. Toomas Hendrik Ilves,
President of the Republic of Estonia.
President Ilves: At the 2005 World Summit here
at the United Nations, States agreed on the need for
universal adherence to, and the implementation of, the
rule of law, at both the international and the national
levels. We must commit to common values and deepen
discussion and action on that principle: governance
that ensures justice and fairness in which all persons,
including the State itself are accountable; where
laws are promulgated publicly, enforced equally and
adjudicated independently.
I would like to thank the Secretary-General for his
report (A/66/749), which is the basis for discussions on
the declaration (resolution 67/1) we adopted today. The
rule of law is a guarantee for the full range of human
rights. The United Nations as the advocate and protector
of the global system of human rights must continue to
improve tools to prevent human rights violations.
The United Nations Human Rights Council is one
of the bodies with the essential function to respond
and draw attention to situations that might give rise to
serious human rights violations. Estonia looks forward
to becoming a member of the Council and to working
proactively towards the fulfilment of its mandate. Our
primary concerns on the Council will be, inter alia,
advancing the rights of women, gender equality, the
rights of the child and of indigenous peoples. We would
work on promoting global Internet freedom and closing
the impunity gap for the most serious international
crimes.
I am glad that the Secretary-General has entitled
his report “Delivering justice: programme of action
to strengthen the rule of law at the national and

12-51904

A/67/PV.3

international levels”, and that has devoted a section to
establishing the age of accountability. Justice, whether
delivered by domestic or international institutions, is a
necessary prerequisite for sustainable development and
security.
Impunity provides fertile ground for the recurrence
of conflicts, and it breeds instability. Recent milestones
in international criminal law are important steps
in building trust in international politics: Thomas
Lubanga Dyilo, the former warlord of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, was the first person convicted
by the International Criminal Court; Charles Taylor,
the former President of Liberia, was found guilty by
the Special Court for Sierra Leone; and none of those
indicted by the International Criminal Tribunal for
the former Yugoslavia are free, and many have been
convicted. Those examples, as well as the fact that the
most serious international crimes have no statute of
limitations, illustrate the waning of the idea that leaders
can be immune from prosecution.
As it celebrates its tenth anniversary, the
International Criminal Court enjoys increased
international trust. An impressive number of 121
countries — six short of two thirds of the States
Members of the United Nations — have already
ratified the Rome Statute. I call upon all countries that
have not yet done so to join the Rome Statute and to
cooperate with the Court. Ratifying the amendments
to the Rome Statute on the crime of aggression adopted
in Kampala is crucial. Estonia pledges to ratify those
amendments, and we call on others to do the same. That
would confirm our commitment to the rule of law and
international criminal justice, and to the International
Criminal Court in particular.
The rule of law is not only about bringing criminals
to justice. The concept’s importance is that it touches
all of society. It is essential also for entrepreneurs,
companies and foreign investors. More than 20 years
have passed since Estonia restored its independence
and market economy. Over those years we have set
roots for the principles of good governance, along with
broadening the use of information technology. The
e-government cabinet, e-health, online voting and online
pre-filled tax returns are not only examples of Estonian
innovation but also examples of citizen-friendly public
services that increase transparency and help prevent
corruption. Our experience shows that open markets
operating in a predictable legal environment provide

12-51904

the preconditions for rapid and sustainable economic
recovery and growth.
The effective participation of all stakeholders
in public affairs is an important way to further the
rule of law. Every person must have the possibility
to improve and influence his community life. In
Estonia participation is enhanced through the use of
information technology. To enable politicians and
non-governmental organizations, indeed every man
and woman, to express himself or herself, we must
maintain open access to the Internet. Additionally, civil
society’s contribution is vital to advancing the rule of
law worldwide. I hope that future conversations on the
rule of law here at the United Nations will be widened,
and adherence to it broadened.
If we respect the international commitments we
have made, the world would certainly be a better place.
Estonia welcomes the possibility of making rule-oflaw-related pledges. We have presented our pledges to
the Secretariat and commend those who have done the
same.
The President: The Assembly will how hear an
address by His Excellency Mr. Porfirio Lobo Sosa,
President of the Republic of Honduras.
President Lobo Sosa (spoke in Spanish): The
peoples of the United Nations recognized, from the
very founding of the Organization, that all human
beings are born free and equal in dignity and rights, and
that, endowed as they are with reason and awareness,
they should therefore behave in a fraternal manner
towards one another. We are thus resolved to create the
conditions necessary for the maintenance of justice and
the respect of obligations arising from treaties and other
sources of international law, and to practise tolerance
and live in peace like good neighbours.
As the Secretary-General said it so well, the
concept of the rule of law is at the heart of the work
of the United Nations. There is an interdependent
relationship between the rule of law and development:
the rule of law promotes development, and development
strengthens the rule of law.
We in Honduras have made progress on a number
of different fronts with a view to promoting and
strengthening the application of the law to all citizens
without distinction, thereby ensuring that justice is
done in a timely and impartial manner.

11

A/67/PV.3

I would like to share with the Assembly the fact
that in my country there is no immunity for any public
official or civil servant; we all are equal before the law.
Moreover, Supreme Court of Justice magistrates are
elected with the broad participation of civil society in
order to strengthen their independence from political
and economic influences. We have also created a
national judiciary council so as to provide guarantees
in terms of the professionalization and careers of our
judges and magistrates.
Our Constitution furthermore states that an annual
percentage of the national budget will be earmarked for
the Supreme Court of Justice. Honduras plans to broaden
the scope of alternate mechanisms for the settlement
of disputes and the strengthening of the rule of law.
We are currently in the midst of an intensive process
aimed at reforming the national police on the basis of
three major objectives: to purge it; professionalize it;
and then provide it with the technical, technological
and logistical resources necessary for it to fulfil its
mandate.
At the international level, Honduras’s membership
in the United Nations has meant not only that it is
subject to its norms but also that it has always had
recourse to mechanisms for the peaceful settlement of
disputes in resolving its differences with other States.
We have accepted the jurisdiction of the International
Court of Justice and the International Criminal Court,
and we have also accepted the jurisdiction of the InterAmerican Commission on Human Rights and the InterAmerican Court of Human Rights. We have complied
with the decisions of the Commission and with the
rulings handed down by the Court.
In the international trade arena, we also accept
the jurisdiction of the World Trade Organization and
have turned to it to resolve trade disputes. Likewise,
we have introduced mechanisms for the peaceful
settlement of trade disputes in the context of the freetrade agreements to which we have adhered.
Honduras is currently facing a tremendous problem
in continuing to strengthen the rule of law owing to
the harmful effects of drug trafficking as a result of
our geographical location, between producers and
consumers of drugs.
I should like to conclude by responding to the
invitation made by the General Assembly in resolution
66/102 and proposing a sub-theme for debate by the
Sixth Committee: “The culture of the respect of law”,

12

or “The culture of legality”. We believe that the rule of
law cannot be reduced simply to a legal body of work
nor to the actions taken by our States to ensure that
the rule of law prevails. In other words, for the rule
of law to prevail, it is not enough just to have laws,
police, prosecutors and judges, nor is it even enough
for them to carry out their work. What is necessary
is a change in society’s values. Society needs to be
aware of and united by the rule of law, and to protect
opportunities for the development and well-being of the
human person. It is not possible to have a State based
on the rule of law or functioning, stable and permanent
democratic institutions in the absence of such a culture.
That is therefore the task of society as a whole,
including teachers in schools, colleges and universities;
the media; and so-called centres of moral authority, such
as the family, churches, citizens’ groups and persons of
renown, at the national, regional and local levels.
We hope that, during this session, we will see a
commitment to continuing to strengthen the rule of law
through the promotion by all States Members of the
culture of respect for legality.
The President: The Assembly will how hear an
address by His Excellency Mr. Heinz Fischer, Federal
President of the Republic of Austria.
President Fischer: I am very happy that the
General Assembly has chosen this important issue as
the subject of this High-level Meeting.
International law and the rule of law are the
foundations of the international system. Austria
strongly believes that a rules-based international
system, with clear and practicable regulation, is an
essential precondition for lasting peace, security and
economic development.
This High-level Meeting provides an excellent
opportunity to renew the commitment of all States
Members of the United Nations to the rule of law at the
national and international levels. We would suggest the
convening of meetings of this kind at periodic intervals
in future.
Today I will focus my statement on the links
between the rule of law and sustainable economic
development, the protection of human rights and the
maintenance of international peace and stability.
First, the rule of law and sustainable economic
development go hand in hand and are mutually
reinforcing. Our own history after the Second World
12-51904

A/67/PV.3

War and the recent history of the neighbouring countries
of Eastern Europe give evidence of that.
Most importantly, the challenge of corruption must
be addressed. At the side event jointly organized by
Austria, Tunisia, Japan and Estonia, to take place at
lunchtime today, we want to focus on this exact aspect.
The International Anti-Corruption Academy, based
in Austria, provides anti-corruption education and
professional training as well as technical assistance. It
has more than 30 members, and we invite other States
to join.
Secondly, we are pleased to see that the Declaration
of the High-level Meeting of the General Assembly
on the Rule of Law at the National and International
Levels, adopted today, prominently refers to the
interdependence between the rule of law and the
protection of human rights. We should therefore
intensify our efforts towards the universalization of
international human rights treaties.
The Office of the High Commissioner for Human
Rights, the Human Rights Council’s special procedures
and the human rights treaty bodies are indispensable to
the realization of the rule of law in practice.
Freedom of expression is essential in building
democratic societies based on the rule of law.
Journalists play a crucial role in the process. In order
to respond to the worrying trend of increased attacks
against journalists worldwide, Austria has placed the
safety of journalists high on its human rights agenda. It
is a priority for our membership in the Human Rights
Council.
Thirdly, with regard to the rule of law and the
maintenance of international peace and security,
we call upon all Member States to actively promote
an international order based on the rule of law and
international law, with the United Nations at its
core. Accountability and the fight against impunity
for violations of international human rights and
humanitarian law are crucial. We cannot turn a blind
eye to mass killings of innocent civilians, as we are
currently witnessing in Syria. We must stop the
atrocities and ensure that the perpetrators and those
ordering the crimes are brought to justice. However,
the referral of a situation to the International Criminal
Court (ICC) is only the starting point towards justice.
The ICC cannot fulfil its mandate without political and
material support and cooperation by Member States.
We also believe that our efforts to promote the rule of

12-51904

law should focus more on prevention. We need to be
better prepared to assist States in their reform efforts
prior to the outbreak of conflict.
Today’s High-level Meeting should not be seen as a
one-time event. The momentum should be maintained
for follow-up and further action. We welcome the
numerous pledges made today and are proud to announce
that Austria has also made a number of pledges, which
are annexed to my written statement. Our efforts to
promote the rule of law do not serve an abstract goal,
but rather the protection of the rights and interests of
individuals. We will continue to give the utmost priority
to the subject, in order to live in a society in which the
rule of law prevails both internationally and nationally.
The President: The Assembly will now hear an
address by His Excellency Mr. Mahmoud Ahmadinejad,
President of the Islamic Republic of Iran.
President Ahmadinejad (spoke in Farsi;
interpretation provided by the delegation): The theme
of this meeting is vitally important and the main
foundation of all other issues. Regulating sound social
relations, establishing order, justice, freedom, peace
and sustainable security, prosperity and public welfare,
and securing the rights of the public are dependent upon
the absolute rule of law, and its various aspects need to
be taken into consideration.
First, lawmaking is a sacred task and God, who
is the most righteous and the wisest, is a lawmaker
himself. The nature of law should be just and based on
wisdom. The law should be all-inclusive, embracing
various aspects and the legitimate interests of all, and
an effective tool to rein in lawbreakers. The law should
secure and protect liberty, dignity and basic human
rights, regulate and facilitate activities and support
society’s development. It must be transparent, current
and not subject to arbitrary interpretation.
Second, legislators should genuinely represent
people and support only those decisions that represent
the actual will of the people in a free, equal and just
manner.
Third, law enforcement authorities must be
conscientious, trustworthy, efficient, fair, dedicated,
self-motivated, impartial and defenders of the rights of
the general public. Even the best laws cannot deliver
their desired results if they are not implemented
correctly or if they are manipulated by corrupted
elements.

13

A/67/PV.3

Fourth, the law should be enforced correctly and
fairly, and should of course be based on knowledge and
prudence.
Fifth, the law needs to be enacted in such a way that
people see it as fair, and in line with their interests and
those of their society. They must believe in it in order for
them to contribute constructively to its implementation.
Law enforcement officials should enjoy legitimacy and
the trust of the people.
Sixth, laws that breed discrimination among people
and nations receive neither recognition nor legitimacy.
The law must be implemented with equal rights and
obligations for all. The discriminatory privilege of the
right of veto enjoyed by some members of the Security
Council lacks legitimacy, and that is why the Security
Council has failed to establish justice and ensure
sustainable peace and security in the world. We have
witnessed that some members of the Security Council
with the right of veto have chosen silence with regard
to the nuclear warheads of a fake regime, while at the
same time they impede the scientific progress of other
nations. They themselves wrongly invoke the United
Nations Charter and misuse freedom of speech to
justify their silence towards offending the sanctity of
the human community and the divine prophets. They
support those offenders, infringe upon others’ freedom
and allow sacrilege to people’s beliefs and sanctity
while they criminalize posing questions or investigating
historical issues and put researchers in jail.
Seventh, in the name of freedom and maintaining
international security, they violate the basic rights and
freedoms of other nations while imposing their own
will on them.
Eighth, legislators and law enforcement officials
should not be influenced or dominated by particular
parties, groups or centres of power.
I would like to make the following proposals for
better and more effective rule of law in international
relations.
First, the General Assembly, as the highest organ
of the United Nations, must restore its real position as
a manifestation of the universal joint governance of the
world by its immediate revitalization.
Second, measures must be taken, in the interests
of Member States and with due regard to justice, to
completely reform and change the rules and regulations

14

governing the Security Council, in terms of both its
powers and its structures.
Third, the principles of justice and fairness as
accepted in today’s world must be maintained in the
making and implementation of laws.
Fourth, the international community must be united
in holding occupying Powers to account and in making
efforts to return occupied territories to their rightful
owners and to restore those nations’ rights.
Fifth, the prohibition of the use or threat of the
use of force in international relations, along with the
peaceful settlement of disputes, must be the foundation
of the rule of law at the international level.
Sixth, the principle of the equal sovereignty of all
States must be respected. All States must enjoy equal
opportunities for participation in global governance,
setting standards and making decisions.
Seventh, all States should adhere to their
international obligations under international treaties
and international law in a consistent manner.
Eighth, States are urged to refuse to yield to the
imposition of laws by bullying countries.
Ninth, the legitimate and legal rights of States and
nations must be respected.
Tenth, divine prophets and divinely inspired
religions, which are the common heritage of humankind,
should be respected by the law in every society in order
to avoid conflicts that lead to hatred, war and hostility
and to promote peace and integration among peoples.
On behalf of the people of Iran, I would like to
express my readiness to cooperate in fulfilling those
goals. I hope that with the concerted efforts of all, we
will witness the ascendancy of just laws emanating from
the free and equal will of nations and the attainment
of peace and sustainable security around the world.
Achieving those desires will unquestionably pave
the way for the establishment of justice in the world
under the rule of the righteous and ultimate saviour of
humankind, Imam Al-Mahdi.
The President: The Assembly will now hear
an address by His Excellency Mr. Andreas Bērziņš,
President of the Republic of Latvia.
President Bērziņš: Latvia is strongly committed
to strengthening the rule of law, democracy, human
rights and good governance around the world. That

12-51904

A/67/PV.3

commitment is based on our own experience. More
than 70 years ago, Latvia and the other two Baltic States
were eliminated from the world political map owing to
the collapse of an international system based on the rule
of law. Two totalitarian regimes, the Soviet Union and
Nazi Germany, divided Europe, violating international
law and ignoring the sovereign will of free countries.
Latvia restored its independence only 21 years
ago. From being a Soviet-occupied country, Latvia
re-emerged as a reliable member of the international
system, represented in the United Nations, the
European Union and NATO. Out of a closed and
regulated system we have developed an open, liberal,
fast-growing market economy. A totalitarian regime
with an oppressed people has been replaced by stable
democratic institutions and an open society where
human rights are respected.
The key to Latvia’s success has been in establishing
the principles of justice, the rule of law and democracy,
and in putting them into practice. We also follow those
principles in our international relations, making our
contribution to strengthening the rule of law around the
world. For example, Latvia is helping Georgia set up
an effective system of supervision over the financing
of political parties and electoral campaigns, and we are
helping Moldova reform its justice sector.
Our history proves that a strong, multilateral,
inclusive international order based on the rule of law
is essential for maintaining global peace and security.
The United Nations plays an important role in this, and
its Member States are committed to implementing the
principles contained in the Charter. We believe that
a comprehensive approach to addressing rule-of-law
issues is needed. International commitments, national
implementation, monitoring and better cooperation and
coordination among international actors in assisting
States can contribute to worldwide respect for the rule
of law.
The voluntary pledges made by Member States
at this meeting are our first concrete steps towards
reaffirming our political commitment to the rule of law
and moving this agenda forward. In that context, Latvia
now makes the following pledges.
First, we will provide assistance to other countries
in the area of reform of the judicial sector and in
strengthening the rule of law.

12-51904

Secondly, in order to improve access to justice by
reducing and balancing the workload of its courts, the
Republic of Latvia will gradually introduce mediation
by the year 2015, thereby facilitating out-of-court
dispute resolution where appropriate.
Thirdly, within the next year, Latvia will take
steps to join Freedom Online: Joint Action for Free
Expression on the Internet, as we strongly support
the right to freedom of expression and to freedom of
the media, as compatible with a democratic form of
governance. We also wish to see the advancement and
protection of those rights on the Internet.
Latvia also stands committed to gender equality, the
promotion of women’s rights and women’s participation
and inclusion in governmental and political processes.
Ending violence and preventing discrimination
against women, as well as addressing women’s justice
and security concerns around the world, are part of
strengthening the rule of law internationally.
The International Criminal Court (ICC) is the
only permanent international court entrusted with
prosecuting the gravest crimes against humanity. It plays
an important role in closing the accountability gap and
in promoting international justice, peace and security.
As a long-term supporter of the ICC, Latvia believes
that the Court should receive the full cooperation and
support of United Nations States Members.
Finally, I would like to wish you, Mr. President,
and all of us an effective and comprehensive follow-up
to this high-level event and its continued existence on
the future agenda of the United Nations.
The President: The Assembly will now hear
an address by His Excellency Mr. Sauli Niinistö, the
President of the Republic of Finland.
President Niinistö: I have the honour to speak
on behalf of the Nordic countries, namely, Denmark,
Iceland, Norway, Sweden and my own country, Finland.
We express our sincere thanks to the SecretaryGeneral for his welcome vision on how the rule of law
should be developed at the national and international
levels. Respect for the rule of law is critical for the
main pillars of the United Nations, that is, international
peace and security, human rights and development.
The rule of law requires a comprehensive approach.
We fully support the Secretary-General’s efforts to
integrate the rule of law in all activities of the United

15

A/67/PV.3

Nations, and we commend the work that the United
Nations does to assist Member States to strengthen the
rule of law.
The rule of law is a core principle whose main
components are legality, equality, accountability
and participation. The Nordic countries reaffirm our
strong commitment to those principles. Those who are
disadvantaged, marginalized or vulnerable deserve our
particular attention.
Women and men have an equal right to participate
in decision-making, institutions of governance and
justice. Legislation should be amended, and institutions
reformed, to ensure the realization of human rights and
to guarantee everyone a life free from discrimination
and violence.
The International Court of Justice is central to
upholding the rule of law. It is our firm belief that the
Court is an underused tool for the peaceful resolution
of conflicts. We call on Member States that have not
yet done so to consider accepting the compulsory
jurisdiction of the Court, in accordance with the Rome
Statute.
Impunity cannot be tolerated. In its 10 years
of existence, the International Criminal Court has
become a major actor in fighting impunity for the most
serious international crimes. The Nordic countries are
committed to promoting the universal ratification and
effective implementation of the Rome Statute. That
includes the principle of complementarity and full
cooperation with the Court. We call upon all Member
States to accede to the Statute.
Attention must also be paid to victims. The Rome
Statute system, which includes the Trust Fund for
Victims, has an important restorative function.
We join the Secretary-General in calling on all
Member States to grant all individuals their full right
to association and assembly. We should support civil
society organizations and give them the necessary
legislative and political space to thrive.
Civil society plays an important role in advancing
the rule of law. It is the bearer of ideas, the provider of
assistance, technical expertise and information, and the
facilitator of dialogue. We should make sure that the
follow-up to this process continues in close cooperation
with civil society.

16

Today’s High-level Meeting marks the beginning
of a new phase in strengthening the rule of law. We
have adopted an outcome document (resolution 67/1)
that will guide us in our future work. This is an agenda
for peace. This is an agenda for sustained economic
growth and sustainable development.
What we need now is concrete action to convert our
political will into benefits on the ground. The Nordic
countries welcome recent initiatives in the United
Nations to enhance the coherence and effectiveness
of the rule of law work. We encourage the United
Nations to further those efforts. We also welcome the
idea of pledges. Today we commit ourselves to several
initiatives.
We firmly believe that a strong rule-of-law
perspective should be included in the post-2015
international development agenda. We hope that we
can one day agree on a set of rule-of-law goals to better
prioritize our action.
Our future agenda of the rule of law is broad and
cross-cutting. We look forward to cooperating with all
Member States.
The President: The Assembly will now hear an
address by His Excellency Mr. Rosen Plevneliev,
President of the Republic of Bulgaria.
President Plevnieliev: Bulgaria subscribes to the
statement that will be made later by President of the
European Commission José Manuel Barroso on behalf
of the European Union, as well as to the joint pledges
undertaken by European Union (EU) member States on
the occasion of this High-level Meeting.
Along with the other European members, my
country is a strong proponent of the rule of law as the
foundation of a predictable and just international system
and as the best strategy for the peaceful settlement
of disputes and the prevention of conflicts. It is the
duty of the United Nations and its States Members
to uphold the rule of law in all their activities and to
continue to improve their performance at the national
and international levels. In that regard, we welcome
the report (A/66/749) and the programme of action
presented by Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon.
Over the past two decades Bulgaria has adopted
the highest international standards in its national legal
system. This year, for example, my country acceded
to several international legal instruments, such as
the 1954 United Nations Convention on the Status of

12-51904

A/67/PV.3

Stateless Persons, the 1961 United Nations Convention
on the Reduction of Statelessness, as well as to the
Optional Protocol to the Convention against Torture
and Other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or
Punishment. We are committed to speeding up the work
on the process of ratification of the Convention for the
Protection of All Persons from Enforced Disappearance,
of 2006. We also support universal arbitration and the
abolition of the death penalty.
We believe that it is important to enhance the
role of the International Court of Justice in the
peaceful settlement of disputes. As one of the original
signatories of the Rome Statute of the International
Criminal Court, we join the efforts to strengthen the
international system for delivering criminal justice.
The United Nations must be at the forefront of the
fight against impunity and crimes against humanity.
Based on recent testimonies of brutal acts of violence
and massacres committed by the regime in Damascus
against its own people, Bulgaria has supported the
proposal for referring the situation in Syria to the
International Criminal Court.
Delivering justice is vital for addressing the
scourge of terrorism, one of the ugliest crimes against
humanity. The recent attack on our soil made us
stronger and more determined. Bulgaria has adhered
to 15 international conventions and protocols related
to the fight against international terrorism and looks
forward to the adoption of a comprehensive convention
on international terrorism.
Human rights, democracy and the rule of law are
core values of the United Nations.
The leading international human rights bodies,
such as the Human Rights Council, should remain
central in promoting and protecting human rights and
fundamental freedoms, monitoring implementation of
commitments and fostering international cooperation
in that area.
As a clear demonstration of our commitment to the
cause of human rights, Bulgaria has for the first time
presented its candidature to the Human Rights Council
for the period 2019-2021. Although we have extensive
achievements in that area, we view our prospective
membership as a challenge and an opportunity to further
develop Bulgaria’s domestic policies and to apply the
highest possible international standards. At the national
level, we have made significant progress in streamlining
our judicial and law enforcement system, making it

12-51904

more efficient, transparent and accountable to our
citizens. The reforms of the judiciary include both new
and improved legislation and its implementation. We
cooperate with the relevant European and international
monitoring institutions and bodies focused on justice
and judicial reform.
Bulgaria welcomes resolution 67/1 adopted earlier
in today’s meeting, which was achieved through
complex negotiations. Although the final text does not
fully reflect our views on the fundamental link between
legality, accountability, democratic governance and
human rights, we hope that it will provide a good
starting point for future dialogue and cooperation
on how best the rule of law should be applied at the
national and international levels.
The President: The General Assembly will now
hear an address by His Excellency Mr. Mohamed
Waheed, President of the Republic of Maldives.
President Waheed: It is a pleasure and an honour to
stand before the General Assembly today, representing
my nation in advocacy of a principle that we hold dear.
I would like to congratulate you, Mr. President,
on your election to preside over the General Assembly
at its sixty-seventh session. Let me also congratulate
and thank the outgoing President, His Excellency
Mr. Nassir Abdulaziz Al-Nasser, and his co-facilitators
from Mexico and Denmark, who assisted him in the
formulation of the Declaration of the High-level
Meeting of the General Assembly on the Rule of Law at
the National and International Levels (resolution 67/1).
The principles enshrined in the resolution resonate
strongly with the Maldives, and we lend our weight to
efforts to achieve the values espoused therein. Allow
me also to commend the Secretary-General, His
Excellency Mr. Ban Ki-moon, for his untiring efforts to
promote the rule of law around the world.
The rule of law is the foundation of governance.
From their inception, societies have had their own
set of rules, norms and boundaries that allow them
to govern their own lives and their relationship with
others. Applied by the governors to the governed, that
universal tenet applies to all of us in the family of
humanity. The fundamental application of law creates
societies and paves the way for civilization, making it
thus the litmus test between barbarism and civilization.
That has been true from the first inscription of the
law in the Code of Hammurabi, promulgated by the
king of Babylon around 1760 B.C., to Immanuel Kant’s
17

A/67/PV.3

philosophy of law, articulated in the eighteenth century,
to the 2005 World Summit Outcome (resolution 60/1)
which called for the universal adherence to and
implementation of the rule of law at both the national
and international levels.
The saying that the basis for democracy is the rule
of law is upheld only when we build our societies on
democratic principles, only when the fundamentals of
human rights and minority rights are protected, and
only when the smallest and weakest of our citizens feel
safe. Despite the near-universal support that the rule
of law has gained, it is perhaps worth asking whether
the principle has been applied in its true sense. When
leaders consider that the law should not be applied to
them as much as it is applied to the ruled, then there is
no rule of law. When national leaders, responsible for
upholding the law, act with impunity, the rule of law
fails. The rule of law can exist only when it is measured
out equally for the most powerful and the weakest alike.
My tiny nation was one of the first countries in
South Asia to adopt a constitution in 1932. In our stride
towards development, we have had six constitutions
and seven amendments. Yet the legal system in the
Maldives is very weak and in need of urgent reforms. In
our quest for democracy, we enacted a new constitution
four years ago. The 2008 Constitution guarantees the
separation of powers, a universal bill of rights and a
free media. The judiciary was granted independence,
and accountability measures were applied for the first
time. It is a constitution that will lead us on our path to
democracy and best practices. The dramatic change in
the legal, governance, constitutional and administrative
systems has subjected the Maldives to many challenges.
The objectives set forth in the Constitution require
strict adherence to and uncompromising application of
the rule of law.
In the face of all of those challenges, my Government
remains committed to implementing the Constitution,
upholding the rule of law and making it a way of life.
The Maldives is a State party to seven of the nine most
important international human rights instruments. The
Maldives will formulate a national strategy to strengthen
national capacities so as to more effectively comply
with those instruments. In addition, my Government is
seeking the consent of the parliament to ratify or accede
to other critically important international instruments,
such as the International Labour Organization’s Eight
Core Conventions on Fundamental Human Rights,
the United Nations Convention against Transnational
18

Organized Crime and the Protocols Thereto and the
International Convention for the Protection of All
Persons from Enforced Disappearance.
Strengthening police accountability is a core
component of my Government’s commitment to the
rule of law. The Government is taking the necessary
measures to strengthen the internal review and
oversight mechanisms in the Maldives Police Service.
We are also taking action to improve the external
review and monitoring of law enforcement operations
by strengthening the Police Integrity Commission.
National
Governments
and
international
organizations alike have a solemn duty to promote the
rule of law. The importance of and the need for a code
of principles and rules in the international arena are
undisputed. International organizations define for us
the meaning of the rule of law. They set the benchmarks
against which the application of the rule of law is
measured, and they prescribe what changes are needed
to improve a country’s performance with regard to the
rule of law.
But let me pause to reflect on whether international
organizations subject themselves to the same standards
they set for Member States. The recent experience of
the Maldives suggests that the answer to the question of
whether the weakest of our global family of nations feel
safe and secure is no.
Small justice is being served out to a small State. It
is regrettable but true that some powerful international
actors have publicly instructed the Maldives to take
certain measures contradictory to our laws. We were
asked to bring a presidential term to an end and hold
elections, even though they were not allowed under our
Constitution. We were asked in no uncertain terms to
abide by such instructions, even if it meant amending
the Constitution. We are being asked to withdraw
certain criminal cases filed by independent State bodies
for crimes as serious as the abduction and detention in
isolation of a serving judge by the armed forces. We
were told to take those measures for the good of the
country.
When we questioned those instructions, we were
were labelled an uncooperative State, casting doubt on
the country’s democratic credentials. We were placed
on an international watch list, without due process.
Those are clearly punitive measures against a country
whose economy is dependent on its image. That label
has caused the Maldives to lose significant investments,

12-51904

A/67/PV.3

external loan financing, and foreign tourist arrivals
into the country. It has also encouraged domestic unrest
and has choked the country’s governance system and
crippled our infant democracy.
The world’s small States cannot afford to be
complacent. Our experience in dealing with the
powerful international actors in the past few months
has not been pleasant. If Member States do not stand up
and draw attention to injustices, any one of them could
be next.
The Maldives is the smallest economy in South
Asia. Small reductions in tourist arrivals or foreign
investments have a significant impact on our economy.
Yet, as one of the smallest countries in the world, there
is very little we could do politically to counter the
pounding that we are subjected to by some international
partners. We lack the political and economic might
of the larger States to counter the weight of those
international players. There is no recourse available for
small States like the Maldives. We have not been given
a fair hearing or the benefit of the doubt.
We recognize that international organizations play
a valuable and indispensable role in promoting the rule
of law. Small States, like the Maldives, value their
membership in international organizations. We depend
on them to protect our interests and values. We expect
them to work with us in promoting the rule of law.
We believe that the story of the Maldives needs to
be told. It is a lesson to be learned by other small States.
The application of the rule of law should protect the
smaller and the weaker and prevent small justice from
being served to small States.
The President: The Assembly will now hear an
address by His Excellency Mr. Teodoro Obiang Nguema
Mbasogo, President of the Republic of Equatorial
Guinea.
President Obiang Nguema Mbasogo (spoke in
Spanish): The Republic of Equatorial Guinea would
like to underscore the importance of the topic of the
rule of law as a key element in shaping a world of
peace, security and the stability of nations. Indeed,
the law regulates human behaviour, which is often
characterized by self-centredness and ambition.
Law provides order based on reason, supported by
the customs or habits accepted by a community. The
law is the only element that can reconcile the various
interests in a given human community. If laws are to be
effective, they must be supported by the consensus of
12-51904

all the elements that make up the society that those laws
govern, at both the State and the international levels.
With regard to my country, Equatorial Guinea, the
rule of law is a principle and ongoing desire for our
Government, which seeks continuously to incorporate
democratic values into the national judiciary. We
attach great importance to the national judiciary in
our political system, so much so that the democratic
process, which began in 1982, has evolved over time
in keeping with our people’s culture, culminating in
the recent constitutional reform, which grants broad
liberties to the people, provides the machinery for
checks and balances on Government action and protects
human rights. Indeed, the reform stipulates that a
leader may not stay in power for more than two terms.
It establishes a bicameral Parliament to increase the
universal representation of the people. All economic
and social decisions are subject to technical criteria and
social interest. It establishes an advisory body for the
President of the Republic, strengthens the judiciary’s
independence, creates a body for the oversight of public
and private economic activities, and establishes an
authority for the monitoring of human rights.
At the international level, despite the considerable
amount of legislation that currently makes up the
international legal order and despite the disappearance
of the Cold War, we note that our world today suffers
from great imbalances at the political level, as well as
at the economic and sociocultural levels, given the low
respect for international law shown by some States,
which create anarchy by systematically violating
international laws at their own risk.
While we are all headed in the same direction
today, we do not believe in the leadership of one
State or one group of States that seeks to serve as the
police in applying international law and morality. That
constitutes a usurpation of United Nations authority and
diminishes the effectiveness of the world Organization,
which should in and of itself impose its authority
in the international arena, thereby preventing any
possible manipulation by external pressures brought
to bear by such States or groups of States in violation
of those norms and laws. To our understanding, the
decisions and recommendations adopted by the United
Nations are not above the principles and objectives
enshrined in its Charter, nor should they violate the
international covenants, conventions and agreements
that shape the world order. Rather, those decisions
and recommendations should lend greater force to the

19

A/67/PV.3

respect for the law, without resorting to measures that
completely ignore the sovereign rights of States.
The spirit of the United Nations is not to create
wars; rather it should avoid them, to the extent possible.
Humanitarian interference is a laudable idea, yet it
should not spill over into violent action, which could
lead to shedding the blood of innocent and defenceless
people.
It is not possible both to be and to stop being at
the same time. The world Organization was created
for peace and not for war, as we see happening today.
Consequently, internal political processes are within
the exclusive jurisdiction of each State, and the United
Nations should intervene only to bring reconciliation
and peace in the event of armed conflict.

will be respected. We also expect States to have full
enjoyment of their natural resources and leadership of
their own political processes without the interference
of others in the interests of maintaining international
peace and security.
Mr. Tanin (Afghanistan), Vice-President, took the
Chair.
The Acting President: The Assembly will now
hear an address by His Excellency Mr. Elbegdorj
Tsakhia, President of Mongolia.

Economically, the world is in a state of continuous
imbalance. Political interests always go hand in hand
with economic and sociocultural interests.

President Tsakhia: One of the major goals of
Mongolia’s transition to democracy has been to establish
a society ruled by law. Today, more than 20 years since
our democratic revolution, in which not a single window
was shattered, I confidently reaffirm our commitment
to the rule of law. I commend the Secretary-General’s
leadership in focusing on the issue, as it is essential
both to democratic values and to economic prosperity.

In that case, the sound decisions of the United
Nations to harmonize international trade should not
serve as a passport allowing some countries to exercise
control over the economic resources of others. For more
than 30 years now, from this very rostrum, speakers
have demanded a change in the world economic system,
since the historical momentum has sought fairness in
trade among States and not to perpetuate a system of
exploitation that favours only a few at the expense of
others.

Human rights and the rule of law are interlinked.
They belong to the universal and indivisible core
values and principles of humankind. If there is no rule
of law, it is not possible to ensure human rights and
the full enjoyment of freedom. That is at the heart of
the social contract between the State and its people. It
requires concrete measures to ensure adherence to the
principles of the supremacy of law, equality before the
law, accountability to the law and fairness in applying
the law.

That is clearly a legitimate demand, which seeks
to ensure the rule of law in international relations. The
current robust efforts promoting global development
should apply that same momentum to the international
legal order. Otherwise, we will fall into the vices of
anarchy and inequality in treatment in international
trade.

The rule of law and corruption cannot coexist.
Freedom, human rights and the rule of law are
non-negotiable, as is the fight against corruption. The
law should apply equally to all. It is a core principle of
democracy that no one is above the law — no one. That
includes everyone from high Government officials to
ordinary citizens.

In conclusion, Equatorial Guinea welcomes
the commitment of African States to engage in the
dynamic development of modern democracies, despite
the political instability that prevents them from moving
forward in accordance with the will of their peoples
owing to systems imposed by others that continue to
exercise their influence over the internal policies of
such countries.

Historically, Mongolians have governed their
State by the rule of law. We have strong penalties for
corruption. In developing nations, corruption is the
mortal enemy of democracy. It is like an infectious
disease. It must be attacked head on and that fight must
be a priority. The crime of corruption is committed
by public servants, not citizens. The fight against
corruption is a test for all leaders and public servants.
Since corruption is a serious crime that is linked to
power and questionable wealth, some of those who
commit corruption try to use the court of public opinion
to escape the court of law.

We expect that United Nations resolutions will be
implemented in line with the spirit of its Charter and that
international provisions governing the sovereign right
of States to manage their own political development

20

12-51904

A/67/PV.3

There are strong links between corruption and
socio-economic development. Where there are higher
levels of corruption, there is less development. The
fight for the rule of law is therefore also a fight for more
transparent and successful economic development.
Education is crucial in the fight against corruption.
Educated populations, where citizens know their rights,
do not let their leaders abuse their power. Mongolia is a
young democracy. Our success cannot be just political
or economic; it must be judicial, as well. We need an
independent judiciary, which means that we must focus
on creating a judiciary that is immune from political
pressure. We have more than 20 new legislative acts
aimed at bringing about the structural reform of our
legal system.
We see the rule of law as a guarantor of fundamental
human rights and freedoms. Governments are created
by the people and must serve the people. A Government
should honour human rights and never take a human
life. I believe that capital punishment is wrong. It
degrades human dignity and does not bring peace
to society, deter crime or further humankind. Since
June 2009, Mongolia has commuted death sentences.
As President, I have declared a moratorium. We are
working on legislation to abolish the death penalty once
and for all.
Last year, Mongolia assumed the presidency of
the Community of Democracies. Advancing the rule
of law is a top priority for us. We applaud the effort
of the international community in that regard. I am
grateful that the United Nations, and Secretary-General
Ban Ki-moon in particular, has made the rule of law
a top priority. It is a passion of mine, and also a goal
of Mongolia, because our democratic progress and
economic success depend upon it.
The Acting President: The Assembly will now
hear an address by His Excellency Mr. Ali Bongo
Ondimba, President of the Gabonese Republic.
President Bongo Ondimba (spoke in French): I am
honoured to take the floor at this historic meeting on
the rule of law at the national and international levels. I
would like to congratulate the President on organizing
this High-level Meeting, and Secretary-General Ban
Ki-moon on the work undertaken by the United Nations
in promoting the rule of law.
At the outset, I would like to reiterate my country’s
profound attachment to the rule of law, democracy and

12-51904

human rights and our political will to work towards
their consolidation.
The rule of law is today an ideal and a universal
aspiration that is largely shared by peoples and
Governments. Strengthening the rule of law in a
lasting manner cannot take place in any country in the
absence of a climate of peace and equitable economic
development. The elements of the triad of peace,
development and rule of law are interdependent.
Gabon’s attachment to the rule of law and democracy
has always guided our political life. In 1990, when my
country re-established the multi-party system, we
established new institutions. Their robustness was put
to the test in 2009 when Gabon successfully navigated
a delicate political transition that was praised by the
international community. Those institutions allow us
today to continue to strengthen the rule of law, which is
also a pillar of the vision of an emergent Gabon looking
towards 2025 that I have proposed for the country.
While democracy and the rule of law must be
mutually reinforcing, it is essential for political action
in a country to be based on respect for the rules and
laws that give them legitimacy. In that regard, I recently
reiterated, in a speech before the Gabonese Parliament,
that, in a democracy, political dialogue is only possible
if there is respect for the nation’s institutions and
laws and for the persons who embody them. In that
connection, I have recently re-launched the National
Council for Democracy, a major institutional framework
for democratic dialogue in Gabon. Since that body’s
creation, it has always been chaired by a member of the
opposition.
In all countries, consolidating the rule of law relies
on independent and impartial justice, which helps to
guarantee social peace and security, to protect the rights
of the most vulnerable and to prevent extremism and
intolerance. That conviction has led me to initiate deepseated reforms aimed at making the judicial institutions
more coherent, effective, transparent, accessible and
equitable. In that regard, we have adopted laws aimed
at protecting the rights of women and children, in
order to combat discrimination embedded in cultural
constraints. That can be seen in the new legal system
for the protection of minors, which helps to combat
child trafficking. Gabon also initiated the adoption
of General Assembly resolution 65/189, establishing
International Widows’ Day. Social stakeholders in
Gabon, such as the foundation chaired by the First
Lady, are fully involved in these efforts.
21

A/67/PV.3

Gabon is continuing other major national reforms,
including introducing biometric registers to improve
vital records and strengthen the transparency of
elections; reorganizing the department responsible
for housing and land ownership in order to protect
the rights of land owners; and combating violations of
the Convention on International Trade in Endangered
Species of Wild Fauna and Flora and other conventions
that protect biodiversity and the environment.
Combating the corruption that impedes equitable
access for everyone to public services and that
undermines development efforts is at the heart of all I
do. I recall that Gabon has ratified the United Nations
Convention against Corruption. My country has a
national commission to combat the illegal amassing of
wealth and a national financial investigatory agency.
The commission has already drawn up a national
strategy to combat corruption, with support from the
United Nations Development Programme. In addition,
to strengthen governance and reinforce the need for
accountability, we are participating in the Extractive
Industries Transparency Initiative. We have also
reviewed the procedures for transactions in public
markets, and we have conducted an audit of the civil
service and the oil industry. However, combating
corruption is a long-term undertaking that requires
cooperation based on dialogue with different partners
and ownership at the national level.
The challenges facing the international community
today call for a strengthened rule of law at the
international level. Our work requires an approach
that is primarily based on affirming the sovereignty of
States and recognizing their rights. We should also say
that the rule of law cannot be strengthened without the
political will to make global governance and institutions
more equitable and democratic.
That is why Gabon believes that Africa must be
fairly represented within a reformed Security Council.
Moreover, we believe that improvements in the
functioning of the Human Rights Council require more
constructive dialogue among States. To that end, Gabon
would like to stand for re-election to that important
body in January 2013.
In the same spirit, we will continue our cooperation
with the agencies responsible for implementing
international criminal justice in order to combat
impunity and transnational organized crime. Such
organized crime is increasingly affecting the

22

environment and biodiversity through poaching
and illegal fishing. Gabon intends to strengthen its
national justice system to combat that phenomenon,
but such efforts will require greater international legal
cooperation.
I would like to stress that there is no single model
for strengthening the rule of law. Therefore, we need
to also promote dialogue and new approaches for
cooperation among States. In that respect, countries
emerging from crisis and conflict are a priority. That is
why I call for further resources to be mobilized for those
States. Furthermore, I encourage the strengthening of
cooperation between the United Nations and regional
organizations, as well as the regular holding of
plenary meetings of the General Assembly to consider
strengthening the rule of law.
In conclusion, I would like to state that my country
endorses the declaration adopted earlier in this meeting.
The Acting President: The Assembly will now
hear an address by His Excellency Mr. Bujar Nishani,
President of the Republic of Albania.
President Nishani: Let me express at the outset my
appreciation for the holding of this High-level Meeting
on the Rule of Law at the National and the International
Levels. In our view, the rule of law is indeed crucial
to the well-being and well-functioning of our societies.
The history of humankind is in fact the history of
the evolution of the law and of the relation of societies
to the law. Every time we have lost the vision to respect
the law, at both the national and international levels,
we have faced turmoil, wars and suffering. Every
time we have committed to respecting the law and to
universalizing its core principles, we have found peace,
agreement and prosperity.
The truth is, the relationship of humankind to the
law is not easy, since our societies, peoples and cultures
have different takes on approaching the law. However,
we all agree on the fact that, as humans who share the
same Earth, we are increasingly required to leave aside
our individual interests for the sake of the common
good. Albania is glad to have invested wholeheartedly
in this role in the United Nations, which has contributed
greatly to what we commonly refer to as international
law, to which we are all willingly bound to abide by.
Concerning our substantial and sometimes
controversial discussions on the rule of law’s extent, I
would like to emphasize two particular instances of the

12-51904

A/67/PV.3

universal character of the jurisdiction of international
courts and tribunals, as well as of their rulings and
options, and to the fact that the full law is not above
people. It is there by the will of the people and for the
people to serve their existence and well-being.
These principles have proven fundamental to
the difficult history that my nation has experienced
throughout the centuries. The Albanian people have
had a complicated relationship with the rule of law.
The manipulated application of the rule of law and the
way in which the law was applied to serve the ruling
class’s concept of justice created in Albania one of
the most evil dictatorships in Europe after the Second
World War. In fact, the Albanian people’s struggle for
democracy in the 1990s was closely related to its strong
disagreement with the principles of governance of a
State not accountable to its promulgated law. Thousands
of citizens were subject to summary extra-legal political
adjudications and multiple arbitrary judgements by the
courts, inconsistent with human rights norms.
It is no surprise, therefore, that for Albania
strengthening the rule of law at the national level has
become a guiding principle for a new and strengthened
democracy and the cornerstone of a harmonious and
consolidated society, a solid open-market economy,
regional stability and lasting peace and security. It is
precisely the principle of the rule of law with which we
all align the charters of our national and international
laws, our conventions, our regulations and even the
very functioning of this body.
Albania is today at the forefront of the support and
protection of human rights, and we sympathize with the
struggles of all peoples for freedom all over the world,
from Syria to Myanmar. Every regime that violates the
law of freedom is to be held accountable at the national
or international level. The rule of law at the national
and the international levels is closely interlinked. The
levels reflect one another and, above all, they deserve
to enjoy equal and unanimous respect.
We have methodized that in the most concrete way.
The Albanian Constitution provides that, in the case
of conflict between national and international law, the
latter prevails. That is the best guarantee that, while
fully respecting State sovereignty, Albania remains
a true, committed partner in the promotion of justice
and accountability, and firmly against impunity for any
crime. In that regard, Albania supports wholeheartedly
the principle of universal jurisdiction, as we believe it

12-51904

to be an important mechanism for ending impunity and
promoting accountability.
Albania has supported and will always support the
mandates of international courts and tribunals, for they
play an irreplaceable role in combating impunity and
establishing standards of global justice in the interests
of peace and security. It is deplorable that the rulings
and opinions of international courts and tribunals are
sometimes disregarded, even by States that initiate their
cases. Such was the case with the advisory opinion of
the International Court of Justice on the independence
of the Republic of Kosovo.
In my region, the Balkans, people of different
ethnicities — Albanians, Bosnians and Croats — have
experienced some of the worst wars waged in the name
of ill-conceived nationalism. Chauvinists sanctioned
in law the ideology of their superiority towards other
peoples, legitimating their subsequent genocide and
massacres. The last two decades have shown that it is
not an easy task to turn that page of the Balkan history
book.
The perpetrators of tragedies and genocides
certainly cannot do it one-sidedly. What is needed is the
conscience of all peoples, and first and foremost that
of the victims who first demand justice. Disturbingly,
in the Balkans, instead of genuine apologies for the
massacres and genocide that have been inflicted, we are
served with negating statements at the highest levels. It
is thus only natural that we uphold respect for the rule
of law at both the national and the international levels.
Its application is needed and must be directly reflected
in our just, peaceful and good relations among us and
our neighbours in the region and beyond.
In that regard, Albania has taken crucial steps
beyond the national level for the establishment of
a constructive dialogue and cooperation with all
countries of the region and unconditionally supports
all European Union initiatives and the laws of the
wider international community in strengthening the
rule of law in our region. We praise in particular the
exemplary work of the European Union Rule of Law
Mission in Kosovo as an individual addition to peace
and security in the region following the Republic of
Kosovo’s declaration of independence. We believe that
in our region, our objective to establish, respect and
abide by the rule of law is an imperative that should
be fully embraced by all countries that seriously and
sincerely seek full regional cooperation and harmony
and the common goal of European integration.
23

A/67/PV.3

I would like to end my remarks by reiterating
Albania’s commitment to the purposes and principles
of the Charter of the United Nations, to international
law and to international order, based on the rule of
law, as vital values for the promotion of our peaceful
coexistence as peoples and our harmonious relations
and cooperation as States.

was also enacted to broaden its mandate. Similarly,
electoral reforms have been undertaken to consolidate
the democratic process. Our focus has been on the
conduct of credible, free and fair elections in order to
avail the citizenry the right to freely choose those who
should govern them. The elections conducted so far in
Nigeria attest to that.

The Acting President: The General Assembly will
now hear an address by His Excellency Mr. Goodluck
Ebele Jonathan, President of the Federal Republic of
Nigeria.

It is imperative for the rule of law to be strengthened
at both the national and international levels to ensure
equity and fairness. The rule of law at the international
level must be based on a number of the core principles
of the United Nations, which were further reaffirmed
in the 2005 World Summit Outcome (resolution 60/1).
This implies that States must, in good faith, honour
their international obligations, including the obligation
to refrain from the threat or use of force, the obligation
to settle disputes through peaceful means, and the
obligation to protect human rights and fundamental
freedoms and abide by international humanitarian law.

President Jonathan: Let me join my colleagues
in first congratulating the Secretary-General on his
initiative to focus attention on a subject matter that
is at the heart of the Charter of our Organization, and
for providing the platform for Member States to share
useful experiences and renew their commitment to the
observance of the rule of law.
Nigeria believes that the strengthening of the
rule of law at the national and international levels is a
shared responsibility of the international community.
1t is undoubtedly an essential condition for peaceful
cooperation and coexistence among States, and critical
to addressing global challenges in accordance with
the principles of the Charter of the United Nations
and international law. Nigeria therefore subscribes to
the view that it is only an international system based
on the rule of law that can guarantee the protection of
the rights of individuals and the interests of the less
powerful in the global arena.
We recognize the close nexus between the rule
of law and democracy and the primacy of the rule of
law as a prerequisite for the promotion and protection
of democracy, good governance and sustainable
development. Nigeria therefore envisions the promotion
of the rule of law at the international level as a vital
means of strengthening cooperation and promoting
enduring peace and security among States.
Nigeria has also consistently demonstrated strong
political will to fulfil its international obligations
through the domestication of relevant international
instruments and recommended practices, such as the
enactment of the Freedom of Information Act 2011 to
promote open government, the Terrorism Prevention
Act 2011 and the Money Laundering (Prohibition)
Act 2011 to give impetus to the global fight against
terrorism, terrorist financing and economic crimes.
The Human Rights Commission (Amendment) Act 2011

24

The principle of equality of States remains an
important element in the promotion of the rule of law
at the international level. The international community
should therefore discourage any semblance of selective
observance and enforcement of international law. I urge
Member States to commit to the faithful implementation
of the pledges deposited with the United Nations at this
event.
Let me assure Member States of my Government’s
unwavering commitment to upholding the rule of law
and to duly implementing the pledges we have made to
the international community.
The Acting President: The Assembly will now
hear an address by His Excellency Mr. John Dramani
Mahama, President of the Republic of Ghana.
President Mahama: Allow me first to congratulate
Mr. Vuk Jeremić on his election as President of the
General Assembly at its sixty-seventh session. I also
wish to express my profound appreciation to the
Secretary-General for organizing this event at this time,
when abuse of human rights, arbitrariness, persecution
and impunity are on the increase in the world. Let me
also single out the special efforts of the co-facilitators,
Denmark and Mexico, and commend them for their
tireless contribution to the outcome of today’s meeting.
Respect for the rule of law at the national and
international levels is an integral part of the Charter
of the United Nations. Ensuring respect for and the
strengthening of the rule of law is fundamental to the
12-51904

A/67/PV.3

maintenance of peace and international security and the
effective promotion of human rights and fundamental
freedoms, and is essential to nurturing a vibrant and
dynamic democracy.
In Ghana, we believe that respect for the rule of
law is essential to building our nation and this has been
our thinking since independence. Our national motto,
therefore, is “freedom and justice”. Ghana has, over the
past 20 years following the return to democracy, worked
to continuously strengthen our governance institutions.
The framework for ensuring respect for the rule of
law has been established in our 1992 Constitution,
and continues to be further elaborated and extended.
That includes the passage of legislation to ensure
accountable and good governance, transparency in
public procurement, the transparent management of oil
revenues, press freedom, human rights, and transparent
and credible elections, to name just a few.
Ghana is reaping the dividends of democracy and
rule of law. The stable atmosphere created as a result
of constitutional governance since 1992 has seen a
remarkable increase in economic growth. Last year,
Ghana’s economy grew by some 14 per cent, one of
the highest rates in the world. Per capita income for
Ghanaians has grown from $400 in 1992 to $1,300
today, pushing Ghana into lower-middle-income status.
During visits to Ghana in 2009, President Barack
Obama said that what Africa needs is not strong
leaders, but strong institutions. The Government of
Ghana is therefore in the process of undertaking the
following interventions, by developing appropriate
legislation, policy and administrative reforms in the
following areas: building the capacities of governance
institutions responsible for ensuring compliance with
existing laws; strengthening the judicial service and
other agencies responsible for the administration of
justice to build confidence in the judicial system, both
for our citizens and for our guests who may have social
or business interests in Ghana; reviewing the laws on
investment promotion and protection; strengthening the
institutions that investigate and prosecute cases relating
to corruption; strengthening the framework governing
the banking and financial service sector; the integration
of information and revenue management systems;
organization to promote greater efficiency in revenue
collection; and ensuring transparent management and
utilization of Ghana’s oil revenues.

12-51904

Ghana is a State party to many international
conventions, treaties and protocols, and recently we
became a party to the Convention on the Rights of
Persons with Disabilities and its related Protocols,
the United Nations Convention against Transnational
Organized Crime, the Comprehensive Nuclear-TestBan Treaty and the Convention on Cluster Munitions.
We have also incorporated many international
conventions, protocols and systems into our municipal
laws. We are committed to ensuring that we respect and
give effect to all international conventions, treaties and
protocols to which we are a State party.
We believe that it is also important to give attention
to regional and subregional organizations such as the
African Union and the Economic Community of West
African States and to help strengthen the institutions
that we have established through those regional
groupings in order to promote the rule of law both
regionally and on the continent.
The Government of Ghana recognizes that our
systems for ensuring respect for the rule of law can be
considered effective only if they successfully uphold
and protect the legal rights of the vulnerable and
disadvantaged in our society. Our goal, therefore, is to
live up to our national motto of being a land that ensures
freedom and justice for all our citizens and those who
reside and work in our country.
In short, we believe that respect for the rule of law
is essential to the creation of a fairer and more just
world and to the promotion of peace, prosperity and
cooperation.
The Acting President: The Assembly will now
hear an address by His Excellency Mr. Mwai Kibaki,
President of the Republic of Kenya.
President Kibaki: I congratulate the President
on his well-deserved election to the presidency of the
General Assembly at its sixty-seventh session. I am
confident that his vast diplomatic experience will be
instrumental in steering our deliberations.
Kenya supports an international order that is
grounded in the rule of law, as envisaged in the Charter
of the United Nations. We are convinced that the rule of
law is the foundation stone of democratic governance,
that it is vital in confronting the global challenges of our
time, and that it is necessary for promoting sustainable
development.

25

A/67/PV.3

Since independence, Kenya has progressively
promoted the rule of law and respect for democratic
constitutionality. Our democratic enterprise over the
past 49 years has been to strengthen the rule of law,
promote human rights and advance our economic and
social development.
Promoting the rule of law remains as important
today as it was at our independence. We are proud to
say that over time, however, the rule of law has not only
further secured our democracy, but it has also allowed
my country to promote entrepreneurship, free trade and
the fight against poverty.
In the past two years, my Government has worked
strenuously to implement our new Constitution,
which Kenya adopted in 2010. We have implemented
far-reaching legal, institutional and administrative
reforms which have further strengthened the rule of
law in Kenya. Furthermore, those reforms have spurred
increased activity across all sectors of the economy.
That has increased investment and encouraged greater
involvement of the Kenyan people in the development
and governance of our country.
Kenya’s national commitment to the promotion of
the rule of law and democratic governance transcends
our national boundaries. We are committed, as a
member of the international community, to playing our
part in promoting the rule of law throughout the world,
and especially in our region.
In that regard, it is my sincere hope that the
international community will work with us, especially
in countries that have suffered a breakdown of law and
order.
In conclusion, I believe that effective international
relations must be based on the equal and just application
of the rule of law among nations, both large and small.
It is also important that the rule of law be pursued
towards the attainment of greater prosperity, the
promotion of equality and greater justice for all.
The Acting President: The Assembly will now
hear an address by Her Excellency Mrs. Ellen JohnsonSirleaf, President of the Republic of Liberia.
President Johnson-Sirleaf (Liberia): The decision
to convene this debate on the rule of law is timely
and opportune because transformative changes are
occurring in the international arena, and they dictate that
we affirm our shared values. We believe fundamentally
that national and international peace and security must
26

rest upon our acceptance of the supremacy of law in the
conduct of affairs, and indeed that law must be founded
on the principles of fairness and justice.
The Government and people of Liberia, working
closely with the United Nations and the international
community, have made significant progress in
re-establishing the rule of law after 14 years of a
ravaging conflict that crippled the entire rule of law
system. In the consolidation of peace, we have focused
particular attention on the re-establishment of the
rule of law. It was an important pillar of our poverty
reduction strategy, and today it is an integral part of our
agenda for transformation. It occupies a central place
in our engagement with the Peacebuilding Commission
and is a strong link binding the countries of the Group
of Seven Plus.
We are proud of the progress we have made in
rebuilding the justice and security institutions in terms
of structure and capacity, especially the Liberian
National Police and the Bureau of Immigration and
Naturalization, the foremost institutions charged
with ensuring internal security. We have, among
other things, set up a number of institutions. We have
established a sexual and gender-based violence crimes
unit and a specialized court that is investigating and
prosecuting cases of sexual and gender-based violence.
We have enacted a freedom of information act, signed
the Table Mountain Declaration, and instituted a
law reform commission, which is modernizing our
national laws, bringing them into conformity with
international standards. We have established an
independent commission of human rights, which has
been challenged to promote a human rights culture and
help foster reconciliation among our people. We have
created a land commission, which is reforming the land
tenure system so as to minimize conflict around land
ownership in the country. We have set up a judicial
institute that is engaged in ongoing training of judges
and other justice actors to enhance the capacity of
the judiciary, and a new commercial court, which is
enabling the Government to speedily resolve matters
relating to commercial transactions, thus improving the
investment climate.
Efforts are under way to improve other components
of the criminal justice system. They include the
construction and rehabilitation of corrections facilities
across the country. We have also introduced a probation
service, a magistrate’s sitting programme and a
pre-detention task force. We have passed a new jury

12-51904

A/67/PV.3

law, which will not only improve the qualifications of
jurors but also expand the jurisdiction of the magisterial
courts so that minor cases will be disposed of more
expeditiously.
Last week, with resolution 2066 (2012), the Security
Council formally endorsed a phased reconfiguration of
the United Nations Mission in Liberia over a three-year
period. As we move forward towards implementing that
transition, we are even more challenged to maintain
the momentum for change and reform. An important
objective is to decentralize the operations of justice and
security institutions. The establishment of five regional
justice and security hubs in strategic locations across
the country will enhance the decentralization process
and make justice more accessible to remote parts of the
country. The first such hub is more than 50 per cent
operational.
We also face challenges that are daunting but not
insurmountable. They include mobilizing resources
to construct the four remaining hubs, implementing
constitutional reform and the repeal of obsolete laws,
accelerating the development of our human resource
capacity, extending sexual and gender-based violence
services in all 15 of our counties, expanding community
corrections and rehabilitation programmes for criminal
offenders, and harmonizing the formal and informal
justice systems so as to provide greater access to justice.
We are not deterred by those challenges. Rather,
we are encouraged by the positive outcomes that we
have witnessed in our reform efforts. In that spirit, we
make the following voluntary pledges. First, we will
develop and publicize an integrated national strategy
for the justice and security sector by the end of the year
2013. Secondly, we will develop a multi-year strategy
and to establish a sexual and gender-based violence
unit in all of our 15 counties by 2015. Thirdly, we will
establish a civilian oversight board for the Liberian
National Police by the year 2013, to accept complaints
from the public on acts of police misconduct. Fourthly,
we will ratify the Optional Protocol to the Convention
on the Rights of the Child on the sale of children, child
prostitution and child pornography. Finally, we will
introduce new legislation and training programmes to
tackle transnational crimes by mid-2013.
In making these pledges, we reaffirm that the rule
of law is a fundamental tenet of good governance in all
of its dimensions. We undertake to continue to put in
place those institutions that will consolidate peace and
reconciliation through greater access to justice. In that
12-51904

effort, we will work in concert with our partners, whose
support is invaluable and highly appreciated.
The Acting President: The Assembly will now
hear an address by His Excellency Mr. Hifikepunye
Pohamba, President of the Republic of Namibia.
President Pohamba: It is my distinct honour and
pleasure to address this High-level Meeting on the
important subject of the rule of law at the national
and international levels. The Republic of Namibia is
founded upon the principles of democracy, the rule of
law and justice for all. Our Constitution contains a bill
of rights that provides for the protection of fundamental
rights and freedoms. All State organs are enjoined to
uphold, respect, protect and guarantee those rights and
freedoms.
In keeping with its commitment to the rule of law
and to multilateralism, our country has acceded to the
relevant international treaties and conventions that
promote the rule of law. We have also joined subregional,
regional and international organizations such as the
Southern African Development Community, the
African Union and the United Nations, in order to help
foster a system of international governance based on
respect for the sovereign equality of States, territorial
integrity and other principles related to peaceful
coexistence among States, based on the purposes and
ideals of the Charter of the United Nations.
This High-level Meeting is convened to reaffirm,
among other things, our commitment to and respect
for the principle of the rule of law. While the United
Nations Charter assigns to the Security Council
the primary responsibility for the maintenance of
international peace and security, it has become clear
with the passage of time that the current composition
and structure of the Council are unrepresentative and
undemocratic. It is for that reason that we reiterate our
call for comprehensive reform of the Security Council
to make it more democratic and transparent and to
better represent and serve the whole of humankind.
Furthermore, we encourage the Council to coordinate
constantly with regional organizations in fulfilling its
mandates, including in the areas of conflict prevention,
peacekeeping, conflict resolution and sustainable
peacebuilding.
We welcome the report of the Secretary-General
entitled “Delivering justice: programme of action to
strengthen the rule of law at the national and international
levels” (A/66/749), take note of the proposal that the

27

A/67/PV.3

General Assembly adopt a programme of action for the
rule of law, and look forward to discussing mechanisms
that will enhance dialogue on the rule of law.
The United Nations came into being in order
to protect humankind from the scourge of war. The
only way that noble goal can be achieved is if all its
Member States refrain from the threat or use of force
in any manner that is inconsistent with the purposes
and principles of justice and international law, the right
to self-determination, non-interference in the internal
affairs of States, respect for human rights and, indeed,
for the equal rights of all without distinction as to race,
language, religion or cultural and social character.
These are our common obligations under the Charter of
the Organization.
It is also our duty to ensure that we avoid the
perception that certain international institutions
are used to advance the interests of certain Member
States, to the disadvantage of others. In that regard,
the operations of institutions such as the International
Criminal Court should be guided at all times by
fairness and objective assessment in order to ensure
justice. We should avoid the temptation of subjecting
this institution to self-serving political considerations
and influences.
Let me once again reiterate that we believe strongly
that the application and practice of the rule of law,
especially at the international level, will always have
true meaning within the spirit of the United Nations
Charter if it is based on the principle of the sovereign
equality of all States, big or small.
The Acting President: The Assembly will now
hear an address by His Excellency Mr. Paul Kagame,
President of the Republic of Rwanda.
President Kagame: It is important that we are
discussing how to make the rule of law more effective
domestically and internationally, and I am pleased to
participate. In that endeavour, let me propose that we
consider three points relating directly to the subject of
the rule of law, with the aim of addressing present-day
realities.
We can begin with the important principle of
universal justice, an ideal that I believe we would all
like to see realized. The rule of law internationally is
premised on the principle that equality before the law
is universal. This, however, is not always the case. In
actual fact, what many countries can attest to is that
in its application justice is often not pursued fairly
28

or without favour. What may be overlooked in one
situation can meet with aggressive sanctions in another.
Some national jurisdictions have assumed priority over
others without any legal or other justification, resulting
in the law being applied selectively. What is more
useful is for people to work together towards a form of
universal justice that is meaningful to all concerned.
In that way, the rule of law will uphold equality among
nations, guarantee fairness and recognize and respect
sovereignty without discrimination.
Secondly, as a global community we should be
alert to the dangers of politicizing justice at both the
national and the international levels, since, ultimately,
this undermines the rule of law. We see principles such
as universal jurisdiction often being used selectively
and in one direction as a political tool in the arena
of international affairs for the purpose of control and
domination. Rwanda has first-hand experience of the
importance of the rule of law and, more specifically,
of the implications of its absence, disregard or unequal
application. That absence destroyed our country in the
decades after independence, leading up to the genocide
of 1994 and followed by unjust treatment in the name of
universal jurisdiction, where it has been very clear that
motives veer closer to the political than the legal.
To turn to my third point, these two issues of justice
and politics are complex and closely intertwined,
requiring a contextual and balanced approach. A purely
punitive course of action is not always the best, even
when grievances are legitimate and obvious. In fact, the
single pursuit of either justice or political imperatives
may aggravate the situation.
Rwanda’s experience following the genocide is a
stark example. From a purely legal perspective, there
were hundreds of thousands of perpetrators and a strong
case for a punitive approach. However, to best serve
our priorities of both justice and social harmony, we
sought to balance the strict application of the punitive
provisions of the law with restorative alternatives. That
home-grown solution through the gacaca courts process
served us better than any other system could have.
Mr. Momen (Bangladesh), Vice-President, took the
Chair.
The principle of balancing punitive and restorative
forms of justice is applicable to the international arena.
The current international justice climate reveals that,
too often, the motives for pursuing justice are punitive,
political and aimed at serving at certain interests,

12-51904

A/67/PV.3

especially those of one party over others. The situation
needs to change to ensure that there is parity between
nations, double standards are eliminated and fairness
and respect for the rule of law are established at the
international level.
To achieve that, it is crucial to adhere to certain
minimum standards of the rule of law. Those include
the right to a fair hearing, respect for basic human
rights, and the existence of review mechanisms to
check excesses in the process, which must take into
account the context of the situation in each country,
because ultimately justice must be served and must be
anchored in society.
We have been able to strengthen the rule of law
in our country, particularly through universal access
to quality justice, so that citizens are not hindered by
financial constraints or by their distance from judicial
centres. Those and other efforts have been supported
by our partners. We acknowledge that cooperation,
which has complemented our own initiatives. We look
forward to continuing and expanding it to address the
broader issues we are discussing today.
The Acting President: I now give the floor to His
Excellency Mr. Jacob Zuma, President of the Republic
of South Africa.
President Zuma: I thank you, Sir, for the
opportunity to participate in this important discussion.
South Africa’s foreign policy is geared towards the
vision of creating a better South Africa and contributing
to a better Africa and a better world. It is our assertion
that all this can be fully realized only where there is a
global commitment to the promotion of the rule of law
and the realization of human rights worldwide. We feel
at home in this discussion because South Africa is a
sovereign democratic State founded on specific values,
which include the supremacy of the Constitution, the
rule of law, human dignity, equality and freedom.
The rule of law requires adherence to a number of
principles, including the supremacy of the law, equality
before the law, accountability to the law, fairness in
the application of the law and the separation of powers.
It also entails participation in decision-making, legal
certainty, and the avoidance of arbitrariness, as well as
procedural and legal transparency.
The rule of law is an integral concept in the work
of the Security Council. Since 2003, the Council has
held regular thematic debates on the rule of law in the
context of international peace and security. Several
12-51904

presidential statements have recognized the crucial
relevance of the rule of law across the full spectrum
of the Council’s agenda. Thematic and country-specific
resolutions adopted by the Council since 2003 have also
regularly addressed issues related to the rule of law, in
both its international and national dimensions.
The rule of law is inextricably linked to human
development. In that regard, in our efforts to promote
the rule of law, we continuously strive to raise the
standards of living of the disadvantaged in society
through the provision of essential services and the
fulfillment of their socio-economic rights.
South Africa continues to play an active role in the
kind of peace and harmony that are dependent on the
rule of law. We do this in a number of ways, including
through bilateral and trilateral agreements, as well as
through mediation efforts in various parts of the world.
We are also of the view that efforts to promote the rule
of law at the national level, including the promotion of
accountability mechanisms, must be accompanied by
equal attention to the rule of law at the international
level. Otherwise, the United Nations runs the risk of
being accused of double standards and hypocrisy.
In that regard, we need to consider the fairness
of the rules of international law. We need to ask
whether the international community can be said to
be governed by a system in which all key players are
accountable under laws that are equally enforced and
independently adjudicated. We also need to look at the
composition of the Security Council and how it may
impact the promotion of international law, and the
rule of law in particular. Given the undemocratic and
unrepresentative nature of the Security Council, we are
concerned that its decisions will be constantly attacked
for lack of legitimacy, regardless of the content of a
given decision.
It is common knowledge that the current
configuration of the Council is unfair. It does not
reflect contemporary geopolitical realities, especially
with respect to Africa. The African continent is
both generally underrepresented and specifically
unrepresented in the permanent category.
Adherence to the international rule of law
will continue to elude us as long as the organ with
the primary responsibility for the maintenance of
international peace and security is unrepresentative
and undemocratic.

29

A/67/PV.3

But we also have to ask whether the content of the
decisions themselves is fair. Over the past year, we
have seen both inspiring improvements and spectacular
disappointments in the promotion of the rule of law
through the Council’s work.
The adoption of resolution 1989 (2011), bringing
the Al-Qaida sanctions regime closer to human rights
and due-process standards, is a noteworthy illustration
of the Council’s willingness to adhere to the rule of
law. The regime had been severely criticized for lack of
due process in the listing and delisting of individuals.
The resolution was an improvement in that it provided
individuals with recourse to challenge unfounded
listings. However, as we noted during the Security
Council’s debate on the rule of law in January 2012
(see S/PV.6705), there is a need to ensure greater
accountability for action taken in the name of the
Security Council.
Perhaps nothing reflects adherence to the rule of
law so much as the judicial settlement of disputes. We
continue, in that regard, to encourage the organs of the
United Nations, including the Council, to make greater
use of the International Court of Justice, the principal
judicial organ of the United Nations, by making requests
for advisory opinions when confronted with complex
legal questions.
We welcome this important decision, as we need
to reflect on all these critical points from time to time,
in order to further strengthen multilateralism. Let me
emphasize that South Africa remains committed to the
global promotion of the rule of law and will continue to
cooperate with the United Nations system to ensure the
success of the international human rights architecture.
We wish to thank President Jeremić for the
opportunity to participate in this debate.
The Acting President: The Assembly will now
hear an address by His Excellency Mr. Michael Chilufya
Sata, President of the Republic of Zambia.
President Sata: We from Zambia are pleased
to be guests in this historic and welcoming city, in
particular on this auspicious occasion, which reflects
the importance and timeliness of the issue of the rule
of law.
Since its inception in 1945, the United Nations has
been influential in supporting the rule of law across the
world. It has helped in the creation of a forum where the

30

universal standards for a basic functioning legal system
have been successfully articulated.
While some of the developing countries have
adopted laws emanating from the colonial period, it is
true that most of the resultant justice systems are in
harmony with the general tenets of the rule of law. Among
them is the non-discriminatory character of law, or the
right to a fair hearing. Today, the concept has evolved
further to require that in the application of penal rules
to offenders, there must not be any derogation of their
basic human dignity. In that regard, the prohibition of
the use of torture as a means of extracting a confession
is a principle that enjoys universal acceptance.
The adage that it is more difficult to build than
to destroy is particularly true for the rule of law.
That means that there is a need for a solid foundation
upon which national legal systems should rest. Public
confidence in a legal system is paramount, and the
population needs to feel that the law is working for the
common good.
Before reiterating the importance of rule of law in
the international context, allow me to highlight some of
the practical impediments to enhancing this principle
in developing countries such as Zambia. One major
challenge is that of accessing justice amid the poverty
that afflicts many of our people. In that context, it
seldom happens that justice comes with an affordable
price tag.
Against that background, many therefore opt for
alternative and often extrajudicial means of seeking
remedy or protection. Closely related to this is the
mischief done by those with money and power when
they abuse it by offering corrupt inducements in order
to pervert the course of justice.
I am therefore pleased to state that since my
Government assumed power a year ago, Zambians have
embraced a reinvigorated programme to promote respect
for the rule of law by fighting vices such as corruption.
The Government, for its part, is implementing a robust
anti-corruption crusade, which has significantly helped
in restoring confidence in the governance system.
The Government has further undertaken educational
programmes aimed at sensitizing the public to the
importance of reporting corruption and related vices.
The Zambian Parliament has also been active
in pushing legislative measures such as the
reintroduction of the offence of abuse of office under
the Anti-Corruption Act of 2012. Another example is
12-51904

A/67/PV.3

the enactment of laws against gender-based violence
to protect our women, so that they can effectively
contribute to development without fear of victimization.
From the judicial perspective, measures such as the
creation of small claims courts are proving to be essential
in fostering the rule of law by offering a quicker and
more affordable avenue for the dispensation of justice,
as claimants need not hire legal representation, but can
instead pursue their claims in person.
Furthermore, our Government has continued to
support the Human Rights Commission of Zambia
in the Commission’s role of providing oversight over
Government and other parties in the realm of the human
rights and fundamental freedoms of individuals.
Let me also mention that Zambia is presently
undertaking a constitutional review process under
the guidance of a technical review committee, which
aims to once again restore dignity to individuals by
granting liberty. This process also aims to ensure a
democratic governance system with efficient, strong
and independent structures endowed with oversight
functions. This is the legacy we hope to create and pass
on.
I am by no means implying that those values were
previously unknown to our people. Indeed, were it not
for the Zambian people’s vigilance and civil awareness,
my election through the ballot box might not have been
guaranteed. As a matter of emphasis, our Government
has brought renewed energy to consolidating the rule
of law.
Returning to the international realm, I want to
acknowledge that treaties are an important part of how
States maintain relations among themselves. Zambia
greatly values the role that the United Nations plays
in supporting the integrity of the international rules.
Major progress has indeed been recorded in bringing
the world under a common understanding of State
organization and duties. For that, we of the United
Nations must congratulate ourselves.
However, it remains a concern that the process of
reaching international agreement has taken on a new
dynamic that in most cases has delayed the finalization
of treaties. I wonder why that should be, when we are
in an era where our physical separation is diminishing
in importance and our commonality is ever increasing.
For its part, Zambia is party to many international
treaties that support the rule of law, among them the

12-51904

International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights,
the International Covenant on Economic, Social and
Cultural Rights, the Convention against Torture and
Other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or
Punishment, the Convention on the Rights of the Child
and many more. We intend to improve our record. We
therefore wish to utilize this platform to pledge our
continued quest to improve our country’s adherence to
important treaties, our current focus being on those that
seek to counter nuclear terrorism.
I would like to endorse what South Africa said.
From the founding of the League of Nations to today,
Africa has been more a spectator than a participant. We
are not permanent members of the Security Council,
yet we represent 54 Members in this House. We cannot
speak of the rule of law when we do not respect each
other. Therefore, all Africans must stand up and be
counted. We must be on the Council as permanent
members.
The Acting President: The Assembly will now
hear an address by His Excellency José Manuel Barroso,
President of the European Commission.
Mr. Barroso (European Commission): It is with
great pleasure that I stand before you today in this firstever High-level Meeting on the rule of law.
This is a topic that means a lot to me and to the
European Union, which I am proud to represent here
today. The European Union is a union of values and
a community of law. Primary among those values are
the universal values of democracy, the rule of law and
respect for human rights. These are the pillars on which
our European Union is built. These are the values that
have spurred the European Union forward in good
times and held us together in more difficult ones, the
values that we need to nurture and strengthen every day.
These are the values that contain the transformative
power that has taken our new member States from
totalitarianism to thriving democracies in a quarter of
a century — a transformative power that is taking hold
in our neighbourhood and that we will support not just
to our south and east, but wherever there are calls for it.
The rule of law is a core principle of the international
system of which this great institution — the United
Nations — is the heart. That is why we wholeheartedly
support the work of this High-level Meeting and
the Declaration just adopted (resolution 67/1). We
recognize and welcome in particular the importance
of linking the rule of law agenda to the work of the

31

A/67/PV.3

United Nations on peace and security, human rights and
development, which are simultaneously preconditions
for and enablers of democracy and the rule of law.
This support is not simply declaratory. In each of
the areas covered by the Declaration, the European
Union will make substantive pledges, backed up by
concrete measures. The European Union member States
have presented a list gathering all their pledges. Allow
me just to highlight some of our priorities.
First is strengthening the rule of law at the
international level. Respect for international law is the
best alternative to the use of force, but when the use
of force is inevitable, it should be legitimized by the
international law emanating from this Organization.
Respect for international law is also the best way to
guarantee the peaceful settlement of disputes among
nations. At a moment when tensions are rising in
some regions of the world, international law offers the
possibility of cooperative and negotiated solutions.
In that context, the role of the International Court of
Justice should be recognized.
Secondly, we need to do more to uphold international
law in our national systems. The European Union
member States have some of the best records in terms
of ratifying international conventions. But we can and
will do more, not only to ratify but to ensure effective
implementation.
We will work both inside the European Union and
with our partners to improve the delivery of justice,
including through supporting a worldwide campaign
on the right to a fair trial. We can and will do more to
promote transitional justice by working with the United
Nations in conflict and post-conflict situations. The
role of the International Criminal Court is essential
in that regard. We pledge to further support its work
politically and through targeted assistance to acceding
states.
Justice is indeed an essential element in fostering
human development. To help create an enabling
environment for its development, we will further
strengthen the fight against corruption.
Globalization is not just about positive economic
links. In fact, transnational threats are also developing
very quickly. From terrorism and organized crime
to maritime piracy and human trafficking, these are
problems that put our democracies and the security of
our citizens at risk. The European Union pledges to
strengthen its own capacities to face these dangers and,
32

more importantly, to help our partners and the United
Nations as a whole to strengthen theirs.
But it is not just security threats that may harm
the democratic fabric of societies. The populist and
extreme nationalist tendencies that germinate in
times of economic and social turmoil also represent a
considerable peril to the rule of law, open societies and
democratic systems.
That is why we also need responsible political
leadership that puts the rule of law and the interests
of citizens above its own. There is no true democracy
without the rule of law, and without democracy the rule
of law is just an instrument in the hands of rulers.
In that context, allow me to say a word on the
appalling situation in Syria. Syria is currently the most
dramatic example of how non-respect for the rule of
law, human rights and democracy can lead to violence
and human suffering.
To conclude, I would like to say that the rule of law
is at the heart of the European Union. It is at the heart
of the United Nations, and it should assist and protect
every person on the planet. That is why our final pledge
is to seek to empower those most vulnerable in society,
especially women and children, because ultimately the
rule of law is not meant to protect rulers but, rather,
to serve us all equally, from the mightiest to the most
marginalized.
The Acting President: The General Assembly will
now hear an address by Her Excellency Sheikh Hasina,
Prime Minister of the People’s Republic of Bangladesh.
Sheikh Hasina: I congratulate the President and
the organizers of today’s first-ever High-level Meeting
on the Rule of Law at the National and International
Levels held at the United Nations. I also congratulate
the Secretary-General for his excellent report on the
rule of law (A/66/749).
Peace in our world today is threatened by, among
other things, civil wars, peoples’ uprisings, religious
intolerance, transnational crimes, terrorism, piracy,
the impacts of climate change, and the financial and
energy crises. Hence has grown the need to reaffirm
humankind’s faith in the just, equitable and fair
application of the rule of law, the Charter of the United
Nations and its principles of justice and international
law, and the Statute of the International Court of Justice
for the peaceful settlement of disputes.

12-51904

A/67/PV.3

Bangladesh believes in peace and justice within
the State and in State-to-State relations. Bangladesh
also believes in sovereignty, territorial integrity
and non-interference in the internal affairs of other
nations. Those principles emanate from the philosophy
of “friendship towards all, malice towards none” of
Bangabandhu Sheikh Mujibur Rahman, the Father of
the Nation who, 38 years ago, at the General Assembly,
declared that philosophy, together with the importance
and the necessity of the rule of law and justice for all
nations, as the foundation of our foreign policy.
However, nations have diverse legal systems.
Therefore, the Statute of the International Court
of Justice emphasizes the representation of major
civilizations and principal legal systems of the world
in the composition of the Court. Unfortunately, given
the current power structure and architecture of global
institutions, equitable application of international
law in accordance with International Court of Justice
principles and the realization of a just global order
based on the rule of law for all remain an illusion. To
have a just world order based on the rule of law,
powerful nations must respect international legal
systems and multilateral treaties and support the fair
and just application of customary international law
in the multilateral decision-making process. Greater
voice and representation for developing countries in
such major global institutions as the Security Council,
the International Court of Justice and Bretton Woods
institutions is vital to ensuring the principle of equity.
Multilateral institutions also must assist developing
countries in their capacity-building efforts for the
efficient implementation of the rule of law.
Our Constitution is the supreme law of the land.
The Constitution pledges that
“it shall be a fundamental aim of the State to realise
through the democratic process a socialist society
free from exploitation, a society in which the rule
of law, fundamental human rights and freedoms,
equality and justice, political, economic and social,
will be secured for all citizens”.
It guarantees thereby 18 fundamental rights
and prohibits the legislature from passing any law
inconsistent with those provisions.
It has also been the pledge of the Father of the
Nation — and my own — to uphold the rule of law
without any discrimination in our national and foreign
policy actions.

12-51904

In our region, with our neighbour India, in 1996
we signed the 30-year Ganges Water Sharing Treaty,
and in 2011 the protocol to the 1974 Land Boundary
Agreement that resolved a 64-year-old dispute. With
our other neighbour, Myanmar, this year we settled
the 41-year-old maritime boundary dispute under the
United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea. At
home, we settled a 20-year-old conflict with the hill
ethnic communities by concluding the 1997 Chittagong
Hill Tracts Peace Accord. Our respect for international
law, the Charter of the United Nations and the pacific
settlement of disputes is reflected in our role as one of
the top troop-contributing countries in United Nations
peacekeeping operations. It is also reflected in our
being party to almost all international conventions on
disarmament, nuclear non-proliferation, human rights,
humanitarian law, counter-terrorism, transnational
crimes, and so on.
Bangladesh is the world’s eighth largest democracy.
We promote our secular and progressive aspirations
based on the rule of law and justice. We believe that that
is a precondition for sustainable peace, development
and the attainment of the Millennium Development
Goals and sustainable development goals.
During its tenure, our Government has, through
amendments, restored secularism to our Constitution
and strengthened barriers to usurpation of State power
by undemocratic forces. On the basis of the rule of
law and justice, we have concluded trials of religious
extremists and terrorists, held trials of the killers
of the Father of the Nation after permitting them to
exercise all their rights as defendants, held the trial
of war criminals from our war of liberation in 1971,
and separated the judiciary from the executive to make
it fully independent in delivering fair and equitable
justice to all.
To ensure the rule of law, in our last term, we
made legal services affordable to such vulnerable
and marginalized groups as women and minorities by
enacting the 2001 Legal Aid Services Regulation Act.
That led to the creation of a successful nationwide legal
aid services organization, with units on the national,
district, upazila and even union levels providing free
legal aid and access to justice through hotline services.
Closely linked are the traditional, informal village
courts, or shalish, and family courts that complement
the State-led rural justice system. Those courts,
formalized by the Village Court Act of 2006 and

33

A/67/PV.3

the non-governmental organizations that organized
alternate dispute resolution systems, allow free-ofcost access to an informal justice system at the grass
roots, following local customs and traditions. They are
active in all 4,576 unions and are relieving the burden
of pending cases from the formal justice system. In the
past two years, 15,000 of 20,000 cases were solved in
six months, with $380 million given as compensation
to victims. It is an outstanding alternative dispute
resolution and rule of law achievement. An international
arbitration centre was also established to deliver
informal dispute resolution for businesses from all over
the world.
To strengthen democracy and the rule of law, our
Government has also strengthened its commissions on
information, anti-corruption, national human rights,
law, energy regulations and elections. A citizen’s charter
of rights has been instituted in all public institutions to
ensure that the Government delivers the rule of law and
public services to every citizen. I am particularly happy
that we could deliver justice and rights to our women.
Our being signatories to 14 international anti-terrorism
treaties; our amending of existing national laws on
counter-terrorism and anti-money-laundering between
2009 to 2012 to make them at par with international
treaties; our adherence to the Palermo Convention
of 2011; our adoption of a human trafficking act, the
Mutual Legal Assistance in Crimes Act of 2012, the
Anti-Terrorism Act and the Anti-Money Laundering
Act of 2012 — all of this reflects our commitment to
the rule of law and to countering terrorism.
Bangladesh is a responsible, peace-loving nation
and my Government is a strong proponent of democracy,
human rights, the rule of law and secularism. I am
personally committed to peace, justice, development,
women’s empowerment, and I am concentrating all
efforts towards entrenching the rule of law at home
and elsewhere. I shall continue doing the same with the
active moral, ethical and technical capacity-building
support of all stakeholders in the area of the rule of
law, our people, judiciary, law enforcement forces, civil
society, non-governmental organizations, social and
community groups and organizations, our international
development partners and all international institutions,
particularly the United Nations, which I believe will
lead to the creation of a better universe for our future
generations.

34

The Acting President: The Assembly will now
hear an address by His Excellency Mr. Zoran Milanović,
Prime Minister of the Republic of Croatia.
Mr. Milanović (Croatia): The rule of law
constitutes the very essence of a social contract
between individuals and their Government. Citizens
have the right to transparency, non-discrimination,
fairness and equality in their standing before the law
and in their social interactions. It is, in a way, a right
to the legitimate expectation of a citizen against the
discriminatory treatment of the Government. If we
define democracy as a vehicle, a journey, then liberty
is the goal and the end in itself. It is all about liberty. At
the same time, we are encountering the same principles
being applied at the international level, thereby
contributing to reinforcing the sovereign equality of
nations, their political independence and territorial
integrity, as well as the maintenance of collective peace
and security as envisioned in the Charter of the United
Nations.
The rule of law should cover every aspect of the
daily political and social life of all citizens around the
world. My Government is firmly committed to the
effective and equitable delivery of public services,
to their transparency and accountability and to the
opportunity to scrutinize and review such services,
including by vulnerable or marginalized groups or
individuals.
On the part of citizens, those obligations correspond
to the principles of civic responsibility, social
solidarity and zero tolerance for corruption, abuse
or mismanagement. At the same time, in exercising
the principles of legal security, every Government
should constantly adhere to established international
legal norms and mechanisms against corruption,
international organized crime, terrorism and grave
breaches of international humanitarian law.
Croatia is a State party to all relevant international
instruments aimed at the suppression of those crimes,
and it is committed to their decisive implementation. To
strengthen the rule of law agenda, we need successful
cooperation among States, in particular within the
United Nations framework, and positive contributions
from major United Nations bodies, notably from the
Security Council and the General Assembly.
Croatia remains fully devoted to the principles of
international justice and the resolution of disputes by
peaceful means and in conformity with international

12-51904

A/67/PV.3

law. We highly value the contribution of international
courts and tribunals in advancing the rule of law at
the international and national levels, in particular the
important role of the International Court of Justice.
Strongly supporting significant efforts aimed at ending
once and for all the “culture of impunity”, Croatia
made the Rome Statute an integral part of its national
legislation, including penalizing, in its new criminal
code, the recently defined crime of aggression.
Croatia continues to fully cooperate with the
International Criminal Tribunal for the former
Yugoslavia and closely follows its decisions, including
their future doctrinal and practical consequences.
Negligence for and rejection of the rule of law often
lie at the root of conflict. Weakened State institutions
can undermine their independence, impartiality and
effectiveness. Croatia recognizes the critical importance
of the rule of law in post-conflict peacebuilding,
peacekeeping and conflict-prevention activities and
fully supports greater coherence and mobilization of
the United Nations system-wide expertise on the issue.
My country pays particular attention to the
rebuilding of national civilian capacities and to
institutions’ implementation of national peacebuilding
strategies. We have already contributed to CapMatch,
an online platform established to better match the
demand and supply of specialized civilian capacities,
and we are ready to deploy our relevant expertise.
As the current Vice-Chair of the United Nations
Peacebuilding Commission, we continue to promote
the centrality of the rule of law in the daily struggles
of conflict-affected countries towards sustainable
peace and development. Without peace and the rule of
law there can be no development; without development
there can be no durable peace and prosperity. Croatia
supports including linkages between security, justice
and development issues in the forthcoming consideration
of the United Nations development agenda.
Finally, allow me to reiterate the commitment of
my Government and my country with regard to the
application and full implementation of the rule of law.
In the past 20 years, Croatia has made a long and
demanding journey: from war-torn nation hosting
United Nations peacekeeping missions and recipient
of international humanitarian aid and development
assistance, through post-conflict reconstruction,
reconciliation and development, to a country at the
doorstep of European Union membership, provider of
12-51904

development assistance and participant in peacekeeping
operations and peacebuilding efforts throughout the
world.
In the course of that journey, Croatia has made
committed efforts to respect the principle of the rule of
law, recognizing it as the very essence of any democratic
society. That principle remains the cornerstone of our
national and international policy, and we look forward
to continuing to work with our partners on enhancing,
promoting and strengthening our joint agenda on this
demanding issue.
Let me conclude by expressing our full support for
the final Declaration (resolution 67/1) resulting from
this meeting. Keeping in mind the cross-cutting nature
of the rule-of-law agenda, we particularly support the
General Assembly’s decision to continue to develop
further linkages between the rule of law and the three
main pillars of the work of the United Nations: peace
and security, human rights and development, thus
contributing to a more prosperous, peaceful and just
world.
The Acting President: The Assembly will now
hear an address by His Excellency Mr. Laurent Salvador
Lamothe, Prime Minister and Minister of Planning and
External Cooperation of the Republic of Haiti.
Mr. Lamothe (Haiti) (spoke in French): It is a great
pleasure for me to speak at this High-level Meeting of
the General Assembly on the Rule of Law at the National
and International Levels. I am particularly pleased to
thank the Secretary-General for having chosen as the
topic of debate for this special Meeting a concept that is
one of the priority themes for the Government of Haiti.
At the outset, I should like to inform the Assembly
that in the area of the rule of law, tremendous progress
has been made in Haiti over the past 14 months.
The Government of Haiti has devoted itself to the
irreversible establishment of the rule of law in Haiti.
We have thus undertaken aggressively to combat
corruption and smuggling. Today all Ministers in my
Government have declared their assets, and the effects
of this are already being felt.
One of the major problems facing the judicial
system in Haiti is lack of independence and autonomy.
It is floundering and chronically dysfunctional and thus
unable to meet the expectations of the people of Haiti.
The rule of law cannot prevail in our country if judicial
security is not guaranteed.

35

A/67/PV.3

It was not until President Michel Martelly took the
helm as the head of State that laws were implemented to
bring about, and even ensure, the independence of the
judiciary. The Supreme Court, which had been bereft
of a president and of several judges for more than five
years, is today operational. That represents a concrete
step towards the establishment of the rule of law in
Haiti.
The Superior Council of the Judiciary, the
supervisory and administrative body of the justice
system, has been established. Pursuant to the 2007 law,
the Superior Council, as the relevant administrative
body, together with the Ministry of Justice and Public
Security, will be playing a key role in judicial reform
and in the functioning of the justice system in Haiti.
The Government has chosen rigorously to refrain
from interfering in the judicial system. However, it
is making every effort to provide it with the required
framework and financial resources. The new authorities
of Haiti believe that judges are the cornerstone of the
rule of law. It is they who must ensure respect for the
law both by citizens and by State bodies. Hence a judge
must embody the intrinsic qualities of impartiality,
honesty and objectivity. We are working tirelessly to
shelter judges from all economic or political pressure.
The Ministry of Justice and Public Security is in
the process of strengthening the process of judicial
inspections. The tools necessary better to monitor
the administration and exercise of justice have been
established and their use promoted, with a view to
speeding up the processing of cases within the judicial
system.
The Ministry of Justice and Public Security will be
focusing in particular on the combat against preventive
detention and ensuring the respect of human rights by
judicial and police institutions.
As the Assembly is aware, the establishment of
the rule of law also involves the keeping of public
records, which is a vital part of any organized society.
The Government of Haiti will be giving careful
consideration to the consolidation, modernization and
institutionalization of its capacity to establish a national
identification and registration system.
In the area of the strengthening of infrastructure,
several projects are already under way, including
the construction of the headquarters of the Haitian
National Police, the office of its Inspector-General and
the maritime base at Les Cayes, as well as repairs to
36

several police stations that were heavily impacted by
the earthquake of 12 January 2010.
The rule of law cannot prevail in the absence of the
promotion and respect of human rights. A policy aimed
at combating social exclusion and extreme poverty has
been established, and the issue of human rights remains
a core concern of my Administration. The MartellyLamothe Government, which it is my honour to lead,
is determined to overcome the remaining obstacles in
that area.
Given the situation, the President of the Republic
of Haiti and I deemed it necessary to establish, for
the first time in the history of our country, a ministry
with responsibility for promoting human rights and
combating extreme poverty, in order to encompass all
dimensions of human rights, that is to say, civil and
political rights as well as economic and social ones.
Articles 19 and 20 of the Haitian Constitution
enshrine the right to life and abolish capital punishment
entirely. In order to ensure that members of the
police force respect the right to life, the Government
has undertaken to build the capacities of the general
inspectorate of the police and to raise awareness among
its officers by requiring them to take mandatory human
rights courses in police academy training programmes.
The freedom of expression has been guaranteed in Haiti
since the adoption of the 1987 Constitution. The press in
Haiti today enjoys complete freedom. The Constitution
also guarantees freedom of worship and of association.
Voodoo is practised with no discrimination against its
followers, with a decree of 4 April 2003 defining it as
a religion like any other. All citizens are free to form
associations, observing the legal provisions in force. By
way of example, there are more than 50 political parties
in Haiti.
Despite all that progress, there is a long road
ahead in Haiti in the area of human rights. The matter
of prisons and lengthy preventive detention are also
areas requiring urgent Government action. We have
established a prison management database, which will
be enhanced. All those efforts require international
cooperation and support by the friends of Haiti.
In conclusion, I would highlight the role that
citizens are called upon to play in the rule of law.
Education for all and the rule of law are inseparable.
That is the reason that those two concepts are the two
pillars of my team’s programme.

12-51904

A/67/PV.3

The Acting President: The Assembly will now hear
an address by His Excellency Mr. Thomas Motsoahae
Thabane, Prime Minister of the Kingdom of Lesotho.
Mr. Thabane (Lesotho): Allow me to congratulate
the President on convening this very important Highlevel Meeting on the Rule of Law at the National and
International Levels.
The world that we are living in has always been
characterized by wars, injustice and inequality since the
dawn of time. The establishment of the United Nations,
in 1945, ushered in hope for humankind that the rule
of law in international relations would reign and breed
freedom, justice and prosperity. Indeed, respect for the
rule of law is at the very heart of the United Nations.
However, challenges to the rule of law abound, both at
the national and international levels. The lack of respect
for the rule of law has led to brutal conflicts, oppressive
rule and violations of human rights in some parts of
the world. This High-level Meeting therefore presents a
golden opportunity for us to reaffirm our commitment
to enhancing respect for the rule of law and to agree
on concrete steps on how to consolidate it at both the
national and international levels.
In the recent past, the concept of the rule of law
has gained some momentum within the United Nations
system. In 2005, at the World Summit, we collectively
agreed on the importance of universal adherence to,
and implementation of, the rule of law, both at the
national and international levels. The resolutions that
the Security Council has adopted on this subject since
2003 and the establishment of the Policy Office for
the Rule of Law within the Secretariat highlight the
importance that the United Nations attaches to this
concept. Despite the strides made, much still needs to
be done.
Strengthening the rule of law at the international
level is critical not only for effectively addressing
current global challenges, but also for reinforcing
the principle itself as the very foundation of peaceful
coexistence between nations. World peace will forever
be difficult to attain unless the principles of the rule of
law are applied to relations between States and other
subjects of international law. The need to increase
compliance with international legal treaties and
conventions and the United Nations Charter cannot
be overemphasized. Consistency in the application
of international law and the democratization of
international relations are also key to building a just

12-51904

world order. Double standards degrade the integrity of
the international legal system.
All laws are made by human beings, and, for
the laws to be applied effectively, they must enjoy
the trust and support of the people. If the faith of the
international community in the rule of law is to be
sustained, flagrant violations of international law
without any consequences must be a thing of the
past. The law must apply to both the mighty and the
weak, to the rich and the poor alike. In that regard,
we need to work together towards strengthening the
International Court of Justice and other international
dispute resolution mechanisms. The era of impunity
must be no more. Enforcing accountability for crimes
punishable under international law must become
the norm. Justice for the victims of the most heinous
crimes and the reconciliation of societies ravaged by
violence will not be possible unless we have a strong
international criminal justice system. It is in that spirit
that we acknowledge the work done by the International
Criminal Court and other international criminal
tribunals in entrenching the traditions of the rule of
law. Let us commit to supporting them in their noble
course and pledge our cooperation with them.
The application of the rule of law at the national
level is a cornerstone for building stable and resilient
societies. In our view, the rule of law at the national
level promotes social interaction among citizens and
Government in a legal environment in which basic
freedoms and human rights are respected and protected.
It is in that spirit that Lesotho, as a country ruled by
a Government that is democratically elected through
equal and universal suffrage, has resolved to advance
the rule of law as an answer to many challenges that
besiege it. Lesotho is committed to respect for the rule
of law and the protection of the rights and freedoms of
its citizens, as enshrined in the country’s Constitution.
It is only in an environment where basic freedoms are
protected that individuals and groups can reach their
full potential in realizing their aspirations.
Lesotho has made modest strides in strengthening
the rule of law at the national level. Inequality between
men and women has been addressed to a large degree.
Legislation aimed at empowering and protecting women
was enacted in 2006. That act provides for equal rights
between spouses. Women are now free to enter into
binding contracts and to access loans from financial
institutions. Moreover, during the life of the current

37

A/67/PV.3

Parliament, we have resolved to fight corruption by
strengthening the judicial system.
We will do so by, among other things, creating
relevant and adequately resourced judicial structures to
fight this menace, which will undoubtedly go a long
way to addressing some of the social ills affecting our
people on a daily basis.
Let me conclude by pointing out that the journey we
have taken thus far is a clear sign of our commitment to
the purposes and principles of the Charter of the United
Nations and international law. It is on the strength of
the principles of the Charter that the rule of law stands
out as the most indispensable tool for promoting a just,
peaceful and prosperous world. The supremacy of the
law over all individuals, ensuring access to justice
and the independence of the judiciary, should be our
common pledge today.
This High-level Meeting should not be an end in
itself but, rather, the beginning of a process in which
the rule of law can be more intensively advocated for,
venerated and actively practised. The Declaration we
have adopted today (resolution 67/1) is a step in the
right direction. It is now time for us to collectively turn
vision and political will into concrete commitments
that will ensure that the universally pursued principle
of the rule of law remains an important hallmark of our
civilization.
The Acting President: The Assembly will now
hear an address by His Excellency Mr. Tuilaepa Sailele
Malielegaoi, Prime Minister and Minister for Foreign
Affairs and Trade of the Independent State of Samoa.
Mr. Malielegaoi (Samoa): The global challenges
to human development and security are multiplying
and becoming more complex. The United Nations was
created to bring about universal justice. It is uniquely
placed to lead and coordinate global initiatives to
achieve that noble goal. Today’s meeting is timely, and
its focus on the rule of law pertinent. Strengthening the
rule of law at the national and international levels is key
to guaranteeing peace and security, human rights, and
social and economic justice for all.
But our discussion today should not be a one-off
effort. It must be the start of a concerted and continuing
process. The achievement of the rule of law at all levels
should be the objective of every Member State. The
challenge is to ensure that a coordinated approach is
in place to develop effective instruments to address
the interrelated threats to the peaceful coexistence of
38

peoples and nations. But the United Nations must do
more than that. There must also be a means for the
Organization to ensure that the rhetoric we preach is in
fact being practised.
The rule of law does not exist in a void. Ultimately,
it is in the way that individual Governments realize
international norms and behaviours at a local level that
the rule of law has meaning and benefits ordinary people
everywhere. Only then can the long-term sustainability
of the rule of law be assured.
Samoa has no military forces and is not a member of
any military grouping. Therefore, our only guaranteed
security and protection is strict observance of the
rule of law. In addition, our cultural institutions and
our traditional system of chiefs have helped maintain
peace in our land — a system that has served us well
for more than 3,000 years, long before our first contact
with Western influences. Those are the foundational
pillars on which our society is built, helping to ensure
stability and an improved quality of life for all. Respect
for the rule of law has been an integral part of Samoa’s
journey as a proud, independent nation for 50 years
now. Let me therefore highlight a few examples of how
we are contributing to strengthening the rule of law at
all levels.
To increase our compliance with international law,
we have established a law and justice sector, launching
a four-year plan with a vision of justice for a safe and
stable Samoa. The sector plan focuses on improving
and strengthening our legal system and services by
increasing community safety, improving access to
justice, integrating customary and community-based
justice with the formal justice system, and promoting
integrity and good governance.
One product of the sector plan was the establishment
of the Samoa Law Reform Commission, which is
currently conducting a comprehensive review of
existing legislation and regulations to ensure that they
reflect present-day realities, congruent with the culture
and traditions of a changing and modernizing Samoan
society, and in line with our international obligations.
The Commission works closely with relevant
stakeholders and members of the public to assess
legislative compliance with international conventions,
particularly the human rights conventions to which
Samoa is party. Its works are published and its final
reports are presented to Samoa’s legislative assembly.

12-51904

A/67/PV.3

Samoa is fully committed to the peacekeeping
work of the United Nations, which is one of the
Organization’s most effective and successful mandates.
The small size of our police force has not prevented us
from contributing officers to peacekeeping operations
in South Sudan and Timor-Leste and to the Regional
Assessment Mission to Solomon Islands. We are proud
that more than 30 per cent of our peacekeepers are
women, already surpassing the United Nations goal.
Samoa is also a participating country in the Justice
Rapid Response multilateral stand-by facility. Being
part of that initiative underscores our strong support
for ensuring that all serious violations of human rights
and international law must be investigated and brought
to justice.
Our long-term vision of an improved quality of
life for all Samoans is the key underpinning of our
development strategy for the period from 2012 to 2016.
A major goal of that strategy is strengthening social
cohesion and stability and meeting the need to put
legislation in place to help meet that ultimate goal.
The strategy includes concrete targets to support our
Government’s efforts to provide an environment that
will promote private-sector development, mindful of
our responsibilities and obligations as a member of the
World Trade Organization, beginning in May.
Women parliamentarians have been an integral
feature of all branches of our legislature throughout
our 50-year history. An amendment to our Constitution
reserving 10 per cent of seats for women, to be enacted
before the end of this year, will ensure that they have
a guaranteed minimum level of representation in our
national Parliament.
Samoa regards the International Criminal Court
as an important part of the architecture of world peace
based on the rule of law. The institutionalization of
the Court, 10 years ago, was a major achievement
in the protection of human rights and in upholding
international humanitarian standards. The unanimous
approval, last year, of the Kampala amendments to
the Rome Statute allows the crimes of aggression to
be finally added to the list of crimes that cannot go
unpunished.
In line with the spirit of today’s meeting, I would like
to conclude by making a pledge that I will implement
this week before I leave New York. Samoa is committed
to ensuring that the rule of law is respected, and adhered
to, at all levels. I am therefore happy to announce that,

12-51904

tomorrow, Samoa will ratify the Kampala amendments
to the Rome Statute of the International Criminal Court
on crimes of aggression as part of the United Nations
treaty event.
The Acting President: The Assembly will now hear
an address by His Excellency Mr. Asylbek Jeenbekov,
Speaker of the Parliament of the Kyrgyz Republic.
Mr. Jeenbekov (Kyrgyzstan) (spoke in Russian):
Respecting and strengthening the principle of the
rule of law is at the very core of the activities of any
democratic nation. The mandatory limitation by laws
and treaties of all parties to legal relationships, from
the citizen to the State itself, is key to a country’s
sustainable development and to the economic growth
and prosperity of its people.
The Kyrgyz Republic is firmly committed to the
principle of the rule of law at the international and
national levels. Kyrgyzstan has acceded to many
fundamental international treaties, thereby reaffirming
its commitment to the principle of the rule of law at
the international level. In total, the Kyrgyz Republic
has met its responsibilities under 40 international
human rights instruments within the United Nations
and 42 conventions of the International Labour
Organization, as well as the Helsinki Final Act, thereby
reaffirming its respect for the principles and norms of
the United Nations and the Organization for Security
and Cooperation in Europe on the protection and
promotion of universal values, the rule of law, human
rights and democracy.
We are firmly committed to implementing
our nation’s international obligations. In line with
international relations, we support strict compliance
with the universally recognized principles and standards
of international law. We also seek both to limit and
to underpin Government activities in order to ensure
respect for a person’s dignity, freedom, justice and
legal protection in relations both with the Government
and with other individuals.
At the national level, we are improving the
regulatory and legal frameworks and are pursuing
complex reforms to enhance the judicial, law
enforcement and penitentiary systems, to ensure gender
equality, to strengthen the role of young people and to
protect the rights of the child and the poor. We intend
to continue to firmly abide by such robust principles
of international law, to move forward strictly in line
with the law and to ensure equality before the law, the

39

A/67/PV.3

protection of human rights, the independence of the
legal system and a fair justice system.
That is demonstrated by my country’s democratic
reforms. In the past two and a half years, following
the events of 2010, we made an enormous effort to
guarantee the rule of law in our country. We adopted
a new Constitution that transformed Kyrgyzstan into a
parliamentary democracy. We held transparent and fair
parliamentary and presidential elections. Conditions
were established for the media to be able to work
independently. We have also declared an unprecedented
war against corruption and organized crime.
Implementing the rule of law remains a complex
challenge, in particular for developing countries, owing
to limited resources to support relevant institutions
and mechanisms that need to be reformed. While the
rule of law is based on laws, the laws themselves are
insufficient to uphold the rule of law.
A legal constitution also does not necessarily prove
the establishment of governance on the basis of the
principle of the rule of law. In that regard, the law is not
an arithmetical sum of legal standards on paper, but a
complex and multifaceted phenomenon that combines
justice and humanism in society and governance.
Kyrgyzstan’s commitment to such an idea is seen in the
constitutional standard that core freedoms and human
rights determine the very essence and form of the
activities of the legislative and executive bodies and of
local Government, inasmuch as they are protected by
the law and the courts. The issue of the rule of law is
closely related to ensuring the quality of laws.
Another problem is weak legislation. Making
frequent and, at times, unwarranted amendments to
laws underscores the importance of the quality of laws.
Successfully dealing with that issue means tackling a
host of mutually related political, organizational and
other matters. Kyrgyzstan strives to ensure that the
ordinary citizen feels that he or she can participate on
policy and knows what issue is being addressed by an
adopted law. Citizen confidence in their involvement in
Government activities and their understanding and trust
in the usefulness of restrictions and prohibitions can
ensure confidence in regulatory and legal instruments.
That is why we have in place an important procedure
for the public discussion of laws that we have adopted.
That is provided for in our law on regulatory and legal
acts. Under that law, draft regulations and laws that
directly affect the interests of citizens and entities, as

40

well as those that seek to regulate business activities,
are subject to public discussion through their posting
on the official site of the submitting body, that is, the
Government or Parliament, as well as through the
holding of round tables and public and parliamentary
hearings. Laws are then adopted at the third reading,
with a 10-day interval between each reading.
We believe that the United Nations must be at the
very heart of efforts to provide effective assistance
to countries in the area of the rule of law. The United
Nations must continue to make efforts to develop
a holistic approach to sustainable development,
encompassing the goals of economic development and
social and environmental protection. The rule of law
must play a critical role in ensuring equal protection
and access to opportunity.
The Acting President: I shall now give the floor
to representatives who wish to speak in explanation of
position on resolution 67/1, which the General Assembly
earlier during this meeting.
Before giving the floor to speakers, however, may
I remind delegations that explanations should be made
by delegations from their seats.
Mr. Valero Briceño (Bolivarian Republic of
Venezuela) (spoke in Spanish): The Bolivarian Republic
of Venezuela would like to put on record that we have
reservations with regard to paragraph 28 of resolution
67/1, entitled “Declaration of the High-level Meeting
of the General Assembly on the Rule of Law at the
National and International Levels”. The full observance
of international law by States without preferential
treatment or privilege will make it possible to arrive at a
fair international order of solidarity, where the interests
of all the world’s peoples take precedence. Only in that
way will it be possible to contribute to strengthening
the rule of law and international peace and security.
Without the existence of a truly democratic system
in the United Nations, and particularly with regard to
the configuration and decision-taking of the Security
Council, the achievement of an international system
where the rule of law prevails will continue to remain
a utopian dream.
Therefore the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela
expresses reservations with regard to paragraph 28 of
resolution 67/1 adopted today, as it refers favourably
to the work of the Security Council. My country,
Venezuela, believes that that body is far from making
a positive contribution to the rule of law and the

12-51904

A/67/PV.3

maintenance of international peace and security. On
several occasions it has contributed to seeing that the
rule of law and the principles of international law
have been violated. The abusive implementation of
resolution 1973 (2011) on Libya and the treatment of
the Palestinian question are just a few telling examples.
Hence, the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela would
like this statement to be part and parcel of the adoption
of the outcome document (resolution 67/1) and would
like our reservations about paragraph 28 to be reflected
in the official record of this High-level Meeting.
The Acting President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Cuba.
Mr. Delgado Sánchez (Cuba) (spoke in Spanish):
Cuba acknowledges the fact that resolution 67/1,
entitled “Declaration of the High-level Meeting of the
General Assembly on the Rule of Law at the National
and International Levels”, which was adopted earlier,
contains elements which can favour the international
establishment of the rule of law. Among those, it is worth
mentioning that paragraph 36 of the resolution clearly
states that a true rule of law means that the international
economic, monetary and financial organizations should
be made democratic so they serve the development of
peoples and not the permanent enrichment of a few. Also,
paragraph 11 of the Declaration unambiguously refers
to national ownership in all rule-of-law activities. That
is a prerogative which cannot be replaced or usurped.
Sovereign equality, the good faith fulfilment of
commitments entered into by States, the peaceful
resolution of disputes, abstention from the threat or
use of force against the territorial integrity or political
independence of any State, non-interference in the
internal affairs of other States and non-selectivity must
be the underlying principles of States at all times and
in the promotion of the rule of law, as is clearly stated
in paragraphs 1 and 3 of the Declaration. However, in
Cuba’s view, paragraph 28 of the Declaration, which
has been anti-democratically imposed, contradicts
what was previously stated by suggesting that the
Security Council has made positive contributions to the
rule of law. That body and its permanent members that
are members of NATO have often violated international
law and the Council’s own decisions in order to impose
their political agenda and military domination over
developing countries.
Also, paragraph 28 runs counter to the appeal by the
majority of the international community that that body
and its members act in accordance with international
12-51904

law. Similarly, paragraph 35 of the resolution adopted
today also very weakly reflects the commitment to
Security Council reform. Thus, although Cuba was
not opposed to that resolution being adopted without
a vote, we would like to indicate our reservations on
the aforementioned aspects, and we wish to see them
duly reflected in the official record of this High-level
Meeting.
Lastly, allow me to add that Cuba condemns
and demands the immediate renegotiation of all the
extraterritorial provisions that make up the commercial,
economic and financial blockade imposed against Cuba
for more than 50 years, and it urges the United States
of America to comply without further delay with what
is stated in paragraph 9 of the high-level Declaration.
The Acting President: I now give the floor to
His Excellency the Minister for Foreign Affairs of
Nicaragua.
Mr. Santos López (Nicaragua) (spoke in Spanish):
As this is the first time that my delegation is taking
the floor, allow me to congratulate Mr. Vuk Jeremić
on his election to the presidency and to assure him of
the support of my delegation. I also extend the words
of congratulations and support to the other elected
members.
Nicaragua acknowledges the endeavours of the
co-facilitators to arrive at resolution 67/1 on the rule of
law, which was adopted by consensus today. Nicaragua
aligns itself with the consensus. However, we would
like to make certain points in that regard. We welcome
the inclusion in resolution 67/1 of issues such as the
peaceful resolution of disputes, the International Court
of Justice, the references to human rights, children and
women, among other issues. Despite the fact that the
issue of the peaceful resolution of disputes is included in
the resolution, we would have liked to have seen greater
emphasis on it, given that in recent years conflicts
have taken truly worrying turns in that they have once
again highlighted the urgent need to eliminate the
implementation of unilateral coercive measures and the
irrational extraterritorial implementation of domestic
legislation. We say, once again, that the General
Assembly must play its true role in consolidating the
rule of law at the international level and ensure that
such unilateral action does not continue to be taken.
Nicaragua would also have liked to have seen
greater emphasis on the role of the International Court
of Justice, as that is the means par excellence for the

41

A/67/PV.3

resolution of disputes. Based on our experience over
the past 26 years, Nicaragua has been a plaintiff or
defendant in eight principal cases and other incidental
ones brought before the International Court of Justice,
sometimes at extremely difficult times for our nation. In
2001, Nicaragua expressed its reservations with regard
to the acceptance of the jurisdiction of the International
Court of Justice, but we have never invoked the
reservation. On the contrary, we have always vested
our confidence in the work of the International Court
of Justice, as we believe that its work contributes not
only to promoting, strengthening and disseminating
the rule of law, but also that its work is crucial in
the implementation of commitments to preserve the
sovereign equality of all States — the fundamental
principle of the United Nations and the paramount
desire of mankind.
For that reason, Nicaragua takes this opportunity
to announce before the General Assembly that, starting
in October, Nicaragua will, by presidential decree,
formally withdraw its aforementioned reservation.
The Charter of the United Nations attributes the
role of maintaining international peace and security to
the Security Council. It is the obligation of the Security
Council to fully carry out that task and not to usurp the
role of other bodies, in particular that of the General
Assembly. In addition, I must state that it is not the role
of this body to promote the rule of law, but rather, that
responsibility is attributed to States. The document,
approved by senior officials, had to be worded generally
and could not refer to information on matters such as
the post-2015 agenda and follow-up methods. Such
matters should be approved and considered by experts,
rather than be mentioned in a high-level document.
Allow me to conclude by expressing our
reservations about the aforementioned points. I also
thank the President and the co-facilitators for their
endeavours towards a successful resolution that enjoys
a true consensus.
The Acting President: I now give the floor to the
Permanent Representative of the Plurinational State of
Bolivia.
Mr. Llorentty Solíz (Plurinational State of
Bolivia) (spoke in Spanish): The Plurinational State
of Bolivia joined the consensus on resolution 67/1
entitled “Declaration of the High-level Meeting of the
General Assembly on the Rule of Law at the National

42

and International Levels”, adopted this morning by the
General Assembly.
Bolivia is aware that international democratic
governance is fundamental for ensuring rule of law,
democracy and justice. In that regard, my country
would emphasize that the Plurinational State of
Bolivia adopted its political Constitution through a
constitutional referendum in 2009. That was a major
step forward in decisively strengthening the rule of law
and in implementing our Constitution.
Based on that framework, in October 2011 the
first direct elections of the highest authorities of the
Supreme Court of Justice, the Environmental Court, the
Plurinational Constitutional Tribunal and the Council
of the Judiciary were held, and their compositions
reflect the new criteria of multiculturalism and gender
equality, as well as the election of indigenous judges
and magistrates. That unprecedented election of the
highest judicial authorities was held in an atmosphere of
peace and citizen participation, as a unique tool aimed
at strengthening independent and impartial justice.
However, Bolivia wishes to place on record its
reservation about paragraph 28 of the aforementioned
document. We would like the Secretariat to ensure
that our reservation is reflected in the record of this
meeting.
Bolivia welcomes the maintenance of peace and
condemns aggression of any form. The traditional
peaceful spirit of the Bolivian people has been reflected
in the Constitution, which establishes the fact that
Bolivia is a peaceful State promoting peace and the
right to peace as well as cooperation among the peoples
of the region and the world and rejecting any form of
aggression as a means of resolving conflicts among
States. In that context, our own Constitution prohibits
the installation of any foreign military base on the
territory of the Plurinational State of Bolivia.
Our reservation complies with the duty to do all and
everything that is possible to avoid unilateralism and
interventionism, which are defined as being contrary
to the maintenance of international peace and security.
The Security Council has been pursuing a certain logic
for more than 60 years. The Plurinational State of
Bolivia believes that the twenty-first century should be
one of great decisions, and that comprehensive reform
of the Security Council can no longer be delayed, in
order to ensure that all Members of the United Nations
are equally part and parcel of matters relating to the

12-51904

A/67/PV.3

maintenance of international peace and security. In
that light, paragraph 35 of the document that we have
adopted should reflect the true, urgent and undeniable
need for urgent Security Council reform. In that context,

we reiterate our reservation regarding paragraph 28 of
the document. We humbly request the Secretariat to
ensure that our reservation is reflected in the record of
today’s meeting.
The meeting rose at 2.20 p.m.

12-51904

43
