United Nations

A/RES/56/253

General Assembly

Distr.: General
6 March 2002

Fifty-sixth session
Agenda item 123
Resolution adopted by the General Assembly
[on the report of the Fifth Committee (A/56/736)]
56/253.

Questions relating to the proposed programme budget for the biennium
2002–2003
I

The General Assembly,
Reaffirming its resolutions 41/213 of 19 December 1986, 42/211 of 21 December
1987 and section VI of its resolution 45/248 B of 21 December 1990,
Recalling its resolution 55/233 of 23 December 2000,
Recalling also its resolutions 54/249 of 23 December 1999 and 55/234 of
23 December 2000,
Recalling the relevant paragraphs of resolutions 52/12 A and 52/12 B of
12 November and 19 December 1997, respectively, as well as resolutions 52/235 of
26 June 1998, 53/220 A of 7 April 1999, 53/220 B of 8 June 1999 and 54/15 of 29 October
1999, relating to the Development Account,
Recalling also paragraph 2 (a) of its resolution 1798 (XVII) of 11 December 1962,
Reaffirming the respective mandates of the Advisory Committee on Administrative
and Budgetary Questions and the Committee for Programme and Coordination in the
consideration of the proposed programme budget,
Reaffirming also the requirement of all Member States to fulfil their financial
obligations as set out in the Charter of the United Nations on time, in full and without
conditions,
Having considered the proposed programme budget for the biennium 2002–2003,1
the relevant reports of the Advisory Committee 2 and the report of the Committee for
Programme and Coordination on the work of its forty-first session,3

_______________
1

The proposed programme budget for the biennium 2002–2003 is contained in documents A/56/6 and
Corr.1 and Add.1 (Introduction, sections. 1–33 and Income sections 1-3). For the final text, see Official
Records of the General Assembly, Fifty-sixth Session, Supplement No. 6.

2
Official Records of the General Assembly, Fifty-sixth Session, Supplement No. 7 (A/56/7); and A/56/7/Add.1–7. For the
final text, see Official Records of the General Assembly, Fifty-sixth Session Supplement No.7A.
3
Ibid., Supplement No. 16 (A/56/16).

01 49706

A/RES/56/253

Recognizing the detrimental effect of the withholding of assessed contributions on
the administrative and financial functioning of the United Nations,
Recognizing also that late payments of assessed contributions adversely affect the
financial situation of the Organization,
Stressing that the established procedures for the formulation, implementation and
approval of the programme budget must be maintained and strictly followed,
1.
Reaffirms that the Fifth Committee is the appropriate Main Committee of the
General Assembly entrusted with responsibilities for administrative and budgetary matters;
2.

Reaffirms also rule 153 of its rules of procedure;

3.
Reaffirms further the Regulations and Rules Governing Programme Planning,
the Programme Aspects of the Budget, the Monitoring of Implementation and the Methods
of Evaluation4 and the Financial Regulations and Rules of the United Nations;
4.
Recalls section III, paragraph 13, of its resolution 55/222 of 23 December
2000, and requests the Secretary-General to submit, in a consolidated form, the long
overdue and delayed revisions to the Financial Regulations and Rules of the United
Nations approved by the General Assembly;
5.
Requests the Secretary-General to take steps to ensure proper compliance with
all regulations and rules of the Regulations and Rules Governing Programme Planning, the
Programme Aspects of the Budget, the Monitoring of Implementation and the Methods of
Evaluation, as well as the relevant resolutions that establish the budgetary procedures, as
part of the preparation of the proposed programme budget for the biennium 2004–2005,
reporting thereon to the Committee for Programme and Coordination at its forty-second
session;
6.
Decides that no changes to the budget methodology, to established budgetary
procedures and practices or to the financial regulations may be implemented without prior
review and approval by the General Assembly, in accordance with established budgetary
procedures;
7.
Reaffirms the role of the General Assembly in carrying out a thorough analysis
and approval of posts and financial resources, as well as of human resources policies, with
a view to ensuring the full implementation of all mandated programmes and activities and
the implementation of policies in this regard;
8.
Welcomes the timely submission of the proposed programme budget and the
continued efforts made by the Secretary-General to improve the format of the proposed
programme budget;
9.
Notes with satisfaction the clarity of the presentation of the proposed
programme budget, including through the provision of organization charts, and requests
the Secretary-General to ensure that, in the presentation of such charts in the future,
complete information on proposals for additional posts, conversions and reclassifications is
reflected;
10. Decides that the staffing table for each year of the biennium 2002–2003 shall
be as contained in annex II to the present resolution;
11. Notes with concern the late submission of section 11B, International Trade
Centre (UNCTAD/WTO), of the proposed programme budget for the biennium 2002-2003;
_______________
4

2

ST/SGB/2000/8.

A/RES/56/253

12. Commends the efforts and initiatives of the Secretary-General aimed at
reforming the United Nations;
13. Requests the Secretary-General to ensure that, in the implementation of
approved reform proposals, there is no adverse impact on the fulfilment of legislative
mandates;
14. Also requests the Secretary-General to review the format currently used for the
presentation of estimates, gross and net, of staff assessment, with a view to enhancing
comparability with other organizations of the United Nations system, and to report on
options in this regard to the General Assembly at its fifty-seventh session;
15. Further requests the Secretary-General, in preparing the proposed programme
budget for the biennium 2004–2005, to ensure full compliance with the provisions of
General Assembly resolution 55/231 of 23 December 2000 and with the relevant approved
recommendations made by the Committee for Programme and Coordination in
paragraphs 35 to 40 of its report,3 as well as those of the Advisory Committee in
paragraphs 10 to 18 of its report,5 bearing in mind the intergovernmental, multilateral and
international character of the United Nations;
16. Requests the Secretary-General to make proposals for the incorporation in the
proposed revisions to the medium-term plan for the period 2002–2005,6 of a medium-term
plan chapter to cover the activities of section 1 of the budget to be considered by the
Committee for Programme and Coordination at its forty-second session;
17. Reiterates that indicators of achievement should be used, where appropriate, to
measure the performance of the Secretariat and not of Member States;
18. Emphasizes that the resources proposed by the Secretary-General should be
commensurate with all mandated programmes and activities in order to ensure their full,
efficient and effective implementation;
19. Renews its appeal to Member States to demonstrate their commitment to the
United Nations by, inter alia, meeting their financial obligations on time, in full and
without conditions, in accordance with the Charter of the United Nations and the Financial
Regulations and Rules of the United Nations;
II
20. Reaffirms that the medium-term plan, as approved by the General Assembly,
shall continue to constitute the principal policy directive of the United Nations;
21.

Reiterates that the priorities for the biennium 2002–2003 are the following:

(a)

Maintenance of international peace and security;

(b) Promotion of sustained economic growth and sustainable development, in
accordance with relevant General Assembly resolutions and recent United Nations
conferences;
(c)

Development of Africa;

(d)

Promotion of human rights;

(e)

Effective coordination of humanitarian assistance efforts;

_______________
5
6

Official Records of the General Assembly, Fifty-sixth Session, Supplement No. 7 (A/56/7).
Ibid., Fifty-fifth Session, Supplement No. 6 (A/55/6/Rev.1).

3

A/RES/56/253

(f)

Promotion of justice and international law;

(g)

Disarmament;

(h) Drug control, crime prevention and combating international terrorism in all its
forms and manifestations;
22. Endorses the conclusions and recommendations of the Committee for
Programme and Coordination on the programme narrative of the proposed programme
budget for the biennium 2002–2003 contained in the report of the Committee on the work
of its forty-first session,3 subject to the provisions of the present resolution;
23. Emphasizes that programmes and activities mandated by the General Assembly
must be respected and implemented fully in the most effective and efficient manner;
24. Reaffirms that changes in mandated programmes and activities are the
prerogative of the General Assembly;
25. Notes with concern that some sections of the proposed programme budget for
the biennium 2002-2003 are not consistent with the medium-term plan for the period
2002–2005, and requests the Secretary-General to prepare the next biennial proposed
programme budget in full conformity with the medium-term plan for the period 2002–
2005, as adopted by the General Assembly in its resolution 55/234, in particular with
regard to the expected accomplishments and indicators of achievement and, taking into
account mandates specific to the biennium;
26. Reiterates that the allocation of resources should reflect fully the priorities
established in the medium-term plan, and notes the importance of adopting efficient and
effective management practices within the United Nations system, in particular by
promoting cooperation, learning and comparison of experience between United Nations
duty stations, so that optimal practices are widely adopted, as appropriate;
27. Requests the Secretary-General to pursue the necessary management
improvement measures as indicated in paragraph 26 above, and to report thereon to the
Committee for Programme and Coordination at its forty-second session;
28. Recalls paragraph 28 of General Assembly resolution 54/249, in which it
requested the Secretary-General to provide a better explanation in the proposed programme
budget for the biennium 2002–2003 on the use of standard costs and unit rates, notes with
regret the absence of such explanations and requests the Secretary-General to address this
matter in the context of the proposed programme budget for the biennium 2004–2005;
29. Emphasizes that cost accounting and the system of costing outputs are an
important part of an effective and transparent decision-making process, and requests the
Secretary-General to report to the General Assembly at its fifty-seventh session on this
subject;
30. Reaffirms the Regulations and Rules Governing Programme Planning, the
Programme Aspects of the Budget, the Monitoring of Implementation and the Methods of
Evaluation,4 and requests the Secretary-General to implement regulation 5.6 of the
regulations and rules and to report to the General Assembly on his effort, and also
reaffirms that the application of rule 105.6 (a) should continue to reflect the understanding
that approval of the medium-term plan and the programme budget constitute the
reaffirmation of the mandate reflected therein;
31. Notes with concern the high cost of information technology-related equipment
at some duty stations away from Headquarters;

4

A/RES/56/253

32. Recalls its resolution 56/239 of 24 December 2001, in which it requested the
Secretary-General to resubmit to the General Assembly at its fifty-seventh session his
proposed information technology strategy to improve efficiency, clarify responsibilities in
the Secretariat, improve decision-making and identify information technology priorities;
33. Requests the Secretary-General to ensure a more consistent presentation of
proposed expenditure on information technology-related services and equipment for the
biennium 2004–2005, detailing the maintenance and unit costs for equipment and making a
full distinction between internal and external costs;
34. Also requests the Secretary-General to conduct a review of library services
covering the Dag Hammarskjöld Library, the libraries of the United Nations Offices at
Geneva and at Vienna, libraries in the regional commissions, departmental libraries,
libraries at information centres and depositary libraries, with a view to defining the
purpose of United Nations library services and identifying primary clients or users and the
relationships and roles of the libraries, including the best way to achieve their mandates
through the relevant intergovernmental bodies, and to report thereon to the General
Assembly at its fifty-seventh session;
35. Further requests the Secretary-General to implement as soon as possible new
and more efficient ways of providing library services;
36. Decides to make changes, as contained in annex I to the present resolution, to
the programme narratives in the final published version of the proposed programme budget
for the biennium 2002–2003, as reflected in the conclusions and recommendations of the
Committee for Programme and Coordination at its forty-first session and the provisions of
the present resolution;
37. Requests the Secretary-General to study the possibility of introducing a
practice whereby user departments within the United Nations Secretariat are responsible
from their own budgets for the consumption and payment of those central services
currently borne centrally under section 27, Common support services, of the regular
budget, and to report thereon to the General Assembly at its fifty-seventh session;
III
38. Endorses the conclusions and recommendations of the Advisory Committee
contained in its reports on the proposed programme budget for the biennium 2002–2003,2
subject to the provisions of the present resolution;
39. Reaffirms paragraph 6 of its resolution 55/233, whereby the General Assembly
decided, inter alia, that additional requirements in the amount of 93.7 million United States
dollars (before recosting) included in the proposed programme budget for the financing of
special political missions should be financed in conformity with the provisions of
resolution 41/213;
40. Reaffirms its support for maintaining the international character of the
Organization and for the principles of efficiency, competence and integrity enshrined in
Article 101 of the Charter of the United Nations;
41. Also reaffirms the role of the General Assembly with regard to the structure of
the Secretariat, including the creation, conversion, suppression and redeployment of posts,
and requests the Secretary-General to continue to provide the General Assembly with
comprehensive information on all decisions involving established and temporary highlevel posts, including equivalent positions financed from the regular budget and from
extrabudgetary resources;

5

A/RES/56/253

42. Emphasizes that there shall be no arbitrary ceiling on the budget of the United
Nations, and that resources proposed by the Secretary-General, in the context of the
proposed programme budget, should be commensurate with all mandated programmes and
activities, in order to ensure their full, effective and efficient implementation;
43. Requests the Secretary-General, in the proposed programme budget for the
biennium 2004–2005, to submit estimates of the total amount of resources, from all
sources of financing, that he should have at his disposal to be able to implement fully the
mandated programmes and activities efficiently and effectively;
44. Also requests the Secretary-General to submit to the General Assembly at its
fifty-seventh session an updated study on a comprehensive solution to the problem of
additional expenditures deriving from inflation and currency fluctuations, taking into
account its resolution 41/213;
45. Reaffirms its role in carrying out a thorough analysis and approval of human
and financial resources, with a view to ensuring the full, efficient and effective
implementation of all mandated programmes and activities and the implementation of
policies in this regard;
46. Emphasizes the need for Member States to provide adequate resources for the
full, efficient and effective implementation of all mandated programmes and activities;
47. Reiterates the need for the Secretary-General to ensure that resources are
utilized strictly for the purposes approved by the General Assembly;
48. Notes the substantial reliance on extrabudgetary resources in some sections of
the proposed programme budget, in view of the mandated programmes and activities, of
some programmes, and reiterates that core functions of the United Nations, as a principle,
should be financed through apportionment among Member States;
49. Notes with concern the current and projected potential decreasing trend in
extrabudgetary resources and that this decrease in some sections of the proposed
programme budget for the biennium 2002–2003 could have an adverse impact on the
effective implementation of programmes and activities, especially those programmes that
are still heavily funded primarily through such resources;
50. Notes that the bulk of extrabudgetary funds are tied to specific operations and
utilized on the basis of donor wishes, and requests the Secretary-General to ensure that this
does not affect the nature of the programme or the orientation of its mandates;
51. Requests the Secretary-General to select consultants and experts, as well as
staff charged against general temporary assistance, on as wide a geographical basis as
possible, in accordance with the principles of the Charter and the provisions of General
Assembly resolution 53/221 of 7April 1999;
52. Also requests the Secretary-General to ensure that, in future programme budget
proposals, requests for consultants and experts groups are clearly and separately identified
in the programme narratives;
53. Reaffirms that the vacancy rate is a tool for budgetary calculations and should
not be used to achieve budgetary savings;
54. Also reaffirms that deliberate management decisions should not be taken to
keep a certain number of posts vacant, as this action makes the budget process less
transparent and management of human and financial resources less efficient;

6

A/RES/56/253

55. Decides that a vacancy rate of 6.5 per cent for Professional staff and
3.1 per cent for General Service staff shall be used as a basis for the calculation of the
budget for the biennium 2002–2003;
56. Notes that, should the realized vacancy rates be lower than those budgeted, the
General Assembly would provide additional resources, if required, in the first and/or
second performance report, so as to preclude the need for any constraint on recruitment of
staff;
57. Requests the Secretary-General to recruit staff expeditiously through proper
planning and by streamlining personnel practices and procedures, in accordance with the
provisions of General Assembly resolution 55/238 of 23 December 2000, in order to avoid
any adverse impact of a high vacancy rate on the effective and efficient implementation
and delivery of mandated programmes and activities;
58. Also requests the Secretary-General to ensure that posts are not deliberately left
vacant to provide a cushion for absorbing the costs of special missions and other activities
authorized “within available resources”;
59.

Reaffirms paragraphs 62 and 63 of the annex to its resolution 51/241 of 31 July

1997;
60. Regrets that the Secretary-General did not undertake a comprehensive review
of the post structure of the Secretariat and did not make proposals in the proposed
programme budget for the biennium 2002–2003 to address the top-heavy nature of the
Organization;
61. Decides not to approve the upward reclassifications of the posts requested by
the Secretary-General in the proposed budget for the biennium 2002–2003;
62. Notes with concern that the comprehensive review of the post structure of the
Secretariat requested in its resolution 54/249 to address the top-heavy post structure of the
Organization was not submitted, and reiterates that the comprehensive review be submitted
to it at its fifty-seventh session;
63. Also notes with concern the number of reclassifications and new posts at senior
levels proposed by the Secretary-General, which could lead to a further distortion in the
pyramid staff structure of an Organization that is already top-heavy;
64. Further notes with concern the inadequacies of existing mechanisms for
proposing and filling the reclassified posts, and requests the Secretary-General to establish
a new mechanism centralizing within the auspices of the Office of Human Resources
Management all proposals for reclassification, provided that all such proposals meet the
following criteria:
(a)

Proposals are of an exceptional nature;

(b)

There is justification in terms of a change in the nature or scope of the work;

(c)

There are full details outlining the increase in the responsibility;

(d)
statistics;

Such proposals are accompanied by justifiable and verifiable workload

(e) Any request involving the grading of a post must be justified solely in relation
to the post itself and without reference to the incumbent or potential incumbent;
(f) The potential incumbent of the post being proposed for reclassification has
encumbered that post for at least three years;

7

A/RES/56/253

65. Emphasizes that the reclassification of posts should not be used as a promotion
tool and that reclassified posts, as approved by the General Assembly, should be filled only
in full conformity with the established procedures for recruitment and placement;
66. Notes with concern cases in which incumbents of posts are being paid at a
level other than the one provided for in the budget, and requests the Secretary-General to
provide a comprehensive report on this matter to the General Assembly at its fifty-seventh
session;
67. Requests the Secretary-General to continue to comply strictly with the
approved travel policies, standards, and regulations and rules, particularly with respect to
ensuring that travel is undertaken by the most direct and economical route;
68. Notes the current use of videoconferencing as a means of communication
within the United Nations, and requests the Secretary-General to study comprehensively
this issue and to report thereon to the General Assembly at its fifty-seventh session;
69. Requests the Secretary-General to further enhance cooperation between
relevant headquarters departments and regional commissions in order to ensure the quality
of output and services to Member States and address the duplication and overlap of
services, where they exist, and to improve the efficiency of programme support activities,
and to report thereon to the General Assembly at its fifty-seventh session;
70. Decides to reduce the resources proposed by the Secretary-General for
allocation for specific operational requirements, as follows:
(a)

Travel of staff, by 2.8 million dollars;

(b)

Contractual services, by 6.4 million dollars;

(c)

General operating expenses, by 19.7 million dollars;

(d)

Supplies and materials, by 1.4 million dollars;

(e)

Furniture and equipment, by 7.2 million dollars;

(f) Consultants and experts, with exception of resources allocated under section 9
for the Department of Economic and Social Affairs, and under sections 1 to 20 for the
regional commissions, by 2 million dollars;
(g) Information technology, with exception of resources for the Economic
Commission for Africa allocated under section 16, by 10 million dollars;
IV
71. Requests the Secretary-General to ensure a more balanced proportion of staff
costs devoted to programme support in comparison with those devoted to the programme
of work itself in all the regional commissions, in particular in the Economic Commission
for Africa;
72. Notes with concern the high proportion of General Service posts compared to
Professional posts in the regional commissions, and requests the Secretary-General to
report to the General Assembly at its fifty-seventh session on efforts undertaken, as
appropriate;
73. Notes paragraph VI.14 of the report of the Advisory Committee,5 and requests
the Secretary-General, as a general principle, to keep under review the ratio between
General Service staff and Professional staff, taking into account the impact on the
Organization of the investments in new technologies and bearing in mind the differentiated
mandates and programmes of work of the various duty stations;
8

A/RES/56/253

74. Requests the Secretary-General, in accordance with the Regulations and Rules
Governing Programme Planning, the Programme Aspects of the Budget, the Monitoring of
Implementation and the Methods of Evaluation,4 to review the publications and
information materials of the United Nation to ensure that:
(a)

They do not duplicate other United Nations publications;

(b)

They have an identified target group;

(c)

They are targeted to the appropriate audience;

(d)

They have a significant impact on that audience;

(e)
activities;

Recommendations are made on methods to strengthen the publication

(f) The direct and indirect costs of producing, translating and disseminating the
materials are identified;
and to report thereon to the General Assembly at its fifty-seventh session;
75. Also requests the Secretary-General to ensure equal treatment for the six
official languages in the Dag Hammarskjöld Library in both the traditional means of
publication and in the electronic media, including the Internet;
76. Further requests the Secretary-General to consider the importance of
specialists available at the Dag Hammarskjöld Library to provide services in cataloguing
and collection maintenance in all six official languages, to facilitate the use of reference
works and documents by delegations and to upgrade the Library’s holdings of reference
works and books in all relevant categories in all six official languages;
77. Requests the Secretary-General to accelerate his efforts to fill all posts
currently vacant in the Dag Hammarskjöld Library and to ensure the prompt and efficient
processing of materials in all six official languages;
Part I
Overall policy-making, direction and coordination
Section 1
Overall policy-making, direction and coordination
78. Notes with concern the potential for duplication in some functions between
sections of the Office of External Relations and the Department of Public Information,
both of which have functions that include outreach, promotion and maintenance of the
relations of the United Nations with important actors in civil society and non-governmental
organizations;
79. Decides to establish the position of Ombudsman at the level of Assistant
Secretary-General in the Office of the Secretary-General, to be supported by a legal officer
at the P-4 level, in place of the D-2 and the P-4 posts originally proposed under
section 27A, Office of the Under-Secretary-General for Management, and requests the
Secretary-General to submit a report on the adequate level of the post in the future;

9

A/RES/56/253

Section 2
General Assembly affairs and conference services
80. Notes with concern that productivity standards for interpreters have not been
reviewed since 1974 and that workload standards and processes for translation have not
changed substantially, as well as the complaints about the quality of the interpretation and
translation;
81. Requests the Secretary-General to ensure that conference services are managed
in an integrated manner throughout all duty stations in the Organization;
82. Emphasizes that all duty stations shall be given equal treatment in respect of
conference services and, in this regard, requests the Secretary-General to provide adequate
resources for the effective and efficient discharge of their mandates;
83. Requests the Secretary-General to submit to the General Assembly at its fiftysixth session, or no later than its fifty-seventh session, through the relevant
intergovernmental and expert bodies, specific proposals for the conversion of some of the
temporary assistant posts requested in section 2 into established posts wherever that would
measurably lead to higher efficiency and better quality of services;
84. Also requests the Secretary-General to submit a report to the General Assembly
at its fifty-seventh session on working methods, functions and productivity standards, and
on the quality and quantity of those functions of the Department of General Assembly
Affairs and Conference Services, and on the backstopping functions within the Secretariat,
bearing in mind the need to make proposals for the efficient use of resources and to
consider the best way to fulfil its mandates;
85. Notes the information contained in paragraph I.76 of the report of the Advisory
Committee5 that the billing arrangement used by the United Nations Office at Nairobi for
conference services was working fairly well, and requests the Secretary-General to take
further measures to address instances of irregular cash flow;
86. Requests the Secretary-General to include in the budget performance reports
comprehensive information (in tabular form) on the use of temporary assistance in the
United Nations language services at duty stations under the responsibility of the
Department of General Assembly Affairs and Conference Services, with the breakdown for
languages, number of staff (local and non-local), number of workdays and expenditures
(on local and non-local staff);
87. Decides to reduce the allocation of resources proposed for travel costs under
subprogramme 2 in New York by 20,000 dollars;
Part II
Political affairs
Section 3
Political affairs
88. Notes with concern the potential for duplication of some activities under
subprogramme 4 with the Department of Public Information;
89. Decides to reduce the allocation of resources proposed for travel of
representatives under policy-making organs by 10,000 dollars;

10

A/RES/56/253

Section 4
Disarmament
90. Decides to establish two new posts in the Professional category (1 P-5 and
1 P-4) and one new General Service (Other level) post;
Part III
International justice and law
Section 7
International Court of Justice
91.

Recalls its resolution 55/257 of 14 June 2001;

92. Requests the Secretary-General to invite the International Court of Justice to
review its management functions, with a view to introducing a system of results-based
budgeting, modernizing work-flow processes and enhancing the use of information
technology for, inter alia, remote translation and the introduction of a performance
appraisal system for staff;
Section 8
Legal affairs
93. Requests the Secretary-General to pursue increased timeliness and availability
of international law codification documents and legal instruments in all six official
languages of the United Nations;
Part IV
International cooperation for development
Section 9
Economic and social affairs
94. Requests the Secretary-General to consider, in consultation with relevant
intergovernmental bodies, with respect to the delivery of advisory services to Member
States, avoiding duplication and achieving optimum and effective use of resources, and to
report thereon to the relevant intergovernmental bodies at the fifty-seventh session of the
General Assembly;
95. Decides to establish seven new P-2 posts as recommended by the Advisory
Committee as well as two further P-2 posts as submitted in the proposed programme
budget;
Section 10
Africa: New Agenda for Development
96. Reaffirms once again the decision contained in paragraph 95 of its resolution
54/249 to assign priority to the development of Africa, and reiterates its previous request to
the Secretary-General to continue his efforts to mobilize additional resources for the
implementation of the programme of action contained in the United Nations New Agenda
for the Development of Africa in the 1990s;
97. Notes with appreciation African-led and African-owned development plans,
such as the New Partnership for Africa’s Development;

11

A/RES/56/253

Section 11A
Trade and development
98. Emphasizes that management restructuring should produce clearly defined
gains in productivity and/or economies;
Section 12
Environment
99. Notes that the activities undertaken by the United Nations Environment
Programme continue to depend heavily on extrabudgetary resources for their
implementation, requests the Secretary-General to make every effort to ensure stability and
predictability in funding the activities of the United Nations Environment Programme, and,
in this regard, reiterates paragraph 110 of its resolution 54/249;
Section 13
Human settlements
100. Notes that the activities undertaken by the United Nations Centre for Human
Settlements (Habitat) continue to depend heavily on extrabudgetary resources for their
implementation, requests the Secretary-General to make every effort to ensure stability and
predictability in funding the activities of the Centre, and, in this regard, reiterates
paragraph 114 of its resolution 54/249;
101. Emphasizes the need for the Centre to be provided with adequate human and
financial resources to enable it to implement effectively the Declaration on Cities and
Other Human Settlements in the New Millennium,7 adopted by the General Assembly at its
twenty-fifth special session;
102. Reiterates its request to the Secretary-General contained in paragraph 111 of its
resolution 54/249, in accordance with paragraph 229 of the Habitat Agenda8 and in
consultation with the Commission on Human Settlements, to continue to ensure more
effective functioning of the Centre by, inter alia, providing sufficient human and financial
resources within the regular budget of the United Nations;
Section 14
Crime prevention and criminal justice
103. Requests the Secretary-General to make proposals to strengthen the Terrorism
Prevention Branch at the United Nations Office at Vienna to enable it to carry out its
mandate as approved by the General Assembly, and to report thereon to the General
Assembly for its consideration;
Section 15
International drug control
104. Notes with deep concern the reports of serious management irregularities in the
United Nations drug-control activities, as documented in recent reports of the Board of
Auditors and the Office of Internal Oversight Services;
105. Requests the Secretary-General to take all necessary actions to correct
immediately the management problems;
_______________
7

Resolution S-25/2, annex.
Report of the United Nations Conference on Human Settlements (Habitat II), Istanbul, 3–14 June 1996
(United Nations Publication, Sales No. E.97.IV.6), chap. I, resolution 1, annex II.
8

12

A/RES/56/253

Part V
Regional cooperation for development
Section 16
Economic and social development in Africa
106. Notes with concern the high vacancy rate in the Economic Commission for
Africa, and in this regard reiterates paragraph 50 of its resolution 54/249;
107. Regrets that the request contained in paragraph 123 of its resolution 54/249 to
achieve a vacancy rate of no more than 5 per cent within the biennium 2000–2001 was not
met and, in this regard, requests the Secretary-General to take immediate steps to decrease
substantially the persistently high vacancy rate which negatively affects programme
delivery in the Commission;
108. Recalls paragraph 123 of its resolution 54/249, in which it requested the
Secretary-General to take the necessary measures, as a matter of priority, to achieve a
vacancy rate of no more than 5 per cent;
109. Expresses its deep concern that the Economic Commission for Africa is still
suffering from a significantly high vacancy rate at the Professional level, and requests the
Secretary-General to ensure that all posts budgeted for the biennium 2002–2003 are filled;
110. Reiterates its request to the Secretary-General to redeploy to the subregional
development centres any savings realized during the biennium as a result of reform
measures and efficiency gains from within the Economic Commission for Africa;
111. Also reiterates its request to the Secretary-General to provide the African
Institute for the Prevention of Crime and the Treatment of Offenders with the core
Professional staff required to enable it to function effectively towards the fulfilment of its
mandates;
112. Expresses concern about the inadequate connectivity between the headquarters
of the Economic Commission for Africa and the five subregional development centres and
between the Commission and the rest of the United Nations system, and, in this regard,
decides to exempt the Commission from the proposed reductions in information
technology referred to in paragraph 70 (g) of the present resolution;
113. Emphasizes the need to improve the capacity of the Economic Commission for
Africa to disseminate information effectively through the use of electronic methods, and,
in this regard, shares the opinion of the Advisory Committee contained in paragraph V.20
of its report5 that the programme of modernization of operations of the Commission is
important and that the provision of resources therefor should not be dependent upon the
possibility of absorption within the Commission’s appropriations, and requests the
Secretary-General to report in the context of the budget performance report on the
additional expenditure that might be incurred;
114. Requests the Secretary-General to report on progress in implementing new
communications technologies and resulting efficiencies in the context of the proposed
programme budget for the biennium 2004–2005;
115. Recognizes that the Economic Commission for Africa will have a major role to
play in the implementation of the new African initiatives, such as the New Partnership for
Africa’s Development;

13

A/RES/56/253

Section 17
Economic and social development in Asia and the Pacific
116. Requests the Secretary-General to pursue his efforts to maximize the use of the
Conference Centre, including its external use, and to report thereon to the General
Assembly at its fifty-seventh session;
Section 18
Economic development in Europe
117. Notes with concern the lack of detail in the proposed programme budget of unit
costs for the replacement or acquisition of information technology-related equipment;
118. Notes the increase in proposed resources for external support for strengthening
the information technology platform;
Section 19
Economic and social development in Latin America and the Caribbean
119. Commends the Economic Commission for Latin America and the Caribbean
for the implementation of the reform programme for the Commission;
120. Expresses its deep concern at the decreasing trend in extrabudgetary resources
and at its impact on the level of technical cooperation activities;
121. Requests the Secretary-General to submit to the General Assembly at its fiftyseventh session concrete proposals to address the impact of declining extrabudgetary
resources for the Economic Commission for Latin America and the Caribbean;
122. Also requests the Secretary-General to ensure that all the necessary means are
provided for the full implementation of all subprogrammes and their respective activities;
123. Notes with concern that consultants and experts are also used for verifying the
views of the Secretariat;
Section 20
Economic and social development in Western Asia
124. Requests the Secretary-General to ensure fully the issuance of all documents
and publications of the Economic and Social Commission for Western Asia in Arabic,
which is most relevant to the requirements of the Member States of the region, as well as
in the other working languages of the Commission, to meet the requirements of readers
outside the region, as appropriate, and to report thereon to the General Assembly by its
fifty-seventh session;
Part VI
Human rights and humanitarian affairs
Section 22
Human rights
125. Notes with concern that section 22 of the proposed programme budget for the
biennium 2002–2003 was prepared prior to the adoption of the medium-term plan by the
General Assembly and that it was not reformulated in its submission in accordance with
the medium-term plan approved by the Assembly;
126. Notes that resources proposed for activities related to the right to development,
research and analysis are not clearly differentiated in subprogramme 1, and requests the
Secretary-General to submit concrete proposals to address this issue in the context of the
14

A/RES/56/253

revisions of the medium-term plan to be considered by the Committee for Programme and
Coordination;
127. Notes also that there are twenty-two subcommissions, committees and other
groups involved in the programme of work of human rights, and requests the SecretaryGeneral to make proposals through the relevant intergovernmental bodies with a view to
rationalizing and streamlining the human rights machinery, as well as the establishment of
rapporteurs and the number of meetings, reports and publications, in order to avoid
duplication and promote efficiency and effectiveness, and to report thereon in the context
of the next programme budget;
128. Requests the Secretary-General to entrust to the Office of Internal Oversight
Services a comprehensive management review of the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Human Rights, including its working methods and functions, bearing in
mind the need to make proposals for the efficient and effective use of resources as well as
its organizational structure, and to report to the General Assembly at its fifty-seventh
session on the actions taken thereon;
129. Notes that the bulk of extrabudgetary funds are tied to specific operations and
are utilized on the basis of donor wishes, and requests the Secretary-General to ensure that
the practice of tied funds does not affect the policies of the Office of the United Nations
High Commissioner for Human Rights or the Commission on Human Rights and its
subsidiary bodies as impartial international instruments for the advancement of human
rights;
130. Decides to establish one new P-3 post and one new General Service (Other
level) post for the functions in the Office;
131. Decides also to reduce the proposed allocation of resources for furniture and
equipment under programme support by 40,200 dollars;
132. Requests the Secretary-General to ensure that funding for the Centre for
Human Rights and Democracy in Central Africa will be formally made an integral part of
the regular budget for human rights in future bienniums;
Section 23
Protection of and assistance to refugees
133. Deeply regrets that some amounts previously funded under posts, other staff
costs, general operating expenses and supplies and materials have been presented in a less
transparent manner under the provision of grants and contributions;
134. Requests the Secretary-General to reinstate resource requirements by object of
expenditure with provisions other than grants and contributions, and to report thereon to
the General Assembly at its fifty-sixth session;
135. Also requests the Secretary-General to review the funding of the Office of the
United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees from the regular budget in a transparent
manner;
136. Further requests the Secretary-General to present resource requirements by
object of expenditure with provisions other than grants and contributions in the proposed
programme budget for the biennium 2004–2005;

15

A/RES/56/253

Section 24
Palestine refugees
137. Welcomes the efforts of a number of donors during the past year to the
programme;
138. Notes with concern the direct impact of the decrease in extrabudgetary
resources on the quality of services provided by the United Nations Relief and Works
Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East;
139. Decides to restore to the regular budget five additional international posts (one
P-5 and four P-4) currently financed from the Agency’s extrabudgetary resources, in line
with General Assembly resolution 3331 B (XXIX) of 17 December 1974;
Section 25
Humanitarian assistance
140. Decides to establish three P-4 posts for the functions of the Office for the
Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs;
Part VII
Public information
Section 26
Public information
141. Decides to establish a P-3 post in the News and Media Division for a
Portuguese-language radio producer;
142. Also decides to establish a P-3 post at the United Nations Information Centre at
Dar es Salaam;
143. Requests the Secretary-General to make available web site language assistance
in the Information Technology Section of the Department of Public Information, in Arabic,
Chinese, Russian and Spanish, and to make proposals as he deems appropriate so that all
official languages are equally serviced;
144. Emphasizes the need for the United Nations to have a coordinated public
information strategy in order to bring the activities of different parts of the Secretariat
together in an integrated way;
145. Requests the Secretary-General to submit to the General Assembly at its fiftysixth session concrete proposals on strengthening the Department of Public Information
within the existing capacity in order to support and enhance the United Nations web site in
all the official languages of the Organization;
146. Emphasizes that the public information resources of the Organization must be
targeted properly to ensure that the United Nations delivers a consistent message, through
a variety of outlets, to the largest possible worldwide audience;
147. Recognizes the critical role of the Official Document System as a primary tool
for accessing all forms of United Nations documentation and the United Nations web site
as the public gateway to the activities of the Organization;
148. Requests the Secretary-General to improve the justification provided for the
resources requested for the United Nations information centres in the context of the next
proposed programme budget;

16

A/RES/56/253

149. Also requests the Secretary-General to report to the General Assembly at its
fifty-seventh session on the financial implications of redressing the imbalance among the
six official languages of the United Nations on the United Nations web site;
150. Further requests the Secretary-General to conduct a comprehensive review of
the management and operations of the Department of Public Information, taking into
account the medium-term plan, and to report thereon to the General Assembly at its fiftyseventh session, addressing, among other things:
(a)

Ways to carry out these activities in the most effective and efficient manner;

(b) Focusing of the activities of the Department to reflect better the substantive
priorities and relevant mandates of the Organization;
(c) The need for greater coordination of public information activities among
departments of the Secretariat to avoid duplication of efforts and to strengthen
complementarity, where appropriate;
(d) Assessment of the impact of United Nations information centres, taking into
account their mandates;
(e) The option and benefit of funding the United Nations information centres on a
cost-shared basis with other United Nations entities that benefit from the services of the
information centres in each location;
151. Notes with concern the fact that the post of the Director of the Office of the
United Nations Information Centre for Central Africa is still vacant despite several appeals
by Member States of the subregion to ensure that a person is appointed to fill it;
152. Decides to resume publication of the United Nations Chronicle in all official
languages, as proposed by the Secretary-General, and allocates 700,000 dollars for this
purpose, and welcomes the intention of using a co-publishing mechanism in publishing the
Chronicle;
Part VIII
Common support services
Section 27
Management and central support services
153. Requests the Secretary-General to conduct an evaluation through the Office of
Internal Oversight Services of the implementation of all provisions of resolutions 55/231
on results-based budgeting and 55/258 of 14 June 2001 on human resources management
by the Department of Management, including the Office of the Under-Secretary-General
for Management, and to report thereon to the General Assembly;
Section 27A
Office of the Under-Secretary-General for Management
154. Expresses concern about the large number of posts and amount of resources
that are devoted to management activities and programme support in the Department of
Management and all the other departments;

17

A/RES/56/253

155. Stresses the need for the Integrated Management Information System to be
enabled to manage and execute its administrative tasks, as foreseen when it was first
proposed to the General Assembly;9
156. Requests the Secretary-General, with the assistance of the Office of Internal
Oversight Services, to review administrative tasks, procedures and policies with a view to
eliminating duplication, and unnecessary and complex bureaucratic procedures and
practices within all departments and entities of the Secretariat, and to ensure that the
Organization is managed in an integrated manner in order to eliminate duplication;
157. Also requests the Secretary-General to ensure that the necessary equipment is
available for the work of the Main Committees of the General Assembly so as to make the
Secretariat more efficient, effective and modern;
Section 27D
Office of Central Support Services
158. Decides to reduce general operating expenditures as explained in
paragraph A.27D.16 of the proposed programme budget10 by 100,000 dollars and to
eliminate the maintenance and support of Dictaphones in the Organization, as it is
incompatible with the goals of an “e-Organization”;
159. Also decides not to approve the increase of 2,116,800 dollars for furniture and
equipment in the Information Technology Services Division;
160. Invites the Secretary-General to continue his efforts to expand free access to
the Official Document System, taking into account the technical capacity of the Office on
the Internet in the six official languages of the United Nations, without affecting the
quality of the service provided;
Section 27G
Administration, Nairobi
161. Welcomes the commitment of the Secretary-General to increase gradually the
regular budget component of the United Nations Office at Nairobi, with a view to easing
the administrative costs levied on the substantive programmes of the United Nations
Environment Programme and the United Nations Centre for Human Settlements (Habitat),
and requests the Secretary-General to report to the General Assembly at its fifty-seventh
session on his plan for the upcoming bienniums;
162. Also welcomes the establishment of a permanent interpretation service at the
United Nations Office at Nairobi, and notes with satisfaction that the conference services
facility at the United Nations Office at Nairobi is becoming organizationally, functionally
and in terms of the budget an integral part of the Department of General Assembly Affairs
and Conference Services and that the proposed programme budget for the biennium 2002–
2003 for the Division of Conference Services is programmed in the context of section 2;
163. Reaffirms paragraph 178 of its resolution 54/249, in which it requested the
Secretary-General to bring the financial arrangements of the United Nations Office at
Nairobi into line with those of similar United Nations administrative offices;

_______________
9

See A/C.5/43/24, para. 54.

10

See A/56/6 (Sect. 27D). For the final text, see Official Records of the General Assembly, Fifty-sixth
Session, Supplement No 6.

18

A/RES/56/253

164. Notes the recommendation of the Advisory Committee on the need to
determine more accurately the level of services that the United Nations Office at Nairobi is
required to provide to the organizations at Nairobi and the rates for reimbursing the cost of
those services, and requests the Secretary-General to expedite the completion of the
agreements between the United Nations Environment Programme, the United Nations
Centre for Human Settlements (Habitat) and the United Nations Office at Nairobi to this
effect;
Part X
Jointly financed administrative activities and special expenses
Section 29
Jointly financed administrative activities
165. Stresses the need to ensure that the independence of the Joint Inspection Unit,
as the only system-wide external oversight body, is not compromised through the
budgetary process;
166. Reiterates its decision 54/454 of 23 December 1999;
167. Reaffirms the statute of the Unit, in particular article 20, paragraph 1;
Income section 2
General income
168. Requests the Secretary-General to continue with the current arrangement
regarding rental charges for the Office of the Group of 77 and China located at United
Nations Headquarters.
92nd plenary meeting
24 December 2001
Annex I
Changes to the programme narratives of the proposed programme budget for the
biennium 2002–20031 as reflected in the conclusions and recommendations of the
Committee for Programme and Coordination in its report on the work of its fortyfirst session,3 and additional modifications
Section 2
General Assembly affairs and conference services
1.
In paragraph 2.7, at the end of the last sentence, replace “on an as-available basis
from within the existing capacity of the Department” with “in accordance with paragraph 4
of section I of General Assembly resolution 55/222 of 23 December 2000.”
2.
In paragraph 2.8, at the end of the fourth sentence, insert “, without prejudice to the
mandates of the General Assembly.”
3.
In paragraph 2.19 (d), at the end of the subparagraph, replace “within available
resources” with “, in accordance with the rules of procedure of the General Assembly and
the relevant United Nations resolutions on decolonization”.
4.
In paragraph 2.46 (a), after “Translation and writing of summary records.” add
“Translation and publishing of the Repertoire of Practice of the Security Council in the six
official languages;”

19

A/RES/56/253

5.
In paragraph 2.48, at the end of the fourth sentence, insert “, in accordance with
General Assembly resolutions 54/248 and 55/222.”
Section 3
Political affairs
6.
In paragraph 3.3, after “while fully respecting the sovereignty, territorial integrity
and political independence of Member States”, in accordance with paragraph 1.3 of the
medium-term plan for 2002–2005,6 add the following:
“and the principles of non-intervention in matters that are essentially within the
domestic jurisdiction of any State and of consent.”
7.

In table 3.12:

(a) At the end of the text under Expected accomplishments, add “, in accordance
with the relevant resolutions and decisions of the General Assembly and the Security
Council.”
(b) Under Indicators of achievement, replace the existing text of subparagraph (i)
with “Provision of electoral assistance to Member States in response to their request.”
8.

In paragraph 3.26:
(a)

Replace “a fair and free” with “an”

(b) At the end of the paragraph add “, in accordance with relevant resolutions and
decisions.”
9.

In paragraph 3.27:

(a) In subparagraph (a) (i) a., delete “the principle of periodic and genuine”, and
add at the end “, in accordance with relevant resolutions and decisions.”
(b) In subparagraph (d) (ii), replace “authorities at the regional, national or local
level” with “national electoral institutions”
10. In paragraph 3.38, after the first sentence, in accordance with paragraph 1.26 of the
medium-term plan, add the following sentence:
“Assistance will be provided to the Committee in promoting a comprehensive, just
and lasting settlement of the question of Palestine in accordance with all relevant
United Nations resolutions, as well as the full and effective implementation of the
Israeli-Palestinian peace agreements.”
Section 4
Disarmament
11.

Replace paragraph 4.1, with the following:
“General and complete disarmament under strict and effective international
control remains the ultimate goal of all efforts exerted in the field of disarmament.
The main responsibilities for disarmament lie with Member States, and the United
Nations, in accordance with its Charter, has a central role and primary responsibility
in supporting Member States in this sphere. The Department for Disarmament
Affairs, headed by an Under-Secretary-General, is responsible for the implementation
of the programme.”

12.

20

Replace paragraph 4.2 with the following:

A/RES/56/253

“The mandate for the programme derives from the priorities established in
General Assembly resolutions and decisions in the field of disarmament, including
the Final Document of the Tenth Special Session of the General Assembly devoted to
disarmament (resolution S-10/2). While weapons of mass destruction, in particular
nuclear weapons, continue to be the primary concern, the Organization would also
continue its work in the field of conventional disarmament.”
13. In paragraph 4.4, in the first sentence, replace the phrase “as well as to expert groups
on disarmament studies” with “as well as review conferences, other meetings of States
parties to multilateral agreements on disarmament and related matters and expert groups
assisting the Secretary-General in undertaking disarmament studies.”
14.

After paragraph 4.4, insert a new paragraph 4.5 to read as follows:
“Training and advisory services will continue to be provided through the
United Nations disarmament fellowships, training and advisory services programme
and the United Nations Institute for Disarmament Research for Member States, in
particular developing countries, to enhance their expertise with a view to
participating more effectively in international deliberating and negotiating forums.
The Department will also assist Member States in increasing understanding among
them of the relationship between disarmament and development.

and renumber the subsequent paragraphs.
15.

In former paragraph 4.6, delete “and landmine issues.”

16.

In former paragraph 4.14:

(a) In the second sentence, after “international disarmament agenda”, delete “in
order to make them conform to the new international political and security environment”
(b)

Replace the third and fourth sentences with the following:

“The Conference on Disarmament will be finalizing its work programme, which will
include resuming negotiations on a number of disarmament issues and continuing the
promotion of global disarmament, in accordance with its agenda.”
17.

In table 4.7:
(a)

Under Indicators of achievement:

(i) In paragraph (a), after “effectiveness of”, add “the services provided by the
Secretariat to facilitate”
(ii)

Replace paragraph (c) with the following:
“An increase in the number of applicants for the United Nations
disarmament fellowship, training and advisory services programme, wider
representation of Member States in the programme and greater support for the
disarmament fellowship programme from Member States.”

18.

In table 4.9:
(a)

Under Expected accomplishments:

(i) In paragraph (a), replace the text after “disarmament issues” with the
following: “and on matters related to weapons of mass destruction, in particular
nuclear weapons, by Member States,”
(ii) In paragraph (b), replace “including the issue of missiles” with “on specific
issues related to weapons of mass destruction, in particular nuclear weapons.”

21

A/RES/56/253

(b)

Under Indicators of achievement, subparagraph (a) (i) should read:

“(a) (i) A record of appreciation for assistance provided, including substantive
and organizational support, for the implementation of agreements in the field of
weapons of mass destruction, in particular nuclear weapons. This would include
sessions of the Preparatory Committee for the 2005 Review Conference and ad hoc
meetings;”
19.

In former paragraph 4.25:

(a) In subparagraph (a) (iv), delete “and the panel of governmental experts on
missiles (2 sessions, 40 meetings, 2000)”
(b) In subparagraph (a) (v), after “2 sessions”, add “, 40 meetings, 2002” within
the parentheses
(c) In all instances where the phrase “weapons of mass destruction” appears, if it
has not already been done, add “, in particular nuclear weapons”
Section 5
Peacekeeping operations
20.

In paragraph 5.3:

(a) Replace the first sentence with the entire text of paragraph 3.1 of the mediumterm plan for the period 2002–2005, as follows:
“The overall purpose of the programme is the maintenance of peace and
security through the deployment of peacekeeping operations in accordance with the
principles and provisions of the Charter of the United Nations. The legislative
authority for the programme derives from the principles and purposes of the Charter
of the United Nations. The mandates of the programme are provided in resolutions of
the Security Council and General Assembly resolutions on the comprehensive review
of the whole question of peacekeeping operations in all their aspects on the
administrative and budgetary aspects of the financing of United Nations
peacekeeping operations and on assistance in mine clearance. In respect of
peacekeeping operations, legislative authority derives from decisions and resolutions
of the Security Council related to particular operations.”
(b) In the seventh sentence, replace “on a broad geographic basis” with “and on as
wide a geographical basis as possible”
(c)

After the seventh sentence, add the following sentence:

“However, this will not affect the troop-contributing countries in taking their
sovereign decisions on the composition of their units deployed to peacekeeping
operations within the mission’s specific guidelines, as agreed upon by troopcontributing countries.”
21. In paragraph 5.8, at the end of the penultimate sentence, replace “peace operations”
with “peacekeeping operations.”
22. In paragraph 5.24, after “Security Council mandates”, delete “and that other parties
… their role”
23. In paragraph 5.25 (c), after “and provision of support to meetings with Member
States,” replace the remainder of the subparagraph with the following:
“by other Organizations within the United Nations system, as well as with other
regional organizations and actors, in accordance with legislative mandates.”
22

A/RES/56/253

24. In table 5.11, under Indicators of achievement in paragraph (b), add two additional
indicators, as follows:
“(i)

Reduction in the duration of the liquidation process;

“(ii) Timeliness of the processing and settling of claims of troop-contributing
countries by the Claims and Information Management Section of the Finance
Management and Support Service.”
25. In paragraph 5.32, after “required military and civilian police components”, add “that
meet the relevant prerequisites of the peacekeeping missions”, and delete the words “to
peacekeeping missions”
26. In paragraph 5.33, in subparagraphs (b), (c) and (d), replace “peace operations” with
“peacekeeping operation(s)”
Section 6
Peaceful uses of outer space
27.

In table 6.3:
(a)

Under Expected accomplishments, paragraph (c) should read:

“(c) Increased access and use of space technologies by developing countries
in their efforts to promote economic, social and cultural development.”
(b)

Under Indicators of achievement:

(i)

Reletter paragraph (c) as (c) (i), which should read:
“(c) (i) An increase in the number of projects and activities carried
out by developing countries to promote economic, social and cultural
development through bilateral and multilateral cooperation, with access to and
use of space technologies.”

(ii)

Insert the following text as paragraph (c) (ii):
“(c) (ii) An increase in and further enhancement of training
opportunities for developing countries, including fellowships provided to
individuals from developing countries to participate in workshops, expert
meetings and training courses on various topics of space science and
technology and its application.”

Section 8
Legal affairs
28.

In table 8.8:
(a)

Replace the entire text under Expected accomplishments with the following:

“Provision of quality legal advice to the principal and subsidiary organs of the
United Nations, leading to an increased understanding of international law, including
the United Nations legal regime.”
(b)

Replace the entire text under Indicators of achievement with the following:
“(a) Quality, timeliness and accuracy of advice.
“(b) Number of instruments finalized.

“(c) Number and impact of opinions rendered on violations of international
legal instruments for the conduct of United Nations operations.”
23

A/RES/56/253

29.

In table 8.10:
(a)

Replace the entire text under Expected accomplishments with the following:

“(a) Greater protection of the Organization’s legal rights and minimization of
its legal liabilities, through the provision of quality legal advice to the principal and
subsidiary organs of the United Nations, leading to an increased understanding of the
Organization’s legal rights and obligations.
“(b) Provision of legal advice and support aimed at enabling offices,
departments and subsidiary organs to maximize their compliance with regulations,
rules and administrative issuances consistent with the Organization’s policies and
purposes.”
(b)

Replace the entire text under Indicators of achievement with the following:
“(a) Quality, accuracy and timeliness of legal advice and support.

“(b) Number and impact of legal opinions and other legal advice such that the
United Nations offices are in a better position to interpret and apply provisions of the
United Nations legal regime to specific cases and to comply with such provisions.”
30.

In table 8.12:
Under Indicators of achievement, replace paragraphs (a) and (b) with the
following:
“(a) Increase in the number of new legal instruments emanating from the
process of codification, adherence by States to existing instruments; and satisfaction
expressed by Member States with the quality, volume and timeliness of
documentation prepared by the Codification Division;
“(b) The quality of publications and seminars dealing with issues of
international law and an increase in the number of visitors to the Division’s web
site.”

31.

In table 8.14:
(a)

Replace the entire text under Expected accomplishments with the following:

“(a) Greater respect for and acceptance of the United Nations Convention on
the Law of the Sea and the related Agreements and a higher degree of uniformity and
consistency in their application.
“(b) Increased opportunities for States to derive benefits from the oceans and
seas in conformity with the United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea.”
(b)

Replace the entire text under Indicators of achievement with the following:

“(a) An increase in the number of legal instruments developed by States and
international organizations in the field of the law of the sea and ocean affairs.
“(b) The degree of satisfaction on the part of Member States, reflected in:
“(i) Acknowledgement by Member States that the products and services
provided through the subprogramme assisted their maritime programmes;
“(ii) Increased participation of Member States in bodies and processes relating
to oceans and the law of the sea.”

24

A/RES/56/253

32.

In table 8.16:
(a)

Replace the entire text under Expected accomplishments with:
“(a) Modernization of trade practices.

“(b) Reduction of legal uncertainties and obstacles posed by inadequate and
disparate laws.
“(c) More efficient trade negotiations.
“(d) Simplification of the administration of transaction and lower transaction
costs.
“(e) Reduction of disputes in international trade.”
(b)

Replace the entire text under Indicators of achievement with the following:

“(a) A higher number of transactions or a higher volume of international trade
carried out under the regime of UNCITRAL legislative and non-legislative texts.
“(b) An increase in the number of legislative decisions based on UNCITRAL
texts.
“(c) An increase in the number of merchants using or relying on harmonized
international trade law in conducting trade.”
33.

In table 8.18:
(a)

Replace the entire text under Expected accomplishments with the following:

“(a) Improved access to international treaties deposited with the SecretaryGeneral, including their status, and to treaties registered with the Secretariat.
“(b) Respect for the international treaty framework and the advancement of
the international rule of law.”
(b)

Replace the entire text under Indicators of achievement with the following:

“(a) Timely processing, registration and publication of international treaties
deposited with the Secretary-General in accordance with Article 102 of the Charter,
and of actions relating to treaties deposited with the Secretary-General, including the
United Nations Treaty Series, multilateral treaties deposited with the SecretaryGeneral, the monthly Statement of Treaties and International Agreements and the
United Nations Treaty Series Cumulative Index; and the timely availability of such
information through electronic services.
“(b) Increased application of information obtained through services provided
under this subprogramme, including electronic services.
“(c) Greater satisfaction of users with the services provided by the Treaty
Section, including electronic services.”
Section 9
Economic and social affairs
34.

In table 9.9:

(a)
follows:

Under Expected accomplishments, add new paragraphs (e), (f) and (g) as

“(e) Establishment of an expanded framework for information exchange and
communication with Governments and civil society.
25

A/RES/56/253

“(f) Increased efficiency and effectiveness of the Inter-Agency Committee on
Women and Gender Equality.
“(g) An increased number of ratifications of the Convention on the
Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination against Women and the Optional
Protocol thereto, increased compliance by States parties with reporting obligations
under the Convention and improved coordination between the Division for the
Advancement of Women and the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner
for Human Rights in contributing to the development and strengthening of human
rights mechanisms to ensure the enjoyment by women of their human rights.”
(b)

Under Indicators of achievement, add new paragraphs (e) and (f) as follows:

“(e) The number of ratifications of the Convention and the Optional Protocol
thereto, the number of States parties submitting their reports to the Committee on the
Elimination of Discrimination against Women on time and the number of reports
examined by the Committee.
“(f) The development of tools and methodologies and the promotion of good
practices with respect to system-wide gender mainstreaming by the Inter-Agency
Committee on Women and Gender Equality of the United Nations System Chief
Executive Board for Coordination, including enhancement of the capabilities of the
regional economic commissions to work as focal points for inter-agency coordination
on gender issues within the United Nations system.”
35.

In paragraph 9.62 (a) (iii) b.:

After “Reports on:” add: “existing studies, information and documentation on abuse
against older persons;”
36.

In table 9.13:

(a) Under Expected accomplishments, reletter paragraph (c) as (c) (i) and insert a
new subparagraph (c) (ii), reading as follows:
“(ii) Improved coordination of the implementation of the World Solar
Programme.”
(b) Under Indicators of achievement, paragraph (c), after the phrase “sustainable
development”, insert the phrase “, including the World Solar Programme”
37. In paragraph 9.69 (a) (vi), in the last sentence, after the word, “development”, add “,
including solar energy”
38. In table 9.21, under Expected accomplishments, replace paragraph (e) with the
following text:
“Improved access by Governments and international bodies to analytical tools,
options and adequate methodologies regarding the linkages between political and
economic issues and policies, such as economic sanctions, imposition of coercive
economic measures, the relationship between disarmament and development and
relevant aspects of post-conflict rehabilitation and reconstruction.”

26

A/RES/56/253

Section 10
Africa: New Agenda for Development
39.

In table 10.4:
(a)

Under Expected accomplishments, replace paragraph (b) with the following:

“(b) Greater awareness and understanding of African development issues,
including those related to post-conflict situations.”
(b)

Under Indicators of achievement:

(i)

In paragraph (b), after “The contribution” add “and impact”

(ii)

After paragraph (d), add the following five paragraphs:
“(e) An assessment of the quality and timeliness of reports submitted to
intergovernmental policy-making and review bodies to facilitate deliberations
on Africa.

“(f) The number and usefulness of briefing sessions on issues concerning
African development.
“(g) The number and usefulness of South-South forums sponsored or cosponsored.
“(h) The number of visits to the Africa web page.
“(i) The use of databases on the activities of non-governmental organizations
and other non-governmental partners contributing to African development.”
40.

In table 10.6:
(a)

Under Expected accomplishments, add paragraphs (d) and (e) as follows:

“(d) Improved reporting on and dissemination of experiences in the
implementation of programmes and initiatives on Africa.
“(e) Strengthened national economic management capacity as an integral
component of peace-building and post-conflict resolution.”
(b)

Under Indicators of achievement:

(i) Add the following paragraph and reletter the subsequent paragraphs
accordingly:
“(a) Expression of satisfaction over the support provided to Member
States in implementing the programme of action.”
(ii)

In new paragraphs (c) and (d), add “and impact” after “The number”

(iii) Add paragraphs (e) and (f) after paragraph (d) as follows:
“(e) The number and impact of forums and expert meetings organized
to access and monitor the rate of implementation of the action programme.
“(f) The number and impact of training activities organized and
development personnel benefiting from them.”

27

A/RES/56/253

41.

In table 10.8, replace the two indicators of achievement with the following:
“(a) Assessment by users of the quality and volume of information
disseminated regionally and internationally through the print and electronic media
outlets.
“(b) The timely and regular issuance of Africa Recovery.
“(c) The number and quality of informational materials prepared and media
events organized in order to maintain the international spotlight on Africa.”

Section 11A
Trade and development
42.

In paragraph 11A.2, after the last sentence, insert the following sentence:
“It is foreseen that the Trade and Development Board will mainstream the
implementation of the Programme of Action for the Least Developed Countries for
the Decade 2001–2010 within the work programme of UNCTAD, as well as in the
UNCTAD intergovernmental process. It is also foreseen that similar efforts will be
undertaken by the governing bodies of all United Nations system organizations, as
appropriate.”

Section 12
Environment
43.

In paragraph 12.21:

(a) In the second sentence, replace “collection, analysis and interpretation of data”
with the words “collection and analysis of data”
(b) In the third sentence, after “reporting arrangements”, add “invited it to submit
its programme of work to the Assembly”
44. In paragraph 12.22, at the end of the last sentence, add “in consultation with
scientists and experts from interested Member States.”
45.

In table 12.10:
(a)

Insert a new expected accomplishment (e) as follows:

“(e) The implementation of a new strategic environmental law programme for
the first decade of the millennium.”
(b)

Insert a new indicator of achievement (e) as follows:

“(e) The adoption by the Governing Council of a new strategic environmental
law programme.”
46.

In table 12.14:
(a)

Insert a new expected accomplishment (f) as follows:

“(f) Adherence to the goals of the International Declaration on Cleaner
Production.”
(b)

Insert a new indicator of achievement (f) as follows:

“(f) The number of signatures to the International Declaration on Cleaner
Production.”

28

A/RES/56/253

Section 13
Human settlements
47. In table 13.9, under Expected accomplishments, replace “city authorities” with “local
authorities”
Section 14
Crime prevention and criminal justice
48.

In table 14.5:

(a) Under Expected accomplishments, replace paragraph (b) with paragraph 12.7 (b)
of the medium-term plan for the period 2002–2005, as follows:
“The expansion of global knowledge of and expertise to deal with crime
problems such as those posed by transnational organized crime, trafficking in
persons, economic and financial crime, including money-laundering, corruption,
illicit manufacturing and trafficking in firearms and terrorism in all its forms and
manifestations, as well as to promote fair and efficient criminal justice systems.”
(b)

Under Indicators of achievement:

(i) Replace paragraph (b) with paragraph 12.8 (b) of the medium-term plan, as
modified below:
“Awareness of best practices and information disseminated, research
undertaken and new techniques developed and shared among Member States to
respond to crime problems as well as to promote fair and efficient criminal
justice systems.”
(ii) In subparagraphs (c) (i)and (iii), replace “transnational organized crime,
trafficking in persons, corruption and terrorism in all its forms and manifestations”
with the words “crime problems”
49. In paragraph 14.18 (a), replace “Readiness of Governments to ratify” with “Cooperation
of Member States in ratifying”
50.

In paragraph 14.18 (b), delete “including from sensitive government data sources”

51.

In paragraph 14.19 (a), add a new subparagraph (vi), reading:
“(vi) Ad Hoc Committee for the negotiation of a legal instrument against corruption:
“a. Substantive servicing of meetings. Six sessions of two weeks’ duration
(120 meetings);
“b. Parliamentary documentation. Six reports to the Ad Hoc Committee,
including, inter alia, annotated agendas with the transmission of a draft text,
contributions and proposals by States; six reports on each session of the
Ad Hoc Committee.”

52.

Paragraph 14.19 (a) (v) should read:
“Ad hoc expert groups (RB/XB): Four regional expert group meetings on technical
issues of common regional concern on the ratification and/or implementation of the
Convention against Transnational Organized Crime and its three protocols; one
expert group meeting each on: the criminal misuse of information technologies; best
practices to combat trafficking in human beings and smuggling of migrants by land,
sea and air, with attention given to the gender dimensions; best practices in
combating corruption, with attention given to the gender dimensions; hostage

29

A/RES/56/253

situations and rescue operations; recognizing early warning signals of terrorist
escalation; and legal approaches to combating terrorism;”
53.

Delete paragraph 14.19 (d) (ii).

Section 15
International drug control
54.

In table 15.7:
(a)

Under Expected accomplishments, add new paragraphs (e) and (f), as follows:

“(e) Improved coordination of drug control-related activities throughout the
United Nations system, with UNDCP providing leadership.
“(f) Progress made towards the adoption and implementation of measures to
strengthen national legislation and progress giving effect to the action plan against
the illicit manufacture, trafficking and abuse of amphetamine-type stimulants and
their precursors; measures to eliminate or reduce significantly the illicit manufacture,
marketing and trafficking of other psychotropic substances, including synthetic
drugs, and the diversion of precursors; national legislation and programmes to
counter money-laundering; and measures to promote and strengthen judicial
cooperation.”
(b)

Under Indicators of achievement, add new paragraphs (e) and (f), as follows:

“(e) The completion of needs assessments for multilateral cooperation on
drug control.
“(f) Measures taken to strengthen national legislation and to give effect to the
action plan against the illicit manufacture, trafficking and abuse of amphetaminetype stimulants and their precursors; to eliminate or reduce significantly the illicit
manufacture, marketing and trafficking of other psychotropic substances, including
synthetic drugs, and the diversion of precursors; and national legislation and
programmes to counter money-laundering; and to promote and strengthen judicial
cooperation.”
55. In table 15.10, under Indicators of achievement, delete in paragraph (c) “(conclusion
of agreements and memoranda of understanding)”
56.

In table 15.12:

(a) Under Expected accomplishments, in paragraph (a), between “meeting” and
“goals”, insert “by 2003 the”
(b)

Under Indicators of achievement:

(i)

In paragraph (a), add “by 2003” after “society”

(ii)

Paragraph (e) should read:
“Number of guides on prevention and treatment issues developed during
seminars and workshops and expert group meetings, and actually in use by
Member States, to determine what constitutes effective prevention among
school-based youth, youth at risk and women, and the design of treatment
responses based on needs assessment and evaluation results.”

57. In table 15.14, objective 2, under Expected accomplishments, in paragraph (a), add
“by 2003” between “to meet” and “the goals”

30

A/RES/56/253

58. In paragraph 15.35 (a) (iv), delete “one ad hoc expert group meeting on international
cooperation against drug trafficking at sea; and”
Section 16
Economic and social development in Africa
59.

In paragraph 16A.1, the last sentence of the paragraph should read:
“The main objective of development in Africa is the reduction of poverty, an
objective that was reaffirmed in Copenhagen in 1995 at the World Summit for Social
Development, which set a target of reducing poverty by half by 2015.”

60.

In table 16A.9:

(a) Under Expected accomplishments, add the following: “Increased mobilization
of financial resources for the development of Africa.”
(b)
follows:

Under Indicators of achievement, add new subparagraphs (iii) and (iv) as
“(iii) A substantial increase in financial flows to the countries of the region;
“(iv) The number of countries that have adopted investment and trade
liberalization policies, including the removal of physical and non-physical
barriers.”

61. In table 16A.13, at the beginning of paragraph (b) under Indicators of achievement,
add the words “An increase in”
62.

In table 16A.15:
(a)

Under Expected accomplishments, add the following paragraph (d):
“(d) Increased Internet connectivity of African countries.”

(b)

Under Indicators of achievement:

(i)

At the end of paragraph (b), add the following:
“Number of countries that, with the support of ECA, have improved their
statistical systems, leading to the collection and dissemination of timely and
reliable data.”

(ii)

Add paragraph (d) as follows:
“(d) An increase in the number of African Internet hosts and countries
with direct connections.”

63.

In table 16A.17:
(a)

Under Expected accomplishments, add the following paragraphs (c) and (d):

“(c) Increased, effective and harmonized utilization of transboundary water
resources.
“(d) Substantial implementation of the Framework of Action adopted by the
Conference of African Ministers of Transport and Communications.”
(b)

Under Indicators of achievement, add paragraph (c) as follows:

“(c) An increase in positive results of the implementation of the Framework
for Action for transport and communications.”

31

A/RES/56/253

Section 19
Economic and social development in Latin America and the Caribbean
64. In table 19.7, under Indicators of achievement, in paragraph (a), delete the phrase “in
particular with respect to the ongoing negotiations on a Free Trade Area of the Americas”
65. In table 19.19, under Expected accomplishments, in paragraph (b), delete the phrase
“democratic governance”
66.

In table 19.21,under Expected accomplishments, paragraph (b) should read:
“Increased technical capacity to incorporate an environmental dimension into
the design of economic policies and the innovative use of economic instruments in
environmental management, including a better understanding of the uneven effects
of such policies on men and women.”

Section 22
Human rights
67. Replace paragraphs 22.1 to 22.8 with paragraphs 19.1 to 19.3 of the medium-term
plan for the period 2002–2005, as follows:
“22.1 The purpose of the United Nations human rights programme is to promote
universal enjoyment of all human rights by giving practical effect to the will and
resolve of the world community as expressed by the United Nations. Its mandate
derives from Articles 1, 13 and 55 of the Charter of the United Nations, the Vienna
Declaration and Programme of Action adopted by the World Conference on Human
Rights on 25 June 1993 (A/CONF.157/24 (Part I), chap. III) and subsequently
endorsed by the General Assembly in its resolution 48/121 of 20 December 1993, the
mandate of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights as defined in
Assembly resolution 48/141 of the same date, international human rights instruments
adopted by the United Nations and the resolutions and decisions of policy-making
bodies. The programme is based on the principles and recommendations of the
Vienna Declaration and Programme of Action.
“22.2 The programme is under the responsibility of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Human Rights, who performs her or his functions under the
direction and authority of the Secretary-General in accordance with General
Assembly resolution 48/141. Its objectives are to provide the leading role on human
rights issues and to emphasize the importance of human rights on the international
and national agendas; to promote international cooperation for human rights; to
stimulate and coordinate action across the whole United Nations system; to promote
universal ratification and implementation of international standards and to assist in
the development of new norms; to support human rights organs and treaty
monitoring bodies; to anticipate serious violations and react to violations; to
emphasize preventive human rights action and to promote the establishment of
national human rights infrastructures; to undertake human rights field activities and
operations; and to provide education, information, advisory services and technical
assistance in the field of human rights.
“22.3 By the end of the period covered by the medium-term plan for the period
2002-2005, it is expected that the following will have been accomplished:
“(a) A significant enhancement and strengthening of international cooperation
in the field of human rights leading to increased effectiveness of international
machinery, improved respect for human rights at the national level, through, inter
alia, universal ratification of all international human rights treaties, the incorporation
32

A/RES/56/253

of those standards into the domestic legislation of States and the continuing
adaptation of the United Nations human rights machinery to current and future needs
in the promotion and protection of human rights, as reflected in the Vienna
Declaration and Programme of Action;
“(b) Major strengthening of coordination for human rights across the United
Nations system, leading to a comprehensive and integrated approach to the
promotion and protection of human rights based on the contribution of each of the
United Nations organs, bodies and specialized agencies whose activities deal with
human rights and on improved inter-agency cooperation and coordination;
“(c) The adoption and implementation of an integrated and multidimensional
strategy for the promotion and protection of the right to development, accompanied
by a significant enhancement of support from relevant United Nations bodies for that
purpose;
“(d) Provision of the appropriate assistance by the Secretariat and the Office
of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights to ensure that the
promotion and protection of all human rights are guided by the principles of
impartiality, objectivity and non-selectivity, in the spirit of constructive international
dialogue and cooperation;
“(e) Compliance by the Office of the High Commissioner with the paramount
consideration of securing the highest standards of efficiency, competence and
integrity, and with due regard to the importance of recruiting the staff on as wide a
geographical basis as possible, bearing in mind that the principle of equitable
geographical distribution is compatible with the highest standards of efficiency,
competence and integrity;
“(f) A significant increase in the recognition of economic, social and cultural
rights and in activities for their protection, including the integration of economic,
social and cultural rights as human rights into the strategies and programmes of
international organizations, agencies and financial and developmental institutions,
the identification of measurements of achievement showing success in respecting
those rights and the adoption of a communication procedure relating to noncompliance with economic, social and cultural rights;
“(g) The adoption and progressive implementation of an improved treaty
monitoring system dealing with multiple reporting obligations and based on a
comprehensive national approach;
“(h) The implementation of a strengthened system of special procedures
based on harmonization and rationalization of work;
“(i) The reinforcement of the United Nations as the unique worldwide forum
for the discussion and resolution of human rights matters of international concern,
with the participation of all relevant actors;
“(j) The adoption of more efficient methods within the United Nations to
promote and protect human rights, including by preventing human rights violations
throughout the world and removing obstacles to the full realization of human rights;
“(k) The implementation of a comprehensive United Nations programme to
assist States, at their request, in developing and implementing national human rights
plans of action strengthening, inter alia, national structures having an impact on
democracy and the rule of law; to establish national institutions to give effect to the
right to development and economic, social and cultural rights; and also to assist
States, at their request, within the respective mandates of the Secretariat and the
33

A/RES/56/253

Office of the High Commissioner, in the process of ratifying United Nations human
rights instruments;
“(l) Fulfilment of the mandates given to the Secretariat for giving appropriate
assistance, according to the resolutions and decisions of the General Assembly, the
Economic and Social Council and the Commission on Human Rights, to treaty
bodies, intergovernmental and expert bodies, as well as the existing relevant
voluntary trust funds;
“(m) The full integration of the human rights of women and the girl child into
the activities of the United Nations system as a whole and its human rights
machinery in particular;
“(n) The implementation of effective measures to promote equality, dignity
and tolerance, to fight racism and xenophobia, and to protect minorities, indigenous
populations, migrant workers, the disabled and others, taking into account also the
outcome of the World Conference against Racism, Racial Discrimination,
Xenophobia and Related Intolerance, to be held in 2001;
“(o) The establishment of effective programmes of education and public
information and the strengthened contribution of non-governmental organizations,
national institutions, grass-roots organizations and civil society in United Nations
human rights activities at all levels, according to the legislative mandates in effect
regarding those issues;
“(p) The provision to States, United Nations bodies, experts and the academic
community of high-quality research and analysis on human rights issues, including
that dealing with emerging problems and the development of new standards and
instruments.”
and renumber the subsequent paragraphs accordingly.
68. In former paragraph 22.27, after the words “the Council also decided that”, insert the
phrase “, once the Permanent Forum had been established and had held its first annual
session,” and replace the words “that it would” with “to”.
69.

In table 22.7:

(a) Replace the text of Objectives 1 and 2 with paragraphs 19.4 and 19.5 of the
medium-term plan, as follows:
“Objective 1: The primary objectives of this subprogramme will include the
promotion and protection of the right to development. In this regard, the objectives
will be to develop an integrated and multidimensional strategy for the
implementation, coordination and promotion of the right to development in
accordance with the Declaration on the Right to Development (General Assembly
resolution 41/128, annex) and subsequent mandates and the Vienna Declaration and
Programme of Action, aimed at facilitating action to be taken by relevant bodies of
the United Nations system, including treaty bodies, international development and
financial institutions and non-governmental organizations, for the implementation of
the right to development as an integral part of fundamental human rights, ensuring
the realization of the right to development across the human rights programme and
by specialized agencies and United Nations treaty bodies; to promote national
implementation of the right to development through coordination with Stateappointed officials; to identify obstacles at the national and international levels; and
to promote awareness about the content and importance of the right to development,
including through information and educational activities.

34

A/RES/56/253

“Objective 2: With regard to research and analysis, the objectives will be to
strengthen respect for human rights by increasing knowledge, awareness and
understanding of human rights issues through data collection, research and analysis.
These objectives will be pursued within the framework of the indivisibility,
interdependence and interrelatedness of all human rights and will be aimed at
facilitating the implementation of standards, the work of treaty bodies, special
rapporteurs and other bodies and the preparation of new standards; ensuring the
recognition on the national and international levels of economic, social and cultural
rights; promoting democracy and strengthening national human rights institutions
and procedures for the rule of law; contributing to the elimination of racism, racial
discrimination, xenophobia and new forms of discrimination; and strengthening the
recognition of the human rights of women and children and the protection of
vulnerable groups such as minorities, migrant workers and indigenous people.”
(b) Under Expected accomplishments, replace the existing text with paragraph 19.6
of the medium-term plan, as follows:
“Expected accomplishments of the Secretariat would include:
“(a) Wider integration and/or inclusion of the promotion and protection of the right
to development, in particular across the human rights programme and the relevant
programmes of work of the United Nations departments and/or offices and specialized
agencies and of major international organizations and forums related to this issue;
“(b) Major strengthening of coordination for human rights across the United
Nations system, leading to a comprehensive and integrated approach to the promotion and
protection of human rights based on the contribution of each of the United Nations organs,
bodies and specialized agencies whose activities deal with human rights and also based on
improved inter-agency cooperation and coordination;
“(c) Strengthened efforts that will contribute to the elimination of racism, racial
discrimination, xenophobia and related intolerance;
“(d) Enhanced awareness, knowledge and understanding of all human rights,
including the right to development;
“(e) Wider recognition of the rights of women, children and persons belonging to
minorities, migrant workers, indigenous people and persons with disabilities, and
strengthening the protection of vulnerable groups.”
(c) Under Measurements of achievement, replace the existing text with
paragraphs 19.7 and 19.8 of the medium-term plan, as modified below:“
“Measures of achievement are elements used as tools for determining, where
possible, the extent to which the objectives and/or have been achieved.
“Measures of achievement of the Secretariat to be applied to each expected
accomplishment, as appropriate, would include:
“(a) The extent to which the right to development had been included in the
work programmes of the departments and offices of the United Nations, the
specialized agencies and other relevant intergovernmental organizations, providing
compiled examples of concrete steps in that regard;
“(b) The extent to which the mandates given to the Secretariat contained in
resolutions and decisions adopted by the General Assembly, the Economic and
Social Council and the Commission on Human Rights had been fulfilled;

35

A/RES/56/253

“(c) The holding of seminars and workshops organized by the Office of the
United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights, in accordance with the
relevant resolutions and decisions adopted by the General Assembly, the Economic
and Social Council and the Commission on Human Rights, or in cooperation with
the Office of the High Commissioner, and the extent to which they contributed to the
fulfilment of the objectives of the subprogramme;
“(d) The extent to which the activities of the Office of the High
Commissioner contributed to increasing knowledge, awareness and understanding in
order to advance the full realization of the right to development, in accordance with
the Declaration on the Right to Development;
“(e) An increased number of visitors to the web site of the Office of the High
Commissioner;
“(f) The number of new publications of the Office of the High Commissioner
as well as their distribution, and the assessment by users of their quality and
usefulness.”
70.

In table 22.9:

(a) Replace the text of the objective with paragraph 19.9 of the medium-term plan,
as follows:
“Objective: The objectives are to support the United Nations human rights
bodies and organs and to facilitate their deliberations by ensuring and enhancing
their effective functioning; to contribute to increasing the knowledge, expanding the
awareness and promoting the importance of all international human rights treaties; to
improve existing procedures through rationalization and streamlining, and the
coordination of the participation of Governments, experts, specialized agencies,
other international organizations, national institutions and non-governmental
organizations in their work; and to ensure the analytical capacity of human rights
treaty bodies for the review of State party reports under international treaties and for
the processing of communications.”
(b) Under Expected accomplishments, replace
paragraph 19.10 of the medium-term plan, as follows:

the

existing

text

with

“Expected accomplishments of the Secretariat would include:
“(a) The timely delivery of required and appropriate support to
intergovernmental bodies, expert bodies and treaty bodies, inter alia, in order to
contribute to reducing the backlog in the consideration by the reviewing mechanisms
of the States parties’ reports;
“(b) The timely delivery of required and appropriate support to
intergovernmental bodies, expert bodies and treaty bodies, inter alia, in order to
contribute to reducing the backlog in the consideration by the reviewing mechanisms
of complaints.”
(c) Under Measurements of achievement, replace the existing text with
paragraphs 19.11 and 19.12 of the medium-term plan, as modified below:
“Measures of achievement are elements used as tools for determining, where
possible, the extent to which the objectives and/or have been achieved.
“Measures of achievement of the Secretariat to be applied to each expected
accomplishment, as appropriate, would include:

36

A/RES/56/253

“(a) The quality and timeliness of services provided by the Office of the High
Commissioner;
“(b) A reduction in the time lag between the submission of a State party report
and its examination by the relevant treaty body;
“(c) A reduction in the time lag between the submission of a complaint and its
review, as appropriate, by the relevant mechanisms;
“(d) The number of reports prepared by the Secretariat in accordance with
resolutions and decisions of the General Assembly, the Economic and Social Council
and the Commission on Human Rights, and the extent to which they were presented
in a timely manner, in compliance with the six-week rule for the issuance of
documentation, for consideration by organs dealing with human rights.”
71.

In table 22.11:

(a) Replace the text of Objective 1 with paragraphs 19.13 to 19.15 of the mediumterm plan, as follows:
“Objective: In the area of advisory services and technical cooperation, the
objectives are to assist countries, at their request, in developing comprehensive
national plans of action to promote and protect human rights and to provide advice
and support to specific projects to promote respect for human rights; to develop a
comprehensive and coordinated United Nations programme to help States in building
and strengthening national structures for human rights promotion and protection; and
to raise awareness and promote specialized knowledge about human rights through
the organization of training courses, seminars and workshops, and the production of
a wide range of educational, training and information material.
“In the area of support to fact-finding bodies, the objectives are to ensure the
effective functioning of human rights monitoring mechanisms by assisting special
rapporteurs and representatives, experts and working groups mandated by policymaking bodies, including through the preparation of information regarding alleged
violations and situations for review and the provision of support for missions and
meetings; and to enhance the efficiency of action by policy-making bodies by
providing analytical information on human rights situations.
“With respect to field activities, the objective is to ensure the efficiency of field
missions and presences through the maintenance of contacts with Governments,
appropriate sectors of the United Nations system, international and regional
organizations and others by supporting and developing such activities through the
development of training programmes and materials for human rights field staff and
training in human rights for the appropriate components of other United Nations
field operations.”
and delete the text of Objectives 2 and 3.
(b) Under Expected accomplishments, replace the existing text with paragraph 19.16
of the medium-term plan, as follows:
“Expected accomplishments of the Secretariat would include:
“(a) Provision of advisory services and technical and financial assistance, at
the request of the State concerned and, where appropriate, the regional human rights
organizations, with a view to supporting actions and programmes in the field of
human rights;

37

A/RES/56/253

“(b) Fulfilment of the mandates given to the Office of the High Commissioner
in resolutions and decisions of the General Assembly, the Economic and Social
Council and the Commission on Human Rights to support human rights monitoring
mechanisms, such as special rapporteurs and representatives and expert and working
groups mandated by policy-making bodies;
“(c) Enhanced awareness, knowledge and understanding of all human rights,
including the right to development.”
(c) Under Measurements of achievement, replace the existing text with
paragraphs 19.17 and 19.18 of the medium-term plan, as modified below:
“Measures of achievement are elements used as tools for determining, where
possible, the extent to which the objectives and/or have been achieved.
“Measures of achievement of the Secretariat to be applied to each expected
accomplishment, as appropriate, would include:
“(a) The number of seminars, workshops and training courses held or
supported by the Office of the High Commissioner; and the number of persons
trained, participants in seminars and workshops and fellowships granted as well as
data on their geographical distribution and the extent to which they contributed to the
fulfilment of the objectives of the subprogramme;
“(b) The number of requests from Member States and, where appropriate,
from the regional human rights organizations, received and fulfilled by the Office of
the High Commissioner for the provision of advisory services and technical and
financial assistance, with a view to supporting actions and programmes in the field of
human rights;
“(c) The timeliness, significance and relevance of the advisory services and
technical cooperation.”
Section 23
Protection of and assistance to refugees
72. In paragraph 23.2, after the first sentence, insert the following sentence, based on the
last sentence of paragraph 21.1 of the medium-term plan for the period 2002–2005: “The
pursuit of permanent solutions to the problems of refugees is at the heart of protection and
the principal purpose of this section.”
73. In paragraph 23.3, in paragraph (e), replace “in these activities, due consideration
will be given to the interests both of Member States and of the United Nations” with the
following text from the end of paragraph 21.5 (f) of the medium-term plan:
“in this regard, due consideration should be given to the obligation of United Nations
officials, in the conduct of their duties, to observe fully both the laws and regulations
of Member States and their duties and responsibilities to the Organization.”
74. In table 23.4, under Indicators of achievement at the end of paragraph (e), add the
following phrase, based on paragraph 21.17 (d) of the medium-term plan: “; the number of
refugees repatriated and resettled.”
75. In paragraph 23.11 delete paragraph (a),“UNHCR staff are trained as to the need for,
and most effective design of, programme initiatives;” and reletter the remaining paragraphs
accordingly.
76. In paragraph 23.14, paragraph (c) should read: “a sufficient level of extrabudgetary
funding is raised to allow for the funding of planned capacity-building projects.”
38

A/RES/56/253

Section 24
Palestine refugees
77. In paragraph 24.14 (b), insert the word “some” between “by” and “host” in the first
line.
Section 25
Humanitarian assistance
78.

In table 25.6:
(a)

Delete paragraphs (b) and (c) under Expected accomplishments;

(b)

Delete paragraphs (b) and (c) under Indicators of achievement;

(c) Delete “Increased attention to and respect for an active and visible policy of”
in paragraph (d) under Expected accomplishments.
79.

In paragraph 25.18:

(a) In subparagraph (b) (iii), replace the words “human rights and international
humanitarian law” with “international humanitarian law and human rights instruments”;
(b) Subparagraph (b) (vi) should read “Paper requested by the Security Council on
protection for humanitarian assistance to refugees and others in conflict situations (1);”
(c) Subparagraph (b) (vii) should read: “Study on the application of the guiding
principles of humanitarian assistance to all populations in need, as contained in the annex
to General Assembly resolution 46/182 (1);”
(d) At the end of subparagraph (b) (viii), add “in strict conformity with the
principles of humanity, neutrality and impartiality and to ensure that they are not working
at cross-purposes;”
(e) Subparagraph (c) (iv) should read: “Production of inter-agency training
package on enhancing the provision of humanitarian assistance to all populations in need;”
(f)

Add a new subparagraph after (c) (iv), reading:
“(v) Collaboration with other agencies to support and to promote the efforts of
Governments of affected countries upon their request to assist and to protect
internally displaced persons;”

(g) Delete subparagraph (c) (vi) and reletter the subsequent subparagraphs
accordingly.
80. In paragraph 25.27, in the second sentence, add “where appropriate” after
“Framework”.
81.

In table 25.10:
(a)

Under Expected accomplishments:

(i) Paragraph (a) should read: “Increased capacity of developing countries for
preparedness in disaster prevention and mitigation.”
(ii) Add a new paragraph (b), reading: “(b) Increased participation by developing
countries in disaster reduction-related training and seminars.”
(b)

Under Indicators of achievement:

(i) Paragraph (a) should read: “Increase in the number of developing countries
having the technical capacity to deal with disaster prevention and mitigation.”
39

A/RES/56/253

(ii) Add a new paragraph (b), reading: “The number of experts from developing
countries participating in training seminars on disaster prevention.”
(c)

Reletter former paragraphs (b) and (c) as (c) and (d) respectively.

(d)

Under Expected accomplishments:

(i)

Delete (d);

(ii)

Add a new paragraph (e) reading:
“(e) Better and more effective coordination in the mobilization of
international support to contribute to preventive management and rehabilitation
related to natural disasters.”

(e)

Under Indicators of achievement, reletter former paragraph (d) as (e).

82. At the end of paragraph 25.30 (c) (i), add a new item, reading: “n. Update inventory
of the resources available to help deal with natural disasters;”
83.

In table 25.12:
(a)

Delete (a) under Expected accomplishments

(b)

Delete (a) under Indicators of achievement

(c)

Under both headings, reletter paragraphs (b) and (c) as (a) and (b) respectively

(d)

Under Expected accomplishments, add a new paragraph (c), as follows:
“(c) Increased capacity of developing countries to deal with disaster relief.”

(e)

Under Indicators of achievement add a new paragraph (c), as follows:

“(c) Increased participation in training seminars on disaster management,
improved field and regional cooperation in disaster management and increased donor
response to inter-agency appeals.”
(f) Under Expected accomplishments, in paragraphs
“environmental disasters”, add “as well as technological accidents”

(a)

and (d),

after

84. In table 25.14, under Expected accomplishments, in paragraph (b), after “United
Nations”, delete the remainder of the paragraph.
Section 27C
Office of Human Resources Management
85.

In paragraph 27C.1, at the end of the last sentence, add the following text:
“, as well as meet the expectations of Member States as set forth in General
Assembly resolution 55/258 of 14 June 2001.”

86.

After paragraph 27C.4, add a new paragraph, reading:
“27C.5. At its fifty-fifth session, the General Assembly considered the report of the
Secretary-General and adopted resolution 55/258. In implementing all the activities
under this subprogramme, the Office of Human Resources Management will take
fully into account the provisions of resolution 55/258.”

and renumber subsequent paragraphs accordingly.
87.

In former paragraph 27C.5:
(a)

40

In the first line, replace “resolution 53/221” with “resolution 55/258”

A/RES/56/253

(b)

In the fourth line, insert the word “robust” before the word “monitoring”

88. In former paragraph 27C.6 (a), replace “monitoring” with “robust monitoring
mechanisms”
89.

In former paragraph 27C.12, replace the second sentence with the following text:
“In accordance with the decisions of the General Assembly contained in its
resolution 55/258, the Division will concentrate on the implementation of human
resources management reform in the areas of its expertise and will work on
improving and enhancing its control and monitoring mechanisms and procedures.”

90. In former paragraph 27C.16, at the beginning of the paragraph, insert the following
text:
“In line with the provisions of General Assembly resolution 55/258 and”
91. In former paragraph 27C.20, at the beginning of the paragraph, insert the following
text:
“In line with the provisions of General Assembly resolution 55/258,”
92. In former paragraph 27C.21, at the beginning of the paragraph, insert the following
text:
“In accordance with the decisions of the General Assembly, including
resolution 55/258,”
93. In former paragraph 27C.26, the beginning of the paragraph, insert the following
text:
“In line with the provisions of General Assembly resolution 55/258,”
Section 28
Internal oversight
94. In table 28.6, under Objective 1, replace paragraph (b) under Indicators of
achievement with the following: “The number of joint meetings, agreements and
assignments with external oversight bodies.”
95.

In table 28.8:
(a)

Under Indicators of achievement:

(i)

Merge subparagraphs (b) (i) and (ii) to read
“(b) Clear delegation of authority and the existence and effective use of
mechanisms to ensure accountability at all levels of the Organization.”

(ii) Replace paragraph (d) with the following: “The number of joint meetings,
agreements and assignments with external oversight bodies.”

41

A/RES/56/253

Annex II
Staffing table for 2002 and 2003
2002

2003

1
26
19
80
244
687
2 300
457

1
26
19
80
244
687
2 300
457

3 814

3 814

269
2 653

269
2 653

2 922

2 922

181
1 632
185
185

181
1 632
185
185

Subtotal

2 183

2 183

Total

8 919

8 919

Professional category and above
Deputy Secretary-General
Under-Secretary-General
Assistant Secretary-General
D-2
D-1
P-5
P-4/3
P-2/1
Subtotal
General Service category
Principal level
Other level
Subtotal
Other categories
Security Services
Local level
Field Service
Trades and Crafts

42
