Re1oludon1 adopted on the reportl of the Special Polidcal Committee

families of persons persecuted by the Government of
South Africa for their opposition to the policies of
apartheid, and recommended that the international community, for humanitarian reasons, provide them with
relief and other assistance, 8
Considering that such assistance is consonant with the
purposes and principles of the United Nations,
Noting that those families continue to suffer serious
hardship,
1. Requests the Secretary-General to seek ways and
means of providing relief and assistance, through the
appropriate international agencies, to the families of
all persons persecuted by the Government of the Republic of South Africa for their opposition to the
policies of apartheid ;
2. Invites Member States and organizations to contribute generously to such relief and assistance;
3. Invites the Secretary-General to report to the
General Assembly at its nineteenth session on the implementation of the present resolution.
1283rd plenary meeting,
16 December 1963.

1990 (XVIII). Question of the composition of
the General Committee of the General As. 1embly1 amendments to rules 31 and 38 of
the Asaembly's rules of procedure
The General Assembly,
Taking into account the considerable increase in the
membership of the United Nations,
Taking also into account that the General Committee
of the General Assembly should be so constituted as
to ensure its representative character on the basis of a
balanced geographical distribution among its members,
Believing that for those reasons it is desirable to
enlarge the composition of the General Committee,
Noting that the General Committee is composed of
the President of the General Assembly, the VicePresidents of the Assembly and the Chairmen of the
Main Committees,
1. Decides to amend rules 31 and 38 of its rules of
procedure as follows:
"Rule 31
"The General Assembly shall elect a President and
seventeen Vice-Presidents, who shall hold office until
the close of the session at which they are elected.
The Vice-Presidents shall be elected, after the election
of the Chairmen of the seven l\Iain Committees referred to in rule 101, on the basis of ensuring the
representative character of the General Committee."
"Rule 38
"The General Committee shall comprise the President of the General Assembly, who shall preside, the
seventeen Vice-Presidents and the Chairmen of the
seven Main Committees. No two members of the
General Committee shall be members of the same
delegation, and it shall be so constituted as to ensure
its representative character. Chairmen of other committees upon which all Members have the right to
be represented and which are established by the
General Assembly to meet during the session sh:ill
be entitled to attend meetings of the General Com-

e Official Records of the General Assembly, Eighteenth SessioJl, Annexes, agenda item 30, document A/5497, para. 513.

21

mittee and may participate without vote in the discussions."
2. Decides that the President of the General Assembly, the seventeen Vice-Presidents of the Assembly
and the seven Chairmen of the Main Committees shall
be elected as provided in the annex to the present
resolution;
3. Decides to cancel all previous resolutions and
stipulations in connexion with the composition of the
General Committee and to modify all related provisions
in its rules of procedure.
1285th plenary meeting,
17 December 1963.

ANNEX
1. In the election of the President of the General Assembly,
regard shall be had for equitable geographical rotation of this
office among the regions mentioned in paragraph 4 below.
2. The seventeen Vice-Presidents of the General Assembly
shall be elected according to the following pattern, subject to
paragraph 3 below :
(a) Seven representatives from African and Asian States;
(b) One representative from an Eastern European State;
( c) Three representatives from Latin American States;
(d) Two representatives from Western European and other
States;
(c) Five representatives from the permanent members of the
Security Council.
3. The election of the President of the General Assembly
will, however, have the effect of reducing by one the number
of vice-presidencies allocated to the region from which the
President is electecl in accordance with paragraph 2 above.
4. The seven Chairmen of the Main Committees shall be
elected according to the following pattern :
(a) Three representatives from African and Asian States;
( b) One representative from an Eastern European State;
(c) One representative from a Latin American State;
(d) One representative from a Western European or other
State;
(e) The seventh chairmanship shall rotate every alternate
year among representatives of States mentioned in sub-paragraphs ( c) and (d) above.

1991 (XVIII). Question of equitable representation on the Security Council and the Economic and Social Council
A
The General Assembly,
Considering that the present composition of the
Security Council is inequitable and unbalanced,
Recognizing that the increase in the membership of
the United Nations makes it necessary to enlarge the
membership of the Security Council, thus providing
for a more adequate geographical representation of nonpermanent members and making it a more effective
organ for carrying out its functions under the Charter
of the United Nations,
Bearing in mind the conclusions and recommendations
of the Committee on arrangements for a conference for
the pu:-pose of reviewing the Charter ,7
1. Dcc;des to adopt, in accordance with Article 108
of the Ch:1rter of the United Nations, the following
amendments to the Charter and to submit them for
1 Ibid.,

agenda item 21, document A/5487, para. 9.
