S/PRST/2015/5

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
6 February 2015
Original: English

Statement by the President of the Security Council
At the 7378th meeting of the Security Council, held on 6 February 2015, in
connection with the Council’s consideration of the item entitled “The situation in
Mali”, the President of the Security Council made the following statement on behalf
of the Council:
“The Security Council urges the Malian parties, namely the Government
of Mali and the signatory and adherent armed groups of the Ouagadougou
Preliminary Agreement, to resume without delay the inter-Malian negotiation
process in Algiers. The Security Council urges the Malian parties to engage
through senior and fully empowered representatives in order to reach as soon
as possible a comprehensive and inclusive peace agreement that addresses the
root causes of the crisis in Mali. The Security Council urges the parties to
engage with sustained political will, spirit of compromise and in good faith on
substantive discussions toward such an agreement. In this regard, the Security
Council further calls on the Malian parties to make the necessary concessions,
while respecting the sovereignty, unity and territorial integrity of the Malian
State.
“The Security Council urges the parties to seize the historic opportunity
offered by the inter-Malian negotiation process in Algiers, in which all
neighbouring countries and relevant regional and international partners are
involved, to support lasting peace in Mali. Recognizing the legitimate
aspiration of all Malian citizens to enjoy lasting peace and development , the
Security Council stresses that the Malian parties have a responsibility to the
Malian people and the international community to reach a durable peace
agreement.
“The Security Council reiterates its full support to the facilitation efforts
of Algeria and of all the members of the international mediation team. The
Security Council calls on all actors who have influence on the Malian parties
to urge them to negotiate seriously and in good faith toward a comprehensive
and inclusive peace agreement. The Security Council also expresses its full
support to the Special Representative of the Secretary-General for Mali,
Mr. Mongi Hamdi, and requests him to use his good offices mandate and
actively engage to play a key role in the inter-Malian negotiation process in
Algiers.
“The Security Council urges all parties to refrain from any action,
whether direct or conducted through proxies, that jeopardizes prospects for
15-01602 (E)

060215

*1501602*

S/PRST/2015/5

peace and, in this regard, expresses its readiness to consider appropriate
measures, including targeted sanctions, against those who resume hostilities
and violate the ceasefire.
“The Security Council reiterates its full support to the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in Mali (MINUSMA) and
its contribution to peace and security in Mali, and welcomes the sustained
efforts of the French forces that support it. The Security Council commends
the continued commitment and sacrifices of MINUSMA’s troop and police
contributing countries. The Security Council reiterates its s trongest
condemnation of all attacks against MINUSMA peacekeepers, personnel and
property, and underlines that attacks targeting peacekeepers may constitute
war crimes under international law. The Security Council recalls the
obligations in operative paragraph 2 (e) of resolution 1373 (2001).
“The Security Council requests MINUSMA to fully implement its
mandate, and, in this regard, recalls its authorization that MINUSMA use all
necessary means within its capabilities and its areas of deployment, in
accordance with resolution 2164 (2014), including to deter threats and take
active steps to prevent the return of armed elements, to protect civilians under
imminent threat of physical violence, and to respond to attacks against its
personnel, installations and equipment.
“The Security Council underscores that only a comprehensive and
inclusive peace agreement can bring lasting security to Mali. The Security
Council deplores the continued violence in the North of Mali, which causes
the loss of human lives and casualties. The Security Council therefore
demands that all parties, including those who are not signatories to the
Ouagadougou Preliminary Agreement, cease immediately all hostilities and
reject violence. The Security Council demands that all parties full y respect the
ceasefire agreement signed on 23 May 2014, as well as the declaration of the
Cessation of Hostilities signed in Algiers on 24 July 2014. The Security
Council further urges all parties to swiftly implement all agreed confidence building measures, in particular the mechanisms established by the declaration
of the Cessation of Hostilities, to facilitate the implementation of the ceasefire,
with the support of and in coordination with MINUSMA.
“The Security Council welcomes the decision of the Secretary-General to
launch an independent inquiry to determine the facts surrounding the tragic
incidents that took place on 27 January 2015 during a violent demonstration in
front of the MINUSMA base in Gao, in the North of Mali, and the reported
death of at least 3 protesters, and expresses its sincere condolences to the
families of those who have died.
“Drawing on lessons from the previous peace agreements signed by the
Malian parties, which did not achieve a durable peace in Mali, the Security
Council urges the Malian parties — and calls on the members of the
international mediation team — in Algiers to devise concrete oversight
mechanisms that will ensure the full, faithful and immediate implementation
of a future comprehensive and inclusive peace agreement. The Security
Council calls for all relevant parties to ensure that provisions relating to
participation of women, sexual violence and child protection are taken into
account during the on-going negotiations and any possible outcome.

2/3

15-01602

S/PRST/2015/5

“The Security Council stresses the critical importance that such an
agreement be Malian-led and Malian-owned and calls on the Malian parties to
demonstrate commitment to its complete implementation. The Security
Council emphasizes that the Special Representative of the Secretary-General
for Mali and MINUSMA should play a leading role, in conjunction with the
other members of the international mediation team and other relevant partners,
to support and oversee the implementation of such an agreement, of which
primary responsibility rests with the Malian parties.”

15-01602

3/3
