asdf

United Nations

S/PV.6868

Security Council

Provisional

Sixty-seventh year

6868th meeting
Wednesday, 21 November 2012, 10.25 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Hardeep Singh Puri . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(India)

Members:

Azerbaijan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Colombia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Germany . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Guatemala . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Morocco . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Pakistan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Portugal . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
South Africa . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Togo . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . .
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Mr. Mehdiyev
Mr. Tian Lin
Mr. Osorio
Mr. Araud
Mr. Wittig
Mr. Rosenthal
Mr. Loulichki
Mr. Masood Khan
Mr. Vaz Patto
Mr. Iliichev
Mr. Crowley
Mr. Menan
Mr. Parham
Ms. Rice

Agenda
The situation concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo
Report of the Secretary-General on the United Nations Organization
Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic of the Congo (S/2012/838)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the
delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-506.

12-60044 (E)

*1260044*

S/PV.6868

The meeting was called to order at 10.25 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation concerning the Democratic Republic
of the Congo
Report of the Secretary-General on the
United Nations Organization Stabilization
Mission in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo (S/2012/838)
The President: Under rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite Mr. Roger
Meece, Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral and Head of the United Nations Organization
Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, to participate in this meeting.
On behalf of the Council, I welcome Mr. Meece,
who is joining today’s meeting via video teleconference
from Kinshasa.
The Security Council will now begin its
consideration of the item on its agenda. Members have
before them document S/2012/838, which contains the
report of the Secretary-General on the United Nations
Organization Stabilization Mission in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo.
I now give the floor to Mr. Meece.
Mr. Meece (spoke in French): I am honoured
to have the opportunity to address the Council
regarding the work of the United Nations Organization
Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo (MONUSCO) and the general situation in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo, in the context
of the report of the Secretary-General (S/2012/838)
distributed to the Council last week. Due to the very
serious crisis currently afflicting North Kivu, I am
obliged do so by video teleconference.
The security situation in North Kivu and some
other areas of eastern Congo has seriously deteriorated
over the past few days, in addition to the large-scale
humanitarian crisis affecting hundreds of thousands
of Congolese. Moreover, since the occupation of Goma
by the Mouvement du 23 mars (M-23), we are facing
violent and spontaneous demonstrations targeting both
the Congolese symbols of power and United Nations
personnel and installations. We cannot exclude the

2

possibility of this phenomenon spreading to other
Congolese towns.
(spoke in English)
At the heart of this grave situation is the armed
rebellion initiated by Bosco Ntaganda, now usually
referred to in short as the M-23 rebellion or mutiny. As
Council members are aware, in recent days the M-23
undertook major new offensive operations and have
now occupied the provincial capital of Goma. This was
done despite significant resistance by the Congolese
Army and MONUSCO forces engaged alongside of
and in support of the Forces armées de la République
démocratique du Congo (FARDC), including
engagement by FARDC and MONUSCO attack
helicopters and ground forces. Initially, the offensive
was held in check. Showing again renewed capacity,
however, the M-23 continued its offensive, exhibiting
sophisticated tactics. The Council has already been
briefed on its capabilities and the reports of external
support helping to provide those capabilities.
By itself, this new advance has produced major
new population movements, caused by the evacuation
of many humanitarian workers and agencies, and has
generally exacerbated an already major humanitarian
crisis in the region. As we have seen in other areas
occupied by the M-23, the occupation of Goma also
poses a major risk of increased serious human rights
violations, including killings and forced recruitment
of civilians, including minors. The leader of the
M-23 armed movement is Sultani Makenga, a former
Congolese Army officer who was ostensibly integrated
into the national army as a result of agreements reached
in 2009. In reality, however, Makenga never accepted
full State authority or central command orders. Like
Bosco Ntaganda, he is a man with a well-documented
history of very serious human rights abuses. These are
qualities shared by many other senior M-23 officers,
with Ntaganda himself the object of a long-standing
arrest warrant issued by the International Criminal
Court. Indeed, it appears to have been Ntaganda’s
growing fear of possible arrest that was his major
motive for launching the rebellion.
At this stage, the M-23 effectively occupies a
significant portion of North Kivu province, and it has
been establishing a formal administrative or governing
structure. We have received numerous reports of
targeted summary executions of those who stand in its
way, including Government and traditional leaders who

12-60044

S/PV.6868

resist or fail to cooperate with an M-23 administrative
structure. We also continue to receive ongoing reports
of the widespread recruitment and use of children,
unconfirmed cases of sexual violence, and other
serious human rights abuses. The M-23 movement has
generally expanded its list of demands from its original
grievances, largely based on allegations of incomplete
application of the 23 March 2009 agreements, although
the specific list seems to vary somewhat by individuals
and forums as demands are articulated. The M-23 has
been unresponsive to date to the demands of the Security
Council and others to withdraw to earlier positions or
even cease its attacks. In fact, the latest reports indicate
offensive moves from Goma towards Sake.
I should note that despite its military advances, the
Movement does confront limits. Contrary to some claims
that it represents the people, or alternatively one or
more ethnic communities, in the face of discriminatory
treatment or worse the M-23 has not achieved the full
support of any ethnic group or community. Indeed, the
M-23 does not enjoy broad support in North Kivu or
elsewhere in eastern Democratic Republic of the Congo.
Despite strong efforts, it has been unable to establish
a base of support in South Kivu or elsewhere beyond
its core area of occupation. While the M-23 military
wing is dominated by senior officers from the former
Congrès national pour la défense du peuple (CNDP)
movement, largely Tutsis from North Kivu province,
the M-23 is far short even of enjoying the full support
of that community, with for example the Banyamulenge
community in South Kivu broadly and strongly
opposed to the M-23, and the North Kivu Tutsi and
Hutu communities deeply divided. Many former CNDP
officers and troops continue serving well with loyalist
FARDC forces. Despite claims to the contrary, it is
simply not true that the M-23 represents any particular
community overall or that it has a particularly large
base of support. This imposes a significant indigenous
capacity limit on the group.
In response to the situation, MONUSCO has actively
supported the regional efforts of the International
Conference of the Great Lakes Region to develop a
neutral international force to confront the M-23, the
Forces démocratiques de libération du Rwanda (FDLR)
and other negative forces, and the establishment of
an enlarged Joint Verification Mechanism and a joint
intelligence fusion cell. We have also had ongoing
consultations with the African Union and other partners
regarding these issues, and the efforts to find a durable

12-60044

resolution leading to lasting peace. We have worked
closely with the FARDC and Congolese authorities
generally to confront the escalating security threats in
North Kivu, including at times very robust engagement
by MONUSCO ground and air elements in support of and
alongside FARDC forces to defend population centres
against attacks launched by the M-23. Unfortunately,
these engagements have led to injuries, and one tragic
death, of United Nations peacekeepers.
I would like to use this opportunity to renew my
deepest condolences to the family and colleagues of
the fallen Indian peacekeeper, and my sympathies to
all injured Blue Helmets. As well, I wish to reiterate
my tribute to them and all members of the MONUSCO
forces and their civilian counterparts, all of whom
are dedicated to the cause of peace for the Congolese
people while working in difficult and often dangerous
conditions. The losses experienced by the FARDC,
and the Congolese population more generally, have of
course been of much larger magnitude, and I also wish
to extend my heartfelt condolences to the families and
friends of all victims of this conflict.
We have also been very active in addressing renewed
threats by other armed groups in the east, particularly
in the Kivus, that have fed off inter-ethnic tensions
heightened since the start of the M-23 rebellion, and the
opportunities created by resultant security voids. For
example, one week ago our Joint Human Rights Office
and the Office of the High Commissioner for Human
Rights published a report documenting the massacre
of over 260 civilians in southern Masisi district arising
from clashes between the FDLR and an associated
group, Mai Mai Nyatura, and a network of local
groups operating under the label of Raïa Mutomboki,
each increasingly attacking women, children, and
other unarmed civilians, largely on an ethnic-driven
basis, and producing appalling large-scale killings as
documented in that report.
The stretched MONUSCO civilian and military
elements have sought to respond as effectively as
possible to these and other reported events and
threats, all in the context of a generally deteriorating
security environment in North Kivu. These ongoing
tragedies underscore the importance of putting an end
definitively to threats to security in North Kivu. This
includes dismantling the zone of M-23 occupation and
administration, renewing the interrupted programme of
pressure on the FDLR and other groups, and pursuing
related stabilization programmes.

3

S/PV.6868

Even while focused on the immediate threats of
these groups in the Kivus, we of course must not forget
the ongoing threats to civilians and security elsewhere.
While the Lords Resistance Army (LRA) combatant
numbers in north-eastern Democratic Republic of
the Congo are limited, and attacks in recent months
have been at relatively low levels, this comes as small
comfort to those civilians living in the area under
constant threat from this very brutal group. Moreover,
of course, LRA elements have the option of crossing the
borders of South Sudan, the Central African Republic
and the Democratic Republic of the Congo at will,
underscoring the regional aspect of the problem.
We have actively continued our efforts with the
FARDC to combat the LRA threat in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, including operation of the Joint
Intelligence and Operations Centre in Dungu, which
currently has MONUSCO, Congolese, Ugandan and
American officers present to share information and
analysis. We have also sought to collaborate as much
as possible in sharing information and ideas with
neighbouring missions and other forces, for example
as to how to increase the effectiveness of targeted
repatriation programmes and increase operational
coordination. In collaboration with the United Nations
Regional Office for Central Africa, we have also
continued to support to the maximum extent possible
regional efforts, including initiatives of the African
Union to confront and eliminate the LRA threat.
In Ituri district, we are continuing active
coordination and support to Congolese Government
efforts to deal with remaining militia activity in the
southern part of the district, notably by militia leader
Cobra Matata and his Forces de résistance patriotiques
en Ituri militia. The Ugandan Allied Democratic
Forces/National Army for the Liberation of Uganda
continues to be present in northern North Kivu, and
while generally not preying on the civilian population
to the extent of these other groups, it represents
a substantial and worrisome ongoing capacity
threatening regional security and the safety and wellbeing of civilians throughout the region. In Katanga
province, the activities of the convicted and escaped
military leader Gédéon and those choosing to associate
themselves with him poses a growing security problem
in the north-central portion of the province, and again
we are working actively with Congolese authorities to
deal with this threat.

4

All of these threats, of course, have considerably
stretched our human and other resources. For example,
we no longer have the capacity to open new operating
military bases without the need to close others. We
are constantly confronting the issue of assessing
conditions and priorities to determine how we may
have the most effective impact. These limitations
again underscore the importance of close and effective
coordination and collaboration with the FARDC and
Congolese Government authorities, who of course
bear the sovereign and primary responsibility and
authority to ensure adequate security conditions for
their population. We can and are determined, however,
to provide as much support as we are able to that effort.
Rape and other sexually based violence also
remains an ongoing problem and a major priority
for MONUSCO and the United Nations specialized
agencies. While those in armed groups guilty of such
crimes or bearing command responsibility for acts of
sexually based violence are normally beyond reach,
Congolese Government authorities and the Mission
maintain the objective of seeking to bring to justice
all those involved. In addition, we have maintained
an active programme of working to support military
prosecutors in bringing to justice those in the security
services who are guilty of such crimes.
In 2011, military prosecutors achieved 213
convictions of individuals guilty of serious human
rights abuses. The vast majority of those cases were
associated with sexually based violence, and the
majority of those prosecutions were supported by the
MONUSCO Rule of Law Section. The conviction rate
in 2012 appears on track for roughly the same number
of convictions. While this most certainly does not
constitute a full solution to the ongoing problem, nor
yet an end to a perceived sense of impunity, we believe
that this strong programme of prosecutions, combined
with training modules incorporated into all phases
of training for military, police, and other security
personnel, and an active engagement on the part of
senior political, military, and police leadership in this
effort, will constitute a firm foundation for effecting
change in this key area.
In another key human rights sector, a key milestone
was recently achieved with the signing of an action plan
against the use of children to fully eliminate the use of
children as combatants and their participation in any
way in Government actions, in violation of international
law and standards. The Prime Minister, Vice-Prime

12-60044

S/PV.6868

Minister and Minister of Defence, the Minister of
Justice and other officials have all fully endorsed that
plan and have committed to personal interest in a timely
and effective implementation programme. That follows
the substantial success already achieved to identify and
remove minors from units of the armed forces, and the
relevant United Nations agencies and MONUSCO are
fully engaged now with the Government to elaborate
and implement all elements of the now-formal action
plan.
In that regard, I would like to express particular
thanks to the Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral for Children and Armed Conflict, Leila
Zerrougui, formerly a MONUSCO Deputy Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, for her
great contribution to bringing that initiative to formal
adoption.
All of the issues I have identified underscore the need
for intensified efforts to effect broad military reform,
complementing and fulfilling the efforts already under
way in other security-sector areas, such as the active
programme with the Congolese National Police and
initiatives under way in the justice sector, as described
in the relevant annex of the Secretary-General’s report.
We have been engaged in in-depth discussions with
the Congolese authorities on this subject, and I am
confident that there is broad recognition of the need
for a full, comprehensive and strong military reform
programme addressing multiple areas and needs.
Important progress has been achieved regarding the
establishment of a needed legal and statutory basis for
the organization, structure and status of military forces.
I am in receipt of a 31-page document just prepared by
the Congolese defence authorities outlining the status
of reform objectives, plans and work done to date.
Important work, however, remains to be done to define
fully the architecture of the comprehensive reform plan,
an institutional framework for the implementation of the
plan and, importantly, a framework that can effectively
mobilize, coordinate and integrate contributions and the
needed participation to effect the required programmes.
In addition, a more systematic identification of
the financing and other resources needed for timely
and effective implementation is required. We will
continue to work intensively with civilian and military
authorities, as well as other interested parties, to see
how we can most effectively contribute directly to
the needed programmes, including through training

12-60044

efforts, as well as help promote the realization of a full
and comprehensive Congolese plan to produce stronger,
more professional and more capable military forces as
rapidly and effectively as possible.
The election process also remains a major focus
of interest in the Democratic Republic of the Congo as
well as to major international partners. Completion of
the current electoral cycle with democratic, transparent
and credible provincial and local elections is a
major immediate objective and one of importance to
maintaining a path towards a more secure and durable
democratic future.
In that regard, major interest is focused on a
pending proposed piece of legislation to reorganize the
Independent National Electoral Commission, now before
the Congolese National Assembly. That legislation is
an essential step to enable meaningful discussion of a
future timetable, the specifics of how future elections
are to be conducted, and the question of international
engagement and support for those elections. Obviously,
the answers to these questions will also be important
for future national and local election cycles.
A special commission was established to seek to
identify appropriate compromises between majority
and opposition members to permit election commission
reform legislation to go forward with broad support. It
is my understanding that compromises regarding many
key specific issues have been found, including adequate
representation on a commission executive board of
majority, opposition and civil society representatives.
Some remaining important differences remain,
however, on specific aspects. We have strongly urged
all parties to work to find acceptable solutions to these
questions as rapidly as possible. Both the Speaker of the
National Assembly and the President of the Senate have
expressed to me in the past two weeks their confidence
and their determination to have this essential piece of
legislation adopted at the current legislative session.
We will continue our efforts to support the election
process, including with respect to the full and inclusive
participation of all parties in the discussion, and, of
course, all possible technical and other support for the
achievement of credible and democratic elections.
Our stabilization mandate also remains a critical
priority that is essential for Congolese future development
and security. The framework of the International
Security and Stabilization Support Strategy in support
of the stabilization and reconstruction plan for areas

5

S/PV.6868

emerging from armed conflict, long established in
eastern Congo, is currently undergoing a strategic
review involving the United Nations, contributing
partners and, of course, Government authorities to
determine areas of success and where adjustments or
changes are indicated to achieve more effective results.
We anticipate being able to present a report on the
results of that study at the time of the next report of the
Secretary-General.
We also achieved in September the establishment
of area coordinators in three initial provinces in central
and western Democratic Republic of the Congo, taking
the place of traditional MONUSCO head of offices. We
hope that those individuals, drawn from United Nations
specialized agencies, will be able to further integrate
comprehensive development and stabilization efforts
appropriate to their respective provinces, drawing
from all parts of the United Nations system, as well as
effective coordination with other implementing partners
and agencies. I readily acknowledge that it has taken far
longer than I had hoped to move to implementation, but
I believe that we are now on track to what promises
to be a productive new approach to stabilization and
development programmes.
I must also emphasize that the solid
accomplishments of the stabilization operations in
western Democratic Republic of the Congo and those in
the east are absolutely essential to achieving durable and
satisfactory security conditions, as well as conditions
to provide for an improved standard of living for the
Congolese people. Even in the most troubled portions of
eastern Congo, stabilization and development activities
remain key to successful security programmes. They
represent essential interrelated elements of an overall
strategic approach, and we are very much committed to
maintaining full engagement with those activities, even
as we are focused on immediate security threats from
armed groups.
Despite the setbacks, I believe it important to
remember that much has been accomplished over the
years in addressing a wide array of major and daunting
issues. Clearly, many aspects of that progress have been
reversed in recent months, in North Kivu province
in particular, as a result of the M-23 rebellion. It is
difficult, if not impossible, to enhance State authority
and governance with an active and strong armed
movement under way. It is clearly essential to resolve
this crisis, roll back the reversals and resume forward
movement. That can be done, I believe, but only with

6

a strong commitment on the part of the international
community, underscoring the responsibility of all
States concerned to contribute to a positive and
peaceful outcome. Clearly any resolution must be
reinforced through comprehensive security-sector, and
specifically military, reform policies and programmes,
with associated full engagement and support from the
international community.
I believe that we have established a strong
partnership with the Congolese authorities. The
ongoing joint assessment process is a good example, as
it provides a solid basis for the continuing evaluation
and assessment of security threats and appropriate
responses. We are determined to do our part and do
all we can within our mandate in order to continue
that partnership and achieve results that enable the
Congolese people to achieve as rapidly as possible
the security conditions and prospects for social and
economic development to which they have a right and
most certainly deserve.
Finally, I would like to conclude with some personal
observations about the tragic current situation in North
Kivu, which poses such a grave threat to the Congolese
people and all the goals and objectives we share. The
M-23 forces are well provisioned and well supplied
with uniforms and a variety of arms and munitions,
many of which clearly have not come from existing
FARDC stocks. They exhibit many characteristics of
a strong, disciplined established military force, with
sophisticated tactics and operations, including night
operations, which are not characteristic of traditional
performance.
MONUSCO does not have the mandate or means to
investigate or verify the sources or methods by which
those impressive capabilities have been achieved. That
is a task that falls within the purview of the Group
of Experts whose mandate is to develop information
and answers such questions. We have reported, and
can continue to report, our encounters with Englishspeaking officers, the use of surprising weaponry and
equipment, and other signs of external support. We
can state with certainty that the M-23 rebellion has
called into question all the efforts to achieve progress
for a stable and successful North Kivu province and
provide for the peaceful coexistence of all groups and
ethnicities for the common benefit of all.
The rebellion as such is not by any standard an
answer to grievances, real or imagined, and in fact

12-60044

S/PV.6868

greatly works against the well-being of all in the
region. The killings and other human rights abuses
being committed heighten the crime.Those responsible
for those acts must be held to account. It is of critical
importance to bring an end to the situation soon. That
will require the goodwill of all in the region.
I believe the interest and engagement of the
international community to date has been essential to
the search for solutions. I strongly encourage continued
efforts in that regard. I also applaud the recent initiative
to study sanctions against those bearing responsibility
for the rebellion and all those guilty of serious human
rights abuses.
(spoke in French)
I would like again to reiterate my heartfelt
appreciation to all members of the Council and other
Member States for the support they have shown to
MONUSCO and the personnel who are working in

12-60044

difficult and dangerous conditions. Allow me to address
to all MONUSCO’s staff, both civilian and military, a
final word of gratitude and praise. In the context of
the very worrisome situation in North Kivu, the entire
United Nations staff continues to work tirelessly,
often in the most difficult of circumstances, thereby
demonstrating a spirit of sacrifice and commitment
that honours the ideals of the United Nations. With
professionalism, courage and determination, the Blue
Helmets and civilian staff have risen to the challenge
of fulfilling the mandate that the Council has conferred
upon them. They are therefore deserving of recognition
and praise. I thank them, and I thank the Council for
its support.
The President: I thank Mr. Meece for his briefing.
I now invite Council members to informal
consultations to continue our discussion of the subject.
The meeting rose at 10.55 a.m.

7
