General Assembly-Twenty-fourth Session

60

- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -- -- ---- - - - - these considerations into full account and to include
them in an appropriate form in its report on the
Decade.
1834th plenary meeting,
I 5 December I 969.
2587 (XXIV).

Commission on the Status of
Women

The General Assembly,
Recalling Economic and Social Council resolution 48
(IV) of 29 March 1947, in which the functions of the
Commission on the Status of Women are defined as
follows:
(a) To prepare recommendations and reports to
the Economic and Social Council on promoting women's
rights in political, economic, civil, social and educational fields,
(b) To make recommendations to the Council on
urgent problems requiring immediate attention in the
field of women's rights with the object ofimplementing
the principle that men and women shall have equal
rights, and to develop proposals to give effect to such
recommendations,
Recalling further its resolution 532 A (VI) of
4 February 1952, in which it resolved to request the
Economic and Social Council to continue to convene
the Commission on the Status of Women for one session each year and the Council's decision of 15 August
19643Z to continue to convene the Commission on an
annual basis,
Appreciating the importance of resolution IX of the
International Conference on Human Rights, adopted
on 12 May 1968,33 which lays down guidelines for the
future work of the Commission on the Status of
Women, and Economic and Social Council resolution
1133 (XLI) of 26 July 1966 on the unified long-term
United Nations programme for the advancement of
women, in which the Secretary-General was requested
to draw up a questionnaire on the role which women
could play in the economic and social development of
their countries,
Believing that the work of the Commission on the
Status of Women has reached a decisive stage, particularly with respect to the implementation of the Declaration on the Elimination of Discrimination against
Women and the preparation and implementation of a
unified long-term United Nations programme for the
advancement of women,
Believing further that the achievement of the Commission's aims demands a sustained effort at the present time, and more especially during the next few
years,
Urges the Economic and Social Council to reconsider its decision of 8 August 196984 so that the Commission on the Status of Women may continue to meet

'

82 See Official Records of the Economic and Social Council,
Thirty-seventh Session, Supplement No. I (E/3970), p. 35,
"Review of the pattern of conferences and calendar of conferences and meetings for 1965", sub-para. (d).
aa Final Act of the International Conference on Human
Rights (United Nations publication, Sales No.: E.68.XIV.2),
p. 10.
U See Official Records of the Economic and Social Council,
Forty-seventh Session, Resolutions (E/4735), p. 18, "Measures
to improve the organization of the work of the Council",
sub-para. (c).

annually, preferably three months after the General
Assembly.
1834th plenary meeting,
15 December 1969.
2588 (XXIV). Implementation of the reoom•
mendations of the International Conference
on Human Rights
A

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 1961 (XVIII) of 12 December 1963 designating the year 1968 as International
Year for Human Rights and the relevant resolutions
thereon,
Recalling also its resolution 2442 (XXIII) of
19 December 1968 on the International Conference on
Human Rights,
Noting the Secretary-General's reports on the implementation of the recommendations of the International Conference on Human Rights35 and on measures and activities undertaken in connexion with the
International Year for Human Rights, 36
Convinced that the International Conference on
Human Rights provided an impetus to positive action
towards achieving the full realization of human rights
and the elimination of violations and denials of those
rights,
Noting with satisfaction the measures that have been
taken and the progress that has been achieved in the
implementation of the recommendations of the International Conference on Human Rights by Governments, United Nations organs, specialized agencies and
other intergovernmental organizations concerned,
1. Expresses its appreciation to Governments,
United Nations organs, specialized agencies, regional
intergovernmental organizations and non-governmental
organizations genuinely concerned with human rights
which have contributed to the observance of the International Year for Human Rights;
2. Further expresses its appreciation to the Secretary-General for his effective co-ordination of the measures and activities undertaken in connexion with the
International Year for Human Rights and for the
informative reports which he has submitted thereon
to the General Assembly;
3. Expresses the hope that the measures and activities undertaken on the occasion of the International
Year for Human Rights by Governments, United
Nations organs, specialized agencies, regional intergovernmental organizations and non-governmental organizations genuinely concerned with human rights
will be continued, developed and enlarged, and that
the initiatives which have emerged from the observance
of the International Year for Human Rights will serve
as -guidelines for action-oriented programmes designed
to ensure that the work accomplished in 1968 shall
be pursued;
4._ {nvites G?vernments, _United Nations organs,
spec1al12ed agencies and other mtergovernmental organiza!ions concerned to continu~ to give effect, as appropnate, to the recommendations of the International
Conference on Human Rights, bearing in mind the
3 ~ A/7661.
36 A/7666 and Add.l and 2.
