UNITED NA TIUNS

SECURITY COUNCIL
OFFICIAL

RECORDS

THIRTY-EIGHTH

NEW

YEAR

YORK

CONTENTS
Page

Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/2456)

. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . ... . . . . . . .

1
1

Expression of thanks to the retiring President . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . ...*......**.
... .... .

1

Adoption of the agenda . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

1

The situation in the Middle East:
Report .of the Secretary-General on the United Nations Interim
in Lebanon (S/15863) .,.........................,...............*.

1

Expression of welcome to the new representative of the Netherlands

Force

WPV.2456

NOTE
Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined
with figures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United Nations
document.
Documents of the Security Council (symbol S/ . . .) are normally published in
quarterly Supplements of the OfflciaI Record of the Security Council. The date of the
document indicates the supplement in which it appears or in which information about
..i (.: .:<r
it is given.
1 P $ i ,$ i 3
The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a system
adopted in 1964, are publishedFin yearly volumes of Resolutions and Decisions of the
Security Council, The new system, which has been applied retroactively to resolutions
adopted before 1 January 1965, became fully operative on that date.

2456th MEETING
Held in New York on Monday, 18 July 1983, at 11 a.m.
President: Mr. LING

Qing (China).

discussion without the right to vote, in conformity with
the relevant provisions of the Charter and rule 37 of the
provisional rules of procedure.

Present: The representatives of the following States:
China, France, Guyana, Jordan, Malta, Netherlands,
Nicaragua, Pakistan, Poland, Togo, Union of Soviet
.Socialist Republics, United Kingdom of Great Britain
and Northern Ireland, United States of America, Zaire,
Zimbabwe.
Provisional

1. Adoption

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Salem (Lebanon)
took a place at the Council table.
4. The PRESIDENT
(interpretation from Chinese):
Members of the Council have before them the report of
the Secretary-General on the United Nations Interim
Force in Lebanon (UNIFIL) for the period 19 January to
12 July 1983.

agenda (S/Agenda/2456)

of the agenda

2. The situation in the Middle East:
Report of the Secretary-General on the United
Nations Interim Force in Lebanon (S/15863).

5. Members of the Council also have before them document S/15871, which contains the text of a draft resolution
prepared in the course of the Council’s consultations, and
document S/15868, which contains the text of a letter
dated 5 July 1983 from the representative of Lebanon
addressed to the President of the Council.

The meeting was called to order at 11.45 a.m.
Expression

of thanks to the retiring President

6. The first speaker is the Deputy Prime Minister and
Minister for Foreign Affairs of Lebanon, Mr. Elie Salem.
On behalf of the Council, I extend a warm welcome to him
and invite him to make his statement.

1. The PRESIDENT
(interpretation from Chinese): I
should like, at the outset of this meeting, to express on
behalf of the members of the Council deep appreciation
to the President for the month of June, Mr. Elleck Kufakunesu Mashingaidze, representative of Zimbabwe. As
President, Mr. Mashingaidze admirably guided the work
of the Council last month with efficiency and great diplomatic skill.
Expression

For technical reasons, the meeting was suspended at
11.55 a.m. and resumed at 12.10 p.m.
7. The PRESIDENT
(interpretation from Chinese): I call
on the Deputy Minister and Minister for Foreign Affairs
of Lebanon, Mr. Elie Salem.

of welcome to the new representative
of the Netherlands

8. Mr. SALEM (Lebanon): I wish to congratulate you,
Sir, on your assumption of the presidency. My congratulations to you acquire special significance in view of the
support that your country, China, has given Lebanon. I
am confident that, under your presidency, the deliberations of the Council will yield wide support for the cause of
peace and stability in my country and in the region as a
whole.

2. The PRESIDENT
(interpretation $+-6m Chinese): On
behalf of the Council, I extend a warm welcome to the
new representative of the Netherlands, Mr. Max van der
Stoel. We all look forward to working closely with him.
Adoption of the agenda

The agenda was adopted.

9. I take this opportunity to pay a tribute to the
Secretary-General and to his assistants for the report on
UNIFIL
submitted to the Council. I also wish to pay a
tribute to the countries contributing troops and logistic
units to UNIFIL:
Fiji, Finland, France, Ghana, Ireland,
Italy, the Netherlands, Norway, Senegal and Sweden.
Those countries have won the gratitude of the Lebanese
people for their readiness to risk the lives of their sons in
helping the United Nations implement its decision on
maintaining peace in a country which has fallen victim to
regional and international conflicts. I must also commend

The situation in the Middle East:
Report of the Secretary-General
on the United Nations
Interim Force in Lebanon (S/15863)

3. The PRESIDENT
(interpretation from Chinese): I
should like to inform the members of the Council that I
have received a letter from the representative of Lebanon
in which he requests to be invited to participate in the
discussion of the question on the agenda. In accordance
with the usual practice, I propose, with the consent of the
Council, to invite that representative to participate in the
1

the distinguished service performed by General William
Callaghan, his commanders and soldiers, and the United
Nations staff under difficult and complicated conditions.

a source of danger to the very existence of Lebanon, a
source of danger to their respective countries and causes,
and a source of danger to the cause of peace in the Middle
East. In the context of peace and security-the two major
concerns of the Council-no
problem on the international agenda is currently more urgent than defusing the
time bomb in the region by effecting the withdrawal of all
unauthorised forces from Lebanon.

10. On 19 March 1978, in the wake of the Israeli invasion of southern Lebanon, the Council established
UNIFIL for the purpose of confirming the withdrawal of
Israeli forces, restoring international peace and security
and assisting the Government of Lebanon in ensuring
the return of its effective authority in southern Lebanon
[resolution 425 (1978)], While the Force, for reasons
well known to the Council, has been unable fully to implement its mandate, it has nevertheless succeeded in ensuring
relative peace and stability in the areas under its control.
It has reinforced there the legitimate presence of the Government of Lebanon and provided hope for the Lebanese people that the present area of operation will be extended to cover the original mandate. Most importantly,
UNIFIL’s presence has been an eloquent manifestation of
the commitment of the Council to stand by Lebanon in
the face of continuing violation of its sovereignty, independence and unity.

14. Lebanon is conducting diplomatic efforts with all
countries involved in the Lebanese crisis. Representatives
of my country have been talking to representatives of
your. countries, either bilaterally or in the context of
United Nations organs and institutions. We will continue
these efforts, and we will apprise this august body of progress made. We shall, in the spirit of the Charter of the
United Nations and relevant United Nations decisions,
resort to all means at our disposal, diplomatic or otherwise, to attain our goal. The goal is the liberation of all
Lebanese territory in the shortest time possible, irrespective of the hardships, the sufferings and the frustrations.
15. We have the right to live in peace and freedom.
Our neighbours have one right they might claim of usnamely, that our territory not be used as a base of hostility against them. We will uphold that right for them. Let
them uphold our right for us. For too long-perhaps
because we were too weak, too free, too lax-we were
treated differently by friend and foe alike. Each claimed
a right in our internal affairs, and each conceives of its
security in terms of rights and gains on our terrain. The
time has come for Lebanon to be treated like any other
Member of the United Nations and not merely as a
proving ground for ideologies, or a testing ground for
weapons, or the probing rod of super-Power policies.
Never again shall we tolerate this status. Give us the
chance and we will put our house in order. We have
learned from the storm not to build on sand again.

11. Since the establishment of UNIFIL,
Lebanon has
witnessed dramatic changes. Fighting between the Palestine Liberation Organisation (PLO) and Israel has continued on and off in varying degrees of intensity. The
fighting led to a massive Israeli invasion of Lebanon in
June 1982 and to the ouster of the PLO armed elements
from southern Lebanon and Beirut. In response to the
Israeli invasion, Syria has strengthened its military presence in Lebanon, and the PLO has concentrated its
remaining forces in the areas in the north and east where
the Syrians exercise effective control. These changes have
intensified the problems of Lebanon, greatly exacerbated
tension in the region and now pitted Syrian and Israeli
forces against each other in a more threatening and more
ominous manner than ever before. The very cause of
regional and international peace is now at stake in Lebanon. In the midst of these developments, UNIFIL
has
remained steadfast, exercising patience and restraint in
the face of continuing provocations and preserving in the
face of chaos the hope of peace, stability and legitimacy.

16. The Government of Lebanon has met the commitments required of it by the Council: it has sent troops to
serve with UNIFIL.
In addition, it has explored all possibilities to ensure total withdrawal. It is exerting maximum efforts to build a strong army, to reform public
institutions, to maintain internal unity and to lay the
foundations of a stable and strong State. Lebanon is
attempting this Herculean task in the face of stubborn
opposition
from external forces, but Lebanon will
neither waver nor falter. Others wonder: could the country be saved? Are parts of it going to be annexed? Is it
going to be partitioned? Can that citadel of democracy,
freedom and tolerance be saved from the clutches of
jostling interests around it? Let me assure the Council
that the Government of Lebanon, under the leadership
of President Amin Gemayel, is determined to restore
government authority over every inch of the territory.
The Government is determined to save Lebanon intact,
to preserve the unity and independence of the Lebanese
people and to present Lebanon to the world community
as a model worth cultivating. Lebanon needs the concerted attention of the Council to disengage it from the
vortex of political conflicts in the region and thus save
not only itself but also the cause of peace in the Middle

12. Lebanon, conscious of the importance of a United
Nations presence in the turbulent south, has been asking
for the renewal of UNIFIL’s
mandate, and the Council
has always responded by renewing the mandate for periods varying from two to six months. We are now asking
the Council to renew the mandate of UNIFIL
for a
further interim period of three months, until 19 October
1983. We are not requesting a change in the nature of the
mandate or a new redeployment of the Force. We hope
that the coming three months will witness the beginning
of the end of an era of war and destruction. We have
committed our full resources to this end, and we have
reason to believe that our efforts will yield the fruits they
deserve.
13. The Government of Lebanon is engaged in intensive
diplomatic efforts to bring about the withdrawal of all
unauthorized forces from Lebanon. These forces are now
2

East. In rescuing Lebanon, the United Nations will rescue
the State system of the Middle East and will herald an
epoch of peace and stability in a region hitherto known
for its tensions and conflicts.

unauthorized external forces from the country. Renewal
today of UNIFIL’s mandate will be a reafftrmation of the
commitment
of the international community to those
objectives.

17. The problems facing Lebanon are clearly greater
than those addressed by the renewal or non-renewal of
UNIFIL’s
mandate. In renewing the mandate of the
Force, however, the Council will reaffirm to the world at
large its commitment
to the independence, sovereignty
and unity of Lebanon.

23. The United States extends its thanks to the Member
States which have steadfastly and generously supported
UNIFIL
with troops and marPrie1. The officers and men
of UNIFIL, four of whom gave their lives during the past
six months, have served the cause of peace in the Middle
East and merit the appreciation of all who seek an end to
conflict in that troubled region.

18. I appear before the Council today to ask for the
renewal of UNIFIL
and to express to the Council, and
through it to the troop-contributing
countries, the gratitude of a thankful nation, a nation that will, like the
Council and those countries, not hesitate also to lend a
helping hand to a nation in need.

24. Mr. LOUET (France) (interpretation from French):
It gives me special pleasure to extend to you, Sir, my own
congratulations and those of my Government on your
accession to the presidency. You represent here at the
United Nations a country with which France has always
enjoyed friendly relations. We have had occasion to
appreciate your qualities as a diplomat, and they will
greatly assist the work of the Council. I should also like to
extend my thanks to your predecessor, Mr. Mashingaidze,
the representative of Zimbabwe, who presided over the
work of the Council with great skill. In addition, I should
like to extend the congratulations and best wishes of the
French delegation to Mr. Max van der Steel, the new
representative of the Netherlands, whom it gives me great
pleasure to welcome here. The Council will assuredly
benefit from his experience as a statesman. Finally, I
should like to welcome the presence here today of Mr.
Salem, the Deputy Prime Minister and Minister for Foreign Affairs of Lebanon. The Council is greatly honoured
at having him participate in our work. Mr. Salem knows
that he can rely on the support of France during this
difficult period for his country.

19. The PRESIDENT
(interpretation from Chinese): It
is my understanding that the Council is ready to proceed
to the vote on the draft resolution before it [S/15871]. If
I hear no objection, I shall put it to the vote.
A vote was taken by show of handr.
In favour: China, France, Guyana, Jordan, Malta,
Netherlands, Nicaragua, Pakistan, Togo, United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United States
of America, Zaire, Zimbabwe
Against: None
Abstaining: Poland, Union of Soviet Socialist Republics
The draft resolution was adopted by 13 votes to none,
with 2 abstentions (resolution 536 (1983)).

25. France has fully supported the request of the Lebanese Government to renew the mandate of UNIFIL
for
a period of three months, and it will maintain its contingent in that Force. On this occasion, we wish formally
to reaffirm our full support for the action taken by the
Government
of Lebanon to restore its authority
throughout the whole of its territory.

20. The PRESIDENT
(interpretation from Chinese): I
shall now call upon those members of the Council who
wish to make statements after the vote.
21. Ms. GROOMS (United States of America): I should
like to take this opportunity, on behalf of my Govemment, to extend our congratulations to you, Mr. President, on your assumption of leadership of the Council
during the month of July. We look forward to working
productively and efficiently under your wise guidance. My
Government would also like to thank the representative
of Zimbabwe for the exemplary way he handled the
affairs of the Council during the preceding month.
Finally, my Government would like to welcome to the
Council the new representative of the Netherlands.

26. My delegation has noted with interest the report
of the Secretary-General and approves its conclusions.
The circumstances in which the Force was established
have been radically changed. UNIFIL
must continuously “cohabit’* with a battalion of Israel Defence Forces
based for an indefinite period throughout the territory
UNIFIL
is mandated to control. In addition, it must
fulfil its role in spite of the presence of de facto forces
and irregulars, The latter resort to such practices as
hostage-taking, threats and the confiscation of vehicles,
all of which call for firm disapproval on our part. For
that reason, we urgently appeal to the Government of
Israel not to limit UNIFIL’s
opportunities for action in
the zone of operations established for it by the Council.
In this connection, the French Government is particularly concerned over the exposed situation of the civilian
population-in
particular, the Palestinians-in
Lebanon, especially in the southern part of the country. It
would hope that the safety of the Palestinian civilians

22. The United States supports the recommendation
of the Secretary-Genera1 that the mandate of UNIFIL
be extended on an interim basis, and the request of the
Government of Lebanon that the interim period be three
months, or until 19 October 1983. The United States
strongly supports the objectives of the Government of
Lebanon to restore its sovereignty throughout
its
national territory and to secure the withdrawal of all
3

might be assured in the best possible conditions. In its
report of 24 June of this year, the International
Committee of the Red Cross expressed the same concerns. Its
representatives, who attempt to provide protection to
Palestinian families in the southern camps, expressed
serious concern. In particular, they visited the Ansar
Camp, where the number of detainees, which currently
stands at 5,000, has increased in recent weeks following
arrests made by Israeli forces.

to your high office for the month of July. We are sure that
under your skilful leadership the Council will succeed in
performing its important tasks. I should also like to
express our gratitude to your predecessor, the representative of Zimbabwe, Mr. Mashingaidze, who so effectively
and clearly organized the work of the Council in June. I
wish to take this opportunity also to welcome to the
Council the new representative of the Netherlands, Mr.
van der Stoel, and to wish him success in his work here.
We also wish to welcome to the Council the Deputy
Prime Minister and Minister for Foreign Affairs of Lebanon, Mr. Salem.

27. In this connection, it is fitting to recall Council
resolution 523 (1982), which, in paragraph 3, states that
the Council authorizes UNIFIL,
with the consent of the
Government of Lebanon,

32. Today the Council is once again considering the
question of extending the mandate of UNIFIL. This is the
thirteenth
time that UNIFIL’s
mandate has been
extended since the Force was established in 1978. This
fact in and of itself is eloquent testimony to the absence of
any positive improvement either in the settlement of the
situation in Lebanon or in the implementation of the provisions of resolution 425 (1978).

“to carry out . . . interim tasks in the humanitarian
and administrative fields, as indicated in resolutions
511 (1982) and 519 (1982), and to assist the Government of Lebanon in ensuring the security of all the
inhabitants of the area without any discrimination*‘.
28. The Lebanese Government, beset by a war that has
been forced upon it, has undertaken a massive task of
national reconstruction
and the restoration of its
authority throughout all of its territory. It is essential for
us to lend it our support by responding positively to its
appeal. For that reason, we unreservedly support the
decision the Council has just taken to extend the mandate of UNIFIL
for a further interim period of three
months. As the Secretary-General has rightly stressed in
paragraph 27 of his report:

33. Furthermore,
the large-scale Israeli aggression
against Lebanon in June last year complicated even
further what was already a tangled web of Lebanese problems. It created a real and immediate threat to the freedom
and independent existence of that State. Today, more than
a year after that act of aggression, Israeli troops continue
arrogantly to lord it over Lebanese soil. They are sowing
terror and violence there, installing their own armed
proteges and openly working towards perpetuating their
occupation of yet one more Arab country.

“the task of assisting the Government of Lebanon in
ensuring the return of its effective authority in southern Lebanon remains especially relevant in the present situation”.

34. Flouting the universally acknowledged norms of
morality and law and the many decisions of the United
Nations-first
and foremost, Council resolutions which
call for the immediate cessation of military activities and
the unconditional
withdrawal of Israeli troops from
Lebanon-Tel
Aviv, with the active support and assistance of its American patron and ally, is now striving to
be rewarded for last year’s bloody act of aggression.

29. My Government fully shares that view. As I stated
at the outset, my Government confirms its continued support to the Government of Lebanon in the action it is
pursuing to restore its authority throughout the whole of
its national territory, a territory freed from all foreign
forces whose presence had not expressly been accepted by
Lebanon. Our support is in keeping with our commitment
to respect for the sovereignty, independence, territorial
integrity and unity of Lebanon. It is in that spirit and
context that France, at the request of President Gemayel
and of his Government, agreed to participate in the multinational force stationed in Beirut. That force, as we have
always hoped and have stated since the beginning, should,
at the appropriate time, be replaced by a United Nations
force.

35. With the whole world looking on, the strategic
partners from Washington and Tel Aviv, in what has
now become their customary cynical and high-handed
manner, have together striven to impose on Lebanon
such conditions for a settlement as are aimed at turning
that country-to
call things by their proper names-into
an American-Israeli
protectorate. Lebanon has been
forced at gunpoint to accept the capitulationist agreement
with Israel which infringes on the sovereignty and independence of the Lebanese State and creates a threat to
the security of neighbouring Arab countries. The implementation of this unfair agreement would be nothing
other than a reward for the aggressor. It would undermine the international legal basis for a settlement of the
conflict in Lebanon which is laid down in the decisions of
the Security Council and the General Assembly on this
subject. It would be simply playing into the hands of
those who are attempting to secure one more springboard for acts of aggression against neighbouring Arab
States.

30. Before concluding, I should like to pay a tribute to
the Secretary-General for his tireless efforts to reduce tension in the region and to facilitate the action of the Lebanese Government. 1 also wish to extend my congratulations and best wishes to the officers and members of the
Force.
31. Mr. OVINNIKOV
(Union of Soviet Socialist Republics) (interpretation from Russian): First of all, I should like
to take this opportunity to welcome you, Mr. President,
4

36. It is essential to lay particular stress on the key
factor of today’s abnormal
situation in Lebanon,
namely, that the flagrant flouting by Israel of the sovereignty and independence of this Arab country became
possible only with the consent and support of the United
States.

did nothing whatsoever to prevent Israel from carrying
out its criminal plans. Moreover, it saw to it that American weapons, which had been used for the slaughter in
southern Lebanon and Beirut, continued to reach the
aggressor in an uninterrupted flow. It was precisely for
that very purpose that in August last year the United
States, in isolation, blocked the Soviet draft resolution in
the Council which provided for the cessation of arms
deliveries and military assistance to the Israeli aggressor.
By so doing, the United States assumed full responsibility
for encouraging the aggressor.

37. The Soviet Union has pointed out on repeated occasions that all that the overseas patron and protector has
to do is lift a linger and Tel Aviv would immediately call
a halt to its piratical policy in Lebanon. Now, after the
recent publication in the United States of the memoirs of
certain highly placed officials in the Carter Administration, some specific facts have become known which confirm this. We believe it to be worth while to recall these
facts here.

42. The reasons why Washington is now not only unwilling to restrain Israel but also actively helping it lord it
over Lebanon are quite clear. Beginning in 1981, Israel
has been a strategic partner of the United States. This is a
qualitatively new situation. On the strength of this partnership, Israel, with United States money, United States
weapons and United States political support, is today in
Lebanon and throughout the Middle East securing not
only its own goals but also those of Washington.

38. Fact number one goes back to September 1977,
when there took place yet one more Israeli incursion
into Lebanon. The memoirs of Brzezinski, former
Assistant to the President for National Security Affairs,
state that, on 25 September 1977, the United States
Administration
decided, for a number of reasons, to
bridle Israel. Late that night, President Carter sent a
telegram to Begin stating that, if Israel did not immediately halt its operations in Lebanon, the United States
would halt all military assistance to it. By the following
morning, according to Brzezinski-that
is, just a few
hours later-he was already reporting to President Carter that Begin had given the order to his troops to leave
Lebanon. Such is the effectiveness of the influence of
Washington on Tel Aviv, if, of course, Washington
wants to exercise it.

43. It is therefore not surprising that the United States,
which at the time voted in favour of Council resolution
509 (1982) demanding the immediate and unconditional
withdrawal from Lebanon of Israeli troops, subsequently stated that that resolution was not relevant and
had become outmoded. It is not surprising either that
the United States, in association with Israel, directly
helped that country to impose this unfair agreement
upon Lebanon. Nor is it surprising, finally, that on Lebanese territory, along with Israeli occupying forces there
have appeared-under
cover of the fig-leaf of the socalled multinational
force-occupation
troops from the
United States and certain other countries of the North
Atlantic Treaty Organization. The protracted stationing
in Lebanon of both Israeli and multinational-in
practice, American-forces
is in contravention of Council
resolutions which reaffirm the responsibility
of the
United Nations for the withdrawal of Israeli troops from
Lebanon. All of this is part of one single whole; all of it
is a reflection of the line of the United States which is
aimed at seeing that, in partnership with Israel, a sinister
military bridgehead is created in the Middle East. The
purpose of this far-reaching strategy is to dictate capitulationist terms to Arab countries and peoples in order to
turn back the clock of history, to gain control of Arab oil
and to recolonize the Middle East. This is what the most
recent events in and around Lebanon tell us.

39. Fact number two goes back to June 1978. At that
time, Washington was put out at the fact that Israel, after
another large-scale incursion into Lebanon, had left for
the so-called de facto forces of Major Haddad armoured
transports and artillery pieces which had been received
from the United States. At that time, as is stated in the
memoirs of former Secretary of State Vance, President
Carter once again sent a telegram to Begin, stating that, if
Israel did not withdraw those American-made weapons
from Lebanon, the United States Administration
would
be compelled to inform Congress of a violation of the
Arms Export Control Act. In those circumstances,
according to Vance, all United States military assistance
would have been automatically halted. Once again the call
from Washington had an instantaneous effect. According
to Vance, Begin immediately-I
repeat, immediatelytook those armaments out of Lebanon.

44. Settlement of the situation in Lebanon must and
can be achieved, not by means of separate deals or armtwisting behind the scenes but on the basis of strict and
unswerving compliance with resolutions of the Council
which demand the unconditional
withdrawal of Israeli
troops from that country.

40. If we are recalling these concrete examples, which
have now become public knowledge, it is not simply to
demonstrate with crystal clarity the extent to which Israel,
in its aggressive policy in the Middle East and in this case
in Lebanon, is wholly dependent on the United States.
The important thing is to stress what further evolution in
United States policy has occurred since that time with
regard to Israel’s piratical actions against Lebanon.

45. It is precisely within this context that the Soviet
delegation views the question of extending the mandate
of UNIFIL.
As is clear from the report submitted to the
Council by the Secretary-General, the activities of the
Force have continued to be carried out under difficult

41. In June last year, when Israel launched its biggest
and bloodiest act of aggression in Lebanon, Washington
5

circumstances created by the actions of the Israeli
occupying authorities. It is clear from the report that
Israel continues actively to support and encourage its
puppets in the south of Lebanon. It is attempting to
impose upon the Lebanese its own proteges and use
them to supplant organs of local administration.
It is
continuing to provoke incidents with the military personnel of UNIFIL, posing a threat to their life and security. These acts by the Israeli authorities towards
UNIFIL
personnel are a direct violation of previous
resolutions of the Council, in particular resolution 523
(1982) in paragraph 2 of which the Council:

year C2411th meet&l-extended
the mandate of the
Force; with interim periods of varying duration. For its
part, the Netherlands Government has agreed to continue
its participation in UNIFIL.
However, when the Council
discussed the UNIFIL
mandate in January of this year,
we made it clear that any continued participation would
be subject to the fulfilment of certain conditions, which in
our view have not been met, or have only very partially
been met.
51. Outstanding among developments which have taken
place since the previous-extension of UNIFIL’s
mandate
by the Council is the agreement signed on 17 May 1983
between the Government of the State of Israel and the
Government of the Lebanese Repubic. The Netherlands
has welcomed this agreement, which provides for the
withdrawal of Israeli forces from Lebanon and which
would terminate the prolonged state of war between the
two countries. We have also expressed the hope that this
agreement will contribute to the establishment of a lasting
peace in the Middle East and that it will receive the support of all parties in the region. It goes without saying that
the Netherlands Government is deeply concerned at the
fact that, two months after the signing of the agreement,
its implementation is still very much in doubt, for in order
to attain the Lebanese Government’s objective that all
external forces withdraw from its territory as soon as possible, it should be able to count on the co-operation of all
concerned.

“Insists that there shall be no interference under
any pretext with the operations of the Force and that
it shall have full freedom of movement in the discharge of its mandate.”

46. It is the duty of the Council to ensure respect for its
resolutions and to put an end to the provocative conduct
of a State Member of the United Nations towards the
international Force operating under the United Nations
flag.
47. In the light of the recommendations
of the
Secretary-General and the request made by the Lebanese
Government, and also bearing in mind that the goals and
functions of UNIFIL
will continue to be determined by
the mandate laid down in resolution 425 (1978) and subsequent decisions of the Council on this subject, the Soviet
delegation has found it possible not to object to the extension of the mandate of the Force.

52. The Government of Lebanon has requested the
renewal of the present mandate for a further interim
period of three months. Although we understand the
very difficult position of the Government of Lebanon,
which prompts it to ask for another temporary renewal
of UNIFIL’s
mandate, we think the time has come for
.the Council to face the fact that UNIFIL’s
mandate, as
established by Council resolution 425 (1978) and subsequent resolutions, has lost much of its meaning. However, during the past six months it has become
increasingly difficult for UNIFIL
to carry out what
remains of its mandate.

48. Mr. van der STOEL (Netherlands): Sir, I should like
first of all to extend my congratulations to you on your
assumption of the presidency. I should also like to take
this opportunity to thank you and members of the Council for the kind words addressed to me as the new representative of the Netherlands in the Council.
49. I now turn to the United Nations Peace-keening
Force in southern Lebanon. We are all aware of the difft:
cult circumstances under which the Force is now obliged
to operate, The Israeli invasion of Lebanon and subsequent developments in the area have made it practically
impossible for UNIFIL to carry out the mandate given it
by the Council under resolution 425 (1978), paragraph 3
of which states that the Council decided to establish the
Force

53. Actions and incidents caused bv the Israel Defence
Forces and local militia have further undermined the
authority of UNIFIL in the area and seriously called into
question UNIFIL’s
ability to carry out its main task
nowadays-that
is, to protect the local population. We
urgently repeat our call to the Government of Israel to
respect UNIFIL’s
mandate and to stop obstructing the
Force from performing its duties.

“for the purpose of confirming the withdrawal ‘of
Israeli forces, restoring international peace and security and assisting the Government of Lebanon in ensuring the return of its effective authority in the area”.

54. Bearing in mind that UNIFIL has now already, for
more than a year, been largely prevented from carrying
out the tasks envisaged for it and that it does not seem
likely at present that the Force will be able to assume
useful functions in the near future, my Government has
come to the conclusion that prolongation of UNIFIL on
the basis of the present mandate could not and should
not be indefinite. With regard to the Netherlands participation in UNIFIL,
I am instructed to inform the
Council that the Netherlands Government has agreed to

50. These difficulties notwithstandinn.
we felt that
UNIFIL still had a stabilizing effect on the situation in the
area. Moreover, the Force was able to play a. useful
humanitarian role, and its presence indicated that it might
be available for duties connected with a future withdrawal of Israeli forces from Lebanon. The Council has
on several occasions-the last being on 18 January of this
6

its further continuation,
under the existing mandate,
for a period of up to three months as from 19 July. We
have therefore just voted in favour of the draft resolution
presented to us today.

role-that
is to say, the role of holding the ring militarily
while politicians -and diplomats attempt to solve the
underlying problems.
61. My Government believes that UNIFIL
is playing a
helpful, protective and humanitarian
role in southern
Lebanon. But we share some of the concern expressed
by the representative of the Netherlands. In particular,
we are concerned that the troop contributors,are being
asked to undertake something different from the conventional United Nations peace-keeping role and that
they are being asked to do this in conditions of considerable difficulty and even danger. I should therefore like
to pay a sincere tribute to all members of UNIFIL in the
field for their continuing courage and tenacity.

55. However, barring entirely new circumstances which
would enable my Government to reconsider its position,
the Netherlands battalion will be withdrawn from Lebanon as from 19 October. The Netherlands decision to
withdraw is linked to UNIFIL’s present mandate, which
in our view has largely .lost its meaning. However, our
willingness to agree to a further extension for the months
ahead offers ample opportunity to consider the future.
We intend to remain in close contact with the Government of Lebanon, with the Secretary-General and with
our friends in UNIFIL
and with all other parties concerned to assess any useful contribution that UNIFIL
could make after 19 October.

62. There are two points to which I should like to draw
attention. First, in his report, the Secretary-General
has a number of criticisms to make of the treatment of
UNIFIL
by an occupying Power. Secondly, there is a
shortfall in the UNIFIL account of almost $170 million.

56. Mr. MARGETSON
(United Kingdom): May I join
in congratulating you, Sir, on assuming the office of President. We are already greatly indebted to you for your help
and your wisdom in informal consultations of the Council, and we admire your distinguished qualities, which we
know you will certainly bring to the presidency. May I
also thank Mr. Mashingaidze, the representative of Zimbabwe, for the excellence of his presidency. He steered the
Council with great skill in some very difficult business last
month, and therefore earned our gratitude. I should be
grateful if my delegation’s thanks could be passed on to
him. May I also join you, Mr. President, in welcoming
Mr. van der Stoel, the new representative of the Netherlands. He has had such a distinguished career in intemational relations, including being Foreign Minister of the
Netherlands for some years, that I know we shall all
benefit greatly from his presence at the United Nations. He
will no longer be just a bird of passage with other Foreign
Ministers at the General Assembly.

63. I believe it is shameful that the troop contributors,
some of which are developing countries that need financial resources badly and that are already making a sacrifice in providing troops for the Force, should be
penalized for playing their part in what is a noble cause.
Anyone who has sympathy for, and understanding of,
the problems of developing countries must be shocked
that they are being treated in this way because of the
unwillingness of a group of Member countries to share
the financial burden of UNIFIL.
64. My country believes that to withdraw UNIFIL
would be to remove what the Secretary-General describes in his report as an element of stability in what,
alas, has become an unstable land.

57. It is not for me to answer the extraordinarily unbalanced and unhelpful account of recent history in Lebanon
that my Soviet colleague has chosen to give us. I want
instead to confine my contribution to the particular matter before us-namely,
the future of UNIFIL.

65. It is no exaggeration to say that the very existence of
a founding Member of the United Nations continues to be
at stake.
66. We have just adopted a resolution reiterating our
strong support for the territorial integrity, sovereignty
and political independence of Lebanon within its recognixed international boundaries. At their meeting at Stuttgart on 19 June, the leaders of the European Community
said that

58. My delegation was very pleased to join in the vote
renewing the mandate of UNIFIL.
The SecretaryGeneral’s report on UNIFIL
which is before us is very
valuable. We are most grateful to him for it. I believe it
has made a convincing case for the renewal of the
mandate.

“the return to full sovereignty and final peace in Lebanon requires the complete and prompt withdrawal
of foreign forces from its territory, except for those
whose presence may be requested by the Lebanese
Government”.

59. Nevertheless, we feel that the Council should ask
itself-not
necessarily now, but over the next three
months-about
the future of UNIFIL,
what its purposes
are, and how it may fulfil them.

They also confirmed
,60. As the representative of France has said, circumstances have changed dramatically since UNIFIL
was
set up. I think it is generally accepted that the Force is
no longer carrying out what I would describe as a conventional or traditional United Nations peace-keeping

“their full support for President Gemayel and his
Government
in their determined
action to reestablish their authority over the entire territory of
Lebanon” [see S/Z5867J.
7

67. Perhaps we should be asking ourselves whether
there is anything the Council can do, beyond renewing
the UNIFIL
mandate for a further interim period, to
help the Lebanese Government regain that territorial
integrity, sovereignty and political independence to
which we have once more given our support.

68. The PRESIDENT
(interpretation from Chinese):
The Council has thus concluded the present stage of its
consideration of the item on its agenda.
The meeting rose at 1.15 p.m.

HOW TO OBTAIN UNITED NATIONS PUBLICATIONS
United Nations publications may be obtained from bookstores and distributors throughout the
world. Consult your bookstore or write to: United Nations, Sales Section, New York or Geneva.
COMMBNT SE PROCURER LES PUBLICATIONS DES NATIONS UND3S
Les publications des Nations Unies sont en vente dans les librairies et les agences d&ositaires
du monde entier. Informez-vous aup& de votre libraire ou adressez-vous B : Nations Unies,
Section des vet&s, New York ou Genbve.
ICAK II0JIYWfl-b

I43&4HEIH

OP~AHH3AHHH

OB’LE~HHBHHbIX

ki3nruIuR
OpraRSi3aI~~i
06aenttnetmbtx Ham@ hfoxoio KymTb B KHmcHbfX
H amt~cntax
BO BCCX paffOAa~
hmpa. HanonnTe cnpanxti 06 x3na~mx
B BtlUZM
bmramie XJIX nxnme no anpecy: Opramsa~m
06aemmemrbtx Ham&
nponaxce ~3namifl,
Hbto-RopIc
m
xenena.

HALIIIH
Mara3nHax
KlIHXHOM

Cexnttx no

COMO CONSEGUIR PUBLICACIONES DE LAS NACIONES UNIDAS
Las publicaciones de las Naciones Unidas es&t en venta en librerfas y casas distribuidoras en
todas partes de1 mundo. Consulte a su librero o dirfjase a: Naciones Unidas, Secci6n de Ventas,
Nueva York o Ginebra.
.

.

.
1

,.

. .. ’

.

‘.
.:

Litho

in United

Nations,

New

York

00300

90-60205-July

1991-2,050
