A

UNITED
NATIONS

General Assembly
Distr.
GENERAL
A/RES/50/121
23 February 1996

Fiftieth session
Agenda item 98
RESOLUTION ADOPTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY
[on the report of the Second Committee (A/50/620)]
50/121.

United Nations Institute for Training and
Research

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 47/227 of 8 April 1993, 48/207 of
21 December 1993 and 49/125 of 19 December 1994,
Having considered the report prepared upon the request of the Board of
Trustees of the United Nations Institute for Training and Research, entitled
"Summary of ongoing activities and brief identification of potential
developments of the United Nations Institute for Training and Research", 1/
and taking into account the statements made before the Second Committee of the
General Assembly,
Recognizing the successful implementation of the transfer of the
headquarters of the United Nations Institute for Training and Research from
New York to Geneva and the Institute’s consolidating itself at its new
location,
Taking note with interest of the measures taken to complete the
restructuring process of the Institute,
Welcoming the measures already taken pursuant to resolution 49/125 in
order to resolve the problem the Institute had been experiencing with respect
to the rent of its Geneva headquarters,
Recognizing that training activities should be accorded a more visible
and larger role in support of the management of international affairs and in
the execution of the economic and social development programmes of the United
Nations system,

1/
96-76777

A/50/539, annex.
/...

A/RES/50/121
Page 2

1.
Reaffirms the relevance of the United Nations Institute for
Training and Research, particularly in view of the many training requirements
of all Member States;
2.
Invites the Institute to further develop its cooperation with
United Nations institutes and other relevant national, regional and
international institutes;
3.
Welcomes the decision of the Board of Trustees of the Institute,
at its thirty-third session and at its special session, inviting the Institute
to open a liaison office in New York, in so far as this is possible within its
existing resources and pursuant to General Assembly resolutions 47/227 and
49/125, in order to respond to the training needs of the Missions and
delegations of Member States in New York and in order to strengthen its
cooperative relationship with the United Nations Secretariat;
4.
Urges all Member States to consider resuming or increasing their
voluntary contributions to the restructured United Nations Institute for
Training and Research, in particular to its General Fund;
5.
Encourages the Secretary-General to take relevant measures with
respect to the regularization of the Executive Director of the Institute,
taking into account the recommendations of the Board of Trustees;
6.
Requests the Secretary-General, duly taking into account the
deliberations of the Board of Trustees, to submit a report to the General
Assembly at its fifty-first session on possible ways to strengthen the
training activities of the United Nations Institute for Training and Research
and to better define its role.
96th plenary meeting
20 December 1995
