A/S-27/PV.1

United Nations

General Assembly

Official Records

Twenty-seventh special session

1st meeting
Wednesday, 8 May 2002, 9 a.m.
New York

Temporary President:

Madam Lee Hee-ho . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

The meeting was called to order at 9:15 a.m.
Item 1 of the provisional agenda
Opening of the session by the Chairperson of the
delegation of the Republic of Korea

(Republic of Korea)

May I take it that the General Assembly duly
takes note of the information contained in this
document?
It was so decided.
Item 3 of the provisional agenda

The Temporary President: I declare open the
twenty-seventh special session of the General
Assembly.

Credentials of representatives to the special session
of the General Assembly

Item 2 of the provisional agenda

(a) Appointment of the members of the Credentials
Committee

Minute of silent prayer or meditation
The
Temporary
President:
I
invite
representatives to stand and observe one minute of
silent prayer or meditation.
The members of the General Assembly observed a
minute of silent prayer or meditation.
Scale of assessments for the apportionment of the
expenses of the United Nations (A/S-27/14)
The Temporary President: I should like, in
keeping with the established practice, to invite the
attention of the General Assembly to document
A/S-27/14, containing a letter addressed to the
President of the General Assembly by the SecretaryGeneral, in which he informs the Assembly that 21
Member States are in arrears in the payment of their
financial contributions to the United Nations within the
terms of Article 19 of the Charter.

The Temporary President: Further to rule 28 of
the rules of procedure of the General Assembly, in
accordance with precedents and as recommended by
the Preparatory Committee for the twenty-seventh
special session of the General Assembly, the
Credentials Committee of the twenty-seventh special
session should have the same membership as that of the
fifty-sixth regular session of the Assembly, namely,
China, Denmark, Jamaica, Lesotho, the Russian
Federation, Senegal, Singapore, the United States of
America and Uruguay.
If there is no objection, I take it that the
Assembly decides to appoint those States members of
the Credentials Committee.
It was so decided.

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. Corrections should be submitted to the original
languages only. They should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature
of a member of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room
C-178. Corrections will be issued after the end of the session in a consolidated corrigendum.

02-37286 (E)

*0237286*

A/S-27/PV.1

Item 4 of the provisional agenda
Election of the President
The Temporary President: I invite the Assembly
to proceed to the election of the President of the
General Assembly at its twenty-seventh special
session.
In this connection, the Preparatory Committee for
the special session recommends that the special session
should take place under the presidency of the President
of the fifty-sixth regular session, His Excellency,
Mr. Han Seung-soo of the Republic of Korea.
I take it that the Assembly wishes to elect His
Excellency Mr. Han President of the General Assembly
at its twenty-seventh special session by acclamation.
It was so decided.
The Temporary President: I extend my sincere
congratulations to His Excellency Mr. Han Seung-soo
and invite him to assume the presidency.
I request the Chief of Protocol to escort the
President to the podium.
Mr. Han Seung-soo took the Chair.
Statement by Mr. Han Seung-soo, President of the
General Assembly at its twenty-seventh special
session
The President: I am very pleased to welcome all
of you to the special session of the General Assembly
on children. I would first like to thank Madam Lee
Hee-ho, First Lady and head of the delegation of the
Republic of Korea, for presiding over the opening of
this special session. This is a crucial moment. It is the
first time that the General Assembly has debated the
issue of children at a special session, and this is one of
the largest gatherings of world leaders ever to take
place at the United Nations. The fact that more than 60
world leaders are here with us is a reflection of the
gravity of the subject: the well-being of our children.
This special session on children was one of the
first major casualties of the tragic events of 11
September last year. These events compelled us to
postpone the session, which had been scheduled for
September. Those very events make it all the more
pertinent that the issues involved in giving children not
just their right to survival, protection and development,
but also a stake in the world’s future are at the core of

2

this special session. Taking this opportunity, I would
like to express my appreciation to all Member States
for their spirit of flexibility and cooperation in
rescheduling this special session.
This special session will review the progress
made since the World Summit for Children held in
1990. The Summit opened a decade of debate and
action on children’s issues, setting concrete goals to
improve child well-being by the year 2000. More than
70 world leaders gathered in 1990, and I am delighted
that the leaders of the world have once again responded
wholeheartedly in the name of children.
Member States have come to renew their
commitments to children, and this time they are doing
so in the presence of more than 1,000 nongovernmental organizations and, very importantly,
hundreds of children and young people. This is a sign
of one of the most important lessons of the last decade:
progress for children depends on partnership among
many players and on the participation of children and
young people themselves.
As we have read in the comprehensive report
prepared by the Secretary-General, there has been real
progress in many areas and there is much to celebrate.
More than 60 countries have cut child mortality by at
least one third, and there has been a 50 per cent
reduction in death from diarrhoeal diseases.
Determined efforts have brought polio to the brink of
extinction, and great strides have been made against
iodine deficiency.
These successes are due to the work of many
people and organizations. I would like to recognize in
particular the great achievements of the United Nations
Children’s Fund (UNICEF) under the able and inspired
leadership of its Executive Director, Ms. Carol
Bellamy. I also wish to congratulate Ms. Bellamy and
her staff, Ambassador Patricia Durrant of Jamaica,
Chairperson of the Preparatory Committee, and the
members of its Bureau on their excellent preparations
for this special session.
Looking into the future, we still have a long
journey ahead of us. We must be serious and open
about the challenges that remain in the unfinished
business of the last decade. And we must ask some
searching questions. Why are so many children still out
of school? Why have we made so little progress in
reducing maternal mortality? In a world of
unprecedented wealth, why are so many children still

A/S-27/PV.1

born into abject poverty and deprivation? And why are
many children still exposed to the horrors of conflict?
Unless we understand and acknowledge our
failures, we are in danger of repeating them. Unless we
recognize and address the barriers to progress for
children, we cannot overcome them. Unless we are
inventive, creative and adaptable, we will be unable to
respond to the issues that have emerged since 1990 or
to the challenges and opportunities that may face us in
the future.
Globalization, for example, presents us with both
profound challenges and great potential. The revolution
in information and communication technologies holds
enormous potential for accelerating the pace of
economic and social progress. Yet at the same time it
has also engendered the digital divide, which threatens
to widen the already huge disparities of income and
opportunity both within and among countries.
May I suggest that, for the next three days, we set
aside any adult prejudices and listen to and learn from
the children and young people who are with us. Let us
take on their excitement, dynamism, optimism and
energy. Let us be as open as they are to new ideas,
differing opinions and alternative viewpoints.
We are immensely privileged to be part of this
historic event. At the same time, we have a great
responsibility to meet the high expectations of
children. The children of the world are watching us.
They expect us to deliver on the promises we make
here in New York. Let us not fail them. Let us therefore
work together during these three days to build a world
fit for children.
I call on the Secretary-General of the United
Nations, His Excellency Mr. Kofi Annan.
The Secretary-General: This is not just a special
session on children. It is a gathering about the future of
humanity. We are meeting here because there is no
issue more unifying, urgent or universal than the
welfare of our children. There is no issue that
important.
None of us — not in the United Nations, not in
Government, not in civil society and certainly not the
children in this room today — needs convincing that
this session must be truly special. And it will be special
in at least one way: it will be the first time that children
themselves will speak at such an event. I urge all the
adults here to listen to them attentively. To work for a

world fit for children, we must work with children. I
would therefore like to address my words to them —
the children of the world.
I would like to tell you that, wherever you may
live, you have the right to grow up free of poverty and
hunger. You have the right to a quality education,
whether you a girl or a boy. You have a right to be
protected from infectious diseases, including
HIV/AIDS. You have a right to grow up on a clean and
healthy planet, with access to safe drinking water. You
have a right to live safe from the threat of war, abuse
and exploitation.
These rights are obvious. Yet we, the grown-ups,
have failed you deplorably in upholding many of them.
One in three of you has suffered from malnutrition
before turning five years old. One in four of you has
not been immunized against any disease. Almost one in
five of you is not attending school. Of those of you
who do go to school, four out of five will never reach
the fifth year of classes. So far many of you have seen
violence that no child should ever see. All of you live
under the threat of environmental degradation.
We, the grown-ups, must reverse this list of
failures, and we are pledged to do so. The very rights I
described for you are part of the promises made in the
Millennium Declaration — a list of pledges agreed by
all the leaders of the world. They promised that by the
year 2015, we will have cut by half the number of
people living on less than a dollar day. They promised
that by the same year, all boys and girls of primary
school age will be in school. They promised that the
spread of AIDS will have been halted. They promised
to work to prevent war and to protect the resources of
our planet.
This gathering of the General Assembly is a
reminder that these were promises made to you, the
next generation.
That means that a child born in the year 2000 has
a right to expect to see a very different world by the
time he or she is 15 years old. It means that all of you
have a right to see a better world in your lifetime. That
better world can be built only by investing in you, the
children of the world.
People may say this cannot be done. But look at
what has been achieved before in the space of just 15
years. A child born in 1954 came into a world that had

3

A/S-27/PV.1

never even sent a satellite into space. In the year that
child turned 15, a man landed on the moon.
A child born in 1964 came into a world where
tens of millions of people were infected with smallpox.
In the year that that child turned 15, smallpox had been
officially eradicated.
A child born in 1976 came into the world in one
of the darkest and most brutal years of South Africa’s
apartheid rule. By the time that child was 15, Nelson
Mandela, who is here with us this morning, had been
released and the end of apartheid was in sight. We are
delighted that today, 10 years later, Madiba is with us
at this special session and is still working harder than
anyone to give children a better future.
Finally, a child born in 1982 came into a world
where there were no attempts to restrict the landmines
that were being laid, from Angola to Afghanistan,
which would kill and maim thousands of children. In
the year that that child turned 15, a treaty was signed
that would ban the use of these abominable weapons.
What did these events signify? Why did these
events come into being, and what do they have in
common? They were achieved because people had the
commitment to use their minds and their hearts to work
together and reach the goals they had set themselves. If
they could accomplish all these things within the span
of one childhood, how can we fail to do the same with
the pledges that have been agreed by all the countries
of the world, especially as we know from experience
that for every dollar invested in the development of a
child, there is a seven dollar return for all society?
To the adults in this room, I will say: let us not
make children pay for our failures any more. Who
among us has not looked into the eyes of a
disappointed child and been humbled? The children in
this room are witnesses to our words. They and their
peers in every land have a right to expect us to turn our
words into action; I repeat, to expect us to turn our
words into action, and to build a world fit for children.
The President: I thank the Secretary-General for
his statement.
In connection with the next item, I should like to
inform Members that the report of the Preparatory
Committee for the special session is contained in
document A/S-27/2 and Addendum 1 (Parts I and II).

4

I call on the Chairperson of the Preparatory
Committee for the special session, Ambassador Patricia
Durrant of Jamaica.
Miss Durrant (Chairperson of the Preparatory
Committee): It gives me great pleasure to extend a
warm welcome to all who are attending this special
session of the General Assembly on children. We are
particularly pleased that so many delegations have
included children.
I now have the honour to present the report of the
Preparatory Committee for the special session, as
contained in document A/S-27/2 and Addendum 1
(Parts I and II).
We are here to witness the culmination of more
than two years of dedication and intense work on
behalf of the children of the world. At this special
session of the General Assembly representatives of
Member States will have the opportunity to commit
themselves to addressing the unfinished business of the
1990 World Summit for Children, as well as new and
emerging issues that affect the lives of children, and to
take concerted action to place the interests of children
at the forefront of development policies.
To oversee the arrangements for the special
session, the Preparatory Committee was established in
accordance with resolution 54/93 of 7 December 1999.
The Committee began its work with the election of a
five-member Bureau made up of Ambassadors from
Bangladesh, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Germany, Mali
and Jamaica.
In addition to its organizational session, the
Committee has held three substantive sessions, several
extended Bureau meetings and numerous informal
consultations.
Decisions on organizational matters for the
special session, including the three interactive round
tables and participation of speakers other than Member
States,
including
children,
non-governmental
organizations and other civil society representatives,
are contained in the main body of the report.
A series of seven panel discussions was held
during the preparatory process. These panels elaborated
several key themes that run throughout the outcome
document; namely, review and assessment, including
constraints encountered in implementing the goals of
the World Summit emerging issues future actions for
children adolescent development and participation the

A/S-27/PV.1

girl child and the subject of the two Optional Protocols
of the Convention on the Rights of the Child, on the
involvement of children in armed conflict, and on the
sale of children, child prostitution and child
pornography.
Another significant feature of the preparatory
process was the holding of five main regional
meetings. These meetings were organized jointly with
the United Nations Children’s Fund (UNICEF) and
took place in Beijing, Berlin, Cairo, Kathmandu and
Kingston. They produced their own declarations, which
have been extremely important in assessing progress
and highlighting regional concerns and priorities.
The declarations of these regional meetings have
been put together in one convenient document for
participants at this special session.
The report of the Secretary-General entitled “We
the Children: End-decade review of the follow-up to
the World Summit for Children” is contained in
document A/S-27/3. The report was introduced to
delegations at the third substantive session of the
Committee. At that time, delegations engaged in
substantive discussion of this very comprehensive
report, which serves as a companion to the draft
outcome document and is based on over 130 national
reports, reports from United Nations entities and on the
follow-up and assessment procedures established by
UNICEF after the 1990 World Summit.
At its meeting on 6 May, the Preparatory
Committee decided to transmit to this special session
for further consideration the draft outcome document
entitled “A world fit for children”. The document is
divided into three main sections.
First, the declaration is a political reaffirmation to
complete the unfinished agenda of the World Summit
for Children and to address emerging issues. It contains
10 imperatives that have been used to mobilize a
groundswell of support that will help to build a world
fit for children.
The second section comprises a review of
progress and lessons learned, which provides a
summary of accomplishments and notes the shortfalls
since the 1990 World Summit for Children.
Section three, the Plan of Action, sets out our
vision of a world fit for children, in which all children
get the best possible start in life; have access to quality
basic education, including primary education that is

compulsory and available free to all; and have ample
opportunity to develop their individual capacities in a
safe and supportive environment.
This section also identifies the broad range of
partners who are called to action in the best interests of
children. The Plan of Action further sets out goals,
strategies and actions in four areas: promoting healthy
lives, providing quality education, protecting against
abuse, exploitation and violence, and combating
HIV/AIDS.
Within each of these areas, specific goals have
been outlined, including, inter alia, developing and
implementing policies and programmes in early
childhood development and adolescent health;
affirming education as a key factor in eradicating
poverty and reducing child labour; protecting children
from all forms of sexual exploitation, including
paedophilia, trafficking and abduction; and reducing
the prevalence of HIV/AIDS within the age group 15 to
24. Several intermediate goals and targets have also
been identified, which will strengthen our progress
towards achieving the goals of the Millennium
Declaration for 2015.
The Plan of Action affirms that in order to
achieve the goals and targets within the four key areas,
additional human, financial and material resources will
be required nationally and internationally, and it calls
for enhanced international cooperation to achieve
global funding targets.
Finally, the draft outcome document addresses
follow-up actions and monitoring to be taken at the
national, regional and international levels. It also
requests the Secretary-General to report regularly to
the General Assembly on the implementation of the
Plan of Action.
On behalf of the members of the Bureau and on
behalf of the members of the Preparatory Committee, I
would like to pay tribute to UNICEF and to the
leadership of its Executive Director, Ms. Carol
Bellamy. In its role as substantive secretariat,
UNICEF’s contribution to the work of the Preparatory
Committee has been immeasurable. I would also like to
thank members of the United Nations Secretariat, who
continually performed miracles to accommodate the
changing needs of the Committee. I am deeply grateful
to the Vice-Chairmen, Ambassadors Chowdhury and
Schumacher, in particular, for their support and

5

A/S-27/PV.1

guidance in facilitating the work of the Preparatory
Committee’s outcome document.
Finally, to all members of the Committee, I am
truly grateful to you for the hard work and the
commitment displayed throughout the process.
We now have the opportunity to participate in
creating a world fit for children.
Item 6 of the provisional agenda
Organization of the session
Draft decision II (A/S-27/2, para. 25)
Draft decision III (A/S-27/2/Add.1 Part 1,
para. 18)
The President: In addition to General Assembly
resolution 55/276 of 22 June 2001 and 56/259 of 31
January 2002, as well as Assembly decision 56/467 of
1 May 2002, the Assembly has before it draft decision
II, recommended by the Preparatory Committee in
paragraph 25 of its report (document A/S-27/2), and
draft decision III, recommended by the Preparatory
Committee in paragraph 18 of Part 1 of the addendum
to its report (A/S-27/2/Add.1 (Part 1)).
Draft decision II is entitled “Organizational
arrangements for the special session”.
May I take it that the General Assembly wishes to
adopt draft decision II?
It was so decided.
The President: Draft decision III is entitled
“Presentation of the outcome of the children’s forum to
the General Assembly at its special session on
children”.
May I take it that the General Assembly wishes to
adopt draft decision III?
It was so decided.
The President: On the basis of the decisions
taken by the General Assembly, the Vice-Presidents of
the twenty-seventh special session shall be the same as
those of the fifty-sixth regular session of the General
Assembly.
The Vice-Presidents of the fifty-sixth session are:
Cambodia, China, the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, Ethiopia, France, Greece, Guatemala,

6

Kyrgyzstan, the Libyan Arab Jamahiriya, Malta,
Mauritania, Nepal, Nicaragua, Paraguay, the Republic
of Moldova, the Russian Federation, Saudi Arabia,
Sierra Leone, South Africa, the United Kingdom of
Great Britain and Northern Ireland and the United
States of America.
If there is no objection, I take it that the
Assembly decides to elect by acclamation those States
Vice-Presidents of the General Assembly at its twentyseventh special session.
It was so decided.
The President: The Chairmen of the Main
Committees of the fifty-sixth regular session shall
serve in the same capacity at the twenty-seventh
special session. The Chairmen of the six Main
Committees at the fifty-sixth regular session are the
following: First Committee, Mr. André Erdös of
Hungary; Special Political and Decolonization
Committee (Fourth Committee), Mr. Hasmy Agam of
Malaysia; Second Committee, Mr. Francisco Seixas da
Costa of Portugal; Third Committee, Mr. Fuad
Mubarak Al-Hinai of Oman; Fifth Committee,
Mr. Nana Effah-Apenteng of Ghana; Sixth Committee,
Mr. Pierre Lelong of Haiti.
If there is no objection, I take it that the
Assembly decides to elect by acclamation those
representatives Chairmen of the Main Committees at
the twenty-seventh special session.
It was so decided.
The President: As concerns the First Committee,
in the absence of its Chairman, Mr. Stéphane De
Loecker of Belgium, Vice-Chairman of the First
Committee, has been designated to act as Chairman of
that Committee for the duration of the special session.
As concerns the Sixth Committee, in the absence
of its Chairman, Mr. Siddig Abdalla of the Sudan,
Vice-Chairman of the Sixth Committee, has been
designated to act as Chairman of that Committee for
the duration of the special session.
In adopting the recommendations of the
Preparatory Committee, the Assembly has established
an Ad Hoc Committee of the Whole, which will be
designated as “Ad Hoc Committee of the Whole of the
twenty-seventh special session”.
In accordance with the decisions taken by the
General Assembly, the Chairman of the Ad Hoc

A/S-27/PV.1

Committee of the Whole will be a full member of the
General Committee of the twenty-seventh special
session.
The Chairman of the Preparatory Committee will
serve in the same capacity in the Ad Hoc Committee of
the Whole.
I take it that it is the wish of the Assembly at its
twenty-seventh special session to elect Her Excellency
Ambassador Patricia Durrant by acclamation
Chairperson of the Ad Hoc Committee of the Whole.
It was so decided.
The President: I congratulate Her Excellency
Ambassador Patricia Durrant on behalf of the General
Assembly and on my own behalf and wish her well in
the important and onerous responsibilities that she has
just assumed for the Ad Hoc Committee of the Whole.
The General Committee of the twenty-seventh
special session of the General Assembly is thus fully
constituted.
I should now like to inform members of the cochairpersons of the three round tables: round table 1,
His Excellency Mr. Nambar Enkhbayar, Prime Minister
of Mongolia, and His Excellency Mr. Ion Iliescu,
President of Romania; round table 2, Her Excellency
Ms. Tarja Halonen, President of the Republic of
Finland, and His Excellency Mr. Vicente Fox, President
of the United Mexican States; and round table 3, His
Excellency Mr. Levy Mwanawasa, President of the
Republic of Zambia, and His Excellency The Right
Honourable Sher Bahadur Deuba, Prime Minister and
Minister for Foreign Affairs of the Kingdom of Nepal.
Members will recall that the President of the
General Assembly was requested to present the list of
selected accredited non-governmental organizations to
Member States in a timely manner for approval. I
should now like to propose to the Assembly the
following eight non-governmental organizations:
Centre for the Culture of Peace and Non-Violence
(“Mali Korak”); Christian Children’s Fund; Forum for
African Women Educationalists; Hague Appeal for
Peace; Arigatou Foundation; NGO Committee on the
United Nations Children’s Fund (UNICEF); Save the
Children Alliance; and South Asian Coalition on Child
Servitude.
May I take it that the Assembly agrees that
representatives from these eight non-governmental

organizations may make statements in the debate in
plenary of the special session?
It was so decided.
The President: In accordance with the decisions
taken by the General Assembly, two child delegates to
the children’s forum will present the outcome of the
forum in the plenary.
After consultations, the following two child
representatives have been identified: Ms. Gabriela
Azurduy Arrieta and Ms. Audrey Chenynut.
I take it that it is the wish of the General
Assembly to hear those two child representatives.
It was so decided.
The President: I should like to remind
representatives that statements in the debate in plenary
are limited to five minutes.
For the twenty-seventh special session of the
General Assembly, the Observer of Palestine will
participate in the work of the General Assembly, in
accordance with General Assembly resolution 3237
(XXIX) of 22 November 1974, resolution 43/177 of 15
December 1988 and resolution 52/250 of 7 July 1998,
with no further need for a precursory explanation prior
to any intervention by Palestine in this special session.
As was stated in my letter of 6 May 2002 to the
Chairpersons of regional groups, the President of the
Inter-Parliamentarian
Council
of
the
InterParliamentary Union requested to make a statement in
the debate in plenary at this special session.
In the absence of objection, may I take it that the
Assembly, without setting a precedent, agrees to hear a
statement by the President of the Inter-Parliamentarian
Council of the Inter-Parliamentary Union in the debate
in plenary meeting?
It was so decided.
Item 7 of the provisional agenda
Adoption of the agenda
The President: The provisional agenda of the
twenty-seventh special session of the General
Assembly is contained in document A/S-27/1/Rev.1.
In order to expedite its work, the Assembly may
wish to consider the provisional agenda directly in

7

A/S-27/PV.1

plenary meeting without referring it to the General
Committee. May I take it that the General Assembly
agrees to this procedure?
It was so decided.
The President: May I take it then that the
Assembly wishes to adopt the provisional agenda as it
appears in document A/S-27/1/Rev.1?
It was so decided.
The President: On the basis of the decisions
taken by the General Assembly, all of the items on the
agenda are to be considered directly in plenary
meetings. In addition, substantive items — that is,
items 8 and 9 — have also been allocated to the Ad
Hoc Committee of the Whole of the Twenty-Seventh
Special Session for consideration, on the understanding
that the debate on those two items shall take place in
the plenary.
In accordance with the decisions taken earlier, I
give the floor to Ms. Gabriela Azurduy Arrieta and
Ms. Audrey Chenynut.
Ms. Azurduy Arrieta (spoke in Spanish): We
have a message from the Children’s Forum entitled “A
World Fit for Us”.
We are the world’s children. We are the victims of
exploitation and abuse. We are street children. We are
the children of war. We are the victims and orphans of
HIV/AIDS. We are denied good-quality education and
health care. We are victims of political, economic,
cultural, religious and environmental discrimination.
We are children whose voices are not being heard; it is
time we are taken into account.
We want a world fit for children, because a world
fit for us is a world fit for everyone.
In this world, we see respect for the rights of the
child: governments and adults having a real and
effective commitment to the principle of children’s
rights and applying the Convention on the Rights of the
Child to all children; and safe, secure and healthy
environments for children in families, communities,
and nations.
We see an end to exploitation, abuse and
violence: laws that protect children from exploitation
and abuse being implemented and respected by all;
centres and programmes that help to rebuild the lives
of victimized children.

8

We see an end to war: world leaders resolving
conflict through peaceful dialogue instead of by using
force; child refugees and child victims of war protected
in every way and having the same opportunities as all
other children; disarmament, elimination of the arms
trade and an end to the use of child soldiers.
We see the provision of better health care:
affordable and accessible life-saving drugs and
treatment for all children; strong and accountable
partnerships established among all to promote better
health for children.
We see the eradication of HIV/AIDS: educational
systems that include HIV prevention programmes; free
testing and counselling centres; information about
HIV/AIDS freely available to the public; orphans of
AIDS and children living with HIV/AIDS cared for and
enjoying the same opportunities as all other children.
Ms. Chenynut (spoke in French): We see the
protection of the environment: the conservation and
rescue of natural resources; awareness of the need to
live in an environment that is healthy and favourable to
our development; accessible surroundings for children
with special needs.
We see an end to the vicious cycle of poverty:
anti-poverty committees that bring about transparency
in expenditure and give attention to the needs of all
children; the cancellation of the world debt that
impedes progress for children.
We see the provision of better education: equal
opportunities and access to quality education that is
free and compulsory; school environments in which
children feel happy about learning; education for life
that goes beyond the academic and includes lessons in
understanding, human rights, peace, acceptance and
active citizenship.
We see the active participation of children: raised
awareness and respect among people of all ages about
every child’s right to full and meaningful participation,
in the spirit of the Convention on the Rights of the
Child; children actively involved in decision-making at
all levels and in planning, implementing, monitoring
and evaluating all matters affecting the rights of the
child.
We pledge an equal partnership in this fight for
children’s rights. And while we promise to support the
actions you take on behalf of children, we also ask for
your commitment and support for the actions we are

A/S-27/PV.1

taking, because the children of the world are
misunderstood.
We are not the sources of problems; we are the
resources that are needed to solve them. We are not
expenses; we are investments. We are not just young
people; we are, above all, human beings and citizens of
the world.
Until others accept their responsibility towards
us, we will fight for our rights. We have the will, the
knowledge, the sensitivity and the dedication. We
promise that as adults we will defend children’s rights
with the same passion that we have now as children.
We promise to treat each other with dignity and
respect. We promise to be open and sensitive to our
differences.
We are the children of the world, and despite our
different backgrounds, we share a common reality. We
are united by our struggle to make the world a better
place for all. You call us the future, but we are also the
present.
The President: I thank Ms. Gabriela Azurduy
Arieta and Ms. Audrey Chenynut for their statements.
Agenda items 8 and 9
Review of the achievements in the implementation
and results of the World Declaration on the Survival,
Protection and Development of Children and Plan of
Action for Implementing the World Declaration on
the Survival, Protection and Development of
Children in the 1990s
Renewal of commitment and future action for
children in the next decade
The President: The Assembly will now hear a
statement by Her Excellency The Honourable
Chandrika Bandaranaike Kumaratunga, President of
the Democratic Socialist Republic of Sri Lanka.
President Kumaratunga: I must apologize for
being the first adult to spoil that beautiful moment
dedicated to the children.
Today, as the United Nations General Assembly
holds this special session on children, I am honoured to
be part of a renewed world leadership movement to
make choices for children, with children, and to give
fresh vitality to our belief that they alone are the
bearers of our future and a nation’s most valuable asset.

Let me begin by quoting Lord Buddha, who said,
“What is mankind’s treasure? Children are mankind’s
treasure.”
The age we live in has been called “the age of
extremes”. The twentieth century saw the marvels of
the rapid development of science and technology, while
it also engendered dangers arising from the excessive
use of such great innovations. For example, the
discovery of nuclear fission, which led to revolutionary
scientific inventions, also led to the manufacture of
nuclear weaponry. I could also mention drugs, the
abuse of which has led to drug addiction, and many
other such examples.
Politically, the emergence of independent nation
States as a result of decolonization has given rise to the
phenomenon of communities within States rising up to
demand recognition and their own separate State,
resulting in a large number of armed conflicts, mainly
in the decolonized regions of the world.
All of that has a direct impact on children in
particular. There are millions of children today who are
suffering physically, psychologically and emotionally
from the effects of war. It is young people who are
most affected by alcohol, tobacco and drug abuse, who
make up the largest number of HIV/AIDS victims and
who suffer the most horrendous consequences of
poverty.
Our world and our modes of living have been
unjust to our children. They, in turn, have become
today’s perpetrators of terrorism, crime and violence.
We adults have the responsibility of ensuring for our
children an environment conducive to growing and
blossoming freely. It is therefore apt that we, the
leaders of Governments as well as of the private and
non-governmental sectors, are meeting here today to
discuss and make decisions about the solutions
required to ensure this for our children. Each one of us
here has a sacred obligation to our children to build
together with our children a world fit for children and a
better place to live in.
We in Sri Lanka have made many endeavours to
keep our promise to children by placing their needs
high on the country’s political agenda. We believe that
children have rights and that they are not mere
appendages of adults. Several decades of sustained
commitment in Sri Lanka to develop health and
education services have led to many success stories.
Free schooling as well as university education and

9

A/S-27/PV.1

other assistance is provided to all our children,
including the poorest. Our high literacy rates — of over
90 per cent for men and for women — bear testimony
to Sri Lanka’s commitment to education without social
or gender disparity. We introduced compulsoryeducation legislation in 1977. Four years ago, my
Government introduced an extensive educational
reform programme aimed at qualitative development
and modernization of education.
Health also has been accorded high priority. We
provide free health-care services for all, with the accent
on primary health care. As a result, we have achieved
very low rates of infant, child and maternal mortality
and low birth rates, eliminated nearly all immunizable
diseases, and provided better sanitation and safe
drinking water. However, we still face the challenges of
malnutrition and the emerging threat of HIV/AIDS.
I have been deeply conscious of the fact that
children in my country have been abused and
victimized, most often by adults. That issue had not
been addressed, due to its sensitive nature. I decided
that a bold step was needed, and legislation was
enacted to establish a national child protection
authority. The concept of that authority, with
responsibilities to prevent child abuse and exploitation,
is new and unique in our region. Its achievements
include legal amendments targeting sexual exploitation,
trafficking, child abuse, juvenile justice, child
pornography,
child-friendly
court
procedures,
campaigns
against
corporal
punishment
and
programmes to promote awareness of child rights and
children’s rights to free expression and participation.
Following ratification of the Convention on the Rights
of the Child in 1991, we developed our own Sri Lankan
charter and ratified all International Labour
Organization protocols and conventions relating to
child labour.
One of Sri Lanka’s greatest challenges in recent
times has been the protection of children from the
impact of an 18-year civil conflict. We provide all
children living in conflict zones with free food, health
care and schooling. We also face the problem of
recruitment by rebels of children as young as 10 and 11
years old as child soldiers. We collaborate with
international agencies, including the United Nations
Children’s Fund, to advocate against the conscription
of children.

10

My Government has accorded priority to the
prevention of the misuse of tobacco, alcohol and drugs,
particularly by youth. We have had success in reducing
the use of these harmful substances by young people.
Investing in social infrastructure development
and poverty reduction is imperative if we are to
seriously bring to centre stage the rights and well-being
of our children.
It has been my special privilege to join you, my
friends, in this leadership endeavour, which has no
parallel, to place children at the heart of all our
development efforts.
In conclusion, may I express my gratitude to all
those who worked hard to make this summit possible
under the dynamic leadership of Ms. Carol Bellamy,
and for the opportunity afforded me to make this
opening statement. I wish the summit every success. I
know that together we can, and we must, make the
world a better place for our children.
The President: The Assembly will now hear a
statement by His Excellency Mr. Ion Iliescu, President
of Romania.
President Iliescu: As we assemble here today for
a special session of the United Nations General
Assembly on children, the reason why it had to be
postponed, almost eight months ago, is still very much
on our minds. The tragic events of 11 September
brought home in a most dramatic fashion the cruel
reality of the world we live in.
The recent traumatic experiences shed new light
on the lasting significance of the documents we
adopted at the first World Summit for Children, in
1990. I vividly remember the sense of responsibility,
commitment and solidarity between generations that
permeated our debates at that time. Indeed, the Summit
and the subsequent entry into force of the Convention
on the Rights of the Child managed to place the subject
high on the agenda as a political priority for action
both nationally and internationally.
At the same time, we have to agree with the
sobering analysis in the Secretary-General’s statement,
as well as with the report of the Preparatory
Committee.
Romania
endorses
the
sound
recommendations and strategic directions outlined in
the report and wholeheartedly supports the forwardlooking provisions of the draft outcome document and
action plan.

A/S-27/PV.1

The condition of children cannot be separated
from the state of the overall political, economic and
social environment. Children are the most vulnerable to
the persistent scourges of poverty, disease, armed
conflict, discrimination, exploitative practices and
environmental degradation. Those issues were
highlighted in the Millennium Declaration, and they
were also discussed during the recent International
Conference on Financing for Development, held at
Monterrey. We shall certainly have to engage in a
comprehensive examination of all the logical linkages
at the forthcoming World Summit on Sustainable
Development, to be held in Johannesburg.
In many respects, the case of Romania is relevant
to the daunting problems that a country in transition to
a mature democracy and a functional market economy
has to face. An appalling legacy, especially concerning
the condition of children, has compounded the painful
social costs of radical transformation. We are now able
to report tangible progress, for which we owe a lot to
the very able guidance and assistance we have received
from various United Nations agencies — and in
particular from the United Nations Children’s Fund
(UNICEF) — European Union institutions, the Council
of Europe and a large number of non-governmental
organizations and well-meaning individuals.
For historical reasons, and also as a matter of
practical necessity, we had to address seriously the
question of institutionalized children. While their
numbers have been reduced in the past 10 years to less
than one third of what they were, we shall continue to
provide every child in distress with a setting as close as
possible to a normal family environment. In order to
make absolutely sure that the children’s best interests
are properly served and protected, we have had to
suspend the practice of international adoption for one
year, pending the enactment of appropriate legislation
and procedures.
In close partnership with the International
Organization for Migration and civil society, we have
developed and made operational a national plan of
action against trafficking in human beings, children in
particular. Since widespread poverty is still a major
challenge in Romania, a comprehensive set of
measures has been devised to make the best of the
limited resources available under our national strategy
for child protection, involving the education and public
health ministries, specialized agencies and local
authorities.

Currently, free milk is provided to all infants. As
part of a wider programme to enhance the quality of
educational services, school supplies are distributed to
about 1 million children in primary and secondary
schools. To encourage attendance, particularly by
Roma children, a free meal is offered at school. Special
support measures have been devised for one-parent
families and for the prevention of child abuse,
discrimination and other forms of exploitation. Further
steps cover additional areas of vital significance, such
as preventive programmes and generalized access to
treatment and care for HIV/AIDS patients, to be
introduced by the end of this year as a result of a
partnership with relevant United Nations agencies and
pharmaceutical companies, and universal salt
iodization by the end of 2003.
The Government of Romania has decided to
prepare and submit to Parliament a special bill on
children. We also envisage creating the necessary
infrastructure and regulatory mechanism for the
effective operation of the newly established institution
of Ombudsperson for Children.
We in Romania take seriously our pledge to say
“Yes” to children. Deeds always speak louder than
words.
The President: The Assembly will now hear a
statement by His Majesty King Letsie III, Head of
State of the Kingdom of Lesotho.
King Letsie III: We bring warm you greetings
and felicitations from the people of Lesotho on this
auspicious occasion, Sir, as you preside over the
special session on children. This session comes at a
critical time when the world is grappling with threats
and challenges concerning the welfare of children.
More than a decade ago, the World Summit for
Children was held here at United Nations headquarters.
That Summit adopted a Declaration and Plan of Action
in which we, the world leaders, jointly committed
ourselves to giving every child a better future. When
we take stock of the progress attained in pursuit of
those undertakings and commitments, we find that the
record is a mixed one. While notable progress has been
made in the realization of the goals enshrined in the
Declaration, new threats and challenges have surfaced,
making it necessary for us to meet once again to review
our performance, formulate new strategies and set new
goals in our bid to create a better world for children.

11

A/S-27/PV.1

For most of us in the developing world,
particularly in sub-Saharan Africa, the central
challenges we face in fulfilling the obligations which
we undertook in 1990 include insecurity, severe and
widespread
poverty,
famine,
environmental
degradation, internal conflicts and the spread of
diseases, including HIV/AIDS and malaria. For us,
therefore, a world fit for children means a world where
children are not killed, maimed or displaced by
incessant armed conflicts; a world where children are
not forcibly recruited into military services; a world
where children are not subjected to and traumatized by
sexual violence and mutilation. Above all, it is a world
where children are not orphaned and left destitute by
AIDS and hunger. In short, it is a world where children
are nurtured and allowed to grow to full adulthood in a
tranquil environment that permits them to display their
natural talents and creativity.
Since the last Summit, notable successes have
been recorded in the global movement for children’s
rights. The implementation of the Machel study on the
impact of war on children has led to the establishment
of the Office of the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for Children and Armed Conflicts.
This development strengthens the international
response to children in situations of strife by enabling
the Security Council to take action for their protection.
In this context, we welcome the promulgation of
the Optional Protocol to the Convention on the Rights
of the Child related to the recruitment of children, boys
and girls into military service by either national or nonState party forces and Security Council resolution 1261
(1999). My Government supports efforts by United
Nations agencies and other international partners to
implement these provisions with immediate effect.
Since the last Summit, the world community has
formulated legal protections for children exposed to
hazardous forms of child labour and children caught in
the insidious trap of commercial sexual exploitation.
The African Charter on the Rights and Welfare of the
Child has come into force and the oversight mechanism
is being established. These developments globally and
regionally embolden national Governments to take
action that will make a difference in the lives of their
children.
The Government of the Kingdom of Lesotho has
successfully disseminated the Convention on the Rights
of the Child in Lesotho throughout the country. Young

12

people and national organizations are playing an active
role in the implementation of the Convention. In a
related development, children and youth have
participated actively in national, regional and
international preparatory meetings for this special
session, giving children in Lesotho an opportunity to
make meaningful contributions to the outcome
document. This exercise was undertaken in the firm
belief that children have a right to express themselves
freely and that their views should be respected and
promoted in all matters affecting them. Moreover,
young people are taking part in processes of legal
reform as well as in the formulation of a national
vision for our long-term development. As a young
nation with a young population, Lesotho values the
contribution of children and youth to our country’s
economic and social development.
The Government and the people of Lesotho share
the view that access to basic education and literacy is a
fundamental right of every child. We are also
committed to providing a healthy start in life for young
children in recognition of their right to care and as an
investment in successful learning later in childhood.
Guided by that principle and following the Millennium
Summit, Lesotho took the bold step of introducing
universal free primary education. By 2006, all the
primary school children throughout the country will
have access to basic education. Since the launch of free
primary education, we have witnessed dramatic
increases in school enrolment, with many older
children now eagerly beginning their schooling. As
part of this national campaign, literacy programmes for
out-of-school youth have been expanded and
community-based early childhood development
programmes are being introduced.
In the food and nutrition sector, intensive efforts
are being made to combat micronutrient deficiency
through food fortification with vitamin A and other
supplements. The national campaign for universal salt
iodization is ongoing. Satisfactory progress has been
recorded in universal immunization coverage as well as
in universal access to safe drinking water and sanitary
means of waste disposal. The community health worker
is central to ensuring that communities have access to
basic health services and that pregnant women have
access to quality antenatal care.
As our efforts begin to bear fruit, new challenges
have arisen. Chief among those is the prevalence of the
deadly HIV/AIDS disease, particularly among youth

A/S-27/PV.1

and children. HIV/AIDS, together with increasing
levels of poverty, not only threatens to undo much of
the progress we have made in the health sector, but also
is largely responsible for the disintegration of
families — loss of household income, increased child
labour, neglect and exploitation, and lower school
enrolment. The changing structures of the family unit
caused
by
increasing
household
poverty,
unemployment and migrant labour have eroded the
traditional support structures for children without
parental care, including those orphaned by HIV/AIDS.
The need for the community as a whole to assume new
roles as care providers for the most vulnerable children
has become even more urgent. As a result, we are
determined to persevere and to redirect our scarce
resources towards building an environment for children
that is consistent with the core values, principles and
commitments enshrined in the Convention on the
Rights of the Child.
Because of the complexity of the task at hand and
the substantial financial and technical resources
required to implement it, we are hopeful that the
United Nations system and the international
community will continue to assist us in our efforts to
realize all the rights of our children. In creating an
environment conducive to children’s development, we
have to address, in a holistic manner, the social,
economic and ideological factors that have inhibited
the fulfilment of our obligations under the Convention
on the Rights of the Child.
In protecting children and in charting a new
course for their future, we will have to redouble our
efforts to eradicate poverty. As we all know, children
are hit hardest by poverty because it strikes at the very
roots of their potential for development — their
growing minds and bodies. Additionally, we will have
to change our mindset and treat every child as a person
who has intrinsic value and whom nature has endowed
with unique gifts that have the potential to enrich our
lives immeasurably if they are allowed to flourish.
Before I conclude my remarks, I would like to
pay tribute to all the people involved in the preparatory
work for this meeting. My special tribute goes to
Ambassador Durrant of Jamaica, Chairperson of the
Preparatory
Committee,
for
her
meticulous
preparations and for her robust efforts to finalize the
Plan of Action and Declaration for our meeting. Much
of the success of this meeting reflects the tireless
efforts and dedication of the country offices of the

United Nations agencies and children’s rights
organizations, in particular the United Nations
Children’s Fund and the Save the Children Alliance.
Our successes and failures of the past decade in
pursuing the goals of the 1990 World Summit for
Children and in implementing the Convention on the
Rights of the Child have taught us many lessons. It is
therefore our duty to draw on the lessons learned as we
recommit ourselves to creating a safer, fairer and
healthier world for our children. The SecretaryGeneral’s report, “We the Children”, tells us that our
failures to achieve most of the goals of the World
Summit for Children have not been because those goals
were too ambitious or unaffordable or technically
beyond our reach, but largely because the requisite
political decisions were not taken. In that regard, I
share the view expressed by the Secretary-General,
when he says that, in order to secure a better future for
our children,
“... leaders at every level of government and civil
society must exert the political will necessary to
bring about a decisive shift in national
investments to favour the well-being of children.
The special session of the General Assembly on
children must be the juncture at which that first
step is taken.” (A/S-27/3, para. 47)
I sincerely and earnestly hope that all of us will
heed that call for the sake of all the world’s children.
The President: At this point, I should like to
remind delegates that statements in the plenary debate
are limited to five minutes.
The Assembly will now hear a statement by His
Excellency Mr. Bernard Makuza, Prime Minister of the
Rwandese Republic.
Mr. Makuza (Rwanda) (spoke in French): On
behalf of my delegation and on my own behalf, I
should like to express my sincere and heartfelt
congratulations to you, Sir, on your election to the
presidency of this special session on children and to
express our thanks to its organizers.
It will be recalled that this session would have
been held last September had it not been for the terrible
tragedy of 11 September, which claimed countless
human lives. Therefore, we should like to take this
opportunity to address our deepest sympathy to those
who lost their loved ones and to reaffirm the
determination of the people and the Government of

13

A/S-27/PV.1

Rwanda to combat terrorism in whatever form it may
appear.
Twelve years ago, Rwanda, like the other
Member States of the United Nations, undertook a 10year commitment to implement various actions for
children.
Today, the time has come to take stock. In the
case of Rwanda, despite a period of four years — from
1990 to 1994 — during which implementation of the
plan of action was interrupted, we can be proud that,
despite the difficult context following the genocide, the
last eight years have been marked by some significant
achievements, including, first of all, the signing of the
Convention on the Rights of the Child and its two
additional Optional Protocols. In this context, the
Government of Rwanda has undertaken a process of
constitutional and juridical review to ensure that our
legislation is now in keeping with these international
instruments.
Secondly, Rwanda has also joined the world
campaign entitled “Say Yes for Children”, and our
people voted en masse for the following three
priorities: combating AIDS; ending violence against
children and the exploitation of children; and
guaranteeing that every child has an education.
Other actions have also been taken and efforts
made: a national programme for children; rehabilitation
of the infrastructure for our schools following the
genocide, which has meant that more than 1.5 million
children have gone back to school; participation in the
programme entitled “Education for All”, and a
campaign against violence and sexual abuse committed
against children. Finally, we have set up an expanded
immunization programme for children under five.
As I am sure the Assembly is aware, this last
decade for Rwanda has been marked by severe
upheavals, culminating in the genocide of 1994, which
cost us more than 1 million innocent lives and left us
with 500,000 orphans or children separated from their
families, 65,000 of whom are heads of household.
Added to these are street children, children orphaned
by HIV/AIDS, children whose parents are in detention,
children living in exile and former child soldiers.
The Rwandese Government, in cooperation with
national and international partners, has made every
effort to help all of these people. Thus, more than
120,000 children have been reunited with their families

14

or have been placed in foster families. Four thousand
four hundred child soldiers have been demobilized and
have been reintegrated into society. An education and
social reintegration programme is now under way for
former child soldiers. Finally, all children under 14
who had been imprisoned on suspicion of the crime of
genocide in 1994 have been released and are now
following a social reintegration programme.
The genocide of 1994 and its consequences have
seriously disrupted all of our efforts for and
commitments to children. The challenges we now face
are enormous. The magnitude of the needs to be met is
well beyond the means that we have available.
That is why, from this rostrum, we appeal to the
international community to help us, first, with the
assistance programme for the most needy survivors of
genocide; secondly, in providing access to vaccines,
even the most expensive ones such as those against
hepatitis and meningitis; thirdly, in the repatriation of
Rwandese children adopted in certain countries,
without the consent either of their parents or the
Government of Rwanda; fourthly, in the financing of
programmes connected with basic health care and
education for all and, finally, in the financing of
programmes to combat AIDS, particularly to prevent
mother-child transmission.
The Government of Rwanda, like all nations
present here, is concerned at the many violations of the
rights of the child committed throughout the world.
That is why, today, we must say “no” to all of these
shameful, degrading practices, such as trafficking in
children, child prostitution, the use of children in
armed conflicts and so on.
After the historic vicissitudes that Rwanda has
been through, my country is resolved to invest in
children.
In conclusion, I wish to recommend that in all of
our decisions and daily actions priority be given to the
higher interest of children, so that children can remain
central to our concerns.
The President: The Assembly will now hear a
statement by His Excellency Mr. Stjepan Mesić,
President of the Republic of Croatia.
President Mesić (spoke in Croatian; English text
provided by the delegation): I have not come here to
talk about declarations or resolutions or to present
statistical data and figures. I have come to talk about

A/S-27/PV.1

children, the children in the world in which we live, the
children to which our present-day world is often
denying the right to live and, even more frequently,
failing to provide them with the opportunity to lead the
life they deserve — as human beings, as children.
We, the politicians holding positions of the
utmost responsibility, represent this world, and we run
it as the leaders of our countries. We have assumed that
responsibility.
Let me ask you a question. When you remember
the thousands — the tens and hundreds of thousands —
of child beggars, labourers and soldiers, children who
are victims of family violence and of sexual abuse, do
you dare to say, “We are doing everything we can and
this world cannot be better than it is, not even for
children.”?
I cannot say that, nor do I dare say it. I am
convinced that this world can and must be better. For
the children as well.
Let me ask you another question. When you face
information on how many children lack the slightest
chance to reach adulthood because they will die of
hunger or otherwise curable diseases — incurable for
them because drugs will never reach them — or
information on how many children have no opportunity
to attend school and learn at least the essentials, do you
dare to say, “We have done everything that could be
done, and we cannot do better in the present-day
world — not even for the children?”
I do not dare say it. I have absolutely no doubt
that this world not only must, but also can, be better —
primarily for the children.
I know that today the position of children is better
than it was literally yesterday. I also know that it is
substantially better than it was in the mid-twentieth
century. Finally, I know that it is incomparably better
than it was in the early twentieth century — not to go
further into the past.
But let us face the truth. The position of children
is not good, and in some parts of the world, particularly
in underdeveloped countries — but not only in them —
it is disastrous.
I have already referred to the child labourers,
beggars and soldiers, children condemned to death by
hunger and curable diseases, children condemned to

illiteracy and to the lack of education, and children
who are victims of violence of all kinds.
As long as even one such child exists, we cannot
be satisfied with the condition of the children in this
world. We have to fight this problem both individually
and together. Some simply cannot fight it on their own,
while others find it difficult to decide to do even what
they can do. If we really want to, together we will be
able to do it.
We therefore need a concerted, coordinated, longterm effort, a clear concept and, of course, the required
funds. It is precisely with the United Nations that this
can be accomplished, or, to be quite specific, only
within the United Nations. However, it is an old and
often confirmed truth that the accomplishments of the
United Nations are equal to the desire of the Member
States. This brings us back to ourselves.
We — both States and their leading politicians —
are the ones who must first face the truth and then
agree on a course of action. In doing so, we must be
fully aware that we will achieve practically nothing
unless we proceed from the fact that the problem of our
children can be dealt with only within the broader
context of the problems facing the present-day world.
Let me list, however briefly, the basic factors that
should be sought at the root of the present,
unsatisfactory conditions of the world’s children,
and — let me add, though I thereby seem to exceed the
framework of the session’s topic — not only of the
children.
Those factors include the still inadequately
widespread and unequally developed state of
democracy based, among other things, on the strict
respect for human rights, including the rights of
children; the inadequate presence of the welfare state;
wars and internal conflicts; underdevelopment; massive
unemployment; lack of awareness that the use of
children as labourers or as soldiers is equal to crime,
and that the lack of education denies the future not only
to children but also to the countries in which they live.
In other words, the propagation and the
reinforcement of democracy, the development of the
welfare state, the elimination of wars and armed
conflicts of all kinds, investments in development and
development aid, and, concurrently, the reduction of
unemployment, the enhanced awareness of the need to
ensure a carefree childhood followed by education —

15

A/S-27/PV.1

all this will improve the overall status of children in the
world. And not only of children but of the members of
the human race in general.
If we really want to give the children of the world
a better future, after last year’s tragic events in this city
and in Washington, factors to be eliminated should
certainly include global terrorism, because children are
also abused when they are trained to be future
terrorists. Moreover, throughout the world, children are
also victims of terrorism.
The time has come to change things, all over the
world. The time has come to restore childhood to our
children, to offer them prospects and thereby ensure the
future of our nations.
I declare that the Republic of Croatia will support
and be actively involved, within the context of the
efforts taken by the United Nations, in every project
focused on improving the status of children in the
world.
I affirm that my country will consistently pursue
the policy of peace, firmly convinced that it is only in
conditions of peace that we can build democracy and
provide for development, without which there is no life
of dignity for children, or for the working population
or for the elderly. Let me reiterate that we have
assumed the responsibility. Let us behave responsibly.
Let us make our world better than it is for the children,
but not only for them.
I began my address with a question. Let me
conclude with a question as well: can we do it? This is
the place and the time, high time, to answer that
question. Let us answer it together, and let us answer it
in the affirmative. Then, let us do what has to be done,
for the sake of our children and the children of their
children, for the sake of the future of our world.
The President: The Assembly will now hear a
statement by His Excellency Mr. Nambar Enkhbayar,
Prime Minister of the Republic of Mongolia.
Mr. Enkhbayar (Mongolia): It is indeed a great
honour and privilege for me to address the special
session of the United Nations General Assembly on
children on behalf of the Government and the National
Children’s Council of Mongolia. As a young nation
with children under 18 making up over half its
population, Mongolia attaches primary importance to
this special session to inspire the vision, commitment
and leadership that is needed to fulfil the promise of a

16

better future for every child at the dawn of the twentyfirst century.
The Secretary-General’s report “We the Children:
End-decade review of the follow-up to the World
Summit for Children” reveals mixed results, with both
achievements and setbacks. It is gratifying to note that
significant progress has been registered towards a
number of important Summit goals. They include a
substantial reduction of under-five mortality rates, high
and sustained levels of child immunization, an increase
in school enrolment rates for children and in adult
literacy rates, and heightened awareness of child rights
issues across the world. All in all, issues relevant to
children are being placed higher on national and global
agendas.
Yet, much more needs to be done to effectively
address both the persistent and the evolving threats to
the survival and development of children. It is
absolutely unacceptable that at a time of unprecedented
global prosperity and opportunity, over 10 million
children still die each year, often from readily
preventable causes, 170 million children are still
malnourished, and nearly 120 million have never seen
the inside of a school.
To redress this depressing situation, the world
needs to generously invest in children. Through
investing in our children, in their health and education,
we can effectively attack chronic poverty by breaking
its vicious circle within a single generation. Through
investing in basic social services, including the 20/20
initiative, we can save more precious lives and prepare
our children from their early childhood years to
become productive citizens. Through investing in
children we will honour our moral imperative of
creating a world fit for children.
One of the important lessons learned from the
past decade is that a lack of success in some important
areas was largely due to insufficient investment in
children. That is why this special session, including the
interactive roundtables of world leaders — one of
which I have the privilege to co-chair this afternoon —
is called upon to renew our unreserved commitment to
put children first and to achieve that through actionoriented and time-bound follow-up measures.
Among the priority areas of action, I wish to
highlight quality education. It goes without saying that
education is a key factor in creating a world where
people can develop their full potential and lead

A/S-27/PV.1

productive lives, thus the need to ensure that all
children have access to primary education that is free,
compulsory and of good quality.
In this regard, I wish to emphasize, inter alia, the
importance of the United Nations Literacy Decade,
proclaimed by the General Assembly at its fifty-sixth
session last December, which represents a major global
initiative to meet our renewed commitment to
education for all.
The creation of a world fit for children requires
genuine partnerships between all stakeholders: parents,
Governments,
parliaments,
non-governmental
organizations, civil society, the private sector and the
mass media, as well as regional and international
organizations. What is also important is the active
participation of the children themselves in shaping the
world they will inherit.
Looking back at national implementation of the
Summit goals, it is gratifying to note that, despite the
enormous economic difficulties and constraints of the
ongoing transition period, Mongolia has been able to
achieve the national targets of reducing infant and
under-five mortality rates; substantially reduce the
number of school dropouts; improve child
immunization coverage; and develop a rights-based
approach in dealing with issues relevant to children.
The Government of Mongolia places children
high on its overall agenda of ensuring human security
and human development. It has increased its
investment in the social sector, including its
infrastructure and basic social services, through
shouldering the cost of dormitories, providing free
schooling supplies to children from poor and large
families in secondary schools, and extending
scholarships to higher educational institutions for
children from poor families and herders as well as for
families with three or more student children. Thus we
have been able to improve the quality of education,
increase the number of secondary schools and
enrolment rates, and foster educational opportunities
for children, especially for the poor and vulnerable.
But we still face daunting challenges to ensure
sustained growth and sustainable development, to
substantially reduce poverty and unemployment as well
as to effectively address and prevent hitherto hidden
problems related to street children, juvenile offences,
alcohol and tobacco abuse and emerging transboundary
threats such as child trafficking and the spread of

sexually transmitted diseases and HIV/AIDS. In our
efforts to ensure the well-being of children, we have
been
cooperating
closely
with
international
organizations, including the United Nations Children’s
Fund (UNICEF); foundations such as the Global
Alliance for Vaccines and Immunization (GAVI) and
SOROS; non-governmental organizations such as Save
the Children; and other bilateral and international
partners.
In conclusion, I wish to reiterate that my
Government will spare no effort in implementing the
goals and objectives envisioned in the Declaration and
Plan of Action, in close and active partnership with
fellow members and regional and international
organizations.
The President: The Assembly will now hear a
statement by His Excellency Mr. Abdoulaye Wade,
President of the Republic of Senegal.
President Wade (spoke in French): It is a great
honour for me to take the floor and to participate in this
general debate of the twenty-seventh special session of
the General Assembly on children.
Allow me at the outset to thank you,
Mr. President, for having participated in the Dakar
Summit on partnership with the private sector for
financing Africa’s growth through the New Partnership
for Africa’s Development (NEPAD), and for having
visited me. For us Africans, NEPAD — because of its
partnership with the public sector, represented by the
G-8, and its partnership with the private sector — is
both a vision and a strategy and the only way to make
Africa internationally competitive and place it on an
equal footing, in order to ensure the growth of the
world economy.
First of all, I should like to pay tribute to my
brother and friend, President Nelson Mandela, and to
Ms. Graça Machel, who, through their inspiring
initiative, have spearheaded an unprecedented and
global movement for children.
The review of the outcome of the Plan of Action
adopted at the 1990 Summit by the leaders of the entire
world has shown that significant progress has been
made in the area of survival, development and
protection of children. I should like to summarize my
written statement by explaining in particular what we
in Senegal have done.

17

A/S-27/PV.1

With respect to our country, I will not stress the
results of the end-decade review of the follow-up to the
World Summit for Children. I should like only to say
that Senegal was one of the first countries in the world
to ratify the Convention on the Rights of the Child, that
it played an active role in promoting its adoption by all
countries of the continent, and that we are
endeavouring to implement it.
The implementation of robust measures has also
helped to overcome childhood diseases, reduce the rate
of malnutrition and improve the lives of girls and
women by giving them equal access to health care and
to education.
Since the advent of a democratic system in
Senegal, and through the holding of the World
Education Forum, Senegal has made the development
of young children one of its main priorities. We have
broad-based vaccination programmes and provide iron
and vitamin A supplements. We iodize salt, promote
breastfeeding exclusively, and provide nutritional
counselling and education. The community-based
nutrition project has been made into a programme to
provide better nutrition, the main recipients of which
are children under the age of 5, pregnant women and
nursing mothers. The Association for Education and
Health has also launched a programme to produce
spirulina to enrich food.
Polio has been practically eradicated in Senegal,
and Guinea worm has totally disappeared. The
Assembly is also aware, I am sure, of the positive
results we have achieved in the fight against
HIV/AIDS. Indeed, the rate of infection in our country
is now 1.5 per cent. We are very concerned about
stopping the spread of AIDS and are involved in AIDS
research with the help of two world renowned
Senegalese experts.
In February 2003, under the auspices of the
Ministry of Health, we will be organizing a seminar in
Dakar with leading global experts on the topic of
malaria, whose theme is “Ending malaria”.
With the declared goal of educating all children,
we have launched an initiative, aimed at very young
children, to expand pre-school services. Those services
will be provided in each of the 28,000 villages in
Senegal. They will be open to children aged 2 to 4,
who will be given educational toys to play with, like
those available to children in the developed world. In
addition, during the day, a grandmother or a

18

grandfather will tell the children one of our wellknown legends — a story with a moral lesson.
Young people are of major interest to us, and we
are creating centres for young people in each of the 35
departments in Senegal. In those centres, young people
can put on plays, talk to one another and explore the
Internet.
All of these measures are backed up by an
institutional plan. We have set up a ministry for the
health of small children. We want to ensure a secure
family environment for young children, and we want to
strengthen Senegalese families.
We have two young representatives in the
National Assembly, at least one of whom is a student.
We have set up a ministry for youth, which deals with
young people’s problems and also with combating
environmental degradation.
I should also stress the establishment of
mechanisms to facilitate dialogue with young people,
in particular the National Council for Young People
and the Children’s Parliament, which aim to take into
account their concerns and dreams regarding all
different matters.
The report of the Secretary-General, which
provided a stark analysis of the situation of children in
the world, particularly in sub-Saharan Africa, identified
the challenges that we, as leaders, must meet in order
to build a world fit for children. These challenges seem
to have been well understood by the States members of
the African Union, which adopted a Declaration and a
Plan of Action during the Lusaka Summit in July 2001.
The main themes of that common African position
were presented and discussed by our representatives
here in New York.
This special session must be an opportunity for
us, the leaders, to solemnly declare our intention not
only to consolidate what we have already achieved, but
also to build a world fit for our children — a world of
peace, solidarity and economic and social progress,
with access to education, health care and nutritious
food for all.
The President: The Assembly will now hear a
statement by His Excellency Mr. Runaldo Ronald
Venetiaan, President of the Republic of Suriname.
President Venetiaan: My delegation would like
to congratulate you, Mr. President, as well as the

A/S-27/PV.1

Secretary-General, the Executive Director of the
United Nations Children’s Fund (UNICEF) and the
entire United Nations system, for the valuable
preparations that were made for this special session and
for the documents that have been provided. We would
also like to commend the Bureau of the Preparatory
Committee for its tireless efforts to prepare the
outcome document for this special session.
At the 1990 World Summit for Children, we
promised to improve the well-being of our children.
More than a decade has since passed. Suriname has
made great strides in achieving the goals set forth at
the 1990 World Summit, despite political, structural
and financial constraints. There have indeed been
changes for the better for children. We have assessed
our national legislation, and we are in the lengthy
process of amending laws that do not conform to the
Convention on the Rights of the Child. For example,
Suriname’s National Assembly adopted legislation to
eliminate discrimination against children born out of
wedlock.
Vaccination coverage has improved; the maternal
mortality rate has decreased; and a great deal of effort
has been put into the prevention of childhood diseases
and malnutrition.
In order to ensure the right to education for all,
the Government is placing great emphasis on
mobilizing more resources to invest in the education
sector.
Substance abuse prevention and treatment
programmes are being provided to young persons,
while life skills programmes are informing children of
health-risk issues and aim to equip them with the skills
necessary to make healthy choices.
In 1999, a Youth Congress was held in Suriname,
which led to the establishment of the National Youth
Council, a body whose task it is to advise the
Government on child-related issues.
We have conducted a situational analysis of
children, as well as a child-labour study; the results
show that important progress has been achieved. But as
long as there are still children deprived of basic social
services, basic health care and basic education, and as
long as children suffer abuse and exploitation, we
cannot and will not be satisfied.
Among the greatest obstacles we will all have to
overcome in promoting and protecting the rights of

children are poverty, the HIV/AIDS pandemic, malaria
and war.
Children are hardest hit by poverty. The
eradication of poverty must, therefore, remain one of
the priorities of our development efforts.
Urgent action is needed if we are to halt and
reverse the spread of HIV/AIDS by 2015. It will
require comprehensive and concerted action by us all,
and many more resources than are now available.
This also applies to combating diseases like
malaria. In Suriname, this disease has re-emerged as a
major cause of morbidity and mortality for the people
who live in the pristine rainforests that cover most of
my country.
Let us take the bold steps needed to achieve a
world that is indeed fit for children. When we adults
look at the statistics of the families of our generation,
we realize that we are among the survivors. We
survived the adversities of the world in which we grew
up. Let us commit ourselves to creating a world in
which our children can all be survivors.
Let all the children survive.
The President: The Assembly will now hear a
statement by His Excellency Mr. Marc Forné Molné,
Prime Minister of the Principality of Andorra.
Mr. Forné Molné (Andorra) (spoke in Catalan;
English text provided by the delegation): The sad
events that took place in New York on 11 September
2001 forced this summit to be postponed. The memory
of the victims of that tragedy and the desire to
overcome and combat such acts strengthen our resolve
to fight against intolerance and fanaticism. Education is
one of the key elements in the training of people.
Living together with respect for others in a just,
democratic and egalitarian society must be one of the
essential pillars of the education of our young people.
We welcome this special session because we are firmly
convinced that, if we wish to obtain a fairer world for
all, actions aimed at our younger citizens are of the
utmost importance and must occupy a prominent place
in the work of this Organization, which is making an
enormous effort to improve the living conditions of
peoples throughout the world.
At the outset, I would like to congratulate
Ms. Bellamy and the United Nations Children’s Fund
for the great coordination effort that they made during

19

A/S-27/PV.1

preparations for this special session and for the
enormously important work that they are carrying out
for children. I would also like to congratulate the
Jamaican Ambassador, Miss Durrant, who worked
tirelessly throughout the negotiation process in her
capacity as Chairperson of the Preparatory Committee.
We are also conscious, however, of the enormous
amount of work done by all concerned in preparing for
this meeting, and we thank all of those involved for
their dedication.
What is the meaning of this special session? Why
have we come to New York for these three days from
all corners of the world to take part in a series of
meetings, round tables, presentations and other
activities related to the future of children? I believe
that the answer is very clear. We all know that a society
in which boys and girls do not receive the basic
services that are their right as citizens is a society
whose future is in jeopardy. That is why I would like to
believe that all of us who are sitting here today in this
Hall, as well as those who will be taking part in other
meetings during these days, have as our basic aim the
development of policies for children. This is a matter
which deserves clear, precise action. The space for
speech-making should be limited to this Hall;
afterwards, we must go on to take specific action,
particularly in the areas of education and health.
Andorra has proven to be most responsive to
actions in these two spheres, as we are a country with a
high percentage of young people. There are 9,000
schoolchildren in an educational system that offers
parents a free choice between different systems, and
schooling is compulsory up to the age of 16. Ninetytwo per cent of those 9,000 schoolchildren have said
yes to the world movement. They wish to be heard and
to contribute, and they firmly believe that no child
should be excluded.
Andorra is also a country where health care for
children is attended to with a whole series of primary
services that enable the provision of personalized
quality attention.
Today’s children are tomorrow’s adults, but they
are today’s young people and, as such, must play an
active part in our daily lives. In our country, the local
councils and various associations, together with the
Parliament, are promoting joint participatory policies
that will be reflected in the National Youth Council.

20

That is why we clearly advocate the strengthening of
all educational policies for all children.
But we would like our voice to be heard in favour
of specific action for girls, as we firmly believe that
their access to education from the very beginning of
their lives helps them to become citizens who are
aware of their rights and duties. In the composition of
my Government, 33 per cent of the ministers are
women, a clear example of women’s participation. So I
would like to point out my country’s undertaking to
seek out practical ways in which it can cooperate in
projects aimed at improving the education of girls,
especially in those regions where their situation is most
precarious.
At the level of education, we would also like to
show our interest in all projects that seek to facilitate
the entry of young people into the world of work. We
know the difficulties inherent in that, and we reaffirm
our wish to cooperate in activating international
projects that may open up new ways of thinking and
acting.
I now wish to touch upon the cruellest situation in
which children may find themselves, the situation that,
beyond a shadow of a doubt, justifies our participation
in international meetings: exploitation. Nothing can
justify the abuse of children, whether that entails the
participation of children in armed conflict, their
exploitation in work or their trafficking and sexual
exploitation. We all know that this happens, and I
believe that we all must assume some responsibility in
this regard. That is why our presence here today must
be used to send the world a clear message of
condemnation of all these activities. No more child
soldiers, no more young people exploited through
work, and no more boy and girl prostitutes.
We are aware of the difficulties inherent in
avoiding these situations, but as a citizen and as the
head of the Government of a country where care for
children is one of the cornerstones of its social
development, I believe that my voice has to be used to
demand decisive action to put an end to these
situations. It is my firm belief that we are here to
reaffirm our commitment to the Convention on the
Rights of the Child, along with its two Optional
Protocols, and, above all, to add our voice to the
international proclamation on behalf of children and
young people in our world. As the children said,
today’s boys and girls are tomorrow’s men and women.

A/S-27/PV.1

That is why, if we want a better future for our children,
we must work tirelessly as of now in all sectors that
constitute our society. That is without doubt the thrust
of our meeting, and we trust that the results will
confirm it.
The President: The Assembly will now hear a
statement by His Excellency Mr. Pedro Verona
Rodrigues Pires, President of the Republic of Cape
Verde.
President Rodrigues Pires (spoke in French): I
would like to begin my statement by extending my
warmest congratulations to the Secretary-General and
to the bodies of the United Nations system, particularly
UNICEF, for their in-depth work and systematic efforts
since the adoption of the Convention on the Rights of
the Child. That Convention is nothing less than an
extension of the United Nations Charter to guide
international efforts and national policies with regard
to children. That basic work on behalf of children fits
perfectly into the overall framework of the struggle for
respect for human rights. As such, it emphasizes all
areas of interest to the human being as a whole.
As we speak here in the prestigious setting of this
Hall, detailed reports containing disturbing statistics
tell us that, despite all the efforts made by the members
of the international community since the adoption of
the Declaration and Plan of Action adopted at the
World Summit for Children, held in September 1990,
millions of children still die every year due to
avoidable causes. One of the latest UNICEF
publications estimates that 150 million children are
undernourished and that about 120 million do not
attend school, 53 per cent of those being girls.
Wars provide no respite. In the decade of 1986 to
1996, 2 million children were killed in armed conflicts;
6 million were wounded or disabled, in particular by
anti-personnel landmines; and almost 1 million have
been orphaned. Moreover, there are currently over 22
million children who have been displaced or have
become refugees due to violence. Many of them have
applied for political asylum without success, thereby
adding the pain of exclusion to the suffering of
isolation. Many children die of hunger and AIDS. The
children of immigration are victims of outdated
policies, racism, intolerance and exclusion. In closer
circles and even in the family, which should guarantee
protection and foster love, children suffer in silence

behind closed doors from ill-treatment, negligence and
violence.
I wonder how many children are at this very
moment wandering the streets looking for survival or
passing from refugee camps to regroupment camps due
to interminable conflicts that exist for reasons
unknown to them and increasingly unacceptable. Take
the example of Palestine, a situation which constitutes
an act of violence against the human conscience.
I believe it fair to recognize that mankind has
made considerable efforts throughout history to
promote human dignity in all its dimensions. In that
regard, it is appropriate to welcome all the progress
made through universal law, the sustained efforts of the
United Nations to make the issue of children affected
by war in particular a priority in international action,
and the determination to include their protection in
peace processes.
I share the opinion that the difference between
one country and another rests, first and foremost, in the
treatment that the generations of today give to children.
Moreover, the world to which we all aspire and which
we wish to build would become a reality if we could all
convince ourselves that investing in children is the way
to guarantee mankind’s future. Cape Verde is willing to
do everything possible, particularly
in
the
implementation of the pertinent recommendations of
the Committee on the Rights of the Child contained in
Cape Verde’s first national report, to ensure that the
children of Cape Verde can enjoy full protection for
their sound development, both physically and
intellectually.
Children in my country enjoy a set of
reinvigorated rights, as all the conventions and
protocols applicable to children have been ratified.
However, I believe that it is one thing to have rights
and entirely another to be able to exercise them. The
challenge we are facing is to create the essential
conditions for children to be able fully to enjoy their
rights. The road to those legitimate ambitions is a long
one.
We are convinced that the children born with the
new century will be able to live in a fairer world based
on greater solidarity; a world in which the majority will
no longer be fated to hunger and justice will not
depend on the colour of one’s skin, beliefs or social
status; ultimately, a world that will be safer for all,
open to the legitimate aspirations of peoples, based on

21

A/S-27/PV.1

the solid foundations of peace, cooperation and
multilateralism, and rooted in international legality.
We must do our utmost to ensure that the youth of
today and of the future are capable of resisting the
ideologies of hatred, obscurantism, violence and
rejection. We believe in the future of the men and
women that the children of today will become.
The President: The Assembly will now hear a
statement by His Excellency Mr. Boris Trajkovski,
President of the former Yugoslav Republic of
Macedonia.
President Trajkovski: It is my great pleasure to
take part in this important gathering aimed at the
benefit of all children of the world. The special session
of the General Assembly on children is a historic
opportunity for us to make the needs and rights of
children a priority in all development efforts and thus
to ensure a better, healthier and safer environment for
every child. There could be no nobler or more precious
cause than creating a world fit for children.
I would like to take this opportunity to express
special recognition of the Secretary-General’s report,
which highlights effectively the issues of concern to
children, giving them a global perspective. This
forward-looking, comprehensive, frank and objective
analysis of the situation of the world’s children and the
problems that they continue to face can guide us in our
future efforts.
It was 12 years ago at the World Summit for
Children that the world’s leaders called for joint action
in securing a better world — a world of equal
opportunities for every single child. Significant
progress has been made since then in promoting and
protecting the rights of the child and in assuring the
well-being of our children. Now is the time to renew
and reaffirm the commitments made 12 years ago, to
review the progress and achievements made for
children in the decade following the World Summit for
Children and the World Declaration and Plan of Action,
and to formulate specific actions and programmes for
the years to come. The key and pressing issues of the
past decade, such as children’s health, education, the
elimination of poverty and exploitation, remain central
to the new global goals. Nevertheless, we should not
forget the newer challenges related to child protection
and HIV/AIDS.

22

The Republic of Macedonia attaches utmost
importance to international activities, particularly those
within the United Nations system, to promote the rights
of children all over the world. After more than a
decade of experience in implementing the Convention
on the Rights of the Child, this is a perfect occasion for
us to reaffirm the commitment and the political will to
implement that important international treaty. It is time
not just to learn more about what is being done for the
well-being of children, but for every individual, every
family, every society, every political leadership, every
State and every organization to do their utmost.
Success relies on our determination and sustained
action towards pursuing the key goals of promoting
healthy lives, providing quality education and
protecting children from abuse, exploitation and
violence. In other words, it depends on our ability to
address the major challenges of our time: poverty, the
scourge of war and terrorism, and the HIV/AIDS
pandemic and the risks it poses to children.
The bitter experience of South-East Europe in the
past decade, including the most recent events in my
country, are yet further proof of the imperative need for
the full implementation of the Convention on the
Rights of the Child and its two Optional Protocols. My
Government is making efforts to review its legislation
and to adopt appropriate amendments to ensure full
conformity with the Convention and that its provisions
and principles are reflected, applied and enforced in
state policy and administrative practices. The National
Action Plan has been incorporated into a national
development plan, social policies and a sectorial
programme. Macedonia has signed the Optional
Protocol on the involvement of children in armed
conflict and the Optional Protocol on the sale of
children, child prostitution and child pornography.
Furthermore, the National Commission for the
implementation of the National Action Plan was
established for the effective evaluation and
implementation of the rights of the child, as stipulated
in the Convention. An Ombudsperson for children’s
rights was also appointed within the National
Ombudsman’s Office.
I would also like to stress the good cooperation
between our Government and the United Nations
Children’s Fund in the field of child protection,
especially in the areas of primary health care and
education. We are now in the process of signing the
third master plan of operation for the period 2002-

A/S-27/PV.1

2004. Programme activities are expected to be of direct
benefit to the entire child population under the age of
18, which numbers approximately 650,000 children in
the Republic of Macedonia. Special emphasis is given
to activities related to the reduction of infant, prenatal
and maternal mortality rates and to better formal preschool education, covering the social, intellectual,
psychological, emotional and physical aspects of the
child’s development, especially for children from rural
and ethnic communities. In addressing this issue, the
government services will closely collaborate with the
local communities, the national network of nongovernmental
organizations
and
international
organizations and non-governmental organizations,
which have largely contributed to the success of such
projects in the past.
The almost universal adoption and ratification of
the Convention on the Rights of the Child makes it
even more important that all States parties to the
Convention fully respect and implement its provisions.
Recalling the promises of the World Summit for
Children, lessons drawn from the past and assessments
of what remains to be done, I am convinced that the
adoption of the Declaration and Plan of Action at the
present special session will be a clear expression of our
political will and partnership in carrying out our joint
task of promoting children’s rights. Let us not forget
the days of our own childhood and what we dreamed
about while waiting for adults to arrange our world. Let
us do better; let us do more.
The President: The Assembly will now hear a
statement by His Excellency Mr. Cándido Muatetema
Rivas, Prime Minister of the Republic of Equatorial
Guinea.
Mr. Muatetema Rivas (Equatorial Guinea)
(spoke in Spanish): First of all, I should like to fulfil
my duty to convey to all representatives of the friendly
countries participating in this session of the Assembly
the warmest and most sincere greetings of His
Excellency Teodoro Obiang Nguema Mbasogo,
President of the Republic of Equatorial Guinea, whom
I have the high honour of representing. Because of
unavoidable obligations of State, he was unable to
share with the Assembly his reflections on the current
state of our planet’s children, who everywhere are
subject to many physical and psychological traumas
that risk their future as human beings called upon to
ensure the survival and development of humanity.

Our meeting today takes place within the context
of our concern at the unfortunate state of our children,
the world in general and the developing countries in
particular. Indeed, the concern of the international
community and the fervent desire of everyone to
improve and secure the situation of children have been
shown in various declarations adopted by the
Assembly, in particular the Declaration of the Rights of
the Child and the World Declaration on the Survival,
Protection and Development of Children.
Nevertheless, we still watch helplessly as
children continue to be the innocent victims of armed
conflicts, maltreatment and every kind of social
injustice perpetrated by human beings older than they.
To all those, one must add the persistence of great
pandemics such as AIDS, malaria and tuberculosis, as
well as hunger and malnutrition, inter alia, all of which
result from the poverty that harms the lives of more
than 200 million children in the world.
In fact, our concern should not focus on children
only because they are the primary victims of such
calamities. A conscientious analysis of humanity’s
global situation reveals that, as the result of the actions
of human beings themselves, we are facing an
imminent disaster whose sacrificial victims would be
children.
Therefore, we must reflect carefully to realize
that the insecurity threatening the survival and
development of today’s children is a result of the
behaviour of the society in which they live. Our
children are a faithful reflection of what we have
wanted: a world full of uncertainty, on permanent alert
for threats by human beings themselves. We are the
ones who are responsible for wars, terrorist acts and the
marginalization of human beings because of race,
religious belief or opinion. We are the destroyers of the
environment and of ecosystems; it is we who threaten
the survival of human beings on Earth — among them
our children, the guarantors of the future.
For my Government, the solution lies in the
eradication of poverty to help make possible a better
life for future generations. However, we do not want
development that promotes licentiousness in youth,
acceding to immoral vices under the pretext of
defending their rights and freedoms. The freedom of
children should be circumscribed by freedom of
thought and expression arising out of their liberal,
creative and humanistic character.

23

A/S-27/PV.1

Motivated by those concerns, the Government of
the Republic of Equatorial Guinea has not failed to
adopt relevant strategies for the protection of the rights
of the children of Equatorial Guinea.
In 1991, a National Plan of Action for Children
and Women for the decade 1991-2000 was elaborated
and adopted.
In 1992 the Convention on the Rights of the Child
was ratified. Also, there was the elaboration of the
General Law of Education, which promotes the
principle of free and compulsory primary education;
the implementation of the nonformal preschool project;
the implementation of the expanded vaccination
programme; and the strengthening of primary health
care to achieve better community participation in the
management of social services.
In 1996 there was the promulgation of the Law on
Family Planning, which lays the groundwork for the
protection of mothers and children, and, in
collaboration with UNICEF, the organization of the
First National Forum on the Implementation of the
Convention on the Rights of the Child, to carry out a
medium-term evaluation of the National Plan of
Action.
In 1997 the National Committee on the Rights of
the Child was created as an organizational platform for
the implementation of the Convention. In the same year
there was the First National Economic Conference,
during which the medium-term economic strategy was
adopted and the Government decided to allocate 40 per
cent of total public expenditure to the social sector,
distributed as follows: education and science, 15 per
cent; health and social well-being, 10 per cent; social
affairs and the condition of women, 4 per cent; youth
and sports, 3 per cent; culture, 3 per cent; the
communications media, 3 per cent; the labour sector, 2
per cent; and activities of the population, 1 per cent.
The National Forum on Education was held in 1997,
and there was the national implementation of a local
development programme whose objectives are to
promote local economic and social development and
dialogue about the decentralization and strengthening
of civil society, giving impetus to its participation in
development. The Poverty Alleviation Project was
implemented to improve the standard of living of the
most vulnerable social strata through the granting of
loans to finance microprojects.

24

In 1999 came the promulgation of the law on the
regime of non-governmental organizations. At present,
various
non-governmental
organizations
and
associations operate in the country, of which three
focus on children. The initial report on the
implementation of the Convention on the Rights of the
Child was prepared.
Science and technology constitute the best
vehicles for strengthening relations between countries
and for ensuring the full development of children. If we
do not make use of them, we will widen the gap
between developed and developing countries and pass
it on to future generations.
Equatorial Guinea recognizes that great efforts
have been made and that much remains to be done. We
are totally convinced that with the assistance of the
international community we will be able to achieve a
world fit for children.
I do not wish to end my statement without taking
this opportunity to thank, on behalf of the Government
and people of Equatorial Guinea, the President of the
General Assembly, the Secretary-General and the
United Nations Children’s Fund (UNICEF) for the
constant material, financial and technical support that
we have received over the past 10 years, which has
constituted important support in our achieving the
objectives outlined. Our gratitude is also extended to
the Government and people of the United States for the
hospitality extended to my delegation since our arrival
in this beautiful city of New York.
I would like to end by requesting that for the
future of humanity and in the spirit of this world
Organization, we remove the barriers that prevent the
full development of the inhabitants of our planet. With
this we will have said “yes” for children and taken a
big step forward in the honourable task of building a
world fit for children.
The President: The Assembly will now hear a
statement by His Excellency The Right Honourable
Percival James Patterson, Prime Minister of Jamaica.
Mr. Patterson (Jamaica): We meet today not only
to assess our stewardship since the World Summit for
Children; we are also fully seized of the compulsion to
plan adequately for the future development of all the
children of Mother Earth.
From this same podium in November last year, at
its fifty-sixth session, I exhorted the General Assembly

A/S-27/PV.1

to proclaim the beginning of the renaissance of the
United Nations. Nothing could make a more propitious
start to effecting such a renaissance than a universal
commitment at this special session to creating a world
that is indeed fit for our children.
Let me commend the United Nations, and
UNICEF in particular, for spearheading initiatives
which have placed children’s issues high on the
international agenda and secured widespread
recognition of children’s rights within the international
community.
We can record with considerable satisfaction the
progress that has been achieved in many parts of the
world: reduced mortality rates for children under five,
heightened levels of immunization, dramatic progress
in preventing iodine deficiency disorders, and an
increase in the activities of civil society and those who
advocate the rights of children. We have witnessed a
tightening of the legal regime governing those rights
with the entry into force of the two Optional Protocols
to the Convention on the Rights of the Child, which
Jamaica will ratify during this session.
But all too soon, the landscape changes. As if
stepping out of an idyllic painting and into another
world, we are confronted with the lamentable reality of
children who are robbed of their childhood innocence
as they fall victim to war and who are used as pawns in
a cruel game, as drug traffickers and as perpetrators of
crime and violence. Others are victims of the ugliest
and most shameful human activities — some sold into
slavery and sexually abused. Many are devastated by
the HIV/AIDS pandemic, which not only impedes their
physical and emotional development but makes them
vulnerable orphans as well.
The advent of globalization has not reduced
appalling hardships, especially for children in
developing countries. Poverty remains the single
biggest obstacle. It causes death, stultifies growth and
breeds abject despair.
Children now have their place on the national
agendas of many Member States and in the work
programmes of several international organizations. In
my own country, our policy makers have been focusing
on children and youth in the process of national
development. We have fashioned a comprehensive
approach to children’s issues, in fulfilment of our
commitment to improving their situation. The process
has involved national consultations with key players,

including government, the
governmental organizations
representatives.

private sector, non(NGOs) and youth

An important milestone has been the development
of a national plan of action for children. Other
supportive policies include a national youth policy, a
revised national population policy, a national poverty
eradication policy and programme of action, and
special programmes to assist children with disabilities.
In order to provide an enabling environment,
Jamaica has undertaken legislative review and reform,
which will culminate in the promulgation of a new
child care and protection act. Jamaica is particularly
proud of the contribution it has made in the shaping of
the important review process, both through regional
initiatives, which gave birth to the Kingston consensus,
and at the international level through the work of the
Preparatory Committee for this special session.
It is imperative that we all continue to engage our
intellect, our resources and our actions to fulfil the
mandates of the Millennium Declaration. At this
special session, we the peoples of the United Nations
must set meaningful goals and targets aimed at
ensuring a better quality of life for children
everywhere. We must continue to build on actions
taken by the Security Council to meet the needs of
children and adolescents in conflict situations.
We must take the necessary steps to bridge the
widening gap in opportunity between rich and poor
countries. We must harness the advances in technology,
particularly in the area of research, to benefit children
in developing countries whose needs for education,
primary health care and food are still to be fully met.
We must isolate and punish those who perpetrate
some of the most heinous crimes against children. We
must seek to spare our children from the hideous
tentacles of drug abuse and from debilitated and
shortened life span as a result of HIV/AIDS. Investing
in our children is our best way of ensuring long-term
development and global harmony.
Let this Assembly transmit a message of hope and
determination. Let us, as heads of State and
Government, policy makers and leaders of civil society,
undertake to ensure that political policies and
economic programmes serve to improve the status and
well-being of children.

25

A/S-27/PV.1

Let us forge the full participation of young people
to ensure that their interests are always truly protected.
We must act in concert and say yes for children, and
construct a world fit for children, recognizing that
since they are central to the progress and continued
development of mankind, they must be afforded
priority attention. Investment in our children is a
prerequisite to ensuring that the key objective of the
United Nations, in creating one world of peace and
stability, is attained.
Let us reaffirm the apt conclusion in the 1990
Summit Plan of Action:
“There is no cause which merits higher priority
than the protection and development of children,
on whom the survival, stability and advancement
of all nations … depends.”
Let every nation gathered in this forum depart
from here with a determination to transform fine
rhetoric into resolute action, and to translate the
universal consensus into early and effective action
within our sovereign borders and thereby everywhere
on this planet.
The President: The Assembly will now hear a
statement by His Excellency Mr. El Hadj Omar Bongo,
President of the Gabonese Republic.
President Bongo (spoke in French): The present
special session of the General Assembly, convened 12
years after the World Summit for Children, gives us an
opportunity to learn collectively from our past
experiences and to outline new solutions to ensure that
our children have a better future.
The situation of our children today is not
outstanding. Most children do not share the privilege of
living moments of happiness, gaiety and joy. Their
dreams and hopes are often crushed by scourges they
are far from creating. While our children make up one
third of the world population, they are paradoxically
the first victims of poverty, violence and disease. The
world that we offer them today is far from being the
one they aspire to. So, let us try to create a new world
consonant with their aspirations.
If we acknowledge that poverty is a major
obstacle to the respect of children’s rights, we have to
admit that the situation of children in the developing
countries is the most chaotic. As these countries do not
possess sufficient material and financial resources, they
cannot always, in spite of their efforts, provide children

26

with good living conditions. Despite those economic
difficulties, Gabon has, since its independence, always
made education a priority, providing for the education
of our children to the minimum age of 16. As well,
sustained efforts are being made in the areas of health,
particularly in the protection of mothers and their
children. In accordance with those concerns, primary
and secondary schools, maternity hospitals and
primary, maternal and child health centres have been
built throughout the Republic. We must not lose sight
of the fact that those activities, carried out within the
framework of the fight against poverty, are aimed at the
well-being of our children.
In Gabon, we say that youth is sacred. It is a
belief we have long held, and it is why children and
adolescents are at the very heart of our policies. That is
why I welcome the initiative of the United Nations
Children’s Fund to organize, on the margins of this
event, a special forum enabling children to speak of
their problems and to communicate to us their
perception of the world.
Building a world fit for children is a considerable
task, requiring the mobilization of significant human
and financial resources. To achieve this, we must
immediately put in motion a worldwide movement of
solidarity and effective cooperation as a source of
growth. Accordingly, and because children are our sole
link to the future, the present session must not
disappoint our children’s expectations and hopes.
The President: The Assembly will now hear a
statement by Her Excellency Madam Nguyen Thi Binh,
Vice-President of the Socialist Republic of Viet Nam.
Mrs. Nguyen Thi Binh (Viet Nam) (spoke in
French): In the name of the Socialist Republic of Viet
Nam, I have the great honour of extending my warmest
greetings to the President of the special session, to the
Secretary-General of the United Nations and to the
delegations present on the occasion of the United
Nations special session of the General Assembly on
children.
We entirely support and appreciate the
comprehensive and concise report of the SecretaryGeneral on meeting the objectives set during the 1990
World Summit for Children. One could say that in the
last 10 years the Convention on the Rights of the Child
has been a driving force and a noble and worthy
objective for all Member States in their efforts and
actions. A great number of States and regions in the

A/S-27/PV.1

world have overcome numerous obstacles and
challenges to meet their commitments towards
children, and their efforts have been rewarded in many
instances. Thanks to this, although a certain number of
objectives have not been achieved as desired, it should
be noted — as the Secretary-General’s report
underlined — that more children’s lives have been
saved, more children have been able to attend school,
more leisure-time activities have been offered to
children and more international treaties and
conventions on children have been concluded and
ratified than in the previous decade. Above all, we can
observe among the leaders of the world a greater
awareness of children’s rights and of their obligations
to ensure the respect of those rights.
However, in recent times, the world has gone
through highly complex political, economic and social
changes, which have given rise to problems whose
scope we had not previously appreciated: terrorism,
armed and ethnic conflicts, endemic famine, the
scourge of HIV/AIDS, the degradation of the
environment and the challenges of the accelerated
process of globalization. All this has prevented us —
especially the developing countries — from fulfilling
all our commitments. It is precisely because of all these
problems that today, in this Hall, we must reaffirm our
intention to follow through on our promises, to seek
appropriate measures and to combine our collective
efforts in order to construct — in this new century and
with a new vision — a world fit for our children.
Viet Nam is fully aware that the implementation
of the Declaration and Plan of Action of the World
Summit for Children and of the Convention on the
Rights of the Child constitutes for us a great and
onerous task; today as in the past, the difficulties Viet
Nam faces are those of a poor country affected by
economic underdevelopment and unending economic
disasters. As well, although the war ended a quarter of
a century ago, its consequences still weigh heavily
upon a considerable number of families and children.
It is under these conditions that we have made
great efforts to progress in three areas: improving the
legal system, taking inspiration in particular from the
provisions of the Convention on the Rights of the Child
in order to enrich our national legislation; developing
and implementing the Programme of Action for
children, with the involvement of all stakeholders
ranging from the central authorities to grass-roots
organizations, and incorporating it into State social

programmes; and working to ensure the participation of
our various social organizations in the process of
realizing the rights of children.
Thanks to that approach, although Viet Nam
remains one of the poorest countries in the world, our
people can be proud of what we have done for our
children. Most of the goals set out in the National
Programme of Action have been achieved, with the
help of an annual budget that was increased by 8.42 per
cent in 1991 and 12.2 per cent in 2000.
Tangible results include a reduction of more than
30 per cent in the mortality rate for children under 5;
an expanded vaccination programme, with 95 per cent
coverage; eradication of polio and of vitamin A
deficiency; universal primary education; and
eradication of illiteracy. In addition, 50 per cent of
districts have cultural and recreational facilities for
children, and 70 per cent of orphaned or homeless
children have been admitted into accommodation
centres.
Our new Programme of Action focuses mainly on
achieving those goals set for the 1991-2000 period that
have not been realized. We are endeavouring to reduce
infant mortality, as well as maternal mortality related to
pregnancy and childbirth, and to reduce malnutrition.
We are addressing the issues of the provision of safe
drinking water and of a healthful environment.
We are also working towards some new
objectives: the creation of preschool centres; improved
primary and secondary education; equal opportunity for
the participation and development of children and
minors, in particular of girls; and the prevention of and
fight against HIV/AIDS.
The State of Viet Nam also devotes great
attention to the protection of children from all types of
abuse and is striving to enable nearly 1 million
disabled children — especially those who were
affected by toxic chemicals, such as Agent Orange,
which was widely used in the 1960s and 1970s during
the Viet Nam war — to enjoy their fundamental rights,
like all other children. Our Programme of Action for
children is entirely compatible with our strategy aimed
at eradicating famine and reducing poverty, which has
been implemented by the State for many years.
Building “A World Fit for Children” in line with
the benchmarks set by the Declaration will not be easy,
but it is a necessary task — an imperative need dictated

27

A/S-27/PV.1

by conscience and honour. It is also a condition for the
stable development of each nation and of the entire
world.
Viet Nam undertakes to continue imbuing
authorities, at all levels, with a great sense of
responsibility and to ensure greater participation by all
families and communities in children’s programmes.
We will spare no effort in ensuring that our children
can enjoy a happy life in conditions of dignity.
It is in this spirit that Viet Nam expresses its
sympathy with the difficulties and the suffering
experienced by women and children in the poorest
nations and those most affected by war and embargoes,
such as Palestine, Afghanistan, Cuba and Iraq. The
international community must focus on, and provide
effective assistance to, the peoples of those countries in
order to allow them — especially women and
children — to enjoy normal living conditions and
normal development.
I should like to take this opportunity to express
Viet Nam’s sincere thanks for the generous and
effective assistance provided by the Governments of a
number of countries, in particular Sweden, Denmark,
France, Japan, South Korea, among others, and of
various United Nations agencies, in particular the
United Nations Children’s Fund and the United Nations
Development Programme. We wish also to thank the
non-governmental organizations.
We sincerely hope that Governments and
international organizations will continue to help Viet
Nam and other developing countries successfully to
implement national and global children’s programmes,
so that we can say “yes” to all of our children.
The President: I should like to remind speakers
once again that statements in the debate in the plenary
are limited to five minutes.
The Assembly will now hear a statement by His
Serene Highness Crown Prince Albert, Crown Prince
of the Principality of Monaco.
Crown Prince Albert (Monaco) (spoke in
French): In 1990 — nearly 12 years ago — during the
landmark World Summit for Children organized by the
United Nations, the international community expressed
its concern about important issues such as child labour
and the education and health of children.

28

Today, at a time when terrorist violence, which is
essentially nihilistic and which has already delayed this
event, is trying to destroy the values underpinning the
United Nations, these matters are still of concern to us.
Now other, especially serious concerns, which affect us
deeply, have been added to them: the question of
increasing poverty and the AIDS pandemic, which
inevitably affect children; the use of children in armed
conflict; and child prostitution.
The current international situation and economic
and social conditions, which are continuing to
deteriorate in many countries, are clear evidence that
we must tirelessly emphasize the imperative need to
respect and safeguard the rights of children, which the
United Nations Convention of 20 November 1989
formally recognized and which should now be a
fundamental source of inspiration in our work, our
commitments and our future efforts.
Almost all of the States Members of our
Organization have acceded to this text, recognizing —
in the wake of the 1924 Geneva Declaration and the
Declaration on the Rights of the Child, adopted by the
Assembly on 20 November 1959 — the need to
provide children with special protection because of
their lack of both physical and intellectual maturity.
That need was likewise recognized by the Universal
Declaration of Human Rights and by the two
International Covenants on Human Rights.
I have briefly referred to the principal
international instruments on human rights to underline
the fact that, in one way or another, all States — even
those that are not formally parties to the Convention on
the Rights of the Child — are in duty bound to respect
them and to promote the principles and the values that
inspire them.
In addition to the specific rights that have been
identified for them, surely children must also be able to
enjoy those universal rights — particularly the social
and cultural rights — that have been internationally
recognized as belonging to all human beings.
The Principality of Monaco has entered into
international commitments by ratifying the United
Nations Convention on the Rights of the Child and by
signing the Additional Protocols, one of which — on
children in armed conflict — has already been ratified.
The Government of the Principality has been making
financial contributions to the fund set up in that
connection since its inception. It has fulfilled its

A/S-27/PV.1

commitments at the national level through legislation
that guarantees strict respect for such rights through
Government agencies and the courts.
With regard to the protection of children,
especially the most vulnerable among them, the
Government has adopted measures not only in the legal
area but in the economic and social fields as well. The
implementation of such measures is the responsibility
of the relevant administrative authorities, which are
particularly concerned with their full implementation,
consistently in the interests of children.
Within the Principality, respect for children is
almost a religion, as shown by the widespread
involvement of principal actors in political life and
community organizations. This involvement has been
strengthened by the active participation and regular
financial support of the Government and the population
of the Principality for the various charitable institutions
whose aim is to improve the living conditions of
children, in particular those living in disadvantaged
countries.
Programmes with evocative names, such as Tears
Without Eyes, which is helping to combat infant
blindness, and the Schools of the Four Winds —
schools that are adapted to the way of life of street
children — are run by the World Association of
Friends of Children (AMADE), whose headquarters is
in Monaco, acting either alone or in cooperation with
the United Nations Children’s Fund (UNICEF), to
which I would like to pay a well-deserved tribute.
Another group, Mission Childhood, is working
tirelessly to increase schooling, improve the health and
promote the integration of children, in particular
disadvantaged children, from the South as well as the
North. The organization known as Frankie’s Children
tries, with great talent and affection, to entertain and
thus provide some relief to hospitalized children.
All of those organizations in Monaco, as well as
many others, deserve a mention because of their
remarkable achievements and the selfless devotion of
their members. Nor should we forget those
organizations — such as the Monaco Red Cross, which
I have the honour of chairing, Monaco Aid and Support
and Friendship Without Borders — which, although not
devoted exclusively to improving the lot of children,
accord them great importance in their local charitable
work, as well as their international activities. I should
also like to mention the Junior Chamber of Commerce

of Monaco, which, every year on 20 November — the
anniversary of the adoption of the Convention —
organizes a Children’s Day, involving fund-raising
activities to benefit children in difficulties, such as a
“no finish line” race, while raising public awareness of
the most disadvantaged children and their most
pressing needs. That organization would like every
country to institute a World Day for Children’s Rights,
to be commemorated on 20 November.
I should also like to mention the Princess
Stephanie Youth Centre, which provides a place for
young people to play and relax together during the
school year, as well as for the many young people who
visit Monaco on vacation. Finally, I should like to
mention “I Am Listening, Youth”, a telephone service
that provides moral support year-round to young
people who find themselves in difficulties.
Thanks to the activities of such humanitarian
organizations, the Principality of Monaco is a centre
for proactive initiatives as well as a place for ethical
reflection — a place where scientific and technical
evolution in our societies, which is constantly obliging
us to confront new ethical issues, can be considered. In
that context, in Monaco in April 2000, after serious and
in-depth scientific preparation, an international
symposium took place, hosted jointly by AMADE and
the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural
Organization, on the theme of bioethics and the rights
of the child. The multidisciplinary — I might even say
cross-cutting — work undertaken at that very highlevel meeting culminated in the Declaration of
Monaco: Considerations on Bioethics and the Rights of
the Child, which advocates, inter alia, respect for the
dignity of the embryo and for the genetic diversity of
humankind.
Furthermore, in the spirit of General Assembly
resolutions entitled “Building a peaceful and better
world through sport and the Olympic ideal” — which
Monaco sponsored — our Government is providing
financial assistance for the construction and
maintenance of a sporting infrastructure for the Central
American and Caribbean Games. After the Games have
concluded, that infrastructure will be used by young
people from the suburbs of San Salvador to develop a
taste and aptitude for sport, which is associated with
educational and social action. Children surely have a
right to access to sporting activities, just as they have a
right to education, of which sport is a part.

29

A/S-27/PV.1

In the context of the irreplaceable role of sport in
the education of young people, I would also like to
refer to its role in rehabilitating mentally handicapped
young people. The exemplary and very worthy
commitment of the Special Olympics Monaco
association deserves every encouragement in this
regard.
This commitment to children, which can be
observed throughout the world, since the cause of
suffering children is universal — it is, perhaps, the
most universal cause of all — prompts us to express
the hope that this special session of the General
Assembly will be crowned with great success. The
Declaration and the World Programme of Action which
will be its outcome will, I am sure, provide a further
stimulus for our ambition to improve the living
conditions of children throughout the world, first and
foremost the most unfortunate among them: those
involved in armed conflict; those who are sexually
abused; those whom poverty has left on the margins of
society by denying them what they need for their
development, so that they are sometimes obliged to
seek food by searching through garbage dumps; and
those who are affected, either directly or indirectly, by
terrorism.
Among the issues dealt with in the excellent texts
under consideration — on which I would like to
express congratulations and gratitude to the
Preparatory Committee — we believe that some are of
major importance. This is particularly the case with
regard to the determination that we have observed to
increase young girls’ access to education. I am deeply
convinced that providing girls with greater cultural
opportunities will increase their children’s chances of
happiness and success. Such education should not only
take account of the gender perspective, but also help to
protect the girl child by shielding her from evils with
very serious consequences, such as prostitution or early
motherhood. The global organization AMADE and its
25 national branches have for many years been helping
to promote appropriate education for young girls. Such
education is all the more important given that it is
generally recognized today that women are an
irreplaceable agent for progress and development.
As the Assembly knows, our delegation
represents one of the smallest States in the world
community. In our small country, built on a rock, the
belief in protecting children throughout the world by
promoting their development has long been the most

30

widespread. It was in 1963 — almost 40 years ago —
that my mother, Princess Grace, founded the global
organization AMADE, to whose activities I have often
referred. That association, of which I am the honorary
President, is currently presided over by my sister, Her
Royal Highness Princess Caroline of Hanover. It is
intended essentially to prevent threats to the
intellectual, moral or physical lives of our young
people by protecting them from all forms of violence,
sexual abuse and other ill-treatment.
As
that
international
non-governmental
organization clearly and resolutely suggests, it is surely
our duty to do everything we can together, both
nationally and internationally, to strengthen all means,
including legal ones, to ensure, over and beyond
constraints of time and boundaries, the prosecution and
punishment of unnatural crimes against children by
classifying them as crimes against humanity. That
would make such crimes not subject to the statute of
limitations, and their perpetrators would be subject to
extradition procedures. That would similarly serve to
consistently protect children from the threats posed by
the senseless violence of international terrorism, of
which they are frequently the first and most innocent
victims — which it is also incumbent upon us to do.
The Principality of Monaco has unreservedly and
with full conviction associated itself with the
Monterrey consensus. The summit against poverty
represents a fundamental phase and marks undeniable
progress in the area of financing for development.
International action in this field, including efforts on
behalf of children, can no longer be what it once was.
The time of begging and condescending charity is
something of the past. Recipients and donors should
become true partners, determined allies intent on
devising and implementing joint efforts that take
realities into account, that is to say, the needs of the
former and the possibilities available to the latter.
Consultations between donors and recipients
should be broader and better balanced. Educational
projects of increasingly wider scope should be
undertaken so that, from the very beginning of their
lives, children will be aware of the human values
essential to their development — and in particular to
their blossoming — as well as of their freedom and the
respect due their dignity.
Whether it is direct, tangible aid given to a child
who is sick or threatened by an epidemic or a

A/S-27/PV.1

pandemic; one whose health is affected by any kind of
pollution resulting from irresponsible assaults on the
environment, especially toxic spills that poison water
tables; or a child who is a victim of the ignorance that
leads to illiteracy, the key to succeeding in the new
partnership we aspire to should be an ongoing and
uncompromising evaluation of the projects undertaken
and the effectiveness of their results.
We in Monaco want to contribute to a new
impetus for the harmonious development of children
and their protection. That for us is not an end, but a
duty. The times in which we live, and the future to
come, should be, despite problems and difficulties to
be encountered, times in which more and more new
ideas and projects are developed on behalf of children,
who are the reason we are gathered here this week at
this special session of the General Assembly.
The President: I once again appeal to speakers to
limit their statements in the plenary meeting to five
minutes.
The Assembly will now hear a statement by Her
Excellency Mrs. Milagros Ortíz Bosch, Vice-President
of the Dominican Republic.
Mrs. Ortíz Bosch (Dominican Republic) (spoke
in Spanish): The delegation of the Dominican Republic
salutes the Bureau and congratulates the SecretaryGeneral on the initiative to hold this special session on
children as proof of the interest of the nations of the
world in their children.
The Dominican Republic is a country where,
despite years of economic growth, poverty has
increased as a result of the accumulation of wealth by
privileged minorities. This has affected in a heartrending way the most defenceless, the children of our
country. We are here before the Assembly today to
explain the efforts being made by the Government,
under the leadership of President Hipólito Mejía
Domínguez, to reverse that painful process.
In 1991, the Dominican Republic ratified the
Convention on the Rights of the Child. We undertook
to comply with the doctrine of the integral protection
of children; this entailed changes in the legal
environment and the organization of our institutions.
We have adopted a law on the protection of children
and adolescents, a general law on education, a law on
domestic violence, a general law on youth, a general
law on the protection of disabled persons, a law on

social security and a general law on health. We have
ratified Convention 138, on the minimum age for
admission into the labour force; Convention 182, on
the prohibition of the worst forms of child labour; and
we are in the process of accepting the amendment to
article 43, paragraph 2, of the Convention on the
Rights of the Child. We are also involved in ratifying
the Optional Protocol to Prevent, Suppress and Punish
Trafficking in Persons, Especially Women and
Children — a protocol to the United Nations
Convention against Transnational Organized Crime —
and the Optional Protocol to the Convention on the
Rights of the Child on the involvement of children in
armed conflict.
With the legal reforms, the country is facing the
challenge of promoting administrative measures in line
with the commitments undertaken. Together with the
United Nations Children’s Fund (UNICEF) and a
coalition of 15 non-governmental organizations
(NGOs), we are organizing a national consultation that
will serve to support the plan to ensure the exercise of
the rights of children and adolescents. That plan set as
a priority the registering of births, the prevention of
commercial abuse and sexual exploitation and
guarantees for children in trouble with the law.
In the field of health and education, we are
implementing programmes to create children’s
development centres for children from 45 days to two
years of age, community children’s homes for children
of three and four years of age, and centres for
comprehensive care located in marginal zones of
extreme poverty for the children of those areas. These
centres provide comprehensive education for the child
population.
In order to fulfil the commitment entered into by
President Mejía in Panama in November 2000, all
school-age children in the Dominican Republic,
whether they are citizens or immigrants, are enrolled in
public school whether they have birth certificates or
not, thereby obliging the State to issue the documents
while they study. We have expanded primary school
attendance to 93 per cent, and we have assumed the
commitment to provide full access to all primary
school students by the end of 2003.
An ambitious programme has been undertaken for
the benefit of schoolchildren in the poorest areas of the
Dominican Republic, who receive a free education,
with textbooks, breakfast, uniforms and shoes. Through

31

A/S-27/PV.1

their school records, we will ensure that each child
below the fourth grade is provided with vaccinations,
anti-parasite
treatment,
vitamins
and
other
supplements, dental and eye care, and height and
weight monitoring. These are all measures we are
taking with our own resources and international aid.
The Government of the Dominican Republic is
quickly moving to improve the lot of our children. In
January 2002, in an unheard of step forward, the
department of the armed forces began a new kind of
project: to provide hostels and residences for children
and adolescents on the street, in order to allow for their
civic re-education and later reintegration into society
and schools, thereby removing them from crime and
delinquency. In an effort to improve primary education,
the schools built since 16 August 2000 are free of all
physical and architectural barriers. We have
implemented an inclusive type of education to allow
children with special needs access to the national
education system.
The quality of education is a primary factor in
increasing the participatory competitiveness of our
human resources. That is why, together with the United
Nations Children’s Fund, we have perfected a model of
multi-grade rural schools that is being implemented in
rural areas of the Dominican Republic and will be
launched in September with the implementation of
pilot programmes for full-day studies to improve the
quality of education. We are seeking to improve the
quality of education by including ecological education
as a comprehensive part of the curriculum.
The President of the Republic has created a social
cabinet in which government bureaux coordinate
actions to target interventions to improve, quantify and
follow up on the social investment being made and in
which non-governmental agencies and private
companies alike participate. The cabinet promotes and
carries out action on behalf of families and their
environment through the anti-poverty campaign in the
context of the effort to achieve the progress and wellbeing of Dominican families. We wish to highlight the
loans offered to families to establish small businesses,
which create economic and social capital that will
benefit their children, as well as home improvement
and sewage and water maintenance to improve the
habitat for children.
For the first time in the history of the Dominican
Republic, we have a government council devoted

32

exclusively to children, headed by the President of the
Republic, to analyse, define and follow up on the
official policy for children and adolescents and
principally to ensure the protection of children at
personal and social risk. We have created the Office of
the First Lady, in charge of executing programmes for
children, including for assistance to pregnant
adolescents; for young women in rural areas; for
training young leaders; and for the development of a
culture of peace, with the support of the United Nations
Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization.
Through its lead agency for children and adolescents,
the Office of the Attorney General is implementing the
law for the protection of children. The law on social
security adopted in 2001 will, as of November, ensure
care for the children of workers.
Within the context of the strategy for the
development of education in the period 2002-2012, we
address the challenge of bringing education into
modern times through the use of technology. I am
pleased to inform the Assembly that the Ministry of
Education has installed hundreds of computer
laboratories and virtual classrooms in middle schools
and is preparing an intranet network to provide
ongoing communication and information within a
modern school-management system. Also in the
context of this project, a national congress of students
is being held to allow them to contribute their vision
and experience to their own needs in the educational
system. Civil society institutions and international
agencies are helping to promote action on behalf of
Dominican children. This union of forces is being
headed by President Hipólito Mejía Domínguez, who is
committed to the human development of the country.
Finally, the challenge of creating a modern, open
and globalized society obliges us to undertake a
consensus dialogue and joint action with communities,
families, children and adolescents, the organizations
and entities of civil society, the mass media and the
private sector to guide our actions on behalf of
children.
That is what we are doing. Before concluding,
however, I wish to point out two things. This special
session was to have been held in September 2001. Its
delay is emblematic of what the children of the world
require: peace and the struggle against violence.
Despite the poverty and the lost decades and years, our
Government is working for the hope embodied in our
children.

A/S-27/PV.1

The President: The Assembly will now hear a
statement by His Excellency The Honourable George
Saitoti, Vice-President of the Republic of Kenya.
Mr. Saitoti (Kenya): I wish to thank the
Secretary-General for his comprehensive report on the
review of the follow-up to the World Summit for
Children held in 1990. The report makes it clear that
significant progress has been made in a number of
areas relating to the welfare of children. However,
many drawbacks remain that threaten the achievements
already made. It is my hope that this special session
will adequately address those drawbacks.
The United Nations Convention on the Rights of
the Child remains one of the most important
instruments for defining and safeguarding the rights of
children. The Convention has served us well, especially
in strengthening action on emerging issues that affect
the well-being of children. Kenya is among those
countries that ratified the Convention in 1990. We
immediately established a task force to draw up a
national plan of action based on the 1990 World
Summit’s goals to re-examine and update laws relating
to children.
A new comprehensive children’s status has been
enacted by Parliament and became operational with
effect from 1 March. The legislation has all the
safeguards of the rights and welfare of the child. In
addition, a family court has been established to
promote the welfare of the family as a custodian of the
rights of children. Similarly, we have established a
specific programme for maternal and child health and
immunization. These measures have assisted in
preventing such early childhood diseases as measles,
tetanus and diarrhoea and in monitoring and improving
the health of the child, reducing malnutrition among
children and significantly improving the levels of
education for child caretakers. Towards these ends,
Kenya has developed an early childhood development
policy, focusing on the child up to the age of six. The
Government’s long-term vision is to achieve quality
education and training, while paying special attention
to alternative approaches to basic education.
Poverty remains a major challenge to our efforts
to meet the needs of children. Moreover, the high
incidence of poverty has greatly compromised our
ability to address the pressing needs of children in such
areas as primary health care, nutrition and basic
education. On the other hand, poor health and

malnutrition are the key reasons for the persistence of
poverty. In an attempt to respond to these challenges,
we have developed a poverty reduction strategy paper,
outlining priorities in poverty reduction.
The HIV/AIDS pandemic is a major obstacle in
the way of achieving the national goal of promoting the
welfare of children. Resources invested in education
are lost due to school drop out arising from AIDSrelated diseases. AIDS orphans are exposed to
malnutrition, abuse and disease due to lack of basic
care and financial resources. The pandemic seriously
threatens the recent gains made in child enrolment and
education. As part of our effort to address these
problems, the Government has formulated a policy to
facilitate intervention for children affected by
HIV/AIDS. Children orphaned by AIDS are provided
with the necessary support to access primary education
and other basic services. These are efforts realized
through mutual partnership between the Government,
civil society and communities. The National AIDS
Control Council has embarked on a comprehensive
programme of AIDS education and placing advocates
in schools and other centres of learning.
The burden of external debt continues to limit the
ability of many developing countries to invest in the
development of children. Some of these countries
spend over 30 per cent of their gross national product
to service external debt. In the past decade alone,
Kenya, for example, used more resources to meet its
external debt service obligations than it actually
received from the donor countries. We are particularly
concerned that the burden of external debt is increasing
at a time when there has been a sharp drop in official
development assistance. Debt relief measures should
therefore be accompanied by an increase in official
development assistance. This would enable us to invest
in basic social services.
Africa continues to experience problems
associated with armed conflict. Over the past decade,
Kenya has hosted thousands of refugees fleeing from
civil war and strife in their countries. We have
witnessed at first hand the challenges that armed
conflicts pose to the rights and welfare of children. The
number of children affected by abuse, neglect and
exploitation is rising. The traffic in children is
increasing, especially in conflict situations.
As we renew our commitment to future action for
children in the coming decade, I invite world leaders to

33

A/S-27/PV.1

strive to achieve the targets of the major United
Nations summits and conferences, especially those of
the United Nations Millennium Declaration. The
outcome of the International Conference on Financing
for Development — the Monterrey Consensus — and
the outcome of the forthcoming World Summit on
Sustainable Development should be at the centre of
implementing policies favourable to vulnerable groups,
in particular children.
I should like to conclude by appealing to the
United Nations to remain at the forefront of the
struggle to improve the rights and welfare of our
children. A sound foundation has been laid for us to
address matters of particular relevance to children at
the national, regional and international levels. I am
confident that this session will result in a concrete
programme of action that will address the concerns and
the well-being of our children. That definitely requires
our collective efforts.
The President: The Assembly will now hear a
statement by Her Excellency Mrs. Dilbar Gulyamova,
Deputy Prime Minister of the Republic of Uzbekistan.
Mrs. Gulyamova (Uzbekistan) (spoke in
Russian): I am glad to greet all Assembly members and
other participants on behalf of the Government of the
Republic of Uzbekistan at this special session of the
General Assembly, which is making a valuable
contribution to creating the necessary conditions and
opportunities for the development of children
worldwide and for ensuring their happiness.
Like many other States, Uzbekistan has supported
and approved all United Nations initiatives aimed at
protecting children’s interests. Experience in recent
years has demonstrated that protecting children’s
interests, in particular during the transitional stage of a
country’s development — which Uzbekistan has
experienced for the past 11 years — cannot be kept
outside the sphere of State policy. Therefore, it was no
accident that in 1992 one of the first steps Uzbekistan
took after it acquired independence was to ratify the
Convention on the Rights of the Child.
Uzbekistan thus demonstrated that it had
undertaken, before the international community, the
responsibility and the obligation to comply with all the
provisions of the Convention. The young State of
Uzbekistan proclaimed to the world that concern for
the protection of children’s interests was the most
important priority of its policy. At the same time, we

34

created and set in motion a system in our country to
monitor the observance of women’s and children’s
rights and to implement the Convention on the Rights
of the Child.
As one of the main trends in Uzbekistan’s State
policy over the past decade, the protection of children’s
interests has involved taking the following steps:
creating and developing a legal framework for the
protection of the interests of the family, in particular
mothers and children, making use of international
experience and legal systems; creating economic
conditions conducive to strengthening the family and to
the material well-being of children, avoiding
conditions that would lead to the neglect of children
and teenagers; implementing a set of measures aimed at
raising healthy children, starting with a healthy family
and achieving the main objective of healthy mothers
and children by providing free State medical assistance
for childbirth and free child care and vaccination
services, as well as free children’s health care;
implementing a national educational programme that
provides a free, comprehensive and compulsory 12year education and awards significant State grants for
the secondary and higher education of young people,
including girls; providing State support for socially
vulnerable groups of children, including the disabled,
orphans and those from needy families; and creating
favourable social conditions and a system of ethical
norms and rules with regard to the family, in particular
mothers and children.
The implementation of that policy is strictly
controlled and forms part of various government
decisions aimed at protecting the interests of children,
women and families, as well as of national programmes
financed by the State and through donations.
To provide for the protection of children’s
interests, Uzbekistan is implementing the following
measures: a national programme for the training of
personnel, including professional training; a healthcare reform programme that provides women with free
medical assistance for childbirth and for children’s
health care; programmes to enhance the role of women
in society — the Healthy Generation, Mother and Child
and Family programmes — aimed at creating the
necessary legal and economic conditions to fulfil the
interests of women and children, to enhance the role
and participation of the family in reforming society and
to strengthen the role of women and the family by
raising a physically healthy, spiritually rich and

A/S-27/PV.1

harmoniously developed new generation; and a
programme aimed at supporting socially vulnerable
sectors of the population for the period 2002-2003.
In the first steps it took after independence,
Uzbekistan focused its attention on reviving and
further developing spirituality, improving its
educational system and raising the quality of life to
international standards. In our country, particular
attention and social support are guaranteed to children
who come from needy families, who have
psychophysical development problems or who lack a
family environment and are in difficult living
situations.
That the issue of raising a healthy generation is a
priority of my Government’s policies is illustrated by
the fact that one of the first honorary medals
established in Uzbekistan was entitled “For a Healthy
Generation”; this is awarded for selfless acts aimed at
raising physically and morally healthy children.
As the President of the Republic of Uzbekistan,
Mr. Islam Karimov, has said,
“... our cherished dream has been to build a State
with a promising future and a free society. The
strategy for our progress is based essentially on
raising a healthy generation and is aimed at its
development.”
In order to achieve that cherished dream, Uzbekistan
has undertaken a set of specific measures to improve
the economic circumstances of the entire population, to
create additional conditions conducive to strengthening
the health of mothers and children, to promote full
personality development and to prepare young people
for an independent life in a free society.
As I said earlier, Uzbekistan will continue to
support all United Nations initiatives that relate to
children’s interests. In that context, I should like to
inform the Assembly that our country participated in
the global “Say Yes for Children” petition and that
more than 3 million signatures were collected from
both adults and children. A coalition of nongovernmental organizations also works in our country
to serve the interests of Uzbekistan’s children.
In conclusion, I should like to wish all
participants in this special session of the General
Assembly good health, happiness, prosperity and
success in their noble work.

The President: The Assembly will now hear a
statement by Her Highness Sheikha Moza Bint Nasser
Al-Misnad, President of the Supreme Council for
Family Affairs of Qatar.
Sheikha Moza Bint Nasser Al-Misnad (Qatar)
(spoke in Arabic): It gives me great pleasure, Sir, to
extend to you, on behalf of the State of Qatar, sincere
congratulations on your assumption of the presidency
of the General Assembly at its twenty-seventh special
session, devoted to children. I cannot but express
sincere appreciation to Her Excellency Ambassador
Patricia Durrant, the Permanent Representative of
Jamaica to the United Nations, for her valuable efforts
in conducting the work of the Preparatory Committee
for this session.
This session has been convened at a date other
than the one originally scheduled, because of the
events that occurred and their repercussions, which
affirmed our shared conviction that the only way to
uproot terrorism is through the promotion and
consolidation of cultural dialogue among nations.
All of this strongly prompts me to steer away
from such individual matters as the achievements of
the State of Qatar with respect to the Convention on the
Rights of the Child and the challenges it is facing, but
to speak instead of universal concerns and of the
conflicts and turmoil experienced by the children of the
world, although both areas form an integral whole in an
interconnected and interdependent world.
It is our duty and our responsibility to espouse the
principle of dialogue in our conduct, at home with our
children, in our educational curricula, in our immediate
environment and beyond. Only in that manner can we
establish a positive, universal, communal culture based
on a balance between interests and values — one that
acknowledges the right to differ on the basis of
cooperation, virtue and righteousness.
Here, I would like to emphasize that, regardless
of our different philosophical principles and
ideological choices, our subscription, free from any
sense of superiority, to the system of values of the
divine religions, whose stated objective, as we know, is
to develop the Earth, would establish a moral
consensus paving the way to dialogue, through which
we can stem violence and extremism and spread
tranquillity and peace.

35

A/S-27/PV.1

We can say that this session reaffirms the role of
the child in our societies, now and in the future. In my
view, it is not enough to rely on the codified rights of
the child guaranteed by the United Nations Convention
to realize our expectations for that role. Rather, we
have to stress the basic principle that we owe it to the
children to teach them to recognize the rights of others.
Otherwise, we will raise rebellious, selfish individuals,
unmindful of their duties and incapable of living and
interacting with others.
Analysis of the present situation bitterly reveals
the flagrant contradictions between ideals and legal
rules on the one hand and reality on the other. How can
we speak of the sacred human right to life in the face of
the tragic reality unfolding on the land of Palestine,
where city squares are rife with hideous scenes that
offend all creeds and value systems. What sin have
infants and children committed to be deprived of food,
medicine, education and even life? Were not the men
perpetrating violence and oppression in those regions
once children accustomed to exercising their own
rights without heeding the rights of others? In the face
of such facts, we must pledge, individually and
collectively, to sensitize our children to their identity
and to the dictates of humanity.
Today we face a real test of our ability to commit
ourselves to implementing what was agreed upon in the
final documents of the World Summit for Children,
which stressed, inter alia, the need to give priority to
children. Let us begin with the children of Palestine
and then continue with all the children of the rest of the
world. Then and only then will this session truly be a
special session, not only in the significance of its
having been convened, but also in the level of its
resolutions and recommendations.
Since we are on the subject of the rights of the
child, it is the view of the State of Qatar that such
rights hinge on the realization of the rights and duties
of the family. We do not want the links of children to
their families and communal values to be severed.
Rather, we want children to enjoy intimate relations
with their immediate environment and beyond based
primarily on human instinct rather than on legal codes.
When we advocate the rights of the child, we
should link that to the system of rights that all human
beings are supposed to enjoy in their societies. Any
real progress in that regard must be measured by the
extent of the evolution of public freedom, participation

36

in decision-making, and the expansion of the functions
and roles of civil society organizations whose
leadership role in human development is universally
recognized.
However, so as not to be idealistic or utopian, we
must realize that the rights of the child require, first
and foremost, genuine political will and, equally
important, the mobilization of the necessary resources,
without which the situation will remain unchanged.
Many developing countries, no matter how strong their
resolve, will find it difficult to commit themselves to
any plans for the advancement of children as long as
they are chafing under the burden of indebtedness. It is
our international responsibility to divert part of the
indebtedness of those States to the United Nations
Children’s Fund (UNICEF) to be invested, according to
an institutional scheme, in those development fields
that affect the status of the child.
We have come to this important gathering
entertaining great hopes, and prompted by the desire
and the resolve to rise to the level of this critical
juncture in the process of our children’s development.
We, as adults, are duty-bound to seek the realization of
their aspirations by restoring their confidence in the
present and the future and by teaching them how to
match ideals with deeds. I am certain that the serious
dialogue prevailing at this session will strengthen our
resolve to overcome the fear, oppression and
deprivation that are the lot of millions of children.
On behalf of the State of Qatar, once again, I
renew our thanks to you, Sir, and extend sincere
appreciation to His Excellency the Secretary-General
and his colleagues for their valuable efforts for the
success of this session.
The President: The Assembly will now hear a
statement by His Excellency The Honourable Tommy
Thompson, Secretary of Health and Human Services of
the United States.
Mr. Thompson (United States of America): As
the Secretary of Health and Human Services of the
United States of America, it is my privilege to
represent President George W. Bush at this special
session on children.
Although the terrorist attacks of 11 September
prohibited us from meeting as originally planned, our
commitment to advancing better health for the world’s
children remains undiminished. In fact, the events of 11

A/S-27/PV.1

September make it even more essential that we gather
here today for the sake of children all over the world.

AIDS orphans in the world, 12 million are in subSaharan Africa.

Since the World Summit for Children 10 years
ago, the United States has continued to make
substantial progress for our children in the areas of
health, nutrition, education, labour and the
environment. The United States takes great pride in
creating a future with limitless potential for our
children.

These realities break our hearts even as they spur
us on to action, and action is what the United States is
taking, in tandem with many who are here today as our
partners. We must join forces, public and private,
through the Global Fund, to eradicate HIV/AIDS, just
as we are on the verge of eradicating polio. That is
what partnership truly is all about.

For example, the child poverty rate in the United
States has declined over the past 10 years. In 1999,
only 17 per cent of United States children lived in
families with incomes below the established United
States poverty line, which is a 17.5 per cent decrease
from 1990.

Over the past decade, the United States has
enhanced its global efforts to improve the lives of
children, mothers and fathers. For example, the United
States provided over $2.5 billion in assistance to child
survival programmes in developing countries,
supporting maternal and child immunization and the
prevention and treatment of respiratory infections,
diarrhoeal diseases and malaria.

Routine immunization coverage levels for
children 2 years of age are at, or near, all-time highs,
and the United States is at record low levels of vaccinepreventable diseases, including measles, mumps and
tetanus.
Recently, the United States has begun promoting
healthy behaviours and right choices for young people.
Our efforts include strengthening close parent-child
relationships, encouraging the delay of sexual activity
and supporting abstinence-education programmes. As
President Bush has said, abstinence is the only sure
way of avoiding sexually transmitted disease,
premature pregnancy and the social and personal
difficulties attendant on non-marital sexual activity.
But our work to support children and families
also extends well beyond the United States borders. It
encompasses a wide array of partners, including faithbased and other non-governmental organizations,
foundations, the research community and private
industry. Let me highlight two wonderful examples of
that type of collaboration. One is definitely the Global
Fund to Fight AIDS, Tuberculosis and Malaria. The
United States already has committed $500 million to
this multinational effort — 25 per cent of the total
effort. And the United States Centers for Disease
Control, which is an agency within my Department of
Health, is working with the World Health Organization
and Rotary International in a global effort to eradicate
polio. We are now down to less than 500 cases.
Last month, I personally visited Africa and saw
first-hand the devastating impact of HIV/AIDS,
particularly on children. Of the roughly 13 million

By September of this year, we will have
contributed nearly $157 million to the International
Programme on the Elimination of Child Labour. We
provide more than $10 billion in development
assistance to support a range of activities that improve
the lives of children today — health care, agricultural
development and food assistance to those especially
vulnerable — but also to support those countries and
communities that are working to establish a long-term
future for their children by their efforts to provide
quality education, growing economies that generate
jobs and sound environmental management.
In fiscal year 2000 alone, we provided new
resources to help prevent the trafficking in and
exploitation of children in developing countries and to
provide services and model programmes for their
protection and rehabilitation. Let me emphasize that
this issue is of great concern to President Bush and to
me personally. We are eager to work with all countries
where child trafficking and exploitation occur in order
to help eliminate these evil practices wherever they
exist.
Despite our accomplishments, we also face
critical challenges as we work to foster responsible
parenting and safe and stable families. All children
deserve to live in nurturing homes and communities
and to realize their own unique promise.
President Bush’s new education plan — No Child
Left Behind — enables all students in the United States
to have a better chance to learn, excel and live out their

37

A/S-27/PV.1

dreams. Since the cognitive development of children
must start in the home, in early April President Bush
and my Department announced a new early learning
initiative — Good Start, Grow Smart — to help prepare
children for a future of learning.
We are working with fellow members of the
Assembly to that same end. We have provided $1.5
billion in assistance to basic education in developing
countries. A sound education is a global pathway to
success for children in every society, and we welcome
joining you as partners in this wonderful effort.
Just as with education, President Bush is also
making the physical health of every American child a
number-one priority, from the womb to adulthood. We
place a high priority on prenatal care for our women
and children. It is exemplified by our Department of
Health and Human Services extension of government
health benefits to the unborn. Our Children’s Health
Insurance Program makes sure that children,
particularly those in low-income families, have access
to medical care. President Bush is calling for an
unprecedented expansion of community health
clinics — neighbourhood medical facilities that
traditionally serve low-income populations. And we
have launched a major preventive health initiative to
discourage illness and disease from ever starting.
Too many American children and other children
throughout the industrialized world are inactive, and
the consequences are being found in the deteriorating
health of many children. In America, for example,
Type 2 diabetes is growing at epidemic proportions and
the number of overweight and obese children has
tripled in the past two decades. I applaud the World
Health Organization for making physical activity and
fitness its theme and priority for the year. We must get
the world moving, literally, and we must begin with our
children. The consequences for all our nations are too
dire if we do not act now.
All children deserve a global strategy that is
focused, visionary and, yes, action-oriented. We must
wed the unfinished agenda of the past decade to the
future challenges facing children and their families.
Today, at this very special session, we have the
opportunity to create a new and better world for all of
our children: a world where children are safe and
healthy and where they are not exploited; where
parents guide their children safely through infancy and
childhood to adolescence and then on to adulthood.

38

The United States remains absolutely committed and is
passionate about giving all children the hope of a new
day and the promise of a better tomorrow. Our children
and their families deserve nothing less.
The President: I call on Mr. Essop Goolam
Pahad, Minister in the Office of the President of South
Africa.
Mr. Pahad (South Africa): I address the
Assembly today on behalf of President Mbeki and on
behalf of the people, and especially the children, of
South Africa. Many States have rightly stressed the
significance of this impressive gathering. Let me add
my voice to that sentiment and let me also say that this
is a truly momentous occasion for our country.
On this occasion, where the lives and the wellbeing of children are the focus, we remember vividly
that children — many of them hardly in their teens —
were instrumental in the fight against apartheid, and we
salute and remember those children today. They faced
police and army bullets, for instance at the time of the
Soweto uprising in 1976. Thousands died and countless
numbers were injured, detained or went into exile from
the land of their birth. All they had to pit against the
might of the apartheid State were their bare hands and
their unshakeable devotion to the principles of nonracialism and democracy. In that struggle, many of our
children were so preoccupied and harassed that they
missed out totally on their youth.
Given our own bitter experience, we feel the
daily pain and anger caused by the continuing
brutalization of Palestinian children. Those children
deserve to live in peace, comfort and security. We
express our solidarity with all children throughout the
world caught in the nightmare of war and armed
conflict. The South African Constitution strongly
promotes the rights of children. Their well-being is of
paramount importance to the State. South Africa has
ratified the Convention on the Rights of the Child and a
number of other international treaties, such as the
Convention concerning the Prohibition and Immediate
Action for the Elimination of the Worst Forms of Child
Labour. We have also ratified the African Union
Charter on the Rights and Welfare of the Child. The
African Charter points the way to important regional
cooperation.
Only when we work together as the African
continent will we be able to address the issues that
plague
us,
such
as
poverty
and
gross

A/S-27/PV.1

underdevelopment. We all know about the impact of
poverty and underdevelopment on mortality, disease,
hunger and suffering. But for the first time in our
history we are in the position to bring about change and
to work to bring about real development and prosperity
for our continent, our nation, our people, and especially
our children.
The plan of action known as the New Partnership
for Africa’s Development (NEPAD), can be an
important vehicle for the advancement and
sustainability of the rights of our children, women and
poor people.
Upon ratification of the Convention on the Rights
of the Child, under the leadership of President Mbeki,
we developed a National Programme of Action for
Children. This has effectively mainstreamed issues
affecting the lives of our children; it commits all
spheres of government and it ensures that the rights of
children will remain on the agenda of the legislature,
the executive branch and the judiciary. The National
Programme of Action is coordinated by the Office on
the Rights of the Child in the Presidency. This
coordinating and monitoring body works with all
government departments, international agencies and
civil society.
We come from a history of strong civil society
involvement and participation, and that input remains
crucial to the growth and development of our country.
Health-care services are free for pregnant mothers and
for children under the age of six. Primary health care is
free for all children. A strategy for the integrated
management of the childhood illnesses has been
introduced at primary health-care facilities to address
principal causes of childhood illnesses and death. An
expanded programme on immunization has been
introduced in order to immunize children against
serious childhood infections. The programme on
immunization has succeeded in reducing both polio and
measles to close to the point of their elimination.
Child nutrition remains one of the priorities of the
South African Government. We aim to provide children
of poor households with one meal a day. In addition,
we have a child-support grant for lower-income
households. In 2000 we released a White Paper on
early childhood development, which provides for a
compulsory reception year in all public schools. This
ensures the best start for all children towards quality
education, now starting at the age of 6 and continuing

through the age of 15. That was followed by a White
Paper on inclusive education to cater for children with
special educational needs.
Protecting children in the criminal justice system
is a priority for our Government. The South African
Parliament will shortly debate a child justice bill,
which deals with children accused of crimes. That bill,
once adopted by Parliament, will set a new minimum
age for criminal capacity, ensure individual assessment
of each child, establish a special legal procedure and
provide for a creative range of sentencing options. The
Government has also amended existing legislation to
provide for a more comprehensive definition of
commercial sexual exploitation of children. The
National Programme of Action has also requested the
South African Law Commission, through relevant
ministries, to undertake a comprehensive review of
child care legislation. Also under review by the
Government is the very important focal area of sexual
offences against children. These proposed laws will
bring about drastic changes to present South African
law and will repeal many of the archaic laws that
reflect patriarchal ideology.
While legislation is an effective tool in realizing
the rights of the child, we are very mindful of the need
for effective implementation. In that respect, we have
established specialized sexual offences courts, one-stop
multidisciplinary centres and shelters for victims and
survivors.
To eradicate all forms of abuse against children,
we are committed as a South African nation to reflect
on our moral values. We have commenced with a
dialogue among our people on the issue of moral
regeneration in our society. This process is led by the
Deputy President, Mr. Jacob Zuma, and our collective
aim is to rebuild families and communities, promote a
culture of zero tolerance of abuse and exploitation and
build a caring society, as envisaged in our Constitution.
We in South Africa held our own Say Yes for
Children campaign, and more than 4 million children
had a chance to air their views on what priorities we
should have as a nation. Our children prioritized the
following. Of the children, 68.1 per cent said that
educating every child is a priority; 65.4 per cent of
children said that we must put children first and care
for every child; and 50.2 per cent of children said that
there is an urgent need to fight poverty and HIV/AIDS
in their communities. We remain committed to those

39

A/S-27/PV.1

priorities and have aligned our programmes with the
aspirations of all the children who participated in the
survey.
One of the main priorities of the presidency is
effective service delivery to children. Much has been
achieved in this realm, but much more needs to be
done. In order for services to be delivered, polices and
programmes must be implemented. The National
Programme of Action is well placed to ensure that such
implementation takes place. The Government of South
Africa will accelerate delivery to children. We will
strengthen our resolve to do more for our children. The
South African Government therefore wishes to take
this opportunity fully to commit itself to creating a
world fit for our children.
The President: I now call on Mrs. Suzanne
Mubarak, Chairperson of the delegation of Egypt.
Mrs. Mubarak (Egypt) (spoke in Arabic): This
session assumes great importance because it will assess
our achievements over the last decade in achieving
goals for our children and will agree on a plan to
protect the rights of children in the future. When we
speak about the protection and rights of children, we
are calling for a new world capable of fully protecting
and guaranteeing their rights. In this regard, I wish to
refer to the violations in the occupied Palestinian
territories, where observance of international
conventions and agreements, particularly those related
to the rights of children and human rights, has been
lacking. The effects of the tragedy in the Palestinian
territories are not just limited to its negative impact on
Palestinian children. The tragedy is affecting also all
the children of the region and the world. It has sown
seeds of fear and hatred and has created an atmosphere
of violence and extremism. However, the world has not
done anything. We ask, “Have we lost our conscience,
or are different standards being applied today?”
In view of our collective responsibility, I call on
the members of the Assembly to contribute to putting
an end to human rights violations, to stopping the
bloodshed in the occupied Palestinian territories and to
seeking just and peaceful solutions to provide good
lives for children, regardless of their nationality or
loyalties. Children are innocent creatures who should
not bear the responsibilities of the past. They are the
children of the future.
I participated in the World Summit for Children
and I also have the honour of participating in this

40

session, which is witnessing unprecedented challenges
to us and to our children, namely globalization and its
economic and political effects, technological
development, structural reforms, armed conflicts and
the spread of HIV/AIDS. All these challenges have
influenced the developing countries and their ability to
deal with children’s causes and their growth and
protection.
Although much progress has been made through
legislation, policies and institutions, we would still like
to know what the international programmes of action
for the next decade are. What are the priorities at the
national and regional levels? The complementarity of
the desire, the ability, the commitment and the
resources will lead to true international partnership,
which will enable us to confront the problems of
childhood and the challenges faced by the developing
countries in this regard.
Egypt has dealt with these difficult problems, and
I am very proud of the achievements made for the
children of Egypt. Yet, I would like to reiterate that we
still have a long way to go and that many more
challenges remain, particularly the use of lessons
learned, so that all the progress achieved can be
enjoyed by all children who need special care, as we
called on the Special Representative of Children to do
this morning.
We proudly belong to the Arab and African
worlds. We had the honour of hosting the preparatory
work for this session. In Cairo we began the “Yes for
Children” campaign. The thirty-seventh summit of
African countries in Lusaka has entrusted me with the
honour of presenting to the Assembly the unified
position of the African people, which has been
circulated among members. The African continent
represents the greatest international challenge to
development. While there have been some
achievements, the African child still has the most
needs. This was expressed well by African children in
Cairo. I express their views to the Assembly and call
on the international community to contribute to
translating their dreams and aspirations into the reality
of a bright future. It is time that we accept this goal.
The world can no longer ignore the children of Africa.
In conclusion, I wish to confirm that achieving
stability and peace and putting an end to the suffering
resulting from foreign occupation and armed conflict,
not only in the Middle East and Africa but in the entire

A/S-27/PV.1

world, are preconditions for present and future family
stability. World peace and stability are indivisible.
Children of the world are one and alike. Our goals
should be collective and unified in order to achieve a
world that is worthy of our children.
The President: I now call on His Excellency
Mr. Liwski, Secretary of State and President of the
National Council for Children, Adolescents and Family
of the Argentine Republic.
Mr. Liwski (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish): I
wish at the outset to convey to the members of the
special session on children the warm and fraternal
greetings of the constitutional President of the
Argentine Republic, Mr. Eduardo Alberto Dualde, and
of his wife.
It would be inconsistent and unacceptable to
consider the evolution of the status of children and
adolescents in my country since the 1990 World
Summit for Children until now without acknowledging
that we are going through some of the most difficult
times in our democratic history. It is worth recalling
that just about 100 days ago political and social
tensions peaked. The entire world witnessed acts of
social violence and eruptions that resulted in the loss of
human life and created the risk of social disintegration.
However, institutional strength and the unwavering
democratic calling of the Argentine people made it
possible to restore governance. Strictly observing the
national Constitution, the Argentine people built a
transition Government based on the goals of national
unity and salvation.
My country is going through the most serious
economic and social crisis of its contemporary history.
This severity is apparent in, among other things, the
unfair concentration of wealth, the crisis of a financial
sector that is alien to the most minimal definition of
human dignity and a crushing foreign indebtedness.
This situation, together with the existence of a
leadership that in many cases is attacked by a society
expecting transparency and dedication to service, has
had a traumatic impact on millions of families.
Unemployment and underemployment have become the
driving force of an accelerated process of social
exclusion and they are weakening the ties and roles
within the family.
In my country the situation of the children and
adolescents living within these families presents the
most dramatic and stark face of the crisis. They are the

most visible victims of the current emergency, and we
know that, should the situation persist, we will have
jeopardized Argentina’s future for several generations
to come.
Thus, we are dealing with true structural
problems having cumulative effects and requiring
complex solutions.
Currently, 6 of every 10 Argentine children grows
up living below the poverty line. Approximately 1.5
million adolescents are excluded from education and
the workplace. Both children and adolescents show
symptoms of great social vulnerability. Moreover,
when adolescents lack support and advocacy, their
behaviour often brings them into conflict with the law.
In response to this situation, we aim at social
integration of these groups through active policies and
not through calling for simple reforms of the penal
code.
In the Argentina of today, one can also observe
pockets of child malnutrition; the premature entry into
working conditions with resulting physical and
psychological risks; school leaving before the
completion of the basic mandatory cycle of education;
the victimization of boys and girls through sexual and
other abuse, child pornography and child prostitution;
the victimization of children by organized illicit drug
trafficking and consumption of, and addiction to, illicit
drugs; the persistence of factors causing infant
mortality, 60 per cent of such deaths being attributable
to curable causes, in particular the spreading of
HIV/AIDS; teenage pregnancy with the attendant
vulnerability with respect to the child’s right to family
ties and identity; and the continued problems due to the
abduction of children during the past military
dictatorship and the current abduction of children, both
within and beyond our borders.
These problems demonstrate new and grievous
realities. However, for the State I represent, they
constitute a formidable challenge spurring us to
implement innovative courses of action. These entail
active social policies based on the exercise of the rights
enshrined in the Convention on the Rights of the Child,
with recognition of the active participation of nongovernmental organizations.
When assessing our success in meeting the
objectives set by the 1990 World Summit for Children,
the Declaration and the Plan of Action, I believe that it
is important to underline the following aspects.

41

A/S-27/PV.1

The decrease in the national infant mortality rate
has reached and gone beyond the objective set.
However, the infant mortality rate continues to be
double that of the Latin American countries with the
lowest rates: Chile, Cuba and Costa Rica.
After the approval of the Federal Education Law,
the Argentine Republic initiated great efforts to create
a process for increasing the number of students
attending school, to extend the mandatory basic cycle
of free education and to improve the quality of
education.
However, due to the current economic and social
crisis, rising numbers of youth dropping out of school
put at risk the achievements made so far.
With regard to legislation, in 1990 the Argentine
National Congress unanimously approved Law
No. 23,849, which incorporates the provisions of the
Convention on the Rights of the Child and reaffirms
recognition of the rights of the child from the moment
of conception. In 1994, the Convention was
incorporated into the national constitution. Yet, many
things still need to be done, including the adoption of a
law for the comprehensive protection of the rights of
children and adolescents.
Argentina is committed to overcoming its
complex and profound social deficits. The national
social emergency requires actions of justice and redress
from the State agencies. However, above all, it requires
immediate and transparent responses, as well as
competence in decision-making and the management of
scarce resources.
It has therefore been proposed that we further
integrate civil society in the process of identifying and
solving those problems and encourage the active
participation of youth in this process as well. That way,
we will be able to build a consensus giving meaning,
sustainability and importance to the efforts towards
social healing and national salvation.
The main lines of action to benefit children and
adolescents — not precluding the objectives presented
to the secretariat of the special session — can be
grouped in the following areas: commitment to the
sectors in the interior of the country; the development
of strategies to strengthen families; the leading role of
civil society and churches; the strengthening of actions
of protection and advocacy; a higher profile for
national efforts dedicated to public policies for

42

children, adolescents and families, reflected in new
budget and service structures; and, fundamentally, the
promotion and consolidation of full compliance with
the Convention on the Rights of the Child. In this
respect, we fully agree with the three principal
objectives specified by the special session.
To conclude this message, I wish to return to my
country’s social-economic crisis. I know that even
amid such misfortune we can discern signs of the
potential and opportunities for change and
transformation leading towards a world more fit for
children.
We should underline, as a spontaneous and
immediate response to the crisis, the commitment and
mobilization of civil society and of organizations of all
types, which in their solidarity have extended to
children and adolescents throughout the country
networks of advocacy, assistance and the promotion of
rights of the child. We also want to underline the
importance of the opening of the Argentine dialogue as
a way of building a new, national consensus. The
Catholic Church and the United Nations Development
Programme have rendered us excellent service in this
respect.
In conclusion, I would like to affirm that just as
our delegation will draw on its legal and moral
principles to build consensus among the nations of the
world to create a programme favouring children and
adolescents, we call upon all sectors of the world
community to strengthen their commitments to the
children, adolescents and families most vulnerable and
most at risk in Argentina.
Argentina, now more than ever, has need of the
world in order to begin healing the wounds to its social
fabric caused by the economic crisis. It needs
understanding, solidarity and help from a world that it
has never turned its back on.
His Holiness Pope John II called upon the
powerful of the world to “globalize hope”. In
accordance with this decree, the Government and
society have set the goal of getting Argentina back on
its feet and directing it towards the future of peace that
its children deserve.
By promoting development, social justice and the
full exercise of the rights enshrined in the International
Convention on the Rights of the Child, Argentina will
meet those objectives of universal humanity and will

A/S-27/PV.1

once again be that country where, as a President once
said, “the only privileged people are the children”.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of the Republic of Korea.
Mrs. Lee Hee-ho (Republic of Korea): I am
deeply honoured to participate in this meeting,
convened to promote the rights and welfare of all
children around the world.
We have reawakened to the value of world peace
and security for all peoples. A world fit for children is
a peaceful and prosperous world for all. I sincerely
hope that this special session will go down in history as
a great milestone for the future of humankind.
There has been much progress since the World
Summit for Children in 1990. The United Nations has
been the leader in this process and the United Nations
Children’s Fund (UNICEF) its most active agency.
Under its Executive Director, Carol Bellamy, UNICEF
has successfully undertaken the Global Movement for
Children and the “Say Yes for Children” campaigns. I
should like to take this opportunity to pay my respects
to them.
Three weeks from now, Korea and Japan will cohost the 2002 FIFA World Cup. During the World Cup
games, UNICEF and Korea will join forces to sponsor
the Children’s World Peace Festival. This will be an
excellent opportunity for children from different
corners of the globe to make friends and to experience
the value of peace by visiting Korea.
War is the most feared enemy of all humanity,
especially children. To deter war and to bring peace to

the Korean peninsula, the Korean Government has
consistently pursued its “Sunshine Policy” towards
North Korea. Just last month, South Korea dispatched a
special presidential envoy to Pyongyang, and the two
Koreas agreed to resume efforts to improve relations. I
trust that the world will continue to give us its full
encouragement in the quest for peace on the peninsula
as well as for the success of the upcoming World Cup
games.
We need only look around the globe to know that
a world fit for children has not yet been achieved.
Countless children are falling victim to poverty,
malnutrition and abuse, in addition to many dreadful
diseases, such as AIDS. It is time for us to act
decisively to relieve the pain of all children on Earth,
so that they can have bright and healthy lives. Korea is
host to the International Vaccine Institute, the only
international organization devoted exclusively to
research on new vaccines for children. Governments,
the United Nations, international organizations, the
media, schools and civic groups should cooperate
positively with each other.
The education of children is the most important
investment that can be made for the future. UNICEF’s
“Back to School” programme and other support
projects for Afghan children are truly praiseworthy.
The Korean Government will make every effort
faithfully to fulfil all of the pledges made during the
current special session. It will also gradually increase
its contributions to various UNICEF activities.
Let us all join our hearts, minds and efforts to
build a world fit for children.
The meeting rose at 2 p.m.

43
