III.

----

-

7. Requests the Conference on Disarmament to submit
to the General Assembly for consideration at its fortythird session a report on the results achieved;
8. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its
forty-third session the ítem entitled "Prohibition ofthe development and manufacture of new types of weapons of
mass destruction and new systems of <;uch weapons: report
of the Conference on Disarmament".
84th plenary meeting
30 November 1987

42/36.

71

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the First C'ommittee

Reduction of military budgets

The General Assembly,
Deep/y concerned about the ever-spiralling arms race
and growing military expend1tures, which constitute a
heavy burden for the economies of ali nations and have extremely harmful effects nn world peace and security,
Reaffirming once again the provisions of paragraph 89
of the Final Document of the Tenth Special Session of the
General Assembly, 11 the first special session devoted to
disarmament, according to which the gradual reduction of
military budgets on a mutually agreed basis, for example,
in absolute figures or in terms of percentage, particularly
by nuclear-weapon States and other militarily significan!
States, would contribute to curbing the arms race and
would increase the possibilities for the reallocation of resources now being used for military purposes to economic
and social development, particularly for the benefit of t he
developing countries,
Convinced that the freezing and reduction of military
budgets would have favourablc consequences on the world
economic and financia! situation and might facilitate efforts made to in crease internationa I assistance for the developing countries,
Recalling that at its twelfth special session, the second
special session devoted to disarmament, ali Member States
unanimously and categorically reaffirmed the validity of
the Final Document of the Tenth Special Session, as well
as their solemn commitment to it/6
Recalling also that in the Declaration of the 1980s as the
Second United Nations Disarmament Decade, it is provided that during this period renewed efforts should be
made to reach agreement 011 the redu..::tion of military expenditures and the reallocation of resourcc), thus saved to
economic and social develo~ment, especially for the benefit of developing countries,- 7
Recalling further the provisions of its relevant resolutions, in which it considered that a new ímpetus should he
given to the endeavours to achieve agreements to freeze,
reduce or otherwise restrain, in a balanced manner, military expenditures, including adequate measures of veritication satisfactory to ali parties concerned,
Aware of the vanous proposals submitted by Member
States and of the activities carried out so far within the
framework ofthe United Nations m the field ofthe reduction of military budgets,
Considering that the identitication and elaboration of the
principies that should govern further actions of States in
freezing and reducing military budgeh and the other curren! activities within the framework of the United Nations
related to the question of the reduct i()n of military budgets
36
Of]ic1ál Record,- of 1h,, Ge11cru/ ,lssembly. '/'weljih Spe.-wl Scrn,111,
Annexe.,, agenda items q tu 1_\, dncument l\/'i- l 2/J2. para t, 1
:n Sce rc<.,,o)utinn 1""./ lh, ·1111ll'X. par;1 l-:.

-- ----

-

- . -

should be regarded as having the fundamental objective of
reaching international agreements on the reduction of
military expenditures,
Noting that thc Disarmament Commission, at its 198ó
substantive session, agreed upon the above-mentioned
principies except eme, on which various alternatives were
proposcd by Member States, 38
\. Declares aga/11 its co11viction that it is possible to
achievc international agreements nn the reduction of military budgets without prejudice to the right of ali States to
und1minished security. self-defence and sovereignty:
2. Appeals to ali States, in particular to the most
heavily armed States. pending the conclusion of agreements on the reduction of military expenditures, to exercise ,elf-restraint in their military expenditures with a
view to realloca1ing the funds thus saved to economic and
socia I development. particularly for t he benefit of developing cnuntries;
3. Reajfirms that thc human and material resources
released through the reduction of military expenditures
could be reallocated for economic and social development,
particularly for the benefit of the developing countries:
4. Requests thc Disarmament Commission to continue
the consideration of the item entitled "Reduction of military budgets" and, in this context, to conclude, at its 1988
substantive session, its work on the last outstanding paragraph of the principies that should govern further actions
of States in the field of freezing and reduction of military
budgets, and to submit its report and recommendations to
the General Assembly not later than at the forty-third session nf the Assembly:
5. Draws anew thc attention of Member States to the
fact that the identification and elaboration of the principies that should govern further actions of States in freezing and reducing military budgets could contribute to har ..
monizing the views úÍ States and creating confidence
among them conducivc to achieving international agreements on the reductinn of military budgets;
6. Urges ali Member States, in particular the most
heavily armed States, to reinforce their readiness to cooperate in a constructive manner with a view to reaching
agre.::ments to freeze, reduce or otherwise restrain military
expenditures;
7. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its
forty-third session the item entitled "Reductinn of military budgets"
84th plenary meeting
30 November 1987

42/37.

Chemical
weapons

and

bacteriological

(biological)

A
C'HEMICAL ANO BACTERIOLOGICAL (BIOLOGICAL)
WEAPONS

Thc General Assembly,
Recalling its previous resolutions relating to the complete and effeetive prohibition of the development, produetion ami ~tockpiling ,)f all d1e111iL·al \H'apnns and to
tlwir (kstn1L'lion,

•,x Off1c1<,I Record, o} 11,,, Grncra/ !ls.wm/,/y.
\1rnn/1 ,m,,u Vn. J_'t t.-\ A) 4::1). p.11a. 2X ~

Fnrty-Jirst Sc.1.üo11.
