S/2010/548

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
22 October 2010
Original: English

Letter dated 15 October 2010 from the Secretary-General
addressed to the President of the Security Council
I have the honour to convey the attached communication dated 11 October
2010, which I have received from the Deputy Secretary General of the North
Atlantic Treaty Organization, Claudio Bisogniero, transmitting the quarterly report
on the operations of the International Security Assistance Force in Afghanistan,
covering the period from 1 May to 31 July 2010 (see annex).
I should be grateful if you would bring the present letter and its annex to the
attention of the members of the Security Council.
(Signed) BAN Ki-moon

10-59959 (E) 041110

*1059959*

S/2010/548

Annex
Letter dated 11 October 2010 from the Deputy Secretary General
of the North Atlantic Treaty Organization addressed to the
Secretary-General
In accordance with Security Council resolutions 1386 (2001) and 1510 (2003),
I attach a report on the operations of the International Security Assistance Force
covering the period from May to July 2010. I would appreciate your making this
report available to the Security Council.
(Signed) Claudio Bisogniero

2

10-59959

S/2010/548

Enclosure
Quarterly report to the Security Council on the operations of the
International Security Assistance Force
Introduction
1.
The present report, pursuant to the obligation under Security Council
resolution 1890 (2009) to report to the United Nations on the progress of the
International Security Assistance Force (ISAF), covers the period from 1 May to
31 July 2010. As at 1 August 2010, total ISAF strength stood at 119,819 personnel
from 28 NATO countries and 19 non-NATO countries, which includes participation
by 2 new countries during the quarter.
2.
Throughout the reporting period, ISAF has continued to assist the Government
of Afghanistan in accordance with relevant Security Council resolutions. From
1 May to 31 July 2010, ISAF suffered 2,168 casualties including 205 killed in
action, 1,943 wounded in action and 20 non-battle-related deaths.
3.
Efforts to train and mentor the various entities within the Government of
Afghanistan continue. This has expanded to roles where ISAF has not formerly been
involved, including the various organizations of the army and police. The recent
increase in support structures and mentorship requirements has seen a
commensurate increase in offers from some countries, but gaps still remain. It is
vital that the international community consider what potential resources and
manpower can be offered in order to continue to develop Afghan security,
governance and development capabilities. Key issues of the reporting period
include:
(a) NATO/ISAF continued to recognize the importance of an explicit link
between governance, security and development. Without successful and continued
strength in all three, gains in any area are likely to be unsustainable. Continued
anti-corruption efforts and an increase in civilian personnel, engagement and efforts
are necessary to advance these issues;
(b) The Kabul Conference constituted a significant milestone towards full
“Afghanization”. At the Conference, which launched the “Kabul process”, the Joint
Framework for Inteqal was endorsed with an affirmation of a conditions-based
approach. The Government of Afghanistan and NATO/ISAF will jointly assess what
provinces/capabilities meet the necessary conditions for Inteqal. As such, the
process does not represent a redeployment of forces out of Afghanistan, but will
allow international forces to move into a supportive role. International community
support in the domain of governance and development efforts are crucial to achieve
a successful transition;
(c) The Afghan National Security Forces have been growing in quantity,
although the quality of the forces still needs to be improved. It is essential that the
international community continue to provide trainers and mentors to develop Afghan
National Security Forces capability in order to transition towards Afghan-led
security;
(d) Although ISAF has increased its troop strength and operations, there has
been a significant reduction in the number of civilian casualties caused by ISAF due

10-59959

3

S/2010/548

to strict adherence to the tactical directive of the Commander of ISAF. In turn, the
number of civilian casualties caused by insurgents has risen dramatically.
Security situation
4.
The insurgency in Afghanistan remains a decentralized, resilient force, that
continuously adapts its tactics and techniques in order to counter and oppose the
increased ISAF presence, the build-up of the Afghan National Security Forces,
development projects and the upcoming parliamentary elections. Insurgents tend to
avoid direct confrontations with large ISAF and Afghan National Security Forces
elements. The number of incidents continues to rise, and improvised explosive
device strikes and coordinated attacks remain the preferred method of operations of
the insurgents. Insurgents also continue in their efforts to intimidate the local
population, exploiting events through their propaganda and creating the perception
of an expanding insurgency with a deteriorating security situation. ISAF progress
across the country is fairly steady. It will take time before effective “hold” and
“build” operations, combined with sustained governance, result in enduring stability.
In some areas, the local populace has remained anxious to see if the Government
could meet their expectations. In other areas, progress has resulted in an active
resistance of the population against the insurgents.
5.

Regionally, the security situation is as follows:

(a) Regional Command Capital. Afghan National Security Forces continue
to be in the lead in Kabul City and Province, and there was a decreasing trend in
insurgent activity during the quarter. Only one insurgency attack on a target of
opportunity resulted in casualties to ISAF in Kabul City. Preparations for the
National Consultative Peace Jirga and the Kabul Conference gave the Afghan
National Security Forces and ISAF the opportunity to disrupt Taliban and Haqqani
network plans and consequently reduce their capacity in this Regional Command.
Consequently, contrary to the prevalent concerns, minimal insurgent disruption and
a relatively secure atmosphere were seen during the Kabul Conference, and this
should be counted as a success on the part of the Afghan National Security Forces
and ISAF;
(b) Regional Command North. Kunduz and Baghlan Provinces remain the
most affected areas in the region. With additional international troops deployed and
increased operational tempo in Regional Command North, the insurgents have
scattered to other areas across the region. Insurgents appear to be moving a portion
of their capability from attacking the security forces to committing violent acts
against civilians;
(c) Regional Command West. The main contested areas were Badghis and
Farah, where improvements in the security situation await improvements in
governance and an increased presence of security forces;
(d) Regional Command South and Regional Command Southwest (in June
2010, the former Regional Command South was divided into Regional Command
South and Southwest). Southern Afghanistan remained the heart of the Taliban
insurgency. Insurgency operations continued despite severe losses. In some areas,
the high threat level continued to hamper reconstruction and development projects;
(e) Regional Command East. Eastern Afghanistan remained the second focal
region for insurgent activities. The threat in Kunar, Khost and Nangarhar Provinces

4

10-59959

S/2010/548

was high and will remain so as long as the insurgents continue to use the border
region of Afghanistan and Pakistan as a safe haven.
6.
Improvised explosive device attacks remained the main cause of casualties
among ISAF, Afghan National Security Forces and Afghan civilians. A total of
1,551 detonations occurred during the reporting period, while 1,591 devices were
discovered and disposed of, representing 51 per cent of all improvised explosive
device events. 1
Afghan National Security Forces
7.
According to the qualitative assessment survey on Afghan perceptions and
attitudes released at the end of the reporting period, the confidence of the people of
Afghanistan in the capabilities of the Afghan National Security Forces has remained
strong (about 80 per cent). However, in order to maintain this level of perception,
the Ministers for Defence and of the Interior and the NATO Training Mission
Afghanistan have been working together to develop better leadership, an improved
Afghan National Security Forces communications strategy and greater transparency.
8.
General Bismillah Khan Mohammadi (formerly the Chief of the General Staff)
was sworn in as new Interior Minister by President Karzai on 30 June 2010. The
Ministry of the Interior and the Ministry of Defence have continued to receive
mentoring assistance from the NATO Training Mission Afghanistan. Like the
Ministry of Defence, the Ministry of the Interior has planned legislation for the
Inherent Law for Officers and Non-Commissioned Officers to better professionalize
the police career structure.
9.
The development of capable, professional and autonomous Afghan National
Security Forces remained the main priority for the ISAF mission.
Afghan National Army
10. Although it still relies on ISAF support as it fights and trains, Afghan National
Army growth had already exceeded its October 2010 target of 134,000, by the end
of July 2010. Better recruiting methods and pay have been key factors in this
success and a high retention rate remains key to its growth and professionalization.
The Inherent Law for Officers and Non-Commissioned Officers passed in July 2010
by the Afghan Parliament was also welcome, as it contains a pension provision for
officers and soldiers. Once implemented, this measure will offer better career
prospects for the Afghan National Army.
11. Mentoring and partnering of fielded Afghan National Army units grew during
the quarter. At the end of June 2010, approximately 95 per cent of fielded Afghan
National Army units were partnered and mentored by ISAF troops. Given the
growth targets of the Afghan National Army for October 2011 (171,600), the NATO
Training Mission Afghanistan has been increasing its output of newly trained
recruits, concentrating on training future key military leaders (officers and
non-commissioned officers) and designing courses to reduce illiteracy rates within
the army.

__________________
1 An improvised explosive device event for the purposes of this report is defined as a detonation,

discovery, turn-in by local nationals or pre-detonation.

10-59959

5

S/2010/548

Afghan Air Force
12. The Afghan National Army Air Corps changed its name to the Afghan Air
Force during the reporting period. Its overall strength continues to rise, surpassing
3,500, but is still behind the planned numbers. The main manning challenges
include English language training and difficulties in attracting enough literate
recruits. Nevertheless, the Afghan Air Force offered contributions in battlefield air
mobility, casualty evacuation and the provision of assistance to the civilian
population in times of flooding and other natural disasters. In addition, the
capabilities of the C-27 transport fleet have continued to grow, providing much
needed additional capacity to the intra-theatre airlift system.
Afghan National Police
13. Positive Afghan perceptions of the Afghan National Police rose slightly in the
quarter. The Afghan National Police has relied on ISAF and the NATO Training
Mission Afghanistan for support, and its development and professionalization
remain behind that of the Afghan National Army. It receives prioritized assistance
from the NATO Training Mission Afghanistan and ISAF.
14. The quarter saw sustained Afghan National Police growth in excess of targets
and it is assessed that it will exceed the objective of 109,000 by 31 October 2010.
However, the high attrition rate remained high, particularly for the Afghan National
Civil Order Police. In order to achieve the October 2011 growth objective of
134,000, an expansion of the training base over the next 18 months is planned. Like
the Afghan National Army, the Afghan National Police needs to professionalize the
force, particularly with respect to leadership development. An intensive literacy
pilot programme has been started to address the challenge of illiteracy, providing
basic reading, writing and math skills to improve the ability of the Afghan National
Police to speak, read and write Dari or Pashto. Continued international support for
the pilot programme will also help the Afghan National Police to attract and retain
qualified personnel.
15. In the field, the Afghan National Police has relied on ISAF for partnering and
mentoring. Currently, more than 83 per cent of the Afghan National Police units in
key districts are partnered. However, the overall national fill rate for partnering the
Afghan National Police is lower, affecting its ability to increase its professionalism.
Civilian casualties
16. ISAF has been making every effort to reduce the impact of the conflict on
civilians. The Commander of ISAF released the revised tactical directive in August
2010 to re-emphasize the need to protect the Afghan population and reduce the
number of civilian casualties. However, when combat-related civilian casualties or
damage to civilian property occur, NATO/ISAF considers that easing civilian
suffering is of tremendous importance. For this reason, in June 2010, NATO/ISAF
agreed on a set of non-binding policy guidelines for dealing with cases of civilian
combat-related casualties. Decisions on making payments in cases of civilian
combat-related casualties or damage remain a matter of national discretion. The
non-binding guidelines are not intended to alter the legal position and obligations of
individual national ISAF forces in Afghanistan, and payments are not an admission
of legal liability or fault.

6

10-59959

S/2010/548

17. ISAF has remained committed to reducing civilian casualties and the ISAF
escalation of force standard operation procedures were revised in April 2010. This
continued effort has resulted in a nearly 60 per cent decrease of the confirmed
civilian casualties caused by ISAF when compared to the previous quarter.
18. Insurgent action has continued to cause the preponderance of civilian
casualties. It has been confirmed by the United Nations Assistance Mission in
Afghanistan (UNAMA) in its 2010 midyear report on protection of civilians in
armed conflict, that more than 70 per cent of civilian deaths and more than 75 per
cent of civilians wounded are the direct result of insurgent activities. These
percentages are suspected to be even higher since the responsible party is not
determined in approximately 16 per cent of all events.
Governance
19. In addition to marking a new phase in the partnership between the Government
of Afghanistan and the international community towards full Afghan ownership, the
Kabul Conference re-emphasized the explicit linkage between development,
governance and security, as outlined at the London Conference in January 2010.
NATO and ISAF have repeatedly stated that if the mission in Afghanistan is to be
successful, the ability of the Government to govern must be supported, which will
require sustained international community assistance through a more resourced
civilian effort. The Afghan National Development Strategy Governance Cluster
endorsed at the Kabul Conference is a welcome development in that context, given
the importance of governance in engendering enduring results across Afghanistan.
As corruption continues to be an issue, an all-Government effort to tackle the key
drivers of the issue will be required.
20. The Kabul Conference endorsed the Inteqal document coordinated between the
Government of Afghanistan and NATO/ISAF, which includes a conditions-based
approach towards full Afghan assumption of responsibility for security nationwide.
It is critically important that the provincial reconstruction teams gradually evolve
towards more civilianized structures as foreseen in the Joint Framework for Inteqal
with a view to adequately supporting “Afghanization”.
21. ISAF security advisory efforts in support of preparations for the parliamentary
elections were purposefully less overt, demonstrating an Afghan-led, transparent
and legitimate process. However, throughout the reporting period ISAF continued to
support the Afghan election preparation efforts through offers of intelligence and
“overwatch” capacity.

10-59959

7
