S/2014/693

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
23 September 2014
Original: English

Report of the Secretary-General on women and peace
and security
I. Introduction
1.
The present report is submitted pursuant to the presidential statement dated
26 October 2010 (S/PRST/2010/22), in which the Security Council requested me to
submit annual reports on the implementation of resolution 1325 (2000), and Council
resolution 2122 (2013), in which the Council requested me to include in my report
for 2014 an update on progress across all areas of the women and peace and security
agenda, highlighting gaps and challenges. It provides an overview of progress since
1 January 2013 in implementing resolution 1325 (2000), including updated data
against indicators (see S/2010/498, annex), and puts forward recommendations for
consideration by the Council, Member States and regional organizations. The report
draws on information provided by entities of the United Nations system, 1 including
field missions and country offices, and contributions from Member States, 2 regional
organizations 3 and civil society partners.
__________________
1 Department of Economic and Social Affairs, Department of Field Support, Department of

Peacekeeping Operations, Department of Political Affairs, Economic and Social Commission for
Asia and the Pacific, Economic and Social Commission for Western Asia, Economic
Commission for Africa, Economic Commission for Latin America and the Caribbean, Food and
Agriculture Organization of the United Nations, International Fund for Agricultural
Development, International Organization for Migration, Joint United Nations Programme on
HIV/AIDS, Office for Disarmament Affairs, Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian
Affairs, Office of the Special Adviser on the Prevention of Genocide, Office of the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General on Children and Armed Conflict, Office of the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General on Sexual Violence in Conflict, Office of the United
Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights, Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees, Peacebuilding Support Office, United Nations C hildren’s Fund,
United Nations Development Programme, United Nations Entity for Gender Equality and the
Empowerment of Women, United Nations Environment Programme, United Nations Human
Settlements Programme, United Nations Office for Project Services, Unit ed Nations Office on
Drugs and Crime, United Nations Population Fund, United Nations Relief and Works Agency for
Palestine Refugees in the Near East, World Bank, World Food Programme and World Health
Organization.
2 Australia, Canada, Chile, Colombia, Denmark, Egypt, Finland, Germany, Iceland, Italy, Japan,
Kenya, Kyrgyzstan, Latvia, Lithuania, Mauritius, Norway, Paraguay, Philippines, Republic of
Korea, Sweden, Switzerland, Thailand, Togo, Turkey, United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland and United Arab Emirates.
3 African Union, Caribbean Community, Council of Europe, European Union, North Atlantic
Treaty Organization, Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe, Organization of
American States and Pacific Islands Forum secretariat.

14-61463 (E)

161014

*1461463*

S/2014/693

II. Overview of progress
2.
Remarkable achievements were made at the normative level in 2013: the
Security Council adopted two new resolutions — 2106 (2013) and 2122 (2013) —
to make the women and peace and security agenda further operational; two high level political commitments to combating sexual violence in conflict were made; 4 a
declaration on women’s economic empowerment for peacebuilding was adopted by
the Peacebuilding Commission (PBC/7/OC/3); and a criterion on gender-based
violence was included in the Arms Trade Treaty (art. 7 (4)). The adoption by the
Committee on the Elimination of Discrimination against Women of its general
recommendation No. 30 on women in conflict prevention, conflict and post -conflict
situations was another landmark achievement, given that it provides authoritative
guidance to States parties to the Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of
Discrimination against Women on the protection of women ’s human rights before,
during and after conflict.
3.
The challenge lies at the implementation level and in sustaining progress.
Commitments to addressing women’s needs and ensuring their protection and
participation in conflict prevention, resolution and peacebuilding are currently being
tested in such settings as the Central African Republic, Iraq, South Sudan and the
Syrian Arab Republic, where mass violence and related humanitarian catastrophes
have led to unimaginable human suffering. Other developments of concern include
targeted violence and human rights violations linked to terrorism committed against
women and girls, violent extremism and transnational organized cr ime, together
with growing tensions, political violence and restrictions on human rights in
countries and regions that were progressing on a path to peace.
4.
Preparations for the high-level review of the implementation of resolution
1325 (2000), to be held in 2015, and the global study requested in resolution 2122
(2013) provide an opportunity for the United Nations system and partners to build
on good practice, accelerate or generate new action, where needed, and address
current and emerging concerns. The year 2015 will be important as a result of the
convergence of the review with other major global policy events, such as the post 2015 development framework and the 20-year review of the implementation of the
Platform for Action of the Fourth World Conference on Women. It is essential to
seize this unique moment and turn it into meaningful change for all. I welcome the
reaffirmation by the Security Council in its resolution 2122 (2013) that sustainable
peace requires an integrated approach based on coherence between political,
security, development, human rights, including gender equality, rule of law an d
justice activities.

A.

Prevention
5.
Preventing violent conflict and identifying non -violent means of resolving
tensions is one of the fundamental tasks of the United Nations and one of today ’s
most pressing issues. In fact, the impetus for resolution 1325 (2000) came from the

__________________
4 In April 2013, the Group of Eight adopted an historic declaration on preventing sexual violence

in conflict. As at June 2014, more than 150 States had signed the Declaration of Commitment to
End Sexual Violence in Conflict launched on the sidelines of the sixty-eighth session of the
General Assembly.

2/34

14-61463

S/2014/693

persistent efforts of women peace activists and civil society organizations from
various regions who aimed to end the horrors of war and militarism and to ensure
the effective participation of women in all decisions relating to peace and security.
6.
The broader prevention aspects of resolution 1325 (2000) and related policy
commitments have until recently been the least exp lored, however. Although many
examples of good practice in terms of the engagement of women in conflict
prevention and resolution, community security and peacebuilding have been
highlighted in past reports, this area of work remains seriously underfunded. I
encourage all actors, in line with resolution 2122 (2013), to increase investment in
building the capacity of women’s organizations and local civil society networks
working in conflict and post-conflict settings and on non-violent means of resolving
tensions and addressing the root causes. I welcome the continued efforts to
strengthen early warning mechanisms and risk assessments with gender-sensitive
indicators, including initiatives under way by the European Union and the
Intergovernmental Authority on Development, and the growing support for building
and strengthening national infrastructure for peace.
Implementing women and peace and security commitments in the work of the
Security Council
7.
Reports on country-specific situations and thematic issues remain a key source
of information guiding the negotiations and decisions of the Security Council (see
box 1). While challenges remain with regard to according priority to and retaining
information on gender issues throughout the reporting chain, from the field to the
Council to related outcomes, missions are increasingly providing more detailed
information in reports and briefings. New efforts are under way to build capacity to
undertake gender-sensitive conflict analysis and use sex-disaggregated data. For
example, the Department of Political Affairs of the Secretariat has trained 150 staff
members on its women and peace and security commitments and recently piloted a
new framework to incorporate a gender dimension into its conflict analysis,
mediation and preventive diplomacy work. The Department of Peacekeeping
Operations and the Department of Field Support of the Secretariat recently devised a
five-year gender strategy and a one-year action plan that involves some
commitments arising out of resolution 2122 (2013). In addition, my Special
Representative on Sexual Violence in Conflict and the Under-SecretaryGeneral/Executive Director of the United Nations Entity for Gender Equality and
the Empowerment of Women (UN-Women) are increasingly providing briefings to
the Council on country-specific situations, with recent examples including the
situations in the Central African Republic, South Sudan and the Syrian Arab
Republic.

14-61463

3/34

S/2014/693

Box 1
Indicator: Extent to which United Nations peacekeeping and special
political missions include information on violations of women’s and
girls’ human rights in their periodic reporting to the Security
Council. In 2013, 102 country-specific and thematic reports were
submitted to the Security Council. Of the 27 periodic reports submitted
by special political missions, 26 (96 per cent) included references to
women and peace and security, compared with 95 per cent in 2012. Of
the 46 periodic reports submitted by peacekeeping missions, 31 (67 per
cent) included such references, compared with 72 per cent in 2012. The
extent of reporting is correlated to the inclusion of references to women
and peace and security in mission mandates. Issues brought before the
Council included human rights concerns, access to justice, political
participation and sexual and gender-based violence. Missions are
increasingly providing more robust gender and conflict analysis and
using sex-disaggregated data more consistently in their reporting. More
work remains to be done to link analysis and reporting to actionable
recommendations, however.

8.
A review of the work of the Security Council in 2013 (see box 2) shows
progress in several areas. 5 This includes advances in including substantive women
and peace and security elements in thematic discussions and resolutions such as
those on small arms (2117 (2013)), counter-terrorism (2129 (2013)) and
peacekeeping (2086 (2013)) and greater use of the informal Expert Group on the
Protection of Civilians as a channel for bringing women and peace and security
concerns and priorities to the attention of the Council. Through efforts such as the
monthly action points provided by the NGO Working Group on Women, Peace and
Security, civil society contributes to continued monitoring of implementation at the
policy level. I welcome these developments and urge the Council to request timely
and consistent information and gender analysis and data in reports and briefings.
9.
Given widespread and systematic sexual violence and gross violations of
women’s human rights, the designation criteria of sanctions regimes have evolved to
include such violations. Of the 15 current sanctions regimes, 5 have designation
criteria relating to human rights and sexual violence. Of the more than 1,000 people
and entities listed, 18 individuals have been designated based on those criteria. In
May 2014, the Security Council Committee pursuant to resolutions 1267 (1999) and
1989 (2011) concerning Al-Qaida and associated individuals and entities listed Boko
Haram following a series of terrorist attacks, including the mass kidnapping of
schoolgirls. Monitoring teams, groups and panels are increasingly including an
expert on human rights and gender-based violence. Of the 11 current panels and
monitoring groups, 5 have such expertise, which represents significant progress. In
addition, my Special Representative on Sexual Violence in Conflict and my Special
__________________
5 Further analysis and information on trends can be found in the annual report of the NGO

Working Group on Women, Peace and Security, available from www.womenpeacesecurity.org,
and in Security Council Report, Inc., “Women, peace and security”, Cross-cutting Report 2014,
No. 2 (16 April 2014), available from www.securitycouncilreport.org.

4/34

14-61463

S/2014/693

Representative on Children and Armed Conflict are engaging more regularly with
the relevant sanctions committees. A recently established inter-agency working
group on United Nations sanctions, led by the Department of Political Affairs and
comprising 18 United Nations entities, will also tackle these issues and coordinate
input to the high-level review of United Nations sanctions.
Box 2
Indicator: Number and type of actions taken by the Security Council
related to resolution 1325 (2000). Of the 47 resolutions adopted by the
Security Council in 2013, 36 (76.5 per cent) contained references to
women and peace and security, an increase from 66 per cent in 2012.
Most pertained to sexual and gender-based violence, followed by other
human rights violations and the participation of women. Notably, two of
the resolutions — 2106 (2013) and 2122 (2013) — are specifically
intended to accelerate the implementation of the women and peace and
security agenda.
Of the 20 resolutions that concerned the establishment or renewal
of mandates of missions, whether or not led by the United Nations, 14
(70 per cent) contained references to women and peace and security, a n
increase from 47 per cent in 2012. They included those establishing new
missions in Mali and Somalia and authorizing the African-led
International Support Mission in the Central African Republic.
Specific requests for data and analysis on the situation of women
and gender-specific concerns remain a tool that could be used more
frequently by the Security Council. In 2013, such requests were made in
relation to the situations in Afghanistan (resolution 2096 (2013)), the
Central African Republic (resolution 2121 (2013)), the Democratic
Republic of the Congo (resolution 2098 (2013)) and the Sudan/Darfur
(resolutions 2091 (2013) and 2113 (2013)).
With regard to sanctions, the Security Council included sexual and
gender-based violence as a designation criterion for targeted sanctions in
Somalia (resolution 2093 (2013)), requested the Panel of Experts on the
Sudan to provide information on such violence (resolution 2091 (2013))
and expressed its intention to consider imposing targeted measures
against individuals who acted to undermine peace, stability and security,
including through sexual violence, in the Central African Republic
(resolution 2127 (2013)).

10. Direct interaction with civil society and women peacebuilders remains an
important channel through which the Security Council can receive information
relating to its work. During the reporting period, Council representatives held
meetings at Headquarters with women civil society representatives from the Central
African Republic, Mali, South Sudan and the Syrian Arab Republic and received
additional information on the situations in the Central African Republic and the
Syrian Arab Republic through Arria-formula meetings. I encourage the Council to
continue that practice and to invite such representatives to address it directly in the

14-61463

5/34

S/2014/693

context of public thematic debates and country-specific briefings. Doing so would
bring a broader range of voices, information and experience to the Council ’s
attention. Information on gender-based human rights violations from commissions
of inquiry is also key.
11. Missions are another tool that the Security Council can use to receive direct
information and raise key concerns with relevant stakeholders. Box 3 provides
information on Council missions in 2013. I welcome the Council ’s intention to make
the implementation of its women and peace and security mandate a focu s of one of
its periodic field visits in advance of the high-level review on the implementation of
resolution 1325 (2000).
Box 3
Indicator: Extent to which Security Council missions address specific
issues affecting women and girls in the terms of reference and
mission reports. In 2013, the Security Council undertook two field
missions, visiting Yemen in January and the Great Lakes region and
Addis Ababa in October. No references to women and peace and security
were included in the terms of reference for the mission to Yemen
(S/2013/61, annex) or made during the briefing on the mission’s findings
(see S/PV.6916). In the mission report (S/2013/173), however, mention is
made of the need for attention to be paid to women’s rights in the Yemeni
political transition and in the drafting of a new constitution. Concerns
about lack of access to services, including life-saving reproductive health
services, are also raised. Issues regarding the protection and participation
of women were included in the terms of reference for the mission to the
Great Lakes region (S/2013/579, annex), in particular for the Democratic
Republic of the Congo. The participants met women leaders and civil
society representatives and engaged with high-level officials on
accountability for sexual violence. There was, however, no related
substantial reporting in the briefing to the Council (see S/PV.7045),
although the mission report (S/2014/341) contains references to ending
sexual violence in connection with combating impunity.

Prevention of sexual violence in conflict
12. Sexual violence in conflict continues to affect women, men and children with
shocking frequency and impunity, the unprecedented political momentum t o end it
notwithstanding. In my report on conflict-related sexual violence (S/2014/181), I
present information on parties to conflict credibly suspected of committing or being
responsible for rape and other forms of sexual violence (see box 4) and efforts to
prevent and respond to violations. As reported by my Special Representative on
Children and Armed Conflict, sexual violence against girls continued to be a
prominent trend in 2013 and included incidents of r ape, harassment, sexual slavery
and forced marriage.

6/34

14-61463

S/2014/693

Box 4
Indicator: Patterns of sexual violence in conflict and post-conflict
situations. The annex to my report on conflict-related sexual violence
(S/2014/181) contains a list of 34 parties to conflict, including armed
groups, militias and government security forces, credibly suspected of
committing or being responsible for patterns of rape and other forms of
sexual violence in situations of armed conflict in the Central African
Republic, Côte d’Ivoire, the Democratic Republic of the Congo, Mali,
South Sudan and the Syrian Arab Republic. South Sudan was relisted as
a result of violations that occurred before and after the outbreak of
conflict in December 2013. The report also provides information on such
parties in Afghanistan, Colombia, Myanmar, Somalia, the Sudan (Darfur)
and Yemen.

13. Sexual violence remains underreported because of the risks and trauma faced
by survivors and witnesses, including severe stigmatization, and the limited
availability of services. Even where primary health care is available to survivors,
staff may lack the capacity and resources to provide holistic care, most notably
psychosocial health services. Such challenges make it all the more difficult to assess
the scale, scope and character of conflict-related sexual violence. I welcome and
emphasize the full implementation of the joint communiqués on preventing sexual
violence in conflict signed by my Special Representative on Se xual Violence and
Conflict and a growing number of Governments, in addition to the framework of
cooperation between the Office of my Special Representative and the African Union
Commission concerning the prevention and response to conflict -related sexual
violence in Africa. At the Global Summit to End Sexual Violence in Conflict,
organized by the Government of the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern
Ireland in June 2014, several Member States made new commitments and an
international protocol on the documentation and investigation of sexual violence in
conflict was launched. I urge all stakeholders to fulfil their commitments and
pledges.
14. There is no shortage of good practice upon which to build. Tangible changes
are apparent in the mandates, monitoring, patrolling and training of peacekeeping
missions. For example, the African Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in
Darfur and the United Nations country team undertook joint assessment missions to
identify security and humanitarian concerns in camps for internally displaced
persons in Darfur. In the Democratic Republic of the Congo, joint protection teams
are used to monitor and address human rights violations in far-flung areas. Efforts to
combat impunity include the deployment of specialists trained in the investigation
of sexual and gender-based crimes, the use of mobile courts in remote areas and the
development of policy for justice bodies, such as the policy on sexual and gender based crimes recently published by the International Criminal Court and the best
practices manual for the investigation and prosecution of sexual violence crimes in
post-conflict regions published by the International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda.
Many actors are increasingly engaging men and boys to enhance preventi on. For
example, in the Democratic Republic of the Congo, the United Nations Children ’s
Fund (UNICEF) and local partners have established discussion groups open only to

14-61463

7/34

S/2014/693

adolescent girls and boys that are challenging prevailing attitudes about sexual
violence. I urge Member States to continue to support and help to scale up good
practice and access to essential services. Recent assessments suggest that spending
on projects relating to sexual and gender-based violence in conflict and emergencies
remains low, with the positive exception of the grants in the amount of $107 million
to be given by the World Bank to countries in the Great Lakes region for the
provision of integrated health services, legal aid and economic opportunities to
survivors.
Prevention of sexual exploitation and abuse
15. I am concerned by continued allegations of sexual exploitation and abuse (see
box 5). There has been a reduction in the number of investigations into allegations
pending from previous reporting periods. Responses from Member States to
referrals for action reached a rate of 91 per cent in 2013. The Secretariat will
continue its efforts to reduce the time taken to complete investigations and to follow
up with Member States regarding action taken based on allegations. I un derline the
importance of disciplinary sanctions and criminal accountability in substantiated
cases and expect Member States to prosecute credible allegations when and where
they are brought to their attention.
16. Both new field missions established in 2013 — the United Nations Assistance
Mission in Somalia and the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated
Stabilization Mission in Mali — had references to zero tolerance included in their
mandates. Such a provision was also included in the mandate of the African Union
Mission in Somalia. I urge that references to zero tolerance be consistently included
in all mission mandates.
Box 5
Indicator: Percentage of reported cases of sexual exploitation and
abuse allegedly perpetrated by uniformed and civilian peacekeepers
and/or humanitarian workers that are acted upon out of the total
number of referred cases. In 2013, 96 allegations of sexual exploitation
or sexual abuse were made across all United Nations entities that
reported information (including departments and offices of the
Secretariat, agencies, funds and programmes), compared with 88 in 2012
and 102 in 2011 (see A/68/756).
In field missions, 66 allegations were reported in nine
peacekeeping missions, an increase from the 60 allegations reported in
2012. Of those allegations, 21 involved staff members, contractors or
United Nations Volunteers, 37 involved members of military contingents
or United Nations military observers, 7 involved United Nations police
officers or members of formed police units and 1 involved a person
whose category was not identified. Of the allegations, 32 (48 per cent,
compared with 45 per cent in 2012) involved the most egregious forms of
sexual exploitation and abuse: 27 per cent pertained to allegations of
sexual activities with minors and 21 per cent to allegations of rape of
persons aged 18 or older. Twelve of the allegations involved paternity
claims. No allegations were reported in special political missions.

8/34

14-61463

S/2014/693

As at 31 January 2014, investigations had been completed into
17 allegations received in 2013: 7 conducted by troop-contributing
countries (of which 6 were substantiated and 1 was unsubstantiated) and
10 conducted by the United Nations (of which 3 were substantiated and
7 unsubstantiated). For entities other than peacekeeping and special
political missions, 63 per cent of the allegations were under investigation
at the end of the reporting period and 37 per cent had been closed, either
for lack of substantiation or lack of sufficient evidence. With regard to
substantiated cases, follow-up action included administrative sanctions,
repatriation, dismissal from service and imprisonment. Efforts have been
made to further improve screening of personnel against records of
misconduct.

Prevention of other human rights violations
17. A review of cases of gender-related human rights violations in conflict and
post-conflict settings brought to the attention of United Nations special procedures
mandate holders in 2013 provides a troubling picture of the broad nature of such
violations (see box 6). I strongly condemn the continuing threats and attacks against
women political leaders, media personnel and human rights defenders, such as the
assassination of a Libyan human rights lawyer, Salwa Bugaighis, in June 2014, and
underline the need for improved protection and accountability.
Box 6
Indicator: Extent to which violations of women’s and girls’ human
rights are reported, referred and investigated by human rights
bodies. From 1 January to 31 December 2013, acting in response to
reported allegations of human rights violations, United Nations special
procedures mandate holders sent 14 communications to nine of the
countries and territories reviewed. a They concerned incidents of rape and
other forms of sexual violence; abduction and forced marriage of girls;
abduction, targeted threats, harassment and intimidation against women
human rights defenders; arbitrary detention, intimidation and harassment
of lesbian, gay, bisexual and transgender persons; conflict-related killings
and injuries; the arrest and detention of a male journalist reporting about
rape in camps for internally displaced persons; charges of indecent or
immoral dress or behaviour and risk of corporal punishment; viol ent
dispersal of demonstrations; disproportionate use of force and arbitrary
detention; and an attack against and the killings of residents of a refugee
camp.
a

14-61463

Countries or territories in which a political, peacebuilding or peacekeeping
mission operated during 2013, or of which the Security Council was seized
between 1 January 2011 and 31 December 2013, or countries or territories that
received programmatic funds from the Peacebuilding Fund in 2013.

9/34

S/2014/693

18. Building the capacity of national human rights bodies to monitor genderspecific human rights violations in conflict and post-conflict settings remains a
priority, as shown in box 7.
Box 7
Indicator: Number and percentage share of women in governance
bodies of national human rights bodies. As at June 2014, of the
33 countries and territories reviewed, a 13 had national human rights
institutions accredited with A or B status b and 1 had an ombudsperson
institution. For the aggregate of those institutions, women held 31 per
cent of leadership positions in 2013, compared with 27 per cent in 2012.
Eight of the institutions (more than half) had specific units, departments
or committees dealing with women’s rights and gender issues, while nine
released special reports, sections of reports or programmes on women’s
rights. This marks an improvement from the previous reporting period,
when five institutions had specific gender departments and three released
gender reports.
a
b

See box 6, note a.
For information on the accreditation procedure, see http://nhri.ohchr.org/EN/
Pages/default.aspx.

19. Within the United Nations, the new “Rights up front” initiative seeks to ensure
that the Organization leverages the full breadth of its mandates, including on women
and peace and security, to strengthen the ability of the United Nation system to
effectively prevent and respond to serious violations of human rights and
international humanitarian law, through early warning and early action.

B.

Participation
20. The equal participation of women in decision-making is essential to achieving
progress for all. While achievements have been made, obstacles persist in
translating policy commitments into accelerated action. To increase results
throughout the women and peace and security agenda, inequalities and multi ple
forms of exclusion need to be addressed.
Participation of women in peace processes
21. Significant progress has been made with regard to the participation of women
in conflict resolution, mediation and peace processes, in particular since 2010,
including the appointment of a growing number of women as mediators and envoys,
as members of mediation support teams and to the delegations of negotiating
parties. There has also been an increased role for women ’s civil society
organizations in and around high-level processes. Notably, six women ambassadors
served on the Security Council in August 2014, reaching an unprecedented
representation share of 40 per cent.
22. In November 2013, the Government of Colombia announced the appointment
of two women to its five-person team for peace talks with the Fuerzas Armadas

10/34

14-61463

S/2014/693

Revolucionarias de Colombia in Havana, one of whom was specifically tasked with
ensuring that gender issues were considered in the discussions. Of the 30 advisers
registered by the Fuerzas Armadas Revolucionarias de Colombia, 12 were women,
with women also constituting more than 40 per cent of participants in country -wide
consultations on the talks. The role of women in conflict prevention, resolution and
peace consolidation is acknowledged in the preliminary agreement. In the second
phase of the Afghan People’s Dialogue on Peace, facilitated by the United Nations
Assistance Mission in Afghanistan in 2013, women represented 32 per cent of those
consulted on the local road maps for peace that were de veloped in 2014. In addition,
the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in Mali
supported the establishment of a core group of 23 women leaders with capacity for
mediation and negotiation to interact with the Mission, the African Union, the
European Union, the Economic Community of West African States and the parties to
the conflict. Consistent with the Geneva communiqué of 30 June 2012, significant
efforts were made by the Department of Political Affairs and UN -Women to engage
Syrian women in the preparatory process ahead of the Geneva II talks. The formal
invitations to the government and opposition delegations stressed that women must
be represented in their delegations, with both delegations strongly urged to engage
with women’s representatives in Geneva.
23. Boxes 8 and 9 confirm a sustained trend regarding the participation of women
in peace negotiations supported by the United Nations and the inclusion of content
specific to women and peace and security in peace agreements. This is in part a
result of the better guidance, training and technical expertise available to mediation
teams. In 2013, more than 100 senior officials participated in a new high -level
seminar series on gender and inclusive mediation processes for envoys a nd senior
mediators from the United Nations, regional organizations, Member States and
international mediation organizations, delivered by the Department for Political
Affairs. Good practice among agreements not brokered by the United Nations
includes the Framework Agreement on the Bangsamoro, signed by the Government
of the Philippines and the Moro Islamic Liberation Front, and its annex on revenue
generation and wealth-sharing, which provides for the use of public funds for
gender-specific development programmes and activities.
Box 8
Indicator: Representation of women among mediators, negotiators
and technical experts in formal peace negotiations (and consultations
with civil society). In 2013, the United Nations led or co-led 11 formal
mediation processes. As in 2012, all United Nations mediation support
teams included women, an increase from 86 per cent in 2011. In 8 of the
11 processes, at least one negotiating delegate was a woman, compared
with 6 of 9 processes in 2012. Gender expertise was provided to 88 per
cent of the negotiation processes, compared with 85 per cent in 2012 and
36 per cent in 2011. Seven processes (88 per cent) held regular
consultations with women’s civil society organizations in 2013,
compared with 100 per cent in 2012 and 50 per cent in 2011.

14-61463

11/34

S/2014/693

Box 9
Indicator: Percentage of peace agreements with specific provisions to
improve the security and status of women and girls. Of the 13 peace
agreements a signed in 2013, 7 (54 per cent) included references to
women and peace and security, compared with 3 of 10 in 2012 (30 per
cent). The continued upward trend since 2010, when the figure was just
22 per cent, is largely linked to the increased inclusion of provisions on
conflict-related sexual violence. The number of ceasefire agreements
including reference to sexual violence as a prohibited act has tripled,
with only three agreements with such provisions having been signed
before 2012. Of the four agreements emerging from negotiation
processes supported by the United Nations, three (75 per cent) — one in
Mali and two in the Sudan (Darfur) — contained provisions on women
and peace and security, marking an increase from 50 per cent in 2011 and
20 per cent in 2012.
a

For the purpose of data collection, the Department of Political Aff airs includes,
under the term “peace agreements”, cessations of hostilities agreements,
ceasefire agreements, framework agreements and overall peace agreements
signed between at least two parties to a conflict, intended to end, prevent or
significantly transform a violent conflict so that it may be addressed more
constructively.

24. More work is needed to overcome inconsistencies and transform good practice
into standard practice. I welcome initiatives that contribute to articulating women ’s
priorities, building capacity and coalitions and sharing lessons learned, such as the
national summit on women and peace held in Colombia in October 2013, the
N-Peace Network in Asia, which connects key women leaders who are working to
prevent conflict in the region and is supported by the United Nations Development
Programme (UNDP), and the exchanges between women from Bosnia and
Herzegovina and the Syrian Arab Republic organized by the Women ’s International
League for Peace and Freedom. In addition, initiatives suc h as the symposium
organized by, among others, the International Civil Society Action Network and
UN-Women to bring together women civil society representatives from Colombia,
Myanmar, South Sudan and the Syrian Arab Republic have helped to review
progress on inclusive peacemaking. It is essential that lessons learned from past
processes and good practice inform current and upcoming efforts, such as the
continuing peace process led by the Intergovernmental Authority on Development in
South Sudan.
Participation of women in post-conflict elections and representation in
non-elected bodies
25. Globally, the share of women parliamentarians stands at its highest ever,
following an increase of 8.7 percentage points since 2000 (see box 10). There is,
however, great variation between countries and, as shown in the Global Gender Gap
Report of the World Economic Forum, progress remains slow. At this pace, it will
take decades to reach gender parity in parliaments around the world. Gender gaps in
participation persist at all levels of elected and non-elected posts and are highest at
the local level. Continued efforts are needed to build on recent gains, remove

12/34

14-61463

S/2014/693

barriers to increasing levels of representation and capitalize on the unique
opportunities that post-conflict periods provide to redress the imbalance in political
participation.
Box 10
Indicator: Women’s political participation in parliaments and
ministerial positions. As at 31 July 2014, 22 per cent of the world’s
parliamentarians were women, an increase from 21 per cent in 2013 and
20 per cent in 2012. In the aggregate of countries reviewed, a the
participation of women reached 18 per cent in 2014, compared with
16.4 per cent in 2013 and 18 per cent in 2012 and 2011. The type of
electoral system used by States, the use of temporary special measures
such as electoral quotas and structural barriers can affect the proportion
of women in decision-making posts. Women accounted for an average of
23 per cent of parliamentarians in those countries reviewed that
employed electoral quotas, compared with 10 per cent for those that did
not. b The representation of women surpassed 30 per cent in five
countries, all of which employ electoral quotas.
As at 1 January 2014, women held 13.1 per cent of ministerial
positions in the aggregate of countries reviewed, a slight increase from
12.7 per cent in 2013, but still lower than the 14.6 per cent of 2012 and
the 14 per cent of 2011. In three of the countries, representation
surpassed 30 per cent. b
a

b

See box 6, note a. Of the 33 countries and territories reviewed, 30 had data on
the representation of women in the single or lower house of parliament.
Based on data from the Inter-Parliamentary Union.

26. Clear policy directives issued by the Under-Secretary-General for Political
Affairs as the focal point for United Nations electoral assistance activities have been
put in place to guide gender-sensitive electoral needs assessments, promote the
electoral and political participation of women and support the design or ref orm of
electoral management bodies. In the past year, United Nations entities provided
various forms of electoral-related support. For example, in Nepal, the Organization
provided gender-sensitive technical support to relevant national authorities during
the elections for the Constituent Assembly, with women now accounting for 29.9 per
cent of the members. In addition, the United Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti,
UN-Women and UNDP, with the support of the United States Agency for
International Development, assisted in the establishment in Haiti of a parliamentary
office for gender equality and consultations, culminating in a plan of action for
promoting the participation of women in the forthcoming elections. The United
Nations also supported the implementation of temporary special measures in Iraq,
Kenya and Libya, as well as in Kosovo. 6
27. Electoral violence remains a serious concern owing to the risks lin ked to
re-escalation of conflict and its impact on the participation of women in electoral
__________________
6 References to Kosovo shall be understood to be in the context of Security Council resolution

1244 (1999).

14-61463

13/34

S/2014/693

processes. For example, during governorate council elections held in Iraq in April
2013, several candidates were killed, including two women. During the second
round of the presidential elections in Afghanistan on 14 June 2014, 110 attacks
directly targeting the electoral process were documented and 54 civilian deaths and
163 injuries recorded, including women and children. World Values Survey data
published in 2014 suggest that perceptions of insecurity at the polls are a major
reason deterring women from voting in some countries and social groups. In 2013,
the Department of Political Affairs and the United Nations System Staff College
trained some 60 staff on how to identify, prevent and mitigate election -related
violence, including gender-based violence. Women’s situation rooms — a civil
society monitoring mechanism that promotes peaceful electoral processes — were
employed in Guinea, Kenya and Mali in 2013.
28. Data comparability and quality issues continue to hinder monitoring of
progress and evidence-based policymaking in this area. Increased investment and
international coordination efforts are needed to enhance statistical capacity and the
availability of sex-disaggregated statistics on local governance. Universal civil
registration, which is vital to ensuring inclusive political participation and access to
public services more generally, is a key issue to be tackled at the national level.
Women’s share of senior positions in the United Nations and
regional organizations
29. The strategic results framework on women and peace and security that I
presented to the Security Council in 2011 (S/2011/598, annex) included specific
targets to increase the proportion of senior positions (P -5 and above) held by women
in United Nations entities operating in conflict and post -conflict situations. In
particular, the framework had a target of 30 per cent to be met in 2014. Judging by
the trends observed since 2011 (see box 11), I fear that this target will be missed. I
urge all United Nations entities to work harder on promoting women ’s access to
senior posts and I call upon Member States to continue to nominate candidates. I
welcome efforts under way such as the “talent pipeline” initiative for senior women
launched by the Department of Field Support, which has resulted in women being
shortlisted for field opportunities.
Box 11
Indicator: Women’s share of senior positions in United Nations field
missions. As at 31 December 2013, women headed 5 (19 per cent) of the
27 field missions (in Côte d’Ivoire, Cyprus, Haiti, Liberia and South
Sudan — all peacekeeping missions), compared with 4 (15 per cent) in
2012 and 6 (21 per cent) in 2011. As in 2012, four (15 per cent) deputy
heads were women (in Burundi, the Central African Republic, Iraq and
Somalia — all special political missions), compared with five (18 per
cent) in 2011. Only one of the seven (14 per cent) offices of the
Department of Political Affairs was headed by a woman.

14/34

14-61463

S/2014/693

In the special political missions, women’s share of senior positions
(P-5 to D-2) stood at 24 per cent in 2013, compared with 25 per cent in
2012 and 18 per cent in 2011. In the peacekeeping missions, the figure
has remained unchanged at 21 per cent since 2011. Comparatively, in
other United Nations system entities reporting data, a women’s share of
senior positions in field operations reached 38 per cent in 2013, an
increase from 36 per cent in 2012 and 31 per cent in 2011, with great
variations between agencies.
a

Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations, International Fund
for Agricultural Development, Joint United Nations Programme on HIV/AIDS,
Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs, Office of the United
Nations High Commissioner for Refugees, UNDP, UNICEF, United Nations
Population Fund, United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine
Refugees in the Near East, UN-Women, World Food Programme and World
Health Organization.

30. Available data indicate an overall upward trend in the representation of women
in the aggregate reporting for regional organizations, as noted in box 12.
Box 12
Indicator: Number and percentage share of women in executive
positions of relevant regional and subregional organizations involved
in preventing conflict. As at December 2013, women held 31 per cent of
executive positions a in the seven regional and subregional organizations
reporting data, b compared with 24 per cent in 2012. The representation of
women in managerial positions was higher at headquarters locations,
where 32 per cent of high-level executives were women, compared with
24 per cent in country offices, missions or as mediators in the field. In
2013, the figures were 37 per cent at headquarters locations and 17 per
cent elsewhere.
a

Including headquarters high-level executives (equivalent to International
Standard Classification of Occupations No. 88, Major Group 1: Legislators,
senior officials and managers, special representatives or envoys, heads of
country offices, heads of missions and mediators).
b
African Union, Caribbean Community, Council of Europe, European
Union/European External Action Service, Organization for Security and
Cooperation in Europe, Organization of American States and Pacific Islands
Forum secretariat.

31. The provision of technical gender expertise continues to play a pivotal role in
integrating gender considerations into mission planning processes and the delivery
of gender-responsive outcomes. Box 13 provides an update on progress in
incorporating gender expertise into field missions. Given that gender mainstreaming
is essential to effective peacemaking, peacekeeping and peacebuilding, it is
concerning that funding and recruitment challenges persist with regard to senior
gender experts.

14-61463

15/34

S/2014/693

Box 13
Indicator: Percentage of field missions with senior gender experts. As
at December 2013, all nine multidimensional peacekeeping missions had
gender units led by gender advisers at either the P -5 or P-4 level a and all
seven traditional missions had gender focal points. b Of the 12 special
political missions (including regional offices) managed by the
Department for Political Affairs, 7 had one or more gender advisers at the
P-5 or P-4 level and 4 had gender advisers at either the P -3 or P-2 level.
All 12 missions had gender focal points, with several appointed at the
P-5 or D-1 level.
Women protection advisers have been deployed to missions in the
Central African Republic, Mali, Somalia and South Sudan. This marks an
increase since 2012, but the pace of deployment is not yet in line with
calls made by the Security Council. Further deployments are in process,
including to Côte d’Ivoire, the Democratic Republic of the Congo and
the Sudan (Darfur).
a
b

As at August 2014, four of the P-5 posts were vacant.
The gender focal point is not a full-time position; persons appointed as gender
focal points normally have other areas of responsibility.

32. In addition to appointing gender advisers and focal points in field missions,
there is a growing trend of providing targeted technical gender expertise in line with
the recommendations of the review of civilian capacity in the aftermath of conflict.
For example, the United Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti piloted a new
approach with gender expertise embedded across the Mission’s substantiv e sectors.
Within the United Nations Operation in Côte d’Ivoire, a gender adviser and a pool
of focal points were established within the United Nations police, which resulted in
the development of a reporting system for sexual and gender-based violence. In
addition, a gender justice adviser was deployed to support the United Nations
country team and the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization
Mission in the Central African Republic with the investigation and documentation of
sexual and gender-based violence and to provide strategic advice on women’s rights
and protection. In Jordan, a Gender Capacity Project adviser deployed to support the
response of the United Nations to the Syrian refugee issue promoted the use of the
Inter-Agency Standing Committee gender marker. Gender Capacity Project advisers
have also increased gender expertise in the Central African Republic and South
Sudan.
33. At the regional level, the African Union has established civilian protection and
gender units in its field missions and systematically includes gender experts in post conflict needs assessment teams. Of the 16 Common Security and Defence Policy
missions deployed by the European Union in 2013, 70 per cent had at least one
gender adviser or trainer. All field operations of the Organization for Security and
Cooperation in Europe have gender focal points, some have gender working groups
and two missions have gender advisers. Notably, in January 2014, Bineta Diop was
appointed the first Special Envoy for Women, Peace and Security of the Chairperson
of the African Union.

16/34

14-61463

S/2014/693

C.

Protection
34. In its resolution 2122 (2013), the Security Council expressed deep concern at
the full range of human rights violations and abuses experienced by women in
armed conflict and post-conflict situations. I am deeply troubled by continuing and
emerging trends and patterns of abuse, violence and discrimination against women
and girls in many conflict and post-conflict settings, often as deliberate campaigns
against women’s rights. In Iraq and the Syrian Arab Republic, women have been
directly targeted in the outbreak of violence, with reports of rape, forced marriage,
forced prostitution, restrictions of movement, enforcement of dress codes and
stoning of women for alleged adultery in areas controlled by militants from the
Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant. The escalation of violence in Iraq in 2014
includes the mass killing in Baghdad of women alleged to be sex workers and the
targeting and mass abduction of minority women.
35. In the Central African Republic and South Sudan, women have been
disproportionately affected by mass displacement. In some areas of South Sudan,
rates of female-headed households are close to 60 per cent and women and girls face
significant security risks, including in sites for the protection of civilians. In the
eastern Democratic Republic of the Congo, there are continued concerns regarding
the presence of armed groups, the increased number of internally di splaced persons
and refugees, who are mostly women and children, and continued incidents of
sexual violence. In Afghanistan, the number of women and girls killed or injured
increased by 61 per cent in the first half of 2013, as compared with 2012, and
targeted killings or attacks against women in public roles continued, including the
killings of two high-ranking women police officers, Islam Bibi and Lieutenant
Negar, in the southern province of Helmand. I call upon all parties to cease such
acts immediately and upon relevant stakeholders to respond to all reports and ensure
the physical security, safety, protection and enforcement of the rights of women and
girls. The protection of civilians is a legal obligation. Members of security forces,
local militias or other armed groups who have committed violations of international
humanitarian or human rights law must be held to account.
Action to ensure more gender-responsive implementation of protection mandates
and tasks
36. New efforts are under way to ensure that international standards relating to the
human rights and protection of women and girls are integrated into policy
directives, codes of conduct and training for security sector personnel. For example,
the African Union is finalizing a code of conduct and a zero tolerance policy for its
field missions and is strengthening curricula for its troops. The North Atlantic
Treaty Organization has strengthened the gender training delivered through the
Nordic Centre for Gender in Military Operations. Box 14 pro vides an update on
progress made in guidance for military and police personnel deployed to United
Nations field missions. In the United Nations Interim Force in Lebanon, a military
gender task force was established and gender training for battalions made
compulsory.

14-61463

17/34

S/2014/693

Box 14
Indicator: Extent to which measures to protect women’s and girls’
human rights are included in directives issued by heads of military
components and heads of police components of peacekeeping
missions. Of the nine military strategic concepts of operations and six
force operation orders valid across nine peacekeeping operations by mid 2014, a 67 per cent included specific measures to protect the human rights
of women and girls. This is the same proportion as in 2013 and an
increase from 56 per cent in 2012. In the case of police components,
94 per cent of directives in 16 missions included such measures in 2014,
compared with 93 per cent in 19 missions in 2013.
a

The period is from mid-2013 to mid-2014.

37. Effective strategies for improving protective environments for women and
girls include measures to increase the number of women in military and police
functions. The targets of 20 per cent of women police officers in peacekeeping
missions and an increase in the number of women military personnel are far from
being attained, however. As at March 2014, 97 per cent of military peacekeepers and
90 per cent of police personnel were men, figures that have remained unchanged
since 2011. The appointment of Major General Kristin Lund of Norway as the Force
Commander of the United Nations Peacekeeping Force in Cyprus was an important
milestone. She is the first female Force Commander of a United Nations
peacekeeping operation. To prepare women to serve in the Burundian national
police, Germany facilitated specialist training expected to increase the participation
of women in security sector institutions. The establishment of regional and national
women police associations has contributed to the recruitment and retention of
women and growing recognition of the need to change the working environment and
culture of security sector institutions. Armed forces in a growing number of
countries, including Australia, are increasingly taking measures to tackle issues of
abuse and harassment in their ranks.
Protection in situations of displacement
38. The immense human and financial cost of conflict is starkly visible in the
situation of refugees, asylum seekers and internally displaced persons. The Global
Trends report, produced annually by the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR), shows that 51.2 million people were
forcibly displaced at the end of 2013, 6 million more than the 45.2 million reported
in 2012. The increase was driven mainly by the situation in the Syria n Arab
Republic, which, by the end of 2013, had forced 2.5 million people to become
refugees and left 6.5 million people internally displaced — most of whom are
residing in urban and peri-urban areas rather than camps. In total, 56 per cent of the
world’s refugees originate from Afghanistan, Somalia and the Syrian Arab Republic
alone. Major new displacements were also seen in Africa, notably in the Central
African Republic and South Sudan. The data were gathered before the renewed
conflict in Iraq and the intensification of violence between Israel and the State of
Palestine, which resulted in massive new displacements. Increased displacement has
also been reported in Ukraine. I call upon all actors to take immediate steps to

18/34

14-61463

S/2014/693

ensure that forcibly displaced populations are protected from violence, humanitarian
access is granted and responses are scaled up to deliver gender-responsive services.
39. Women and adolescent girls in conflict-affected settings face a heightened risk
of falling victim to sex and labour trafficking and account for the majority of
victims of human trafficking overall. Although 134 countries have criminalized
trafficking in line with the Protocol to Prevent, Suppress and Punish Trafficking in
Persons, Especially Women and Children, supple menting the United Nations
Convention against Transnational Organized Crime, the number of convictions for
related crimes remains extremely low.
40. Refugees, asylum seekers, returnees, stateless persons and internally displaced
persons suffer disproportionately from sexual and gender-based violence, whether
during the outbreak of conflict, during flight or during displacement. In many
emergencies, families may resort to negative coping strategies, including early and
forced marriage, which is often viewed as a means of providing for families or
justified as a strategy to protect girls from conflict-related sexual violence. Other
driving factors include discriminatory gender norms and limited access to safe
livelihoods for women to meet their basic needs and those of their families. Women
and girls with disabilities face specific risks and often lack access to the most basic
services.
41. Given the crucial linkages between the participation of women in decision making and their enjoyment of basic human rights, improving participation and
leadership in refugee and internally displaced persons settings is essential. Women
account for 48 per cent of the membership of camp management committees in
eastern Nepal, a figure achieved through regular elections with gen der quotas.
Another example of good practice is the establishment of women’s groups by
UNHCR and partners in countries hosting Syrian refugees.
42. In its resolution 2122 (2013), the Security Council expressed concern at
women’s vulnerability in relation to forced displacement, as a result of unequal
citizenship rights, gender-biased application of asylum laws and obstacles to gaining
access to identity documents. The UNHCR annual survey on gender discrim ination
in nationality laws found that 27 countries retained legal provisions preventing
mothers from conferring their nationality on their children on an equal basis as
fathers. Such discrimination can lead to statelessness. States are, however,
increasingly taking the initiative to reform laws that discriminate against women in
nationality matters. In the past decade, 12 countries have undertaken reforms to
achieve gender parity in their nationality laws. For example, Senegal amended its
nationality law in 2013 to ensure that both women and men are equally able to
confer their nationality on their children. In addition, recognizing the central
importance of documentation to the enjoyment of women’s rights, the tripartite
voluntary repatriation agreement between Kenya, Somalia and UNHCR includes
provisions for recognizing the legal and civil status of Somalis, including birth,
death, adoption, marriage, divorce and custody decisions, including changes thereto
during their displacement in Kenya.

14-61463

19/34

S/2014/693

Other emerging protection-related concerns
43. A growing body of research is providing evidence on how armed violence
affects women, men, girls and boys in different ways. 7 In the area of conventional
arms control, the landmark Arms Trade Treaty, adopted in April 2 013, requires that
exporting States parties take into account, before authorization of transfers, the risk
that the arms may be used to commit or facilitate serious acts of gender -based
violence or serious acts of violence against women and children. As at September
2014, the Treaty had been signed by 121 States and ratified by 53. Up from just four
ratifications in 2013, this increase means that, pursuant to its article 22, the Treaty
will enter into force on 24 December 2014. I encourage all States to sig n and ratify
the Treaty without delay and I appeal to States and intergovernmental, regional and
subregional organizations to assist States parties to fulfil and implement the Treaty’s
obligations, including making the gender-based violence criterion operational. I
welcome the work performed by civil society in this regard.
44. The human cost of the illicit transfer, destabilizing accumulation and misuse of
small arms and light weapons is seen every day in conflict and post -conflict
settings, in displacement, injury, death and sexual and gender-based violence
perpetrated at gunpoint. International homicide statistics from the United Nations
Office on Drugs and Crime show that 75 per cent of the homicides reported in
conflict and post-conflict countries were perpetrated with firearms. As shown in
box 15, data reported to the Programme of Action to Prevent, Combat and Eradicate
the Illicit Trade in Small Arms and Light Weapons in All Its Aspects — albeit
limited — indicate stagnation in national small arms control efforts. This is of
concern, given that many post-conflict settings are saturated with weapons that
contribute to armed violence and crime long after hostilities have ended and
increase the likelihood of a resurgence of violence, as seen in South Suda n.
Box 15
Indicator: Existence of national mechanisms for control of illicit
small arms and light weapons. In 2013, 66 per cent of conflict and
post-conflict countries a reported having national coordination agencies
and national focal points on small arms and light weapons, figures that
show stagnation since 2011. Only 44 per cent of those countries have
regulatory legislation in place, and 35 per cent of the reporting countries
indicated that their legislation was not comprehensive. National action
plans on small arms and light weapons currently exist in 22 per cent of
the conflict and post-conflict countries that reported, compared with
21 per cent in 2011.
a

See box 6, note a.

45. I welcome resolution 2117 (2013), in which the Security Council urged
Member States, United Nations entities and intergovernmental, regional and
subregional organizations to take further measures to facilitate the full participation
of women in all policymaking, planning and implementation processes to combat
__________________
7 See, for example, Geneva Small Arms Survey, Small Arms Survey 2014: Women and Guns

(Cambridge, United Kingdom, Cambridge University Press, 2014).

20/34

14-61463

S/2014/693

and eradicate the illicit transfer, destabilizing accumulation and misuse of small
arms and light weapons in all its aspects. The need for the participation and
representation of women in such processes is also e mphasized in the outcome of the
Fifth Biennial Meeting of States to Consider the Implementation of the Programme
of Action to Prevent, Combat and Eradicate the Illicit Trade in Small Arms and
Light Weapons in All Its Aspects (A/CONF.192/BMS/2014/2, annex).
46. As violent extremism continues to spread, there is growing recognition that
women’s rights are under threat and that the role of women in countering terrorism
and extremism is underutilized. In such settings as Afghanistan, Iraq, Mali, Nigeria,
Somalia or the Syrian Arab Republic, the curtailment of women’s rights with regard
to dress, travel, education and employment often accompanies violence against
civilians. In societies with higher gender equality, extremism is less likely to take
root and women are less vulnerable to its impacts. I welcome the efforts to increase
collaboration among Member States, United Nations entities and civil society actors
working on counter-terrorism and women and peace and security.
47. Notably, the General Assembly, in its resolution 68/276 on the United Nations
Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy review, explicitly refers to the important
contribution of women to the implementation of the Strategy. In Kazakhstan, women
experts were invited as facilitators at a regional workshop organized by the United
Nations Regional Centre for Preventive Diplomacy for Central Asia and the Counter Terrorism Implementation Task Force on strengthening the role of Central Asian
religious leaders and institutions in preventing conflict and countering extremism.

D.

Peacebuilding, relief and recovery
48. Gender-responsive peacebuilding and recovery initiatives and the engagement
of women in programme planning and delivery increase their effectiveness and
contribution to durable and just peace.
Economic recovery and access to resources
49. A concern often highlighted by women, including in refugee and internally
displaced persons settings, is how the lack of a livelihood places them at further
risk. I welcome the increased attention paid to the importance of economically
empowering women in post-conflict and recovery settings, including in Security
Council resolution 2122 (2013) and the declaration adopted by the Peacebuilding
Commission on women’s economic empowerment for peacebuilding ( PBC/7/OC/3)
in 2013. Nevertheless, alarmingly low levels of peacebuilding and recovery
spending target the economic empowerment and livelihoods of women. Support for
female-headed households in displacement and post-conflict settings should be
accorded priority, given the relationship between women’s economi c security and
their ability to avoid harmful coping strategies.
50. Some countries have recently modified property and inheritance laws and
policies to guarantee equal rights to women. In Liberia, for example, the
participation of women in the land rights policy consultations led to the granting of
land ownership rights to women. Nevertheless, limited access to land and property
and difficulties in securing family support allowances and obtaining civil
documentation in many countries remain key obstacles to the economic resilience
and security of women. According to the latest estimates of the Food and
Agriculture Organization of the United Nations on land holdings of female -headed

14-61463

21/34

S/2014/693

households, only 9 per cent of landholders in conflict and post -conflict countries8
are women, compared with 19 per cent globally. Many livelihood projects target
women refugees and internally displaced persons. For example, in response to the
Syrian refugee crisis, the Government of Turkey has supported education and
vocational training initiatives for more than 7,000 women refugees living in Turkey
and social facilities and training courses have been opened in all camps.
51. In 2013, UNDP began to roll out a monitoring strategy to track disbursements
to women beneficiaries in the context of temporary employment and productive
livelihood projects for the reintegration and stabilization of conflict -affected
populations. The initial findings are reported in box 16. Improved monitoring will
contribute to more gender-responsive project design and delivery.
Box 16
Indicator: Percentage of benefits from temporary employment/
productive livelihoods in the context of early economic recovery
programmes received by women and girls. Although data are still not
reported for the totality of projects implemented in each country and
specific details such as the number of hours per day worked by different
beneficiaries are mostly unavailable, preliminary figures provide an
indication of the sex distribution of project benefits. Available data o n
cash contributions show that only 22 per cent of funds were directly
disbursed to women in 2013, while 29 per cent of beneficiaries were
women. The figures vary widely by project and country, however,
reaching 45 per cent in agriculture-related projects in Uganda and 43 per
cent in cash-for-work projects in Burundi. In contrast, only 1 per cent of
beneficiaries in cash-for-work projects in the Central African Republic
were women.
In the case of in-kind contributions, a data availability issues prevent
the calculation of an accurate aggregate. Improved guidelines are needed
for the attribution of benefits to direct and indirect project beneficiaries.
As reported, the percentages of women beneficiaries and of benefits
received by women vary widely: from 91 per cent in microenterprise
start-up packages for self-employment of young people and women in
Uganda to 5 per cent in projects implemented in Côte d’Ivoire. Further
methodological refinements and improved monitoring mechanisms are,
however, likely to produce improved estimates that may differ
substantially from these preliminary figures.
a

Including such benefits as training, equipment, productive assets and enterprise
start-up kits.

52. Conflict-related changes to access to and use and control of natural resources
can significantly increase the vulnerability of women to poverty and violence.
Conflict also often leads women to assume new natural resource management roles,
either by taking up alternative income-generating activities or by moving into
traditionally male sectors. In the aftermath of conflict, capitalizing on such shifting
__________________
8 See box 6, note a.

22/34

14-61463

S/2014/693

roles can contribute to furthering the empowerment and productivity of women.
Women can also play a critical role in mediating resource-based conflict. In
December 2013, UN-Women, the Peacebuilding Support Office, the United Nations
Environment Programme and UNDP launched a policy report, Women and Natural
Resources: Unlocking the Peacebuilding Potential, which gathers good practice and
puts forward policy and programmatic recommendations.
Disarmament, demobilization and reintegration and security sector reform
53. In its resolution 2151 (2014), the first stand-alone resolution on security sector
reform, the Security Council recognized the interlinkages between security sector
reform and other important factors of stabilization and reconstruction, such as
transitional justice, disarmament, demobilization and reintegration, long -term
rehabilitation of former combatants, including women and children, national small
arms and light weapons management, protection of civilians, in particular women
and children, and gender equality and human rights issues. The Council underscored
the importance of the equal and effective participation of women in all stages of
security sector reform, the provision of adequate training for security personnel and
effective vetting processes in order to exclude perpetrators of sexual violence from
the security sector.
54. In terms of disarmament, demobilization and reintegration programmes
supported by the United Nations, various entities continued to support the economic
security of women and their reintegration into civilian life (see box 17). In Nepal, as
part of efforts to reintegrate girls and boys associated with armed forces and armed
groups, UNICEF is providing targeted reintegration support to young mothers to
enable them to attend school while supporting their children. Specific project
components to address the needs of women in insecure environments are key to
achieving disarmament, demobilization and reintegration objectives. Disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration programmes must also improve the delivery of
gender-specific psychosocial support, given that high instances of tra uma can pose
obstacles to sustainable reintegration.
Box 17
Indicator: Percentage of benefits from disarmament, demobilization
and reintegration programmes received by women and girls. In 2013,
UNDP supported disarmament, demobilization and reintegration initiatives
in 13 countries and territories for a total of 66,114 beneficiaries, 28 per
cent of whom were women. In the same year, the Department of
Peacekeeping Operations provided disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration and community violence reduction support in 104,277 cases,
25 per cent of which involved women. Success stories include the
contribution of UNDP in Burundi, where female participation rose from 30
to 50 per cent in 2013, Nepal, where 54 per cent of beneficiaries were
women, and the community violence reduction programme launched by
the Department of Peacekeeping Operations in Haiti, where 30 per cent of
participants were women. In contrast, female participation reached only
15 per cent in Afghanistan, 7 per cent in Côte d’Ivoire and 6 per cent in
South Sudan.

14-61463

23/34

S/2014/693

Rule of law and access to justice
55. Since 2013, when the Security Council held an open debate on women and
peace and security in which it focused on the rule of law and transitional justice, it
has continued to accord priority to the strengthening of the justice and security
sectors in recent outcomes. Rule of law support is currently included in 18 of
28 mission mandates, including through the rebuilding of justice institutions, the
deployment of mobile court systems, the establishment of transitional justice
mechanisms and the reforming of areas of civil and administrative law that directly
affect key drivers of conflict such as property and land disputes and combating
impunity. To secure women’s rights, it is essential that access to justice be accorded
priority and linked to programmes aimed at tackling economic and social injustices.
Integrated assessment and planning, including when planning for mission drawdowns
and transitions to a United Nations country team, is key to filling this gap.
56. Since its establishment in 2012, the joint global focal point for the police,
justice and corrections in the rule of law in post-conflict and other crisis situations,
managed by the Department of Peacekeeping Operations and UNDP in partnership
with UN-Women, the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human
Rights and the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime, has jointly undertaken
19 field visits and contributed to planning efforts by deploying technical experts a nd
mobilizing resources. Such collaboration has resulted in the improved integration of
gender perspectives into the development of rule of law programmes. For example,
a joint rule of law strategy was launched in the Central African Republic to accord
priority to the immediate justice and protection needs of women and girls, including
providing assistance to survivors of sexual and gender-based violence in Bangui.
57. Transitional justice mechanisms employed to achieve redress for serious
crimes can include judicial and non-judicial processes to promote the rights of
victims, hold perpetrators to account, reveal the truth and provide reparations. More
truth commissions are actively addressing forms of gender-based violence in their
work and supporting the participation of women and girls. There is also growing
acknowledgement that truth commissions have a unique role in uncovering the root
causes of such violence and the complexity of its effects, thereby promoting wider
justice and accountability efforts. 9 Box 18 provides an update on measures taken to
integrate gender perspectives into the operations of truth commissions supported by
the United Nations that were active in 2013.

__________________
9 See, for example, the analytical study focusing on gender-based and sexual violence in relation

to transitional justice (A/HRC/27/21); UN-Women, “A window of opportunity: making
transitional justice work for women” (New York, 2013); World Bank, World Development
Report 2011: Conflict, Security and Development (Washington, D.C., 2011).

24/34

14-61463

S/2014/693

Box 18
Indicator: Extent to which truth and reconciliation commissions
include provisions to address the rights and participation of women
and girls. From January to December 2013, three truth commissions
supported by the United Nations continued their work (in Brazil, Côte
d’Ivoire and Kenya). All had some form of gender mechanis m in place
and had women represented as commissioners at rates ranging from 29 to
44 per cent. Notably, in Kenya, a dedicated hearing on women’s rights
was held, as were 39 women’s hearings across the country. The
commission provided a modest stipend for witnesses who travelled long
distances and for persons who accompanied female witnesses to care for
their children so that they could attend the hearings. Of the statements
received by the commission, 39 per cent were from women. The
commission engaged the services of counsellors to offer psychosocial
support before, during and after the hearings. Its report includes chapters
on sexual violence and on gender and gross violations of human rights.

58. Reparations programmes are particularly important for women as victims and
widows, wives, mothers and/or caregivers. Reparations can provide
acknowledgement of equal citizen rights, a measure of justice and crucial resources
for recovery, as well as contribute to transforming underlying gender inequalities in
post-conflict societies. Despite their importance, however, reparations continue to
be routinely omitted from peace negotiations or sidelined in funding priorities.
Nevertheless, some progress has been made. For example, in February 2014, the
Council of Ministers of Libya adopted Decree No. 119/2014 to provide reparations
and legal aid to female and male victims of sexual violence during the Qadhafi
regime or the transition period. In March 2014, the Assembly of Kosovo adopted a
legal amendment to ensure legal recognition of and reparation to survivors of
conflict-related sexual violence. 6 In Colombia, 362 female victims of conflictrelated sexual violence benefitted from individual reparation measures administered
by the Government’s Victims Unit in 2013.
59. In June 2014, I issued a new guidance note for United Nations engagement on
reparations for conflict-related sexual violence, 10 including activities to advocate
and/or support the design, implementation, monitoring and evaluation of reparation
initiatives. I place victims at the centre of reparation initiatives and stress the
empowering potential of reparations to challenge gender stereotypes and break
cycles of discrimination and violence. Emphasis is laid on long -term, integrated
solutions beyond one-off cash payments, such as land and inheritance rights, access
to credit, fistula surgery for rape victims and income -generating skills. I encourage
all relevant actors to use the note and to seek technical support from the Office of
the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights and UN-Women to
support its full operationalization.

__________________
10 Available from www.ohchr.org/Documents/Press/GuidanceNoteReparationsJune-2014.pdf.

14-61463

25/34

S/2014/693

Access to basic services, including education and health services
60. The continuing progress on education enrolment rates globally
notwithstanding, worrying trends include disparities in learning outcomes and
barriers to girls’ education, such as early marriage and violence against girls in
schools, the military use of schools (which limits access to education and puts
civilians at further risk) and attacks against schools and related personnel, all of
which have an immense impact on the right of children to education. In Afghanistan,
at least 3,800 girls were denied their right to education because schools were closed,
mainly owing to security concerns. Furthermore, girls and female teachers have
been targets of killing and maiming by extremist groups simply because they attend
school. Such groups have also interfered in education curricula or in the conduct of
classes, which has affected girls’ education. Box 19 provid es information on
enrolment ratios.
Box 19
Indicator: Net primary and secondary education enrolment ratios,
by sex. An estimated 50 per cent of out-of-school children of primary
school age lived in conflict-affected areas in 2012; girls were
disproportionately affected. a While the global adjusted net enrolment rate
in primary education was 91.9 per cent for boys and 90.3 per cent for
girls, it reached only 80.5 per cent for boys and 73.4 per cent for girls in
conflict and post-conflict countries. b Although gender gaps in primary
education in this set of countries are slowly narrowing (the rates were 65
per cent for boys and 54.3 per cent for girls in 1999), they remain
roughly unchanged over time in the case of secondary enrolment, with
net rates of 43 per cent for males and 35.4 for females in 2012, compared
with 35.2 per cent and 28.5 per cent, respectively, in 2003. b
a

b

United Nations, Millennium Development Goals Report 2014 (New York,
2014).
See box 6, note a. Estimates provided by the United Nations Educational,
Scientific and Cultural Organization Institute for Statistics, 2014.

61. An estimated 289,000 women died in 2013 from causes relating to pregnancy
and childbirth, although some 80 per cent of such deaths could have been averted
had women had access to essential maternity and basic health-care services. The
causes of maternal mortality vary by region, but are largely a result of the absence
of emergency obstetric care services, the lack of skilled personnel during delivery
and the denial of comprehensive sexual and reproductive health and rights for
women and girls. Childbearing at a young age, most often stemming from early
marriage, constitutes another significant health risk for women and their children.
As shown in box 20, these risks and resulting deaths remain significantly higher in
conflict and post-conflict settings.

26/34

14-61463

S/2014/693

Box 20
Indicator: Maternal mortality ratio. The global maternal mortality
ratio in 2013 fell to 210 deaths per 100,000 live births. For the aggregate
of conflict and post-conflict countries, a the figure was 60 per cent higher
(531 deaths per 100,000 live births). Not only do the data show an
increase from the rate of 438 deaths per 100,000 live births in 2010, but
they also highlight large disparities between countries, with some, such
as the Central African Republic and Sierra Leone, having the highest
rates in the world at 880 and 1,100 deaths per 100,000 live births,
respectively. The proportion of deliveries attended by skilled health
personnel rose from 56 to 68 per cent between 1990 and 2012 in
developing regions, but only 47 per cent of deliveries in conflict and
post-conflict countries with available estimates for 2012 were attended
by skilled health personnel. Considering that skilled attendance data wer e
not available for countries with the highest maternal mortality rates,
figures in those countries are expected to be even lower.
a

See box 6, note a. Maternal mortality ratio aggregates for the 29 countries with
data, of 33, were calculated using Maternal Mortality Estimation Inter-agency
Group estimates (www.maternalmortalitydata.org) and interpolated annual
birth estimates of the Population Division’s World Fertility Data 2012
(http://esa.un.org/wpp/ASCII-Data/disk_navigation_ascii.htm#Interpolated_
Annual_Indicators).

62. For women in camps for internally displaced persons and refugees, limited
access to reproductive health services and emergency obstetric care remains a
serious concern. Deliveries often take place in temporary shelters and amb ulances,
while supplies and qualified staff are not always available, including as a result of
targeted attacks on health facilities and medical staff. United Nations entities are
working to respond to the growing health needs resulting from increasing
displacement. In 2013, the United Nations Population Fund and its partners
responded to the health-related needs of women and girls, including as a result of
gender-based violence, in 28 emergency-affected and conflict-affected countries. In
the Syrian refugee camps in Jordan, for example, the Fund provided reproductive
health services to more than 67,000 Syrian refugee women and girls. In Uganda, the
Central Emergency Response Fund managed by the Office for the Coordination of
Humanitarian Affairs provided contributions for emergency obstetric assistance,
focusing in particular on providing support to pregnant refugees from neighbouring
countries. In line with Security Council resolution 2122 (2013), I call upon all
actors to support improved access to comprehensive sexual and reproductive health
services in conflict-affected settings. This must include access to HIV counselling
and testing, which remains limited in many settings, and the safe termination of
pregnancies for survivors of conflict-related rape.
Planning and financing
63. Data on funding allocations for gender-responsive peacebuilding projects show
that accelerated efforts are needed to meet the goal of allocating at least 15 per cent
of United Nations-managed funds in support of peacebuilding to projects whose
principal objective is to address women’s specific needs and advance gender
equality, as set out in my seven-point action plan on gender-responsive

14-61463

27/34

S/2014/693

peacebuilding (see A/65/354-S/2010/466). Box 21 provides an update on progress
made by entities using gender markers to track spending. Owing to differences in
methodology, data from reporting entities are not comparable. For those using a
gender marker, projects are generally attributed scores between zero and three,
pursuant to the gender equality marker guidance note prepared by the United
Nations Development Group in 2013. For most entities, a score of two means that
projects have gender equality as a “significant” objective and a score of three means
that it is a “principal” objective.
Box 21
Indicator: Proportion of United Nations system funding used to
address gender equality issues, including multi-donor trust funds.
Allocations from the Peacebuilding Fund to projects with gender equality
as a principal objective fell to 7.4 per cent in 2013 from 10.8 per cent in
2012. After the successful roll-out of the gender promotion initiative in
2011 and 2012, 2013 was a year of implementation for man y of the
projects, including some to support the role of women in electoral and
reconciliation processes, reintegration, access to land and economic
empowerment. In Liberia, allocation to projects with a score of three
(from the current projects funded by the peacebuilding priority plan)
reached almost 20 per cent, exceeding the target of 15 per cent.
Analysis of expenditure by UNDP in 2013 in 30 countries shows
that 5 per cent of funds were allocated to projects with a score of three,
22 per cent to projects with a score of two and 65 per cent to projects
with a score of one (weak gender focus).a This illustrates a slight shift
since 2012 (63 per cent for projects with a score of one and 23 per cent
for those with a score of two). Allocations to projects with scores of zero
and three have remained relatively stagnant since 2011.
In the case of UNICEF, 23 per cent of expenditure in 2013 in
conflict and post-conflict countries had gender equality as a principal
objective, while 46 per cent had it as a significant objective,
demonstrating an increase in gender focus since 2012, when only 13 per
cent had it as a principal objective. Most gender-sensitive interventions
were concentrated around education and child protection. Notably, there
has been an increase in humanitarian interventions contributing
principally to gender equality (from 3 per cent in 2011 to 7 per cent in
2012 and 16 per cent in 2013).
The application of the Inter-Agency Standing Committee gender
marker during the 2013 humanitarian planning season (strategic response
plans) shows that 4 per cent of projects had gender as a primary
objective, as in 2012, while 36 per cent had it as a central objective,
compared with 53 per cent in 2012. The humanitarian country teams in
the Sudan and the State of Palestine demonstrated strong gender
responsive programming, with 52 per cent and 66 per cent, respectively,
of projects having gender as a central objective.
a

28/34

Figures include outlier Law and Order Trust Fund for Afghanistan. If excluded,
the aggregates would be 13, 48, 31 and 8 per cent for ratings of zero, one, two
and three, respectively.

14-61463

S/2014/693

64. Similar patterns are reflected in data compiled using the gender equality policy
marker of the Development Assistance Committee of the Organization for Economic
Cooperation and Development, which shows that some 5 per cent of the funds 11
allocated to activities in conflict and post-conflict countries 8 in 2012 had gender
equality as a principal objective, while 30 per cent were allocated to activities with
it as a significant objective. Allocations were largely concentrated in the education
and health sectors, with only 0.35 per cent of aid allocated to conflict, peace and
security activities marked as having a gender focus.
65. Although goals and targets relating to fund allocations are far from being
attained, the use of markers has greatly contributed to improving understanding of
how initiatives that promote gender equality and the empowerment of women are
financed. Such information should be used to inform policymaking, planning and
budgeting to accelerate change. I welcome UNHCR efforts to set up genderresponsive fund tracking mechanisms and its commitment to ensuring that
interventions contribute to gender equality. I also welcome the launch of the s econd
gender promotion initiative by the Peacebuilding Support Office and encourage the
establishment of other special mechanisms to increase funding allocations to projects
for the empowerment of women in peacebuilding contexts. Since the launch of my
seven-point action plan, allocations from the Peacebuilding Fund to projects
implemented by UN-Women in post-conflict countries have increased fourteenfold,
rising from some $500,000 in 2010 to some $7 million in 2014. World Bank data
show that lending operations in fragile and conflict-affected States increasingly
integrate gender considerations into their design, with an increase in gender-informed
projects from 62 per cent in 2010 to 79 per cent in 2012 and 93 per cent in 2013.
66. The linkages between disarmament, peacebuilding and development are well
known. As recognized in the Platform for Action of the Fourth World Conference on
Women, excessive military spending reduces the resources available for social
development. Although research indicates that global military spending declined in
real terms in 2013 (see www.sipri.org), investments in conflict resolution,
peacebuilding, gender equality and development continue to lag far behind. As such,
women’s organizations continue to strongly call for funds to be redirected towards
sustainable peace.

III. Coordination and accountability for results
67. In follow-up to a recommendation in my 2012 report on women and peace and
security (S/2012/732), a global review was organized from 5 to 7 November 2013 in
Glen Cove, New York, to assess approaches and identify strategies at the national
and regional levels for the implementation of resolution 1325 (2000) and related
commitments. More than 80 countries have now committed themselves to the
implementation of the women and peace and security agenda through regional or
national action plans. A marked increase in policy support since 2010
notwithstanding, findings from the meeting 12 confirmed that the content of
implementation frameworks, and the resources attributed thereto, varied widely and
that adequate financing remained a pervasive challenge. Recent research finds that
__________________
11 Screened bilateral or European Union-multilateral sector-allocable official development

assistance funds only. See http://stats.oecd.org/Index.aspx?DataSetCode=GENDER.
12 See www.peacewomen.org/assets/file/final_report_global_review_meeting_.pdf.

14-61463

29/34

S/2014/693

few Member States have a budget or earmarked funding for national action plans. 13
In follow-up to the global review, UN-Women and its partners, Cordaid and the
Global Network of Women Peacebuilders, led the formation of a women and peace
and security financing discussion group, comprising donor Governme nts, postconflict Member States, United Nations entities and civil society partners. The
group will elaborate specific proposals for increasing funding in the lead -up to the
15-year high-level review of resolution 1325 (2000).
68. As at July 2014, national action plans had been adopted by 46 Member States
(23 in Europe, 13 in Africa, 3 in the Americas, 6 in Asia and the Pacific and 1 in the
Middle East and Western Asia) 14 and more than 20 others were in development. An
action plan was also adopted by Kosovo to implement resolution 1325 (2000).6
Notably, several countries are implementing a second -generation or third-generation
action plan. Of those, most have strengthened monitoring and evaluation
frameworks, including through indicators and targets. Australia, for example,
supported the development of a civil society report card to hold the Government
accountable for implementation, while several countrie s report regularly on progress
both to their parliaments and through publications. When well -designed and
inclusive, national action plans can be useful tools to translate global commitments
into national policy and programming.
69. Regions and subregions are increasingly strengthening approaches to the
implementation of the women and peace and security agenda. For example, the
European Union presented its second report on its women and peace and security
indicators, while the North Atlantic Treaty Organization launched a new project on
indicators for the implementation of resolution 1325 (2000) and related resolutions.
The Pacific Islands Forum secretariat established a women and peace and security
reference group to oversee the implementation of its regional action plan. In West
Africa, a new database of actors, tools and resources on gender, women and peace
and security was launched as part of the midterm review of the regional action plan.
In the Great Lakes region, a regional action plan for the implementation of
resolution 1325 (2000) was adopted by Burundi, the Democratic Republic of the
Congo and Rwanda in support of the Peace, Security and Cooperati on Framework
for the Democratic Republic of the Congo and the region. In addition, the African
Union launched a major new five-year gender, peace and security programme,
covering the period 2015-2020.
70. Beyond action plans, tools that are improving imple mentation and
accountability include a localization programme implemented by the Global
Network of Women Peacebuilders in Colombia, the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, Liberia, Nepal, the Philippines, Sierra Leone and Uganda. Continued efforts
to build capacity among legislators on women and peace and security, such as those
__________________
13 Cordaid and Global Network of Women Peacebuilders, “Financing for the impleme ntation of

national action plans on UNSCR 1325: critical for advancing women’s human rights, peace and
security” (2013). Available from www.peacewomen.org/assets/file/financing_background_
paper_global_review_dec_2_2013_1.pdf.
14 Australia, Austria, Belgium, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Burundi, Canada, Chile, Côte d’Ivoire,
Croatia, Democratic Republic of the Congo, Denmark, Estonia, Finland, France, Gambia,
Georgia, Germany, Ghana, Guinea, Guinea-Bissau, Iceland, Iraq, Ireland, Italy, Kyrgyzstan,
Liberia, Lithuania, Nepal, Netherlands, Nigeria, Norway, Philippines, Portugal, Republic of
Korea, Rwanda, Senegal, Serbia, Sierra Leone, Slovenia, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland, the
former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Uganda, United Kingdom and United States of
America.

30/34

14-61463

S/2014/693

by the Economic Commission for Africa and the Economic and Social Commission
for Western Asia in collaboration with the Inter-Parliamentary Union, are also
encouraging.
71. Discussions on the post-2015 development framework are increasing the
attention paid to how to measure governance, peace and security issues. In this
connection, the African Union is leading the implementation of household surveys
on governance, peace and security within the framework of the Strategy for the
Harmonization of Statistics in Africa. UN-Women is supporting analysis of the data
to capture gender-specific concerns.
72. Review processes linked to human rights instruments support synergies
between the Committee on the Elimination of Discrimination against Women and
the resolutions of the Security Council on women and peace and security. In 2013
and 2014, the reports of 12 conflict and post-conflict countries were considered by
the Committee, with the reports of a further eight such countries to be submitted in
either 2014 or 2015. UN-Women, in consultation with the Committee, is developing
a guidebook on general recommendation No. 30 and Council resolutions on women
and peace and security to support more effective reporting by States parties to the
Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination against Women.
73. In terms of coordination and accountability within the United Nations, a recent
independent thematic review on gender and peacebuilding, commissioned by the
Peacebuilding Support Office, found that a gap remained between policy
commitments and the actual implementation of gender-responsive peacebuilding,
the accelerated efforts throughout the United Nations to bridge the gap since 2010
notwithstanding. At the end of 2014, the United Nations will review progress
against the targets in its strategic results framework on women and peace and
security, which will allow for a critical assessment and revision of targets, as
needed, and more effective implementation beyond 2015.
74. Efforts to measure the impact of the women and peace and security agenda
should be stepped up, including through greater investment in gender and peace and
security statistics. Increased interaction is needed among stakeholders engaged in
conflict prevention, peacebuilding and recovery to build and share knowledge and
practice. This includes improved sharing of existing analysis, good practice,
evaluations and statistics and coordinated design of statistical methodolo gies to
ensure the international comparability of estimates.

IV. Observations and recommendations
75. In its resolution 1325 (2000), the Security Council set out a visionary agenda
for achieving gender equality as a prerequisite for peaceful, inclusive and just
societies. Since 2000, progress has been made in ensuring that peacekeeping
missions provide more gender-responsive protective environments, supporting the
effective participation of women in peace processes and mediation efforts led by the
United Nations, tackling impunity for sexual and gender-based crimes, addressing
linkages between irresponsible arms transfers and gender-based violence and
responding to the needs of women and girls in humanitarian and recovery settings.
There is also increased awareness of the importance of seizing the unique political
moment offered by post-conflict transitions to repeal discriminatory laws and
policies and foster the economic and political empowerment of women.

14-61463

31/34

S/2014/693

76. Nevertheless, aspirations fall short of reality. As shown herein, the past year
has been marked by a series of deeply troubling developments and abhorrent crimes
linked to violent conflict and terrorism leading to new mass displacements,
humanitarian catastrophes and serious violations of international humanitarian and
human rights law. I remain extremely concerned about the continued incidence of
sexual and gender-based violence and targeted attacks and threats against women
and girls and those defending their rights. I call upon all parties to armed conflict to
respect and uphold international law, I underline the obligation of States to protect
civilians and investigate and prosecute such crimes and I emphasize the need for
action to protect witnesses and victims and guarantee that women have access to
justice.
77. There are several strategic reviews scheduled for 2015, including of United
Nations sanctions and peace operations. I call upon entities and Member States
leading and supporting the reviews to ensure that they fully integrate the
commitments and priorities of the women and peace and security agenda.
78. Findings available from entities using gender markers demonstrate that
financing for women and peace and security remains inadequate. I encourage
Member States, the United Nations system and civil society to urgently explore
means of increasing the funding dedicated to the implementation of the women and
peace and security agenda. I call upon Member States to ensure that national and
regional action plans on women and peace and security are well financed and that
dedicated budget lines are included in all peace, security and peacebuilding
initiatives. I encourage Governments and regional organizations to consider the use
of tools such as gender markers to assess and improve performance.
79. I welcome the initial steps taken to follow up on the commitments of Security
Council resolutions 2106 (2013) and 2122 (2013) aiming to ensure more consistent
implementation of the women and peace and security agenda. I note the importance
of sustained efforts by the United Nations and other actors to improve gender sensitive conflict analysis and to accord priority to and retain such information
throughout the reporting chain and related outcomes. I call upon the Council to
consistently request the inclusion of such information in reports and briefings and
encourage increased attention to be paid to women and peace and security issues in
all relevant thematic areas of work on its agenda, including on threats to
international peace and security caused by terrorist acts.
80. I reiterate the importance of technical gender expertise in ensuring the
effective mainstreaming of gender perspectives throughout the work of field
missions and the application of gender analysis to inform policy and planning
processes and investigations. I call upon Member States to continue to support that
capacity. I underline the need for such support also in situations of mission
handover and transition and I call upon those planning and negotiating the
transitions to ensure that gender considerations are integrated into benchmarks,
timetables and handover plans.
81. I emphasize the need for appropriate training for all United Nations staff, both
before and during deployment, to ensure their understanding of their responsibilities
in promoting the principles of the Charter of the United Nations, human rights
instruments and related policy commitments, including those on women and peace
and security, gender equality and the empowerment of women.

32/34

14-61463

S/2014/693

82. I welcome recent progress in global gender statistics and emphasize the role of
data disaggregated by sex, age and other variables in expanding the evidence and
knowledge base guiding policy and programme development and implementation. I
call upon Member States to make greater investments in monitoring and evaluation,
including improving the availability of up-to-date data on women and peace and
security and building technical capacity to collect, analyse and use such data in
policymaking and programming.
83. I support the renewed attention paid to the prevention and mitigation of violent
conflict and armed violence and the recent debates of the Security Council on
related topics, including that held in August 2014 on conflict prevention, which
resulted in the adoption of resolution 2174 (2014). I encourage enhanced attention
to be paid to the role of women in early warning, mediation and community
prevention initiatives, together with their engagement in efforts to tackle the root
causes of conflict.
84. I call upon Member States and United Nations entities to ensure that the needs
of women and girls are fully taken into account in policy, planning and
programming efforts in peacebuilding and recovery work, including in terms of
support for basic services such as education and health services, and economic
empowerment and livelihood initiatives. Legal, medical and psychosocial services
for survivors of sexual and gender-based violence in conflict must be provided in a
gender-responsive and non-discriminatory manner and in accordance with
international humanitarian law. I emphasize the obligation of all actors to ensure
that all women and girls, especially those from vulnerable groups, including forcibly
displaced women and girls, those with disabilities and adolescent girls, are able to
participate in pre-design programme consultations and in the monitoring and
evaluation of activities.
85. Since the tenth anniversary of resolution 1325 (2000), there has been a steady
increase in the number of accountability frameworks and political dec larations in
support of accelerated implementation. I find herein that, while the advances at the
policy level are of critical importance, more robust action is needed to translate
commitments into improved outcomes for women and girls. In the coming year,
before the implementation of resolution 1325 (2000) is reviewed again, I call upon
Member States, United Nations entities, regional organizations and civil society to
make progress on, and ensure accountability for, commitments on women and peace
and security. In this regard, I encourage Member States to hold parliamentary
debates or organize other review processes to assess progress. I recommit the United
Nations system to making greater efforts to meet its own goals and targets,
including those on the representation of women at the most senior levels.
86. The unique opportunities offered by the convergence of major global policy
events in 2015 must be maximized. I note the recommendation made by both the
High-level Panel of Eminent Persons on the Post-2015 Development Agenda and the
Open Working Group of the General Assembly on Sustainable Development Goals
that a stand-alone goal on gender equality and women’s empowerment should be
central to the next development framework, in addition to the emphasis placed on
having peaceful societies and institutions — both of which are fundamental to the
achievement of commitments on women and peace and security. I encourage all
actors to ensure that the issues are addressed in the 20-year review of the Platform
for Action of the Fourth World Conference on Women.

14-61463

33/34

S/2014/693

87. I urge the United Nations system to ensure that innovative and successful
practices delivering specific results throughout the women and peace and securit y
agenda are documented so that the international community can accurately take
stock of achievements and challenges at the high-level review of the implementation
of resolution 1325 (2000). I envisage the global study mandated in resolution 2122
(2013) to be forward-looking, focusing on specific impacts on the ground and
including targeted recommendations to accelerate implementation.

34/34

14-61463
