S/PV.9373

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-eighth year

9373rd meeting

Tuesday, 11 July 2023, 3 p.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Kariuki. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(United Kingdom of Great Britain
and Northern Ireland)

Members:

Albania . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Brazil. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ecuador. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Gabon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ghana . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Japan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Malta. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Mozambique . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Switzerland . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Arab Emirates . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Hoxha
Mr. França Danese
Mr. Geng Shuang
Mr. Pérez Loose
Mr. De Rivière
Mrs. Onanga
Mr. Anyanah
Mrs. Shino
Mr. De Bono Sant Cassia
Mr. Afonso
Mr. Nebenzia/Mr. Polyanskiy
Mrs. Chanda
Mr. Abushahab
Mr. DeLaurentis

Agenda
Threats to international peace and security

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of speeches delivered
in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records of the Security Council.
Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They should be incorporated in a copy
of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the
Verbatim Reporting Service, room AB-0601 (verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be
reissued electronically on the Official Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

23-20205 (E)
*2320205*

Accessible document

Please recycle

S/PV.9373

Threats to international peace and security

The meeting was called to order at 3.05 p.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Threats to international peace and security
The President: In accordance with rule 39 of
the Council’s provisional rules of procedure, I invite
the following briefers to participate in this meeting:
Mr. Bryce Greene, independent journalist; and
Mr. Jeffrey A. Brodsky, independent journalist.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I now give the floor to Mr. Greene.

11/07/2023

for Ukraine. Removing that leverage would severely
harm — and has severely harmed — Russian strategic
interests on that front. Also, Russia had already made
statements urging Germany, then suffering from high
energy prices, to end the sanctions against the Nord
Stream pipeline, saying that both lines could be opened.
Importantly, we know now that the leading investigator,
from Sweden, told the press, “Do I think it was Russia that
blew up Nord Stream? I never thought so. It is not logical.”
The other problem with immediately blaming
Russia was that another immediately apparent culprit,
the United States, was almost completely ignored as
a potential suspect. Why is that? As we shall see, the
circumstantial case for United States complicity in the
attacks is far stronger than the case for Russia.

Mr. Greene: My name is Bryce Greene, and I am
an organizer, a graduate student and a freelance media
critic. My work has been published by Fairness and
Accuracy in Reporting and has been republished in other
outlets, including Salon and the Monthly Review Online.
I am also a United States citizen, and thus I bear the
responsibility for the actions of my own Government to
the extent that I have the ability to influence them. But
I appear here before the Security Council on my own
behalf and represent no Government or organization.
It is media criticism work and studying the Ukraine
war in general that brought me to investigate the Nord
Stream attack and the international response to it.

It has long been a United States and NATO strategy
to prevent the integration between Western Europe and
Russia. That was clear in the early post-war days. NATO’s
first Secretary General, Lord Hastings Ismay, made it
clear that NATO’s role as an organization was to “keep
the Russians out, the Americans in and the Germans
down”. That has not really changed over the past 80 years.

For a brief background, beginning around midnight
on 26 September 2022, a series of leaks were detected
along the route of the Nord Stream pipelines. Seismology
reports indicated clearly that this was the result of
deliberate sabotage and not an accident. For Western
officials, experts and the press, the culprit was clear:
Russia. Numerous articles and government officials
immediately pointed the finger at Russia. What was their
explanation as to why Russia would blow up its own
pipeline? Well, even the New York Times acknowledged
that “it is unclear why Moscow would seek to damage
installations that cost Gazprom billions of dollars to
build and maintain”. But the press quickly fell into line
with the motive that the attacks were just “a reminder
from Moscow”. According to Western officials, experts
and media, Russia attacked themselves to intimidate
the West.

We see that in a 2019 study by the RAND
Corporation. The study was looking at ways to
overextend and unbalance Russia. Specifically, it
looked at how best to exploit “Russia’s economic,
political and military vulnerabilities and anxieties”.
The RAND study also prophetically recommended that
the United States start “providing more United States
military equipment and advice” to Ukraine in order to
“lead Russia to increase its direct involvement in the
conflict and the price it pays for it”. At the same time,
the study acknowledged that “Russia might respond by
mounting a new offensive and seizing more Ukrainian
territory.” We now know how that went, so clearly
this is an important piece of literature with respect
to understanding what is going on over there. More
relevant to today’s discussion, the study included a
recommendation to reduce Russian natural gas exports
and hinder pipeline expansions. The study noted that “a
first step would involve stopping Nord Stream 2,” and
that natural gas from the United States and Australia
could provide a substitute.

Now there are all sorts of problems with blaming
Russia. For one, gas flows from Russia were a major point
of leverage over Europe with respect to their support
2/13

Since the announcement of the second Nord Stream
project, three successive United States Administrations
have done their utmost to stop the pipeline. The Obama,
Trump and Biden Administrations all opposed it. Even
people who plan out the global strategy for the military
have taken those things into account.

23-20205

11/07/2023

Threats to international peace and security

S/PV.9373

I should note that now, if one looks at the study
online, it has a warning that it is being misused by proRussian propagandists, however I believe the words of
the study speak for themselves, as do the words and
actions of United States officials.

attack. Those reports, citing information ostensibly
gathered in the ongoing German investigation, alleges
that a small boat, the Andromeda, was a key part of the
plot to bomb the pipelines. However, some investigators
are still sceptical of the role it may have played.

I recall that, at the start of the Biden Administration,
United States Secretary of State Antony Blinken told
Congress he was determined to do whatever he could
to prevent Nord Stream 2 from being completed.
Under-Secretary of State Victoria Nuland told the
press: “If Russia invades Ukraine, one way or another,
Nord Stream 2 will not go forward”. In February,
President Biden told reporters, “If Russia invades,
there will be no longer a Nord Stream 2; we will
bring an end to it. I promise you, we will be able to do
that.” And after the attack, both Blinken and Nuland
celebrated the destruction of the pipelines, calling it a
tremendous opportunity.

However, much like the United States, Ukraine
has ample reason to want the pipeline gone. In 2021,
Ukrainian and Polish ministers published an article in
Politico, entitled “Nord Stream 2 has damaged the West
enough. Time to put an end to it.”

On 8 February, veteran American journalist
Seymour Hersh published a major article, hosted on his
Substack, about who was responsible for the attacks.
The story was based on anonymous sources with
knowledge of the operation, one of whom was willing
to go on the record. The story alleged that the pipeline
was attacked on orders from Joe Biden and his National
Security Council, originating from plans that predated
the war. The story goes that United States Navy divers
used the NATO BALTOPS exercises in June 2022
as cover to lay explosives on the pipeline that were
detonated three months later, in September.

We also learned that the United States was
training Ukrainians in undersea operations similar to
the one that must have been carried out against Nord
Stream 2. According to numerous media reports in the
Western press, Dutch intelligence agencies passed on
information about a potential Ukrainian attack to the
American Central Intelligence Agency, which then
warned Germany about a potential attack. Therefore,
according to mainstream sources in the West, the
United States had some degree of advanced knowledge
of the attacks.

Analysts within the open-source intelligence
community have pushed back, citing differences
between some of the vessels involved in Hersh’s story
and what is available in the open-source intelligence
community, but Hersh has responded to that criticism
by pointing out that covert operations would likely not
leave a trail that is searchable by the public.
The White House, for their part, called Hersh’s
story completely and utterly false, but given the
interests of the United States in those pipeline
explosions, those denials carry no information.
There has been information collected by researchers,
including Swedish scholar Ola Tunander, which appear
to corroborate elements of Hersh’s story, however, to
my knowledge, those leads have yet to be seriously
looked into by western investigators.
After Hersh’s article was published, a new story
emerged in both the United States and European press,
alleging that a “pro-Ukrainian group” was behind the

Corroboration for that story came from the
Washington Post, which published an addition to the
ongoing Discord Leaks story. According to United
States intelligence intercepts of high-level Ukrainian
communications, Zelenskyy has been advocating
making bolder moves against Russia, including attacks
on pipelines.

One thorough investigation comes from journalist
James Bamford, who reported that the United States is
almost certain to know more about the attack than it
is letting on, whether it or the Ukrainians committed
the attack. It is worth quoting some excerpts from his
report. He says:
“United States intelligence constantly monitors
Russia and other countries in near-real time from
beneath the seas, including from under the Baltic,
where arrays of acoustic sensors tethered to the
seafloor would certainly have been able to pinpoint
the exact time and location of these massive
undersea explosions.”
He goes on to say:
“Even more important, by analysing the distinct
engine sounds of the ships, submarines and
unmanned underwater vehicles passing above,
in the days surrounding the sabotage, United
States intelligence would have likely been able to

23-202053/13

S/PV.9373

Threats to international peace and security

“fingerprint” them and determine their nationality
and exact identity. While the transponder on a
ship can be switched off, rendering it invisible to
satellites, as long as its engines are running it can be
detected by the United States Navy’s little-known
and highly secret worldwide Integrated Undersea
Surveillance System.”
Therefore, it is likely that the United States knows
far more about what happened than it is letting on.
To recap, the consensus among Western press and
officials is that either the United States or Ukraine was
involved in the attack — and if Ukraine was involved
in the attack, then it surely had the acquiescence of the
United States.
Everyone here likely knows all this, but given the
United States’ power to veto any motion in the Security
Council, the situation will likely not change anytime soon.
So, what will change that? Now I direct my comments
to members of the Western press — people at CNN,
The Washington Post, The New York Times — major
American journals with the resources and the power
to investigate the attack and demand responses from
American officials. But there have been very few
reports actually analysing the situation and seriously
weighing the evidence, and very few questions have
been asked of the Biden Administration.
An article from the New York Times is emblematic
of the general attitude of the country. They wrote “a
flurry of new findings and competing narratives has
sown distrust among Western allies”. Most critically,
The New York Times acknowledges that “it may be in
no one’s interest to reveal more.” In no one’s interest?
Is that serious? They have abdicated their role to hold
power accountable.
In conclusion, The West has let these revelations
sink into the background. Despite the parlour game
about whether or not it was American or Ukrainian
divers who actually planted the charges, analysts
and officials across the West seem to agree on key
facts — that the attacks originated in the West, The
BALTOPS exercises were the staging ground for those
attacks, and the United States knows a lot more than it
is currently sharing. Those facts and their implications
need to be seriously understood and addressed by both
the Security Council and the world’s press.
Western media is not seriously pressing for answers
right now, and the distinction between the two versions
of the story — “the United States did it” versus “Ukraine
4/13

11/07/2023

did it” — are a distraction. It is a distinction without
a difference. Both stories clearly indicate Western
complicity and a conspiracy of silence, at the absolute
least. I urge the Security Council and, especially,
Western press, to utilize their considerable power and
authority to shed some light on the situation and to hold
accountable those individuals and organizations and
nations that may be responsible for this act of terror.
The President: I thank Mr. Greene for his briefing.
I now give the floor to the second briefer requested
by the Russian Federation, Mr. Brodsky.
Mr. Brodsky: My name is Jeffrey Brodsky. I am
the only journalist who has travelled to all four blast
sites of the Nord Stream 1 and 2 pipelines in the Baltic
Sea. I have been investigating the Nord Stream sabotage
since the day it occurred on 26 September 2022. I am
appearing before the Security Council on my own
behalf. I represent no Government or organization in
the testimony that I will deliver.
The attack on the Nord Stream pipelines is likely
the most severe act of ecoterrorism and the largest
instance of industrial sabotage in history. Under
Chapters V and VI of the Charter of the United Nations,
two of the functions and powers of the Security Council
are to maintain international peace and security “in
accordance with the purposes and principles of the
United Nations” and “to investigate any dispute, or any
situation which might lead to international friction”.
Bringing the perpetrator of the Nord Stream sabotage
to international justice and compensating the parties
harmed will advance international peace and security
and reduce international friction, as well as further the
aim of preventing future attacks on critical international
infrastructure. I therefore appeal to the Security
Council to execute its functions and powers under the
Charter by conducting an impartial investigation into
the Nord Stream sabotage.
In late May I participated in an independent
expedition to all four blast sites of the Nord Stream 1
and 2 pipelines. Underwater drone images and videos
and sonar images of the damaged pipelines were
obtained through the investigation. The public had
never seen the images and videos before, and they offer
unique insights into the amounts of explosives used in
the attack, the types of charges and their placement.
By analysing the expedition’s data, both military and
civilian experts have drawn conclusions about how
the pipelines were damaged. Notably, previous reports
23-20205

11/07/2023

Threats to international peace and security

stating that more than 500 kilograms of explosives were
used at each blast site were shown to be inaccurate.
Based on my reporting and the expedition’s findings,
the actual amount of explosives used ranged between
10 and 50 kilograms, likely leaning towards the lower
end of that range. However, neither the data obtained on
the expedition or my investigative work has so far been
able to conclusively attribute the sabotage to a specific
nation State, and it may be that only the Security
Council can do that. In order to achieve that objective, I
am confident that many people around the world would
welcome the Council’s assistance.
The European Union (EU), moreover, has
warned that
“[a]ny deliberate disruption of European energy
infrastructure is utterly unacceptable and will be
met with a robust and united response.”
Yet whatever the actions are that the EU has taken
to identify the perpetrator of the attack, they remain
unclear. Furthermore, it is widely known to members
of the Council and the general public that three
countries — Germany, Denmark and Sweden — have
carried out investigations into the sabotage. Regrettably,
none of those countries have disclosed the results of
their investigations, despite the fact that nine months
have passed since the sabotage took place. I have
personally contacted the German, Danish and Swedish
investigators several times to ask them for comments
on my reporting and the expedition’s findings, but
they have refused to comment. It is not clear why those
countries have not shared their findings with the public.
The Baltic Sea is probably the most heavily
trafficked and monitored body of water in the world.
As one European parliamentarian told me,
“Do you think that a terrorist attack like this, in
international waters, in a sea that is observed by
many different surveillance systems ... could
happen without anybody taking notice? That’s hard
to believe. It wasn’t an attack on Mars; it was in the
Baltic Sea.”
There is also sufficient economic motivation for the
three countries to release their findings. The pipelines
cost more than $23 billion to build, and their owners,
operators and stakeholders are from a number of
countries. A good deal of the inflation that is currently
hurting families and small businesses throughout
Europe has been brought on by the lack of inexpensive
natural gas. And Germany’s industrial base has suffered

S/PV.9373

particularly from the sabotage, as manufacturing costs
have risen. Nord Stream 1 alone could supply 58 per
cent of Germany’s annual gas consumption, while
according to one study, “Germany’s three-decade-long
trade surplus flipped into a deficit, driven by the rise
in gas prices.” Furthermore, the ecological impact of
the sabotage will likely be tremendous. The explosions
caused what could be the largest release in history of
methane, a greenhouse gas more than 25 times as potent
as carbon dioxide at trapping heat in the atmosphere,
according to the United Nations Environment
Programme. As of now, unfortunately, Germany,
Denmark and Sweden have shown no willingness to
share the results of their investigations with the public.
It is of particular interest that Sweden was the
first country to arrive at the crime scenes and conduct
investigations, including the removal of debris and
materials. In fact, Swedish investigators removed
debris and materials from one of the crime scenes on at
least two occasions. In October 2022, when the Swedish
newspaper Expressen published images and videos of
the ruptures in one of the pipelines, media attention to
the sabotage increased again. The Swedish investigators
subsequently closed off the area for several days and
did some more investigative work. It remains unclear
why Swedish investigators took that action and what
information the debris and materials that they removed
could provide about the sabotage. And even when, or
if, the three countries release their findings, it does not
appear that Sweden, in particular, is going to tell the
world who is responsible for the sabotage. The Swedish
Prosecutor has previously said that
“[t]he main purpose of the Swedish preliminary
investigation is to find out whether Sweden or
Swedish infrastructure has been used for the
attack and whether there are people who should be
prosecuted for participation.”
That was an excerpt from an English translation of an
article published in a European newspaper in May.
The Nord Stream sabotage stands as one of the most
significant acts of ecoterrorism and industrial sabotage
in history. It also represents one of the most pressing
geopolitical mysteries of our time. Is it sufficient to
inform global citizens, the numerous businesses and
the many countries affected by the sabotage merely
about whether Sweden or Swedish infrastructure has
been used in the attack and whether there are people
who should be prosecuted for participation? I think
not. The nation State or States responsible for the

23-202055/13

S/PV.9373

Threats to international peace and security

sabotage must be held accountable for their violation of
international law. The perpetrators must be identified
and brought to justice, and the parties affected must be
duly compensated. Many people worldwide have lost
faith in national and international institutions. I hope
that condemning this act of global terrorism and swiftly
establishing a Security Council-led investigation into
such an enormous global crime can help restore some
of that lost faith. The world is watching and expecting
the Security Council to uncover the truth about the
sabotage and share it publicly.
The President: I thank Mr. Brodsky for his briefing.
I shall now give the floor to those members of the
Council who wish to make statements.
Mr. Nebenzia (Russian Federation) (spoke
in Russian): We thank the independent American
journalists Bryce Greene and Jeffrey Brodsky for
their briefings, in which they presented the Security
Council with objective facts surrounding the sabotage
of the Nord Stream gas pipelines in the Baltic Sea in
September 2022. They confirm our version of events,
which is that carrying out such a crime would simply
have been impossible without the direct involvement or
at least support of a State actor. We have been drawing
the attention of the Security Council to this topic for
months. We note that in whatever format it is discussed in
the Council, and regardless of delegations’ positions on
the draft resolution we proposed (S/2023/212), virtually
every Council member has consistently condemned the
crime and acknowledged the importance of establishing
the truth and identifying the perpetrators. At the same
time, Western colleagues tried to convince the Council
that there was no added value in international efforts
until the completion of national investigations carried
out by Berlin, Copenhagen and Stockholm. They
persistently urged us to wait until those investigations
were completed.
It has now been almost 10 months since the
sabotage, and 4 months since the vote on our draft
resolution. No information had been provided to the
Security Council and the international community until
yesterday. The German, Danish and Swedish authorities
stubbornly refused to provide any intelligible response
to our numerous requests and appeals. They did not
provide a response to the message sent in October
2022 by the Prime Minister of the Russian Federation,
Mr. Mishustin, on the need to conduct a comprehensive
investigation of the incident with the participation
of representatives of the Russian authorities and the
6/13

11/07/2023

Gazprom company. Nor did they provide a response
to the numerous notes sent by the Russian missions in
this regard.
We have repeatedly drawn the Council’s attention
to the fact that its entire response amounted to
formal non-answers, with a refusal to cooperate
under extremely ludicrous and far-fetched pretexts.
Members of the Council had the opportunity to see
this for themselves when they received copies of our
correspondence with the authorities of Denmark,
Sweden and Germany, which we circulated in the
Council in March (S/2023/193 and S/2023/223).
As a result of our efforts, it appears that Germany,
Denmark and Sweden have begun to realize that
they are not just ignoring the requests of the Russian
Federation, but they are essentially defying the opinion
of the Security Council, among whose members, as our
discussions behind closed doors have clearly shown,
there is growing confusion and dissatisfaction due to
the absence of any information on the progress of the
national investigations.
As a result, after receiving yet another yellow
card from the majority of Council members, Berlin,
Copenhagen and Stockholm decided to prepare the
collective letter that was disseminated yesterday
(S/2023/517). Unfortunately, it is also very reminiscent
of a non-answer and cannot replace a full-fledged
briefing by them to Council members, in which we
could ask them questions, of which a great many have
piled up.
Moreover, not only does their letter repeat the
false assertion that Russia was allegedly informed
about the progress of the investigations, the choice of
wording also indicates that the authorities of Germany,
Denmark and Sweden are deliberately trying to prepare
the members of the Security Council not to expect any
concrete results from these investigations. In any case,
it is impossible to say when they will be completed.
Even more telling is the language from the part
devoted to the Swedish investigation:
“[t]he ongoing investigation will show whether
anyone can be suspected of, and later prosecuted
for, this crime.”
It follows from this quotation that, from the very
beginning, Swedish authorities have never set the goal
of identifying the perpetrators. In this context, there is
of course no question of the inevitability of punishment,
23-20205

11/07/2023

Threats to international peace and security

which is particularly striking given that Sweden, as we
heard today from one of our briefers, was the first to be
at the scene of the crime.
The demonstrative inaction of European authorities
can be explained by only one thing: attempts to stall
for time in order to cover up the identities of the real
perpetrators of the crime. The evidently coordinated
disinformation campaign in Western media eloquently
testifies to this point in their attempts to popularize
absolutely absurd versions of the events. While earlier
some journalists actively tried to claim that it was
Russia itself that blew up the pipeline — a pipeline that
was functioning in its interest — another fiction has
recently come to dominate, namely, the claim that some
pro-Ukrainian saboteurs who allegedly had nothing to
do with the Kyiv regime were behind the attack.
Meanwhile, it is telling that in a recent interview
with The Times, the head of Ukrainian intelligence,
Kyrylo Budanov, in response to a direct question about
the involvement of Ukrainian authorities in the pipeline
incident and other terrorist attacks, literally said the
following:
“We [are] doing that right now ... We use direct
actions. We use them, and we love them... We were
proud of using them, and we are not afraid of using
them anywhere in this world against who[m]ever.”
Let us be honest. The bravado of the ringleaders of
the Kyiv regime does not inspire confidence. They are
prepared to take credit for any accomplishments just
to shift the focus from the failures of the Ukrainian
army on the front and flagrant violations of human
rights inside Ukraine taking place in the context of the
strengthening of Zelenskyy’s dictatorship.
We also recall the publication of a highly plausible
version of events by the American investigative
journalist Seymour Hersh. Referencing reliable sources,
he later cited information that, following the March
meeting between United States President Joe Biden and
German Chancellor Olaf Scholz, American and German
intelligence were instructed to prepare and promote an
alternative version for the media about who blew up
the Nord Stream. Immediately after this, articles began
to spring up en masse in the Western media, claiming
that the destruction of the Nord Stream could have
been perpetrated by a small group of near-amateurs
who had neither serious expertise nor significant
resources and who were not backed by any State, and
this despite the fact that numerous independent experts,

S/PV.9373

including those who have spoken before the Security
Council, including today, made it clear that non-experts
could not have carried out an operation to blow up gas
pipelines that were protected with the latest technology.
In any case, it is not something of which at least the
coastal States in this region would have been unaware,
especially since the region is considered one of the most
closely monitored in the world.
How can this be squared with the repeated threats
against the Nord Stream from top United States
leadership, whose threats had been voiced more than
once? However, as soon as inconvenient facts came to
light, Americans and their European allies began to
interfere with an international investigation in every
way possible. Moreover, unlike many other States
Members of the United Nations, they were not interested
in investigative efforts being undertaken under the
auspices of the Secretary-General. They stand to gain
much more in a situation where Western States enjoy
complete carte blanche and absolute impunity within
the framework of a so-called rules-based order imposed
on the whole world and which has nothing to do with
international law.
We want to stress that any efforts to cover up
the sabotage in the Baltic Sea are doomed to fail.
We expect the authorities of Germany, Denmark and
Sweden to take concrete steps to conduct an objective
and transparent investigation into all the circumstances
of the incident, with the obligatory participation of
Russian investigative authorities and other interested
parties. In the meantime, we reserve the right to conduct
our own investigation.
In this context, we took note of the statement in the
letter from the authorities of Germany, Denmark and
Sweden (S/2023/517) that access to the crime scene is
allegedly open. If that is the case, we presume that our
investigative authorities can independently examine
the crime scene at any time as part of the criminal
proceedings initiated by the Prosecutor General’s
Office of the Russian Federation pursuant to its article
on acts of international terrorism.
The Russian Federation will continue raising the
issue of the Nord Stream sabotage in the Council until
the perpetrators are identified and held accountable.
The letter mentioned today leaves little doubt that this
is not a goal that the three national investigations seek
to accomplish. However, we will use all means at our
disposal to make sure that this goal is achieved. We
trust that our constructively minded colleagues in the

23-202057/13

S/PV.9373

Threats to international peace and security

Security Council and other members of the international
community will support our efforts. We are open to
cooperation in this area.
The Council must make it clear that crimes against
cross-border pipeline infrastructure, which pose a direct
threat to international peace and security, will not go
unpunished. Only then can we prevent the recurrence
of such crimes to which any State could fall victim.
Mr. Pérez Loose (Ecuador) (spoke in Spanish): I
listened carefully to the briefers. I also carefully read
the joint letter from Sweden, Germany and Denmark
contained in document S/2023/517 of 10 July 2023,
and its annex, with which they provide information
on each of the national investigations separately.
This information shows the complex nature of the
investigations, which involve, inter alia, technical,
scientific and logistical aspects.
It is clear that the explosions that occurred in the
Nord Stream 1 and 2 underwater gas pipelines in the
Baltic Sea were the result of acts of sabotage, and we
reiterate that nothing justifies attacks against essential
civilian infrastructure, including energy infrastructure.
In addition to endangering safe maritime and air
navigation, those acts were an incalculable source
of pollution of local marine life, with potentially
devastating consequences for the climate, as hundreds
of millions of cubic metres of gas were released into
the atmosphere. Such acts, amid a highly complex
global geopolitical environment, must be prevented
from exacerbating tensions on either side or triggering
actions with unpredictable consequences.
For all the aforementioned reasons, Ecuador has
condemned such acts on several occasions and continues
to call on all States of the Organization to demonstrate
the utmost prudence and restraint. Furthermore, we will
continue to be guided by the briefing on 21 February
(see S/PV.9266) by Under-Secretary-General Rosemary
DiCarlo, who called on us to avoid speculation and any
unfounded accusations that could escalate tensions in
the region and hinder the quest for the truth. In that
regard, our delegation, which, in March, had already
expressed its support for the investigations under
way in Denmark, Germany and Sweden, supports
the continuation of those investigations, aimed at
determining what occurred.
Mr. De Rivière (France) (spoke in French): This
is the third time in less than a month that Russia has
requested a meeting on this subject, without any new
8/13

11/07/2023

developments to justify it. In addition, we cannot
help but highlight the contradiction between the deep
concern expressed by the Russian Federation about the
presumed attack on critical European infrastructure
and its conduct, day after day, as it continues its strikes
on essential Ukrainian civilian infrastructure. We
therefore have every reason to doubt the validity of
Russia’s approach. Once again, it is clear that Russia
seeks to divert the attention of the Council and the
international community.
France clearly expressed its concern following the
two underwater explosions at the Nord Stream 1 and 2
gas pipelines in the Baltic Sea, on 26 September 2022.
It was under our presidency that the Security Council
met on 30 September to discuss the same issue (see
S/PV.9144). Our assessment remains the same. The
events are serious and must be taken seriously.
Investigations have been launched by Denmark,
Germany and Sweden. Given the nature and
unprecedented character of the acts of sabotage that were
committed, it is understandable that those procedures
are complex and may take some time. We have no
reason to doubt the seriousness of the procedures. The
investigations must be completed. I would like to thank
those three countries for the joint letter submitted
yesterday to the presidency of the Council (S/2023/517),
which provides an update on those investigations.
It may be useful to remind Russia that the
investigations under way are being conducted in
accordance with the fundamental principles of
the rule of law. The German, Swedish and Danish
judicial authorities are independent — I repeat,
independent — and the investigations being conducted
are not subject to political interference.
Mr. Anyanah (Ghana): I thank the briefers for their
respective views on this agenda item. We also take note
of the joint letter submitted by Denmark, Germany and
Sweden on developments related to their respective
ongoing national investigations on the sabotage of the
Nord Stream pipelines (S/2023/517).
Ghana continues to be deeply concerned about the
sabotage against the Nord Stream 1 and 2 gas pipelines
last September, given the impacts on the marine
environment and the potential economic, humanitarian
and security risks that could arise from the destruction
of such critical infrastructure of a transboundary
nature. We therefore maintain our support for the
ongoing national investigations by the countries of
23-20205

11/07/2023

Threats to international peace and security

S/PV.9373

interest, in particular Denmark and Sweden, in whose
exclusive economic zones the incident occurred, as
well as Germany.

additional efforts to prevent misinformation and ensure
that the results of investigations are known soon, with
due transparency.

In view of the sustained interest of the international
community on the matter, we encourage frequent
updates and readily available information on the status
of the investigations to provide clarity on the facts
and help to determine the necessity or otherwise of
an international investigative process. Pending the
conclusion of the national investigations, we urge
cooperation among all relevant stakeholders, including
the operators of the pipelines, with the objective of
arriving at a single narrative on the circumstances
resulting in the unfortunate incident.

Mr. Afonso (Mozambique): Mozambique wishes to
thank the briefers, Mr. Bryce Greene and Mr. Jeffrey
Brodsky, for their important and insightful updates.

I wish to end by reiterating our previous appeals
to all concerned to exercise restraint against unilateral
actions that may be detrimental to peace.
Mr. França Danese (Brazil): I thank the briefers
for their views and assessments. I also take note of
the letter circulated yesterday by Denmark, Germany
and Sweden (S/2023/517).
Immediately after the Nord Stream 1 and 2 gas
pipeline explosions last September, Brazil, as well
as other Council members, expressed deep concern
about what was clearly a threat to international peace
and security. We consider it essential to identify those
responsible and hold them accountable for their actions.
For that reason, last March, we supported a proposal
for the launching of an international investigation,
coordinated by the United Nations, in support of efforts
by national authorities.
We are aware that Denmark, Germany and Sweden
are conducting investigations on the incident. We trust
their objectivity and await the disclosure of information
that may shed light on that act of sabotage, which
resulted in immense economic losses and environmental
damage. Brazil underscores the importance of the
conclusions of the investigations in progress being
disclosed as soon as possible. The consequences of the
incident cause concern to the international community,
especially in view of the proliferation, by the media, of
narratives and unconfirmed versions of the events.
We understand the need for secrecy and time for
the proper conduct of procedures. However, the lack of
responses, almost 10 months after the explosions, has
produced anxieties and deepened tensions, even among
members of the Council. We encourage increased
cooperation among the States directly affected and

Almost a year has gone by since the grave incident
occurred in the Baltic Sea in September 2022. Despite
the prevailing understanding that it was indeed an act
of sabotage and that a serious violation of international
law had occurred, we are still searching for answers
than can be conducive to the determination of the truth.
By principle and policy, Mozambique does not
condone the deliberate destruction and weaponization
of critical and transnational infrastructure, such as the
Nord Stream pipelines. We hold that view in the spirit
that led to the adoption of resolution 2341 (2017), which
is aimed at protecting critical infrastructure from
such attacks.
We are aware of the ongoing investigations into the
incident by the competent authorities in three national
jurisdictions — Germany, Sweden and Denmark. We
also take note of their commitment to a fair and impartial
process to establish the truth surrounding what appears
to be a deliberate act of sabotage. As the primary organ
responsible for international peace and security, it is
right that the Security Council should be kept abreast of
the results of the trinational investigations, preliminary
or otherwise. As this concerns an infrastructure of
transnational reach and international ownership, the
search for an answer is fair and warranted. As a country
that is investing heavily in a regulated and orderly
energy infrastructure for its development and that of
our region as a whole, Mozambique supports the speedy
conclusion of objective, impartial and professional
investigations into the incident.
Mrs. Chanda (Switzerland) (spoke in French):
I took note of the briefings by Mr. Greene and
Mr. Brodsky.
As we have mentioned in the past, we are concerned
about the alleged acts of sabotage against the Nord
Stream 1 and 2 gas pipelines, which led to worrisome
gas leaks in September. I reiterate Switzerland’s
condemnation of any acts of sabotage of critical
infrastructure, including energy infrastructure, and
the negative consequences they can have for countries’
energy supplies, economies and environment. We
welcome the information provided in the joint letter

23-202059/13

S/PV.9373

Threats to international peace and security

of 10 July from Sweden, Germany and Denmark
(S/2023/517). As indicated in the letter, those countries
have continued to conduct their respective national
investigations in order to shed light on the facts. We
look forward to their conclusions.
Mrs. Onanga (Gabon) (spoke in French): I too
would like to thank the briefers for their briefings
and analysis.
Nearly 10 months ago, underwater explosions
damaged the Nord Stream 1 and 2 gas pipelines in
the Baltic Sea. The resulting methane leaks have had
an undeniable impact on the flora and fauna and the
marine environment.
Gabon takes note of the investigations that are being
carried out by Germany, Denmark and Sweden. The
Security Council met in a closed meeting on 27 June to
examine the issue, and now we are meeting to discuss it
again. My country reiterates its deep concern about the
attacks perpetrated on civilian infrastructure and calls
on the conflicting parties to respect the international
legal instruments protecting civilians and civilian
infrastructure against any armed attack. We reiterate
our call for dialogue and consultation to find a political
and diplomatic solution to this crisis.
Mr. De Bono Sant Cassia (Malta): Malta reiterates
its strong condemnation of the act of sabotage that
occurred in September targeting the Nord Stream 1 and
2 pipelines. Such acts pose a serious threat to energy
security and regional stability. We also reiterate our firm
stance against any form of disruption to critical energy
infrastructure. Furthermore, the subsequent methane
leaks have posed a significant risk to the countries
concerned and jeopardized an important pathway for
transporting a vital energy resource. They also put
additional pressure on developing countries and global
energy markets, which were already negatively affected
by Russia’s aggression against Ukraine. The incident
serves as a reminder of the vulnerability of essential
energy infrastructure.
As we have stated before, we support and trust
the ongoing investigations by Denmark, Germany and
Sweden. We have no doubt that those investigations will
disclose and establish the truth behind this deliberate
act. It will be crucial to ensure the completion of those
national processes without any external interference. We
have full confidence in their impartiality and credibility.
As we all know, investigations of this magnitude take
time. The persistent claims that nine months should have
10/13

11/07/2023

been enough to investigate and establish the truth on this
matter are unfounded. Such insinuations do not move
us any closer to the truth and serve only to generate
unfounded suspicions and distrust among States.
In conclusion, we reiterate our firm position that
introducing further investigations at this juncture would
risk seriously impeding progress and potentially have
counterproductive effects on the ongoing processes.
Mr. Abushahab (United Arab Emirates): The
United Arab Emirates reaffirms its unequivocal
condemnation of September’s acts of sabotage targeting
the Nord Stream 1 and 2 pipelines in the Baltic Sea.
Such attacks threaten international security, stability
and prosperity. They are dangerously disruptive to
global energy markets, which depend on international
collaboration, and cause significant ecological damage.
They merit the sober attention of the Security Council
and the concern of the international community.
Furthermore, we underscore our respect and
support for the ongoing national investigations by the
competent authorities in all the relevant countries,
and we continue to monitor their progress. We also
note the heightened international interest in this issue
and recognize the legitimate equities at stake, and
we therefore encourage cooperation between all the
relevant countries and entities. In that vein, we welcome
the updates on the status of the investigations offered
to the Council by Denmark, Germany, and Sweden
through their joint letters of 21 February (S/2023/126)
and 10 July (S/2023/517) addressed to the President
of the Security Council. We appreciate the increased
information-sharing reflected in yesterday’s letter. As
the investigations are still ongoing, it will be vital to
refrain from prejudging their outcomes. We await their
swift conclusion, the transparent communication of
their findings and timely updates, as appropriate.
In conclusion, the United Arab Emirates takes
attacks on cross-border critical infrastructure extremely
seriously. They must never be tolerated, and we expect
to see those responsible held to account.
Mr. Hoxha (Albania): The quick version of our
statement today would have been a reference to our most
recent statement on this issue, made a week or so ago,
since there is nothing new on the matter. But since we are
here, I would like to make the following points.
First, we have said it many times and will reiterate
it again. We were and still are deeply concerned about
the apparent act of sabotage on the Nord Stream 1 and
23-20205

11/07/2023

Threats to international peace and security

2 pipelines in the exclusive economic zones of Denmark
and Sweden in the Baltic Sea. Such acts are unacceptable.
We reiterate our full support for the investigations
initiated by the national authorities of Denmark,
Germany and Sweden to determine the damage and
its origin and possible perpetrators. We welcome their
joint letter of yesterday (S/2023/517) indicating that the
investigation is under way, and we have full confidence
in their objectivity and comprehensiveness. The three
countries that are carrying out the investigations have
strong judicial institutions and unquestionable records
on the rule of law.
Secondly, this is the third meeting on this issue
zealously requested by Russia in less than a month. It is
obvious that such investigation processes are complex
and need time, as the letter highlights. In the meantime,
the Internet is full of all kinds of information,
disinformation and misinformation, including colourful
theories advanced by dependent and independent
journalists — especially those who have the luxury to
use their freedom as they wish.
We all want to see the findings, but we must
be patient and wait for the ongoing investigations’
conclusions. Therefore, incessantly placing this
discussion on the Security Council’s agenda amounts
more to political pressure and a manoeuvre to divert
attention away from other issues. The politicization
of the investigation process and the artificial pressure
placed upon it by heated rhetoric do not help to expedite
the process, which is what we all want.
Thirdly, while we all want to know the truth on
the acts of sabotage, the obsession with singling out
this one issue is both cynical and preposterous at a
time when, for more than 500 days, Russia has been
waging an unjustified, aggressive and merciless war on
its neighbour, with devastating human and economic
consequences. Today, like every year on 11 July, we
commemorate the Srebrenica genocide. The scale and
depravity of that tragedy continues to burden our souls
28 years later. I mention it not only because it deserves
commemoration with humility, but also because it
happened during the most recent war in Europe, and we
have committed to never let those tragic events reoccur.
That is why I insist that, when it comes to the
question of war in Ukraine, there are far more important
and consequential questions that need and should have
our attention on a daily basis, such as the killing of more
than 9,000 innocent civilians, including 500 children;
the whole range of despicable crimes committed by the

S/PV.9373

Russian army; the deliberate destruction of residential
areas by waves of illegally acquired Iranian kamikaze
drones; the thousands of Ukrainian children forcefully
deported to Russia and given up for adoption; the
frightening magnitude and cost of the deliberate
destruction of civil infrastructure; and the decimation
of the economy in Ukraine.
A joint assessment by the United Nations, the
World Bank Group, the European Commission and
the Government of Ukraine estimates that the cost of
reconstruction and recovery in Ukraine has grown to
$411 billion. The report finds that direct damage to
buildings and infrastructure amounts to more than
$135 billion. The most affected areas are housing, transport, energy, commerce, industry and agriculture — in
other words, the backbone of the economy. That was
last month. The cost of war, including for Russia itself,
increases every hour, every day.
Therefore — and this will be my final point — instead
of calling for meetings on the Nord Stream pipeline and
wasting the Council’s time with the futile politicization
of an ongoing investigation process, Russia could be
more useful and productive if it would put an end to
the war in Ukraine and seriously engage in diplomacy,
starting with the complete withdrawal of its troops
from the territory of Ukraine.
Mr. Geng Shuang (China) (spoke in Chinese): I
listened to the briefings by the two briefers. I also read
the letter to the President of the Security Council from
Germany, Sweden and Denmark (S/2023/517).
The explosion of the Nord Stream pipeline happened
nearly 10 months ago. The Security Council has held
a number of discussions on the matter in different
formats. China has already comprehensively set out its
position. Today I will stress only three points.
First, the Nord Stream pipeline explosion not only
poses a direct threat to the safety of transnational
infrastructure, but also has a negative impact on the
ecological environment and the safety of shipping in
the relevant maritime areas. It is essential to adopt
a responsible approach with regard to the security
and development of the region by carrying out an
independent and professional investigation into the
incident and ensuring that its conclusions are objective,
impartial, authoritative and can stand the test of time.
Secondly, the countries concerned have been
conducting country-specific investigations into the
Nord Stream pipeline explosion for quite some time.

23-2020511/13

S/PV.9373

Threats to international peace and security

A clear statement, however, has yet to come after
much delay. The longer the delay, the more difficult
it will be to collect evidence and ascertain the truth,
the more doubts and speculations and the less credible
the results of the investigations will be. China believes
that the best way to respond to the concerns of the
international community is to announce the results of
the investigation as soon as possible, even if it is only
a milestone.
Thirdly, the Nord Stream pipeline explosion took
place against the backdrop of the Ukraine crisis. The
parties concerned have made very different analyses
and interpretations in the wake of the incident. We
call on all parties not to politicize the investigation, let
alone use it as an opportunity for political manipulation.
Russia is one of the main parties involved in the
explosion and any objective and impartial investigation
requires communication and cooperation with Russia.
I hope that the countries concerned will acknowledge
that and take positive steps accordingly.
In conclusion, I would like to reiterate China’s
call for an early clarification of the facts surrounding
the explosion and for the perpetrators to be brought to
justice at an early date, and its support for the Secretariat
to provide more useful information and for the Council
to remain seized of the matter.
Mr. DeLaurentis (United States of America): As
others have noted, this is the third time in less than a
month that Russia has called for the Council to discuss
the Nord Stream pipeline issue. Russia’s efforts to try
to use the Council as a platform for its disinformation
are as cynical as they are transparent. Bludgeoning the
Council with repetitive meetings will not change the
facts on the ground.
As we have emphasized many times, we do not
condone that attack on critical infrastructure. We
remain confident in the ongoing, competent and
credible investigations under way by Germany, Sweden
and Denmark. We thank those countries for their
commitment to diligent and impartial investigations
into the attack, and for their recent letter on the topic
to the Council (S/2023/517). Russia’s unabating,
unsubstantiated so-called concerns about the
transparency and impartiality of those investigations
ring as hollow as its assertions that it had no relationship
with the Wagner Group and had no plans to invade
Ukraine. The countries directly involved should be
permitted to conclude their investigations without
undue pressure and specious allegations. Russia cannot
12/13

11/07/2023

and should not be allowed to prejudge or prejudice the
results of those investigations prior to their conclusion.
The hypocrisy is on full display. Russia claims
to respect sovereignty and territorial integrity while
invading its sovereign neighbour and attempting
to annex its territory. Russia now disregards the
jurisdiction of competent national authorities carrying
out and concluding investigations within their
exclusive economic zones. Russia also claims to want
an impartial investigation, as long as that investigation
upholds Russia’s spurious accusations that the United
States was behind the attacks. We again categorically
refute any allegations that the United States bears any
culpability for those attacks.
As Russia continues its theatrical hand-wringing
and selective concern regarding the protection of critical
infrastructure, it is razing entire cities with relentless
attacks against Ukraine. It is importing unmanned
aerial vehicles from Iran in flagrant violation of
resolution 2231 (2015) and deploying them in attacks
that kill civilians in Ukraine. Russia’s agenda here is
simple: it is to overwhelm the Council with meetings
on the Nord Stream pipeline issue, undermine ongoing
investigations and distract from its ceaseless attacks
against Ukraine’s power stations, hospitals, schools and
apartment buildings.
Ongoing national investigations must be allowed
the space to carry out their work. The Council should
reject repeated meetings with no purpose other than
to waste time, spread disinformation and distract
from the Kremlin’s indefensible war of aggression
against Ukraine.
Mrs. Shino (Japan): I thank the briefers for
their briefings and appreciate the informative input
in the letter from Germany, Sweden and Denmark
(S/2023/517).
Energy resources, including natural gas, are
fundamental to people’s lives. The global energy
situation has been tense in recent years. Vandalism of
critical infrastructure and facilities is an unacceptable
act that can have a significant impact on countless
people. Japan is therefore deeply concerned about
the incident involving the Nord Stream pipelines and
about the potential long-term damage and risk to the
maritime environment.
We are closely monitoring and looking forward
to the progress of the ongoing national investigations
by the authorities of Germany, Sweden and Denmark,
23-20205

11/07/2023

Threats to international peace and security

and we are confident that they will be conducted in
a fair manner. We hope that they will complete their
investigations as soon as possible and that the results
will be provided to the Security Council. It will be the
Council’s job to address any matter that concerns the
peace and stability of the international community,
but we do not want to speculate without objective
information. The Council should wait for the national
authorities to conclude their work.
The President: I shall now make a statement in my
capacity as the representative of the United Kingdom.
The United Kingdom condemns acts of sabotage
of critical national infrastructure. We should treat the
sabotage of the Nord Stream pipeline with the utmost
seriousness. The international community is concerned
about it and wants clear answers about what happened
and who was responsible. As we have said before, the
best way to get those answers is to support the impartial
investigations of Denmark, Sweden and Germany and
to respect those processes. We do not believe it is a good
use of the Security Council’s time to start to prejudge
the outcome of the investigations, dictate how they are
conducted or otherwise undermine them.
We welcome the latest update sent by Germany on
behalf of Denmark and Sweden, and their commitment
to updating the Security Council. Their letter addressed
to the President of the Security Council (S/2023/517)
underlines the complexity of the ongoing investigations
and underscores that this process will take time. We
are confident that when the investigations conclude,
their findings will be authoritative. We and our fellow
Council members should continue to offer our full
support to the investigations so that we can establish
who was responsible for these acts. Finally, we feel
compelled to note Russia’s inconsistent attitude
towards civilian infrastructure. While claiming outrage
here, Russia has been pursuing a systematic campaign
targeting civilian infrastructure in its war of aggression
on Ukraine, killing thousands of civilians in the

S/PV.9373

process. Such hypocrisy should not surprise us, but it
makes it hard to take anything the Russians say on this
subject at face value.
I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.
The representative of the Russian Federation has
asked for the floor to make a further statement.
Mr. Polyanskiy (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): Because we spoke at the very beginning, I
will allow myself a few comments. First of all, I would
like to ask the representative of the United States to
clarify something. If I remember correctly, he said that
the States affected have a right to participate in this
investigation and should do so. Does he consider the
Russian Federation — the State to which the pipeline
actually belonged — to be among the States affected,
or does he believe that they include only the States in
the coastal area around the site? I would hope that the
Russian Federation is indeed included among the States
affected. Anything else would simply be illogical. We
are therefore trusting in and counting on the United
States representative’s support so that our experts can
join that ongoing investigation, and we have much more
reason to do that now.
I have one more comment. I noticed that today’s
statements, which many of our Western colleagues
devoted almost entirely to the Ukrainian crisis, have
enabled us to clearly follow the cause-and-effect
connections that guided those who committed these
crimes and those who have covered it up and continue
to do so. I thank them for that, because it alone made
today’s meeting worth it. I am convinced that this is
excellent material for a Russian and international
investigation in future, and I am sure that the record
of today’s meeting fully deserves to be one of its key
documents, at least in the initial stages.
The meeting rose at 4.15 p.m.

23-2020513/13
