S/PV.7540 (Resumption 1)

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventieth year

7540th meeting

Thursday, 22 October 2015, 3 p.m.
New York

President:

Mr. García Margallo. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Spain)

Members:

Angola. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Chad . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Chile . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Jordan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Lithuania. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Malaysia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
New Zealand . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Nigeria . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Ms. Jorge
Mr. Mahamat Zene
Mr. Barros Melet
Mr. Liu Song
Ms. Bergeon-Dars
Mr. Omaish
Ms. Gleveckaitė
Mrs. Adnin
Mr. Van Bohemen
Mr. Aliyu
Mr. Safronkov
Mr. Hickey
Mr. Wagner
Ms. Rodríguez Gómez

Agenda
The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

15-33018 (E)
*1533018*

S/PV.7540 (Resumption 1)

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

The meeting resumed at 3.05 p.m.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I wish to remind
all speakers to kindly limit their statements to no
more than four minutes in order to enable the Council
to carry out its work expeditiously. Delegations with
lengthy statements are kindly requested to circulate
the texts in writing, and to deliver a condensed version
when speaking in the Chamber in order for us to work
more efficiently. I would also like to appeal to speakers
to deliver their statements at a normal speed so that the
interpretration can be provided accurately.
I now give the floor to Mr. Børge Brende, Minister
of Foreign Affairs of Norway.
Mr. Brende (Norway): Mr. President, I thank you
for this initiative. It is a very important meeting. With
the ongoing war in Syria and its escalating humanitarian
consequences both in the region and in Europe, it is
with deep concern that we have witnessed the vicious
cycle of escalating violence and tensions in Israel and
Palestine during the past weeks. The process of finding
a negotiated end to the conflict by establishing two
States living side by side in peace and security is stuck.
The two peoples now live side by side in fear, anger and
distress.
I would like to make three observations.
First, I welcome all efforts to promote calm,
encourage restraint and prevent actions that further
exacerbate tensions, in particular around the holy sites
in Jerusalem. But more needs to be done. I call on
every politician, community elder and religious leader
to refrain from reckless and inflammatory statements
and actions; reject the extremists who pursue a political
agenda to turn the current situation into a religious
conflict; condemn all acts of terror; and show respect for
the sanctity and the dignity of the holy sites. I welcome
commitments to maintaining the status quo at the holy
esplanade. Security coordination between Israelis and
Palestinians must continue. Like every other State,
Israel has the right to take necessary measures to protect
its citizens against violence and unprovoked killings.
At the same time, measures construed as collective
punishments, such as house demolitions, should stop
immediately, both in Jerusalem and on the West Bank,
as they feed violence.
Secondly, I call for a return to a credible political
process. While tensions at the holy sites in Jerusalem
instigated the current crisis, lack of hope for a better

2/39

22/10/2015

political future contributes to increased frustration
and anger among the Palestinian youth. No amount of
frustration justifies violence. Still, the crisis cannot be
resolved through de-escalation and security measures
alone. The current tensions call for immediate and
coordinated political steps by both sides. Israel should
stop building new settlements on occupied land and
expanding existing ones. Such building undermines any
political process and turns hope into frustration, anger
and rage. Palestine needs to reform and strengthen
its political institutions and governance structures.
In particular, the West Bank and Gaza need to be
reintegrated into one authority that fully respects the
parameters of the security agreements between Israel
and the Palestine Liberation Organization.
Thirdly, cooperation on tangible measures
to strengthen the Palestinian economy and the
reconstruction of Gaza can pave the way for the
political process. Last month, I chaired the meeting of
the donors group, the Ad Hoc Liaison Committee, here
in New York. The donors reiterated their continued
commitment to supporting the establishment of
capable and robust Palestinian institutions and a
viable economy. Measures need to be undertaken in
the West Bank, Gaza and Area C. Unresolved issues
related to the Paris Protocol need to be resolved without
delay. Donors cannot be expected to compensate for
unresolved economic issues between the two parties. I
urge the donors to increase their support.
It is clear, however, that no donor support can
substitute or compensate for inadequate measures
by the Palestinian Authority or by Israel themselves.
Also, achieving the full potential of a Palestinian State
with well-functioning political and governmental
institutions, including a sustainable economy, requires
a political resolution of the conflict. I therefore welcome
the interest expressed by both sides in doing more and
in working harder together to improve the Palestinian
economy and reconstruct Gaza.
Direct economic cooperation is no substitute for
a political process, but may help to build stability
and establish better grounds for the political process.
While the parties themselves hold the keys to resuming
talks, the international community needs to engage
and support them in a concerted manner that can bring
the conflict to a resolution. Business as usual cannot
continue.
I started my statement by referring to Syria. To
facilitate a more coherent and better funded response to
15-33018

22/10/2015

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

S/PV.7540 (Resumption 1)

the humanitarian needs, Norway, Germany, the United
Kingdom and Kuwait are cooperating to convene a
donor conference next year. We hope that, while we
struggle to find a political solution to the conflict,
we can develop ways and means to better face the
humanitarian challenges.

under siege for years, and wars have been unleashed
against anyone who resisted. Finally, there are those
who are bent on blocking access to the holy sites in
Jerusalem, which could even lead to the division of the
space. Those groups are an integral part of the Israeli
Government.

The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the Minister for Foreign Affairs of Qatar.

The Palestinian people take to the street to be heard,
not because they seek mercy or pity. The Palestinian
people have dignity. They are the original population.
They take to the street to say that they reject humiliation
and occupation and that they do not accept the
international indifference that has allowed a just cause
to go without response for decades. Apartheid is over,
but in Palestine, for all intents and purposes, it is on the
verge of being restored. Here, I would like to point out
that the generation that has taken to the streets and that
is being subjected to summary executions is demanding
a solution based on the 1967 borders before it is too late.
The elements on the ground presage terrible results.

Mr. Al-Attiyah (Qatar) (spoke in Arabic): We
congratulate you, Sir, on your country’s accession to
the presidency of the Security Council and thank you
for presiding personally over today’s meeting and for
the invitation to participate in this debate at a time when
the Middle East region is heading into an extremely
grave situation. We also wish to thank Spain for its role
in promoting peace in the region and Mr. Jan Eliasson
for his briefing.
The Council is meeting today to consider the
situation that is unfolding as a result of the serious
escalation in the activities of the Israeli Defense
Forces against the Palestinian people. Anyone who has
followed the situation knows that the situation is the
result of the occupation, with its illegal settlements,
its discrimination against the Palestinian people, its
violation of their rights and basic freedoms, its denial
of access to natural resources and its stifling economic
blockade. The Palestinians are currently the object of
crimes committed by Israeli extremists, who act with
impunity.
The Palestinian people have taken to the streets yet
again in order to express their rage for reasons that are
perfectly understandable. They are a people whose land
has been occupied and who are subjected to humiliation
daily. Their land is constantly being usurped and
confiscated in order to build settlements. We can all
bear witness to that, and today we are here to discuss
a question of major importance that weighs heavily
not only on the shoulders of the Arab and Muslim
peoples but that unites all the world’s democracies. It
has been impossible to resolve the dispute, because
the international community is not prepared to impose
a just solution. The Palestinian people are being held
hostage to the balance of power between the occupying
Power and the occupied people.
Negotiations have therefore lost their value. Talks
have not been held on a continuing basis, and Israel has
adopted the practice of annexing forcibly occupied land
in Jerusalem and in the Golan. The Gaza Strip has been

The people of the region are facing a new tragedy
that risks exacerbating the question of Syria, which is
an international question. Despite the suffering of the
Syrian people, the international community has not
attempted to resolve it. The international community
has proof of the use of chemical weapons and barrel
bombs, and there has been a mass exodus of people, yet
the regime remains in place, because no one has put an
end to its excesses.
We have discussed the matter many times but no
one has replied to the question of why we have not
provided protection to Syrian civilians or why we
have not succeeded in protecting them. I do not think
there is a convincing answer to that question. We
continue to speak about combating terrorism. We all
face that danger, and we must all work to combat it,
but the Syrians believe that the main problem is State
terrorism. Unfortunately, opposition to the Syrian
regime no longer rests simply on the fact that it is a
criminal regime that commits crimes against humanity.
Now it is a matter of seeing whether or not there is a
point in combating terrorism. That is exactly what the
Syrian people were afraid of. What we need to do today
is to agree again to implement the Final Communiqué of
the Action Group for Syria of 30 June 2012 (S/2012/523,
annex), establishing a transitional authority with the
executive power to address the demands of the Syrian
revolution while preserving that country’s sovereignty,
territorial integrity and unity. Such a solution would
spare the world the dangers of terrorism.

15-330183/39

S/PV.7540 (Resumption 1)

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

Now we must seriously address the task of finding
a solution to the destructive mechanism that has led
to the total destruction of Syria and turned its people
into refugees in our countries and all over the world.
We can testify to the gravity of the situation just by
counting the number of victims. The situation in Syria
is a tragedy that will remain etched in human memory.
Unfortunately, the international community has chosen
to respond based on self-interest. We used to believe that
the solution for Syria should, above all, be a political
one, but have we asked ourselves what we have done to
improve the situation and whether we have acted with
courage to protect those who need our protection? By
that, I mean the Syrian people and none other.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the Minister for Foreign Affairs of Sweden.
Ms. Wallström (Sweden): I thank Spain for
organizing this timely meeting and Foreign Minister
García Margallo for presiding over it. I would also like
to thank Deputy Secretary-General Jan Eliasson for his
strong remarks and strong message to us this morning.
I welcome the Secretary-General’s visit to the
region, and, as he said in Jerusalem earlier this week,
the terror attacks against civilians are deplorable. Such
random attacks make every place unsafe and every
person a potential victim. We are, of course, deeply
concerned about the deaths on both sides, with nearly
2,000 injured so far in October, a vast majority of
whom were Palestinians. The Israeli response must
be proportionate. All perpetrators must be brought to
justice and excessive use of force must not be used.
There is an urgent need for leadership, responsibility
and restraint.
One year ago, Sweden decided to recognize the
State of Palestine. Our recognition aimed at making
the parties to the conflict less unequal. It aimed at
supporting moderate Palestinians and Israelis alike,
providing a positive input into the dynamics of the
dormant Middle East peace process and at sending
a clear and convincing message of hope to younger
generations that there is an alternative to violence
and to the so-called status quo. As we have seen in
recent weeks, the absence of hope is one of the greatest
challenges facing the prospect of peace and the vision
of a two-State solution.
But we believe that it is not too late for initiatives
for de-escalation, confidence-building and peace in
the region. It is time to create conditions for a results-

4/39

22/10/2015

oriented peace process, including confidence-building
measures such as settlement freezes. Now it is time
for the full implementation of agreements reached
between Palestine and Israel. Now is time to end the
isolation of Gaza and for all factions in Palestine
to cooperate. Now it is time to remove obstacles to
economic development in all of Palestine, including
that of limited access to Area C and Gaza. Now it is
time for an international recommitment regarding clear
parameters and realistic time frames for negotiations
and an end to the occupation. We must not lose track of
the real goal: a negotiated two-State solution and an end
of the occupation where both Palestine and Israel can
live side by side in peace and security, and the Council
should lead the way.
The recent escalation of the violence in Syria is
deeply concerning, and the present situation, more
than ever, calls for the complete, genuine and concrete
support of Special Envoy Staffan de Mistura and
a political solution. That humanitarian crisis is the
world’s largest in modern times, and my country,
Sweden, shoulders its responsibility in three ways.
First, we are currently receiving 3,000 Syrian
refugees every week, and to date we have received
100,000, although I know it is a small number compared
to the neighbouring countries of Lebanon, Jordan and
Turkey. Secondly, Sweden has so far contributed over
$213 million in humanitarian assistance. Thirdly, in
addition to our humanitarian assistance, Sweden will
allocate another $220 million over the coming five
years, through a new Syrian crisis strategy. I want to
encourage all others present here to also step up their
engagement. I know that many are already doing a lot.
Throughout the conflict in Syria, women and girls
have been targeted on the basis of their gender. Sexual
violence is systematic and widespread among many
warring parties, including its use as a tactic of terror
by the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant. But Syrian
women are not only victims; they are also actors.
That is why I am hosting a meeting on Syrian women
peacebuilders tomorrow morning. It is important to
look upon women as actors of change who want to be
given a voice in any discussions about the future of
Syria.
Lebanon is one of the countries most affected by the
conflict in Syria. Domestic stability in Lebanon is key,
and Lebanese leaders need to set their differences aside
and elect a new President without any further delay. But
Lebanon also needs and deserves more international
15-33018

22/10/2015

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

support. Lebanon, led ably by Prime Minister Tammam
Salam, is hosting more than 1.2 million refugees who
have fled the war in Syria. Our substantial humanitarian
assistance and our contribution to the Trust Fund for
Lebanon, managed by the World Bank, will soon be
complemented by increased development assistance. I
strongly encourage others to follow suit.
As already mentioned, the vicious cycle of direct
and indirect violence has to be broken. Security
cannot be achieved through bombs or rockets, war or
violence, humiliation or threats. Genuine security can
be achieved only through peace. We need to take our
responsibility. We owe that to the children and future
generations in Israel, Palestine, Lebanon, Syria and
other countries in the region. We need to restore the
hope of a better future.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the Secretary for Foreign Affairs of Maldives.
Mr. Mohamed (Maldives): It is an honour to speak
before the Council today on the question of Palestine. It
is an issue of profound importance to the Government
and people of the Maldives. I would like to extend my
thanks to Mr. José Manuel García Margallo, Minister for
Foreign Affairs of Spain and President of the Security
Council for the month of October, for convening this
timely debate on the question of Palestine. My delegation
wishes to further express our sincere appreciation to
Secretary-General Ban Ki-Moon for his recent visit to
the region, which is yet another in a series of visits, in
continuation of his tireless efforts in search of peace.
In two days’ time, we will be marking the seventieth
anniversary of the establishment of the United Nations.
The United Nations has been a force for good for all
humankind. It has helped in ending conflicts and in
making peace. It has saved millions of people from
oppression, colonialism and military occupation. Yet
the United Nations has been helpless in ending Israel’s
subjugation of Palestinians. Israel’s continued illegal
occupation of Palestine epitomizes a deep malaise in
the international system that we have to address.
For decades, the international community has sought
the realization of a two-State solution, reaffirmed by
United Nations resolutions, the Madrid Principles, the
Oslo accords, the Arab Peace Initiative and the Quartet
Road Map. Those efforts attempt to succeed against a
system of institutionalized occupation and apartheid
that tries to alter the mindsets of generations who have
grown up under occupation and whose reality is one of

S/PV.7540 (Resumption 1)

fear, hatred and violence. Those efforts have failed a
people, a nation, a region and the entire international
community.
The recent violence that has broken out in
Jerusalem and across the occupied territories paints a
bleak picture. In the past weeks, we have seen violence
and counter-reprisals escalate sharply. That the Old
City of Jerusalem has been shut to Palestinians is a
clear illustration of the gravity of the current situation.
The sanctity of the Haram Al-Sharif must be restored.
Granting Palestinians their rightful access is a first step
to further the peace process. Israel must stop altering
the Islamic and Arabic character of the city.
Every year, thousands of Israeli settlers move into
the occupied territories illegally. The combination
of increasingly belligerent political rhetoric and the
enforced physical and demographic changes to the
occupied Palestinian territories continually reduces the
chances for peace. That window is steadily closing. The
Secretary-General, on his latest trip to the occupied
Palestine, highlighted that, when he said: “What is
missing is the resolve to restore a political horizon for
talks and a political process that delivers real results
and hope”.
It is a sad reality that today there is an absence of
hope and that despair has grabbed hold of a people who
have nothing left to lose, and that conditions for further
violence are being fermented. It is no coincidence that
the second Intifada broke out six weeks after the collapse
of the Camp David summit, nor is it an accident that
violence broke out last summer following the collapse
of the United States-led peace effort. In the absence
of hope and in the face of oppression, there is only
violence and hatred. Such hatred has bred extremism,
fostered radicalism and consumed the entire region.
The Maldives has repeatedly called for the
community of nations to be more vigilant in addressing
the issues of borders, refugees, settlements and
Jerusalem in the quest for a comprehensive and
sustained peace. The Maldives reiterates its support for
full recognition of an independent State of Palestine
within its pre-1967 borders, with East Jerusalem as
its capital. We have underscored the importance of
greater involvement on the part of the international
community, particularly the Council, in the settlement
of a negotiated peace.
The Maldives urges the Security Council to fulfil
its primary responsibility for maintaining international

15-330185/39

S/PV.7540 (Resumption 1)

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

peace and security. We urge it to take the firm measures
that are needed to end Israel’s illegal occupation of
Palestine and its apartheid practices there. It is time that
the Council demanded an end to the illegal occupation
and to the oppression of the Palestinian people. The
United Nations must take the lead in steering the peace
process from passive rhetoric to pragmatic action. The
right to live life in peace is as much one for each and
every Palestinian as it is for each of us here today.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Guatemala.
Ms. Rodríguez Pineda (Guatemala): My delegation
appreciates the presence of Mr. José Manuel García
Margallo, Minister for Foreign Affairs of Spain, in
today’s debate, and is grateful for the Deputy SecretaryGeneral’s informative briefing.
Guatemala is extremely concerned about the
current situation of violence in the occupied Palestinian
territory, Israel and, especially, Jerusalem. The
situation has been complicated by the increase in direct
clashes between Palestinians and Israel’s security
forces, together with the expansion of settlements and
the forced displacement of Palestinians. Such violence
undermines the possibility for finding a political
horizon that meets the legitimate needs of both peoples
and can enable them to reach a just and final settlement.
We believe that that can be achieved only through
the establishment of a Palestinian State coexisting in
peace with Israel, and not through the commission of
violent acts. It is essential that any measure designed
to maintain peace and security in the region take that
ultimate goal into account. The walls and checkpoints,
the violent responses from the security forces and the
demolition of homes, along with violent attacks by
individuals and groups and rocket fire, are not things
that will help to solve this conflict.
The most urgent challenge we are facing is to halt
the spiral of violence and preventing any further loss of
life. We are particularly concerned about the repeated
provocations that have occurred in the holy sites of
Jerusalem, as well as the disproportionate actions that
have been taken in that context. It is vital that political,
community and religious Palestinian and Israeli leaders
stand firm against terrorism, violence and incitement.
In that regard, we welcome the Secretary-General’s
the rapid response and his visit to the region to ask the
parties to stop the violence.

6/39

22/10/2015

Whatever happens, the current crisis cannot be
resolved by adopting security measures. The unending
occupation and Palestinians’ reduced prospects for
their aspirations to establish a State also increase
frustration and despair, while the severe economic
situation, including the high unemployment in the area,
exacerbates such feelings. Similarly, the continued and
increasing expansion of settlements diminishes hope
and the potential for a viable Palestinian State. This loss
of any political prospects is the single most detrimental
factor contributing to the violence we are seeing.
The only thing that can break this cycle of violence
and fear is the establishment of a political horizon.
We hope that the Security Council can redouble its
efforts to create conditions conducive to a resumption
of meaningful negotiations. In that regard, we join
with the various calls that have been made to find
mechanisms that will enable us to relaunch the political
process. Similarly, we recognize the value of the
principle of shared responsibility, and in that regard, we
believe that the active diplomatic participation of the
Quartet in the Middle East peace process can generate
new momentum for the parties to take responsible steps
towards a comprehensive, just and lasting peace. We
also see the benefits that could result from an expanded
Quartet that includes other key actors in the region.
This is a good moment for us to rethink how we
can make progress and conclude the peace talks
that can enable us to work on measures aimed at
confidence-building and promoting Palestinian
reconciliation, issues that are critical to ensuring that
the parties commit to peace. We cannot stand idly by.
However, it must be the parties themselves, those with
a principal interest in reaching a mutually satisfactory
solution, who must commit to making a real and
renewed effort. It is they who must strengthen their
confidence and commitment to the option of peace and
coexistence of two States, Israel and Palestine, side by
side in peace and security.
In conclusion, Guatemala acknowledges the
enormous challenges that lie ahead, but it is our
political and historical responsibility as members of
the international community to support every possible
means and effort to overcome them.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Lebanon.
Mr. Salam (Lebanon): The situation in the occupied
Palestinian territories is indeed alarming. According

15-33018

22/10/2015

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

to the United Nations Office for the Coordination
of Humanitarian Affairs, the past two weeks have
witnessed the highest number of fatalities and injuries
in the West Bank since 2005. That in itself not only
justifies the call for this high-level debate, which we
would like to thank Spain for organizing, it also calls
for swift action by the Security Council.
Since the beginning of this month, on average two
Palestinians have been killed every day, and more than
1,000 have been injured, not to mention the increasing
number of attacks by settlers on Palestinian property.
Israeli provocations and assaults at the Haram Al-Sharif
have continued, in an obvious attempt to change the
agreed status quo by establishing a temporal if not
geographical division of the holy site, contrary to the
claims of Mr. Netanyahu.
Israel, the occupying Power, is once again acting in
total disregard of its obligations under international law
and international humanitarian law to protect civilian
Palestinians. That is why we are once again calling
on the Council to use all possible ways and means at
its disposal to ensure the protection of the endangered
lives and property of Palestinians living under Israeli
occupation, pending its assumption of its full duty and
responsibility to end the Israeli occupation and help the
Palestinian State to achieve its independence.
The events of the past month are only the tip of the
iceberg of the occupation, which has now lasted almost
50 years. In fact, the need to provide international
protection for the Palestinians who are under Israeli
occupation is self-evident when we recall the fate of
the most vulnerable Palestinians, the children living
under occupation. We have only to note that, between
2000 and 2013, one Palestinian child was killed by the
Israeli occupying forces every three days, and that
62 per cent of the 95,000 Palestinian children detained
by the Israelis since 1967 have probably been subjected
to some form of physical violence. And how can one
omit to mention the case of the two Palestinian children
who were recently burned to death by extremist
Israeli settlers — 18-month-old Ali Dawabsheh, who
was killed in July in an arson attack in Douma, and
Mohammed Abu Khdeir, a 16-year-old Palestinian,
who was kidnapped, beaten and burned alive by Israeli
settlers in East Jerusalem in August 2014.
Notwithstanding such acts of appalling savagery,
Benjamin Netanyahu, in total contempt for our
intelligence, dared to claim in his latest speech before
the General Assembly that “Israel is civilization’s front

S/PV.7540 (Resumption 1)

line in the battle against barbarism” (A/70/PV.22).
Moreover, instead of facing the reality of the occupation
and its inherently oppressive structure and repressive
methods, Israeli officials and their propaganda
endeavour to represent the mounting violence in
the West Bank and Gaza as an eruption of so-called
terrorist hatred, motivated by nothing else but pure
anti-Semitism and bloodthirsty Islamic fanaticism.
I am sure that we all recognize a familiar situation
here — that of blaming the victim. We are reminded
of William Ryan’s famous book, Blaming the Victim, a
1971 classic that shows how victim-blaming functions
as an ideology that is used to divert responsibility and
to justify racism and social injustice. In fact, blaming
the victim is so odious that it was rightly depicted by
one of the great twentieth century thinkers as “one of
the most sinister features of the fascist character”.
In Israel, like elsewhere, racism is not only blind,
it is also deadly. We only have to consider how on
Monday, Haftom Zarhum, an innocent Eritrean asylum
seeker fleeing the scene of acts of violence, was shot,
then lynched. That dismaying attack is documented in
videos in which an angry Israeli mob is shown hurling
benches and chairs and kicking him in the head,
assuming he was an Arab terrorist just because he was
dark-skinned, all the while screaming things like “Death
to Arabs!” It is worth asking Mr. Netanyahu whether
that is another example of Israel as “civilization’s front
line in the battle against barbarism”. Obviously, we do
not have the same lexicon as Mr. Netanyahu, because,
in our lexicon, racism and xenophobia, let alone acts
of burning people alive and lynching, are examples of
barbarism and not of civilization.
In conclusion, let me reiterate that the situation in
the occupied Palestinian territories is very alarming.
Not only can the Council prevent the situation from
deteriorating, it can also unlock the path to a just
and lasting peace in the Middle East, provided that it
resolves to act on the basis of the principles and rules
of international law and international humanitarian
law. Here, to seek balance, where no balance exists or
can exist between the occupier and the occupied, is not
justice. It is not even a travesty of justice, it is injustice,
plain and simple. Conversely, pending the end of the
Israeli occupation, the Council can and must move now
to provide international protection for the Palestinian
people, the sooner the better, for the relevance of the
Council and, above all, for the just cause of peace in our
part of the world.

15-330187/39

S/PV.7540 (Resumption 1)

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Egypt.
Mr. Aboulatta (Egypt) (spoke in Arabic): Allow me
to congratulate Minister José Manuel García Margallo
on his delegation’s assumption of the presidency during
this month of October. We are confident that the work
of the Council will be successful in this period of
escalating developments that are having a serious and
negative effect on the Middle East.
Since the beginning of this month, the situation in
holy Jerusalem, in the occupied Palestinian territories,
particularly aound the Al-Aqsa Mosque and Haram
Al-Sharif, has deteriorated quickly and is threatening
to worsen. After decades of occupation and suffering
and the frustration of their hopes to establish an
independent Palestinian State with Al-Quds Al-Sharif
as its capital, the Palestinian people find themselves in a
painful situation. They are still under Israeli occupation
and have to deal with the shortsighted security policies
of the longest occupation in history, with no prospects
for a decent life in the near future. Statistics indicate
that the unemployment rate among the young people
in Jerusalem is approximately 68 per cent, and 44,000
housing units are in danger of collapsing.
In addition to the violence committed by the
settlers and their attacks on the dignity and physical
safety of the Palestinian people and the confiscation of
Palestinian land, particularly the holy sites, which are
extremely important to more than 1 billion Muslims
around the world, there are ongoing attempts to change
the spatial and temporal character of all Islamic holy
sites. That is an extremely dangerous attack, not only
on the occupied Palestinian territories but also on the
Middle East as a whole. It kills hope and removes any
prospects for settling this issue.
Egypt strongly condemns all violence committed
in the occupied Palestinian territories, including
in Jerusalem, by the Israeli side and its use of
incommensurate and oppressive means in dealing with
the situation, which has led to deaths and injuries,
including among children and women. It considers the
actions committed by the settlers against Palestinians
to be crimes that can only fuel feelings of hatred and
dissension. The situation requires serious consideration
by the Council. The international community as a
whole, and the Security Council in particular, are under
a serious obligation to take the necessary action as soon
as possible to address those threats to peace and security
in the Middle East. The Security Council should uphold
8/39

22/10/2015

its responsibilities, in accordance with the Charter of the
United Nations, given the many important resolutions
that have not been adopted so far. The reasons for that
failure to act are known to all and include attempts by
certain parties to protect the Israeli occupation, even
though it is morally and politically unjustifiable. The
failure to act prevents the Palestinians from receiving
protection, and that threatens further escalation of
tensions in the near future.
In order to safeguard its credibility, the Security
Council must to adopt the necessary resolutions and
adopt a firm approach in applying principled diplomacy,
so as to reach the desired objective of settling the
Palestinian question. That should be carried out within
the context of a peaceful process that takes into account
all important aspects, including the approaches to a
final solution, which have been under consideration for
more than two decades. There is no need to reinvent
the wheel, and the Council should tackle the situation
immediately, so that Israel does not have more time to
continue devouring Palestinian territories despite the
condemnation of the international community. Egypt
believes that the Palestinian people have the right to
establish an independent State with East Jerusalem as
its capital, and that is the only way to achieve stability
in the Middle East.
We therefore support all efforts, particularly
those of Jordan, aimed at addressing the Palestinian
question, in particular efforts to contain the current
crisis at the holy sites, stop the fighting and discourage
any provocative incitement to violence. We call upon
the Israeli Government to take history into account,
particularly in Jerusalem, and put an end to all attacks
on Islamic holy sites and give priority to resuming
negotiations, the freezing of which has led to the current
serious escalation.
The Palestinian question is the most important issue
for the Arab world. Any additional procrastination will
further complicate the crisis; the time to deal with it is
now.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of the Islamic Republic of
Iran.
Mr. Khoshroo (Islamic Republic of Iran): I have
the honour to speak on behalf of the Non-Aligned
Movement (NAM). I wish to convey the Movement’s
appreciation to the Spanish presidency and to the
Minister for Foreign Affairs of Spain, Mr. José Manuel

15-33018

22/10/2015

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

García Margallo, for convening today’s open debate.
I also wish to thank the Deputy Secretary-General,
Mr. Jan Eliasson, for his briefing.
In these days of tragedy that starkly remind us of
the continuing plight of the Palestinian people resulting
from the denial of their rights and the grave injustices
inflicted upon them for decades, the Non-Aligned
Movement takes this opportunity to reaffirm its
long-standing solidarity with the Palestinian people
and reiterates its support for the realization of their
legitimate national aspirations and inalienable rights,
including their right to self-determination and freedom
in their independent State of Palestine, with East
Jerusalem as its capital, together with a just solution for
the plight of the Palestine refugees pursuant to General
Assembly resolution 194 (III) of 11 December 1948.
Today, the situation in occupied Palestine,
including East Jerusalem, continues to deteriorate
at an alarming rate, as a result of Israel’s crimes and
violations against the Palestinian people. More than
49 Palestinians, including children, have been killed
by the Israeli occupying forces, and more than 1,800
Palestinians have been injured, many severely, by the
live ammunition and other weaponry used excessively
and indiscriminately by the occupying Power against
the defenceless civilian population under its occupation.
That situation requires immediate attention by the
international community, in particular the Security
Council, which must act to bring a halt to all such
violations of international law, including humanitarian
and human rights law, committed by the occupying
Power, which is further destabilizing the situation and
threatening international peace and security.
The Movement strongly condemns all acts
of violence and the provocations and incitement
committed by the Israeli occupying forces and
extremists at the sensitive holy site, which threaten to
further destabilize the already fragile situation with
far-reaching consequences for the region and beyond.
NAM believes that the continuation of Israel’s illegal
settlement campaign, which is at the core of the 48-year
foreign occupation, remains the major obstacle to
peace, undermining all efforts to resume a credible
peace process and casting serious doubts on Israel’s
alleged commitment to ending its foreign occupation of
Palestinian land and achieving the two-State solution
on the basis of the pre-1967 borders and a just, lasting
and comprehensive peace.

S/PV.7540 (Resumption 1)

NAM calls once again upon the international
community to act collectively and forthwith to compel
Israel, the occupying Power, to cease its destructive
and illegal practices and abide by all its obligations
under international law, including humanitarian and
human rights law, in the occupied Palestinian territory,
including East Jerusalem. The Security Council, in
particular, must uphold the duties assigned to it by the
Charter to address the situation and act with urgency to
implement its own resolutions, respond to those critical
developments and advance a peaceful solution based
on United Nations resolutions, the principle of land for
peace and the Arab Peace Initiative.
The current dangerous situation, including in
occupied East Jerusalem, cannot abide further delay or
aggravation. The time to act is now to save innocent
civilian lives, including by providing protection to the
Palestinian people, in accordance with the relevant
provisions of international humanitarian law, and to
revive the gravely diminished prospects for peace.
The Security Council cannot remain on the
sidelines in the quest for a just and peaceful solution to
the question of Palestine. NAM again urges the Security
Council to act resolutely and forthwith to end the plight
of the Palestinian people and the Israeli occupation,
support the realization of the inalienable rights of the
Palestinian people, and establish peace and security by
resolving this prolonged conflict, which has so severely
destabilized the region and undermined international
law and the international system as a whole.
Lebanon continues to suffer from continuing Israeli
violations of its borders and incursions against its
territory, along with years of occupation and aggression.
Unfortunately, Israel continues to violate Lebanese
airspace and has been intensifying its incursions over
Lebanon. Such activities are a blatant violation of
Lebanese sovereignty and the relevant international
resolutions, in particular resolution 1701 (2006). The
provisions of that resolution should be implemented
in a manner that ensures the strengthening of the
foundations of stability and security in Lebanon and
prevents Israel from undertaking its daily violations of
Lebanese sovereignty.
With regard to the occupied Syrian Golan, the
Movement condemns all measures taken by Israel,
the occupying Power, to alter the legal, physical and
demographic status of the occupied Syrian Golan, which
have intensified since the outbreak of the Syrian crisis.

15-330189/39

S/PV.7540 (Resumption 1)

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

The Non-Aligned Movement demands once again that
Israel abide by resolution 497 (1981) and withdraw fully
from the occupied Syrian Golan to the borders of 4 June
1967, in implementation of resolutions 242 (1967) and
338 (1973).
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Brazil.
Mr. De Aguiar de Patriota (Brazil) (spoke in
Spanish): I thank the presidency of Spain for having
organized today’s debate.
(spoke in English)
I also thank Deputy Secretary-General Jan Eliasson
for his briefing. Brazil wishes to acknowledge the
statements made by the Minister for Foreign Affairs
of the State of Palestine, Mr. Riad Malki, and by the
Permanent Representative of Israel. The SecretaryGeneral’s trip to the Middle East was timely and
underlined the sense of urgency that the issue at hand
deserves.
Brazil is seriously concerned about the severe
upsurge in violence in Palestine and Israel. We call
upon the authorities of both countries to do their utmost
to halt the current escalation. It is about time for the
Security Council fully to assume its responsibilities
under the United Nations Charter and actively support
and steer the peace process towards a two-State solution.
Unfortunately, we cannot say that this tragic
deterioration was unexpected. Many delegations,
including Brazil, have repeatedly called for an end
to illegal and provocative actions, in particular
the expansion of Israeli settlement activities. The
spontaneous and mostly uncoordinated nature of the
many violent incidents does not render them justifiable.
Taking into account the present disturbing state of
affairs, Brazil deems it important that the international
community respond to the request made by President
Mahmoud Abbas by carefully examining different
modalities for international protection. We also believe
that the United Nations membership at large should
discuss alternative approaches to engage the parties in
negotiations and support avenues leading to a peaceful
solution to the conflict that is based on international
law and the relevant United Nations resolutions.
Brazil remains convinced that effective prospects
for peace require the establishment of a Palestinian
State that is sovereign, economically viable and
territorially contiguous, side by side with Israel within
10/39

22/10/2015

internationally recognized borders based on the 1967
lines.
The spiral of violence and destruction in
Syria continues to worsen, leading to a continuous
deterioration in the humanitarian situation, despite the
general recognition that there is no military solution to
the conflict. A genuine and inclusive dialogue based
on full respect for human rights and the independence,
sovereignty, unity and territorial integrity of Syria
is as urgent as ever. We reiterate our support for the
work of Special Envoy Staffan de Mistura as well as
the Human Rights Council’s international Independent
Commission of Inquiry on Syria, headed by Professor
Paulo Sérgio Pinheiro.
Brazil condemns in the strongest terms the use of
any toxic chemical as a weapon and firmly supports the
establishment of the joint investigative mechanism by
the Security Council. The attacks against the civilian
population, including the use of barrel bombs, are
inhumane and intolerable. Brazil urges all parties to
the conflict to comply with their obligations under
international humanitarian law.
We applaud the work done by the United Nations
agencies to help the millions of people in need and the
generosity of many countries in the region which have
been receiving the bulk of Syrian refugees. Brazil is
contributing to these humanitarian efforts. We have
issued more than 8,000 entry visas for Syrian residents
affected by the crisis and provided food and medicine
through United Nations agencies to help alleviate the
dire situation faced by refugees and displaced persons
in the region. We will continue to welcome, within our
capacity and resources, those who have had to flee their
home country and need a place to restart their lives.
We are glad that in Yemen the Government of
President Hadi Mansour has agreed to participate in a
new round of consultations, under the auspices of the
United Nations, in order to seek understanding on how
to put an end to the conflict. Brazil supports United
Nations efforts to bring the parties to the negotiating
table and engage them in the process of seeking a
diplomatic solution without any further delay.
Brazil is united by both historical and cultural ties
with Lebanon, where peace and stability must be firmly
upheld by the international community. We underscore
the instrumental role played by the United Nations
Interim Force in Lebanon, whose Maritime Task Force
has been led by a Brazilian navy admiral since 2011.

15-33018

22/10/2015

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

We urge all Lebanese political actors to embrace the
path of understanding and end the presidential vacuum
without further delay.
The dire humanitarian situation in Libya and
the negative impact of the Libyan crisis on regional
stability requires our continued attention. We call on
all parties to the Libyan conflict to cease hostilities and
favour dialogue by remaining engaged in constructive
political negotiations, under the auspices of the United
Nations, with a view to achieving a Government of
national accord.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the Secretary-General of the League of Arab
States.
Mr. Elaraby (spoke in Arabic): I should like to
thank you, Sir, and the Spanish presidency for having
convened this very important meeting, which is taking
place at a time when the Middle East is facing serious
challenges and threats of all kinds, for which the
Security Council is responsible at the political, legal
and moral levels, given current developments and their
serious impact on the peoples of the region.
However, the Council is not adopting any resolutions
to tackle these very serious crises in the region, either
in Palestine or in Syria. It must also face the threat of
terrorist groups, which have turned the region into a
breeding ground from which to spread their influence,
while threatening both the region and the independence
and sovereignty of States. This requires a review of
the Council’s mechanisms and of the resolutions it has
adopted, as well as their follow-up and the commitment
of States to abide by them.
Given the explosive situation in the region, the
Palestinian question remains the central issue on
which peace and security in the Middle East hinge. For
decades now, the Council has continuously considered
the deteriorating situation in the occupied Palestinian
territories, given the ongoing escalation and the serious
violations committed by the Israeli occupying forces
against the Palestinian people and their rights and
against the holy sites of both Islam and Christianity, in
particular Al-Quds and the Al-Aqsa Mosque. Unarmed
Palestinians are the victims of massacres, lynchings and
collective punishment. All of this represents a violation
of international law, the will of the international
community and the inalienable legal rights of the
Palestinian people. The Israeli Government is solely
responsible for the impact of these actions, which have

S/PV.7540 (Resumption 1)

jeopardized international peace and security in the
Middle East throughout the occupation.
I am speaking today on behalf of the League of
Arab States, which adopted a decision on 13 October
asking for the protection of the Palestinian people
and the holy Christian and Muslim sites. This is not
the first time that the League has asked the Security
Council to take urgent steps to implement resolutions
on the occupied Palestinian territories and guarantee
international protection for the Palestinian people and
the holy sites.
I ask, how long will the Israeli occupation last? Until
when will the international community, represented by
the Security Council, stand idly by, unable to put an end
to the occupation or achieve a lasting and permanent
settlement on the basis of the Security Council and
General Assembly resolutions on this issue?
The lack of effectiveness and efficiency of the
Council given current developments only aggravates
the deterioration of the situation, taking it ever further
away from international legality. The Council of the
League of Arab States has repeatedly warned against
the situation and the non-respect by Israel of United
Nations resolutions on the issue. A great many of these
have been adopted over the past 50 years, such as, for
example, resolution 181 (II), 242 (1967), 267 (1969), 338
(1973) and many others asking Israel to withdraw from
the occupied Palestinian and Arab territories in order to
resolve the conflict.
The Security Council has never witnessed such a
precedent, in which manipulation and blackmail by a
State that disregards international law and commits war
crimes is allowed. Ensuring international protection has
now become the most urgent question, as this is a legal
requirement given the situation and the need to achieve
the peace to which we aspire. The need for international
protection for Palestinian civilians is stipulated in the
provisions of international legality and resolutions on
Palestine.
Since the emergence of the Palestinian question, in
the days of the League of Nations when the territory
was under a mandate, the situation has been the
responsibility of the international community.
The International Court of Justice, in a wellknown Advisory Opinion issued in 1950, stipulated the
following:

15-3301811/39

S/PV.7540 (Resumption 1)

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

(spoke in English)
“Two principles were considered to be of paramount
importance: the principle of non-annexation and
the principle that the well-being and development
of such peoples, those under the mandate, formed a
sacred trust of civilization.”
(spoke in Arabic)
The legal study of the Secretary-General adopted
yesterday refers to this, for which I thank him.
(spoke in English)
The International Court of Justice confirmed that
the mandate remained valid after the determination of
the Covenant of the League of Nations.
(spoke in Arabic)
This international protection through the United
Nations can be easily carried out. In that connection,
I recall the United Nations Truce Supervision
Organization (UNTSO), established pursuant to
resolution 73 (1949), which stipulates that the
Secretary-General could take all necessary steps to use
as many United Nations staff members as necessary
to ensure that the truce is respected. UNTSO remains
in Jerusalem to this day. That body can play a role in
protecting the holy sites.
In that regard, I recall resolution 904 (1994), which
was adopted following the massacre in the Mosque
of Ibrahim to guarantee the safety and security of all
Palestinian civilians throughout the occupied territories
and which stipulates that there should be a temporary
international presence. That is why I thank the
Secretary-General for having distributed and published
this important legal study, which stresses the need for
international protection through a direct presence in
the occupied Palestinian territories, given the recent
developments.
I would also like to state that the first article of the
Geneva Accord stipulates the shared legal commitment
of all States, which have the collective responsibility
to guarantee the compliance and implementation of the
provisions of that Accord. In addition, the International
Committee of the Red Cross, among other bodies, can
guarantee international protection by elaborating on
this concept.
Finally, measures aimed at protecting Palestinian
civilians faced with the violations perpetrated by the
Israeli occupying forces and the settlers are essential
12/39

22/10/2015

to addressing the current situation. However, the crux
of the problem is the Israeli occupation of Palestinian
territories. As long as this occupation continues, the
Israeli violations will continue, be it is in Jerusalem or
any other part of the occupied territories. It is high time
that this method of managing the conflict be brought
to an end. The Security Council must act quickly to
end the conflict by halting the Israeli occupation of the
occupied Palestinian territories. We ask the Council
to consider the Quartet to be a Council mechanism
and to consider the mandate it gave the Quartet, in
accordance to resolution 1515 (2003), to achieve a twoState solution based on the borders of 4 June 1967, to be
a mandatory step on the path to security and stability in
the Middle East.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the observer of the European Union.
Mr. Vrailas: I have the honour to speak on behalf
of the European Union (EU). The candidate countries
Montenegro and Albania, as well as Ukraine, the
Republic of Moldova and Georgia, align themselves
with this statement.
While the Middle East faces multiple challenges
today, including the crisis in Syria, the Middle East
peace process cannot be allowed to slip from our
agenda. It is crucial for the Israelis and the Palestinians,
but also for regional peace and security. The increased
deadly violence in October, not least in East Jerusalem,
the West Bank, Gaza and Israel, claiming many lives
and injuring over a thousand, is a tragic reminder of
this. We deeply regret the loss of lives and our thoughts
are with the victims and their families. The risk of
escalation is a source of great concern. We therefore
urge political leaders on both sides to promote calm,
encourage restraint and avoid actions which could
further fuel tensions.
Violence or acts of terror against any innocent
civilian are simply unacceptable. The response of
security forces needs to be proportionate and consistent
regardless of who is the perpetrator. The continued
cooperation between Israel and the Palestinian
Authority to ensure de-escalation and the restoration
of order is crucially important. However, current
developments on the ground provide the evidence that
the status quo is not an option. They prove the need for
a political horizon. The best way of halting the violence
is an immediate return to a credible political process.
The immediate priority for the parties is to agree on
substantial steps, which would improve the situation
15-33018

22/10/2015

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

on the ground and build a path back to final status
negotiations.
The EU position has been clear and consistent.
A negotiated two-State solution, which ends the
occupation and fulfils the aspirations of both sides, is
the only way of bringing the lasting peace and security
that both Israelis and Palestinians deserve. By the same
token, actions by either side that call into question their
stated commitment to a negotiated solution must be
avoided. This includes demolitions and the expansion
of Israeli settlements in the West Bank, which are
illegal under international law, and of projects funded
by the EU and EU member States.
The two-State solution will also require Palestinian
factions to work together to address the needs of the
Palestinian population. We therefore continue to
urge them to make reconciliation a top priority. The
Palestinian Authority must take greater responsibility
in this regard and assume its Government functions
in the Gaza Strip. The dire situation in Gaza must
be fundamentally changed to allow for improved
socioeconomic conditions for the local population and
security for all.
Let us also not forget Jerusalem, a city sacred to
three religions. The historical status quo at the holy
sites, a matter of great sensitivity, must not be altered.
Therefore, all relevant parties must open a serious
dialogue to ensure the status quo at the holy sites is
upheld.
A renewed peace process will require a common
international effort. The EU remains determined
to play its part, not least through the EU Special
Representative for the Middle East Peace Process,
Fernando Gentilini. We will work with all sides,
through the implementation of existing agreements,
to allow Palestinian socioeconomic development and
to empower Palestinian institutions in preparation for
statehood.
The EU warmly welcomes the statement issued
by representatives of the Quartet, dated 30 September,
and their consultations with the Foreign Ministers of
Egypt, Jordan and Saudi Arabia, as well as with the
Secretary-General of the League of Arab States and
other interested member States. Outreach to regional
partners will remain essential, as the Arab Peace
Initiative is of key strategic importance for any future
comprehensive peace agreement.

S/PV.7540 (Resumption 1)

The EU offers its full support to the SecretaryGeneral’s Special Coordinator for the Middle East
Peace Process, Mr. Mladenov. The Security Council,
with primary responsibility for the maintenance of
international peace and security, continues to have a
crucial role in regard to the Israeli-Palestinian conflict.
However, ultimately sustainable peace will require
courageous decisions by the parties to the conflict.
We urge them to carefully consider the high price of a
continued unresolved conflict, which will continue to
be paid by local populations.
The EU continues to follow developments on
the ground very closely. It remains determined to do
its utmost to preserve the viability of the two-State
solution in the interest of both Palestinians and Israelis.
Turning to the conflict in Syria, there is an
increasingly urgent need to find a lasting solution that
will end this conflict. Only a Syrian-led political process
leading to a peaceful and inclusive transition, based on
the principles of the Geneva communiqué (S/2012/522,
annex) of 30 June 2012, will bring back stability to
Syria, enable peace and reconciliation, create the
necessary environment for efficient counter-terrorism
efforts and maintain the sovereignty, independence,
unity and territorial integrity of the Syrian State.
There cannot be a lasting peace in Syria under the
present leadership and until the legitimate grievances
and aspirations of all components of Syrian society are
addressed. The international community has to unite
around two complementary and interlinked tracks: a
political one aimed at ending the civil war by addressing
all the root causes of the conflict and establishing an
inclusive political transition process that will restore
peace to the country; and a security one focused on the
fight against the regional and global threat of Daesh.
The European Union reiterates its full support to
the United Nations-led efforts and the work of United
Nations Special Envoy Staffan de Mistura. We call
on all Syrian parties to show a clear and concrete
commitment to the United Nations-led process and to
participate actively in the working groups proposed by
the Special Envoy. The moderate political opposition
and associated armed groups urgently need to unite
behind a common approach in order to present an
alternative to the Syrian people.
We urge all those with influence on the parties,
including on the Syrian regime, to use that influence to
encourage a constructive role in the process, leading to a

15-3301813/39

S/PV.7540 (Resumption 1)

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

political transition and to end the cycle of violence. The
EU will proactively engage with key regional actors,
such as Saudi Arabia, Turkey, Iran, Iraq, Jordan, Egypt
and international partners within the United Nations
framework, to build the conditions for a peaceful and
inclusive transition.
We condemn the excessive, disproportionate and
indiscriminate attacks that the Syrian regime continues
to commit against its own people. The Al-Assad regime
bears the greatest responsibility for the 250,000 deaths in
the conflict and the displacement of millions of people.
International humanitarian law applies to all parties,
and human rights need to be fully respected. We call on
all parties to stop all forms of indiscriminate shelling
and bombardment against civilian areas and structures
and, in particular, on the Syrian regime to cease all
aerial bombardments, including the use of barrel bombs
in line with resolution 2139 (2014). We also call for the
immediate cessation of the use of chemical weapons,
which is a violation of resolutions 2118 (2013) and
2209 (2015). In that light, we welcome the unanimous
adoption of Security Council resolution 2235 (2015)
to identify those responsible for the use of chemical
weapons, and stress that those individuals, entities,
groups or Governments must be held accountable. The
systematic targeting of civilians by the regime has led
to mass displacements and encouraged recruitment to
and the flourishing of terrorist groups in Syria. This
calls for urgent attention and action.
We strongly condemn the indiscriminate attacks,
atrocities, killings, conflict-related sexual violence,
abuses of human rights and serious violations of
international humanitarian law perpetrated by Daesh
and other terrorist groups. We support international
efforts and initiatives to address those issues. We
condemn Daesh’s deliberate destruction of cultural
heritage in Syria and Iraq, which amounts to a war
crime under international law. Those responsible for
war crimes and crimes against humanity in Syria
must be held accountable. We reiterate our call on the
Security Council to refer the situation in Syria to the
International Criminal Court.
The EU supports the efforts of the Global Coalition
to Counter Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant. As a
consequence of its policies and actions, the Al-Assad
regime cannot be a partner in the fight against Daesh.
Action against Daesh needs to be closely coordinated
among all partners, and needs clearly to target Daesh,

14/39

22/10/2015

Jabhat Al-Nusra and the other United Nationsdesignated terrorist groups.
The recent Russian military attacks that go beyond
Daesh and other United Nations-designated terrorist
groups, as well as on the moderate opposition, are of
deep concern and must cease immediately; so too must
the Russian violations of the sovereign airspace of
neighbouring countries. That military escalation risks
prolonging the conflict, undermining a political process,
aggravating the humanitarian situation and increasing
radicalization. Our aim should be to de-escalate the
conflict. The EU calls on Russia to focus its efforts on
the common objective of achieving a political solution
to the conflict In that context, it urges Russia to push
for a reduction of violence and the implementation of
confidence-building measures by the Syrian regime,
pursuant to the provisions of resolution 2139 (2014).
The EU will reinforce its efforts to scale up the
implementation of the Security Council resolutions
2139 (2014), 2165 (2014) and 2191 (2014) to deliver
cross-border and cross-line assistance in order to help
those Syrians most desperately in need, intensify
humanitarian diplomacy, seek ways to improve access
and protection and promote humanitarian principles
and local consensus with regard to guidelines for aid
delivery.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give
the floor to the Vice-Chair of the Committee on the
Exercise of the Inalienable Rights of the Palestinian
People.
Mrs. Rubiales de Chamorro (spoke in Spanish):
First and foremost, I should like to thank Spain and
Foreign Minister José Manuel García Margallo for
convening this timely open debate. Coming as we
celebrate the seventieth anniversary of our Organization,
it should serve as a basis to commit ourselves as an
Organization to one of the most important pending
issues before us — making the Palestinian State a
reality and allowing its people to live in peace and
security.
At the most recent Council debate on the situation
in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question
(see S/PV.7490), we marked the first anniversary of
the latest war on Gaza. At that time three months ago,
we noted the continued construction of illegal Israeli
settlements, the confiscation of Palestinian land and
the demolition of Palestinian houses and orchards,
and called on the Council to meet and take action to

15-33018

22/10/2015

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

ensure implementation of its resolutions regarding the
question of Palestine. We also warned that ongoing
violence in a land so sacred to many peoples and faiths
was particularly troublesome.
Today, the situation in Jerusalem is reverberating
throughout the occupied Palestinian territory and
Israel, and has reached a point of conflagration that,
sadly, validates our darkest fears and predictions. The
despairing Palestinian youth in Jerusalem and the West
Bank are desperate and being driven to acts of violence,
as the only way they feel they will be heard. Israeli
communities are acting out of fear, engendering a mob
mentality that is adding a dangerous dimension to this
current upsurge in violence.
The construction of walls between ethnically
different neighbourhoods will not solve any of the
problems that led to the current situation. In fact,
cementing the borders of illegal Israeli settlements in
East Jerusalem will only exacerbate the conflict. The
only sustainable way out is to seek a comprehensive
solution to the Palestinian question, based on the
implementation of the relevant resolutions of the
Security Council. That will require an end of the Israeli
occupation in all its facets and the emergence of a
sovereign and independent State of Palestine, based on
the 1967 borders, with East Jerusalem as its capital.
Unless we, the United Nations, and the Council can
provide both peoples with a blueprint of hope for a just
solution and an end to this seemingly endless battle — for
a future where both can live in peace and dignity — we
will be complicit in the further deterioration of the
conflict, which month after month, year after year,
becomes increasingly difficult to resolve.
Three months ago, we spoke of a new international
awareness that 20 years of bilateral negotiations,
plagued by interruptions, had not yielded the expected
result, and that a comprehensive solution to the
Palestinian question might need multilateral efforts.
The Committee on the Exercise of the Inalienable
Rights of the Palestinian people therefore salutes
the Quartet’s efforts to provide such a multilateral
framework. We likewise reiterate our position that the
initiative of the League of Arab States, which proposes
a comprehensive peace agreement that would include
the normalization of relations between Israel and the
entire region, remains a historic opportunity to bring
peace to the Israeli and Palestinian peoples, as well
as to their neighbours near and far. We urge Israel to

S/PV.7540 (Resumption 1)

seriously weigh that initiative before events on the
ground sweep it aside.
This year, which marks 70 years since the
founding of our Organization and the fortieth year
of our Committee, the Security Council should
urgently assume its responsibility for ensuring that the
Palestinian people are able to exercise their inalienable
rights. Failure to do so would have severe consequences
far beyond Jerusalem, Israel and Palestine. If the
nations of the world, united through our Organization
and in the Council, wish to win the fight against
violent extremism in the Middle East and elsewhere,
the Council must find and implement a solution to the
question of Palestine, with the formula of two States
living side by side in peace and security.
Meanwhile, as an immediate priority, the Council
should urgently act to guarantee the status quo with
respect to the holy sites in Jerusalem. The proposal to
station international observers is promising as a first
step towards relieving tensions and re-establishing
stability. The Committee on the Exercise of the
Inalienable Rights of the Palestinian people reaffirms
its commitment to the principle of a peaceful solution
to the conflict on the basis of those premises.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Saudi Arabia.
Mr. Al Saad (Saudi Arabia) (spoke in Arabic):
Allow me at the outset to thank you, Sir, for convening
this open debate on the situation in the Middle East. I
would like to express particular thanks to the Minister
for Foreign Affairs of Spain for the attention and
importance he attaches to this question.
We meet today as young Palestinians are being
killed by bullets fired by the Israeli occupation forces,
and while blood continues to flow in the courtyards
of Al-Haram Al-Sharif, in its vicinity and at its gates.
Israeli soldiers and terrorist settlers rush out to kill,
destroy and burn. One of them even proudly posted a
video of a bleeding Palestinian boy he had shot, while
cursing the boy and wishing him dead.
Let us recall the reasons behind the acts of violence
that began with repeated acts of aggression by the
Israelis against Al-Haram Al-Sharif, when settlers and
soldiers stormed the precincts of the Mosque without
even taking off their shoes. The Israeli Government
tried to impose a new pattern of spatial division and
restrictws access based on time slots to one of the sites

15-3301815/39

S/PV.7540 (Resumption 1)

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

most revered by Muslims everywhere. Let us not forget
that Israel has failed to protect the Islamic holy sites. The
Al-Aqsa Mosque was set on fire by Israeli extremists
shortly after the Israelis occupied Jerusalem. There
were also repeated attempts to demolish Al-Haram
Al-Sharif and to excavate beneath it with the aim of
destabilizing the building or causing its collapse. Nor
should we forget that Israel demolished the gates of
Al-Haram Al-Sharif and the protective fences around
the courtyard and turned them into places of prayer
for Jews without taking their sanctity for Muslims
into account. Let us not forget that Israeli extremists
set fire to the Cave of the Patriarchs in Hebron and
attacked people at their prayers, and built a temple and
a memorial to glorify the base acts of those killers.
Therefore, who can really blame the Palestinians if
they mistrust the intentions of Israel and its Government
with respect to the preservation and security of the
Al-Aqsa Mosque or with rspect to changing its historic
status quo? Who can blame the Palestinians for reacting
in the face of the Israeli occupation when its officials
call for Israeli settlers and occupiers to fight to the
death? Who can blame the Palestinians for feeling that
settlers can walk into their villages and neighbourhoods
like criminals and stalk their children, families and
property? Who can blame the Palestinians for trying to
defend themselves in their occupied towns and cities,
in Jerusalem and other Palestinian territories? And who
can deny Palestinians the right to seek international
protection to defend their land, their sons and their holy
sites?
The Kingdom of Saudi Arabia calls on the
international community once again to say no to Israeli
occupation, injustice and arrogance, to end to the
bloodshed and to hold the Government of the Israeli
occupation legally and criminally accountable for its
flagrant crimes and violations against the Palestinian
people, which can truly be considered war crimes
and crimes against humanity. Of that there can be no
doubt. Israel must respond immediately to and abide by
international decisions and the Arab Peace Initiative.
The Kingdom of Saudi Arabia also calls on the
Security Council to intervene immediately to protect
our children in Palestine. We appeal to the Council
to demonstrate a reaction commensurate with the
gravity of the situation and with the seriousness
of its responsibility. The Council should not be
content with issuing repeated statements. It must act
courageously to grant the Palestinian people the right

16/39

22/10/2015

to self-determination leading to the establishment of
an independent State, with Al-Quds Al-Sharif as its
capital, on the basis of the borders of June 1967, and to
end tragedy that has afflicted Palestine ever since.
The Kingdom of Saudia Arabia views with grave
concern the ongoing suffering of its brothers, the Syrian
people, who continue to face an oppressive regime that
bombards their villages and cities with barrel bombs
and uses chemical weapons against its own people. In
abdicating its own sovereignty, it has granted foreign
Powers and militias, which are equally criminal, the
opportunity to participate in a genocide that the regime
has waged against its own people in a grave escalation
that will have serious consequences in the region.
We call on all active parties to cooperate
immediately in implementing the Geneva Communiqué
(see resolution 2118 (2013), annex II), including the call
for a transitional governing body with wide executive
powers that seeks to establish a future Syria that will
embrace all well-intentioned Syrians, regardless of
their religious, political or ethnic affiliations. It will be
a Syria that rejects terrorism, violence, fanaticism and
extremism and not a Syria for those who have killed
their own people.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Kuwait.
Mr. AlJarallah (Kuwait) (spoke in Arabic): I have
the honour to address the Security Council today on
behalf of the States members of the Organization of
Islamic Cooperation (OIC). At the outset, allow me to
congratulate the Kingdom of Spain on its presidency
of the Security Council and the fact that its Foreign
Minister is chairing today’s meeting.
We meet once again in this open debate on the
situation in the Middle East, at a time when the
occupied Palestinian territory and, in particular, the
occupied city of Jerusalem have been witnessing a
dramatically deteriorating situation as a result of the
escalation of Israeli military aggression against the
unarmed, defenceless Palestinian people and their holy
places. Israel’s arrogance, disregard for international
law and disrespect for agreements with the Palestinian
side, as well as the total impunity that it enjoys for its
violations and crimes, have brought the situation to a
dangerous juncture.
On more than one occasion, the OIC — most
recently on 1 October at an extraordinary meeting of
the OIC Council of Foreign Ministers, held in New
15-33018

22/10/2015

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

York in the margins of the general debate of the General
Assembly at its seventieth session — has warned of the
consequences of the continued Israeli provocations,
incitement and attacks on the Al-Aqsa Mosque and has
condemned those attacks as an unprecedented assault
against the inalienable religious rights of Muslims all
over the world. They also constitute a violation of the
freedom of worship and the sanctity of holy places. If
they are not halted, they will further fuel extremism,
violence and racism and contribute to igniting religious
strife, endangering the prospects of peace and stability
in the region.
We renew our warning once again — as the
Palestinian President stated before the General Assembly
three weeks ago (see A/70/PV.19) — that the continuation
of Israeli aggression against Islamic and Christian holy
sites in Jerusalem risks setting off a religious war, for
which only Israel would bear the responsibility. The
international community, and the Security Council in
particular, cannot ignore those dire warnings.
We cannot talk about the recent escalation separately
from its context. It follows decades of occupation,
oppression and the denial of the fundamental rights of the
Palestinian people. Furthermore, the current escalation
is continuing within the context of unprecedented levels
of Israeli aggression against the Palestinian people,
Israel’s attempts to change the historical status quo at
Haram Al-Sharif, and the unparalleled increase in the
levels of terrorist attacks and crimes perpetrated by
Israeli settlers with the protection and encouragement of
Israeli forces. The Organization of Islamic Cooperation
reiterates the importance of preserving the Jordanian
Hashemite custodianship of the Islamic and Christian
holy sites in Jerusalem, including Haram Al-Sharif, as
has been exercised by His Majesty King Abdullah II
ibn Al Hussein.
One example of Israeli crimes was that committed
against the Dawabsha family. A young boy, barely
two years of age, was burned alive two months ago
by Israeli settlers. That reminds us of similar crimes
perpetrated by the Islamic State in Iraq and the
Levant. Furthermore, Israel’s repeated attacks on
the Al-Aqsa Mosque represent only one aspect of the
terrorism that has been fuelled and protected by the
Israeli occupation. Recent legislation adopted by the
Israeli Knesset allows the occupation forces to shoot
at Palestinian demonstrators in the occupied city of
Jerusalem, which represents an official cover and
endorsement of the criminal operations and an explicit

S/PV.7540 (Resumption 1)

provision of impunity for the killing and oppression
of the Palestinian people, ensuring the further loss of
innocent lives and worsening the injustices committed
against the Palestinian people.
The Organization of Islamic Cooperation strongly
condemns the policy of execution and deliberate murder
carried out by the Israeli occupation forces against the
Palestinian demonstrators in the occupied Palestinian
territory, particularly in occupied East Jerusalem. Some
of those acts, in which children have been targeted,
were captured by media cameras. Furthermore, the
Organization of Islamic Cooperation condemns the
unprecedented escalation in the acts of violence and
terrorism by extremist settlers against Palestinian
civilians. Only this past month, Israeli violence has
claimed the lives of more than 45 Palestinians and
wounded more than 1,800 people, including women and
children.
Those crimes and violations show the horrible
reality of the occupation and the racist nature of Israeli
policies, targeting the Palestinian people, their land
and holy places. Moreover, the recent Israeli crimes
and practices have exposed and revealed Israel’s lies
regarding its army’s ethical code of conduct. How can
one leave an injured child to bleed after having shot
him? How is it possible that a teenager is shot only
because his smile provoked an armed and fanatical
Israeli settler? There is no definition for such acts other
than that of shameful war crimes. The perpetrators
of those crimes must be held accountable, and justice
must be done. The International Criminal Court was
established for such a purpose.
While the Organization of Islamic Cooperation
warns against the dangers posed by the Israeli
aggression to regional and international security and
stability, we call on the Security Council to shoulder
its responsibility by taking measures to stop the crimes
and violations committed by the Israeli occupation.
There is no doubt that the Israeli authorities consider
the silence of the international community in response
to its crimes to be an encouragement to continue with
acts of State terrorism. That silence encourages them
to commit further violations against the unarmed and
defenceless Palestinian people throughout the occupied
Palestinian territory, including East Jerusalem.
We renew our support for achieving peace based
on the two-State solution in accordance with the
Arab Peace Initiative and international norms, but we
underscore that it is not acceptable to remain silent or

15-3301817/39

S/PV.7540 (Resumption 1)

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

22/10/2015

merely to express indignation and concern about the
unspeakable Israeli war crimes, genocide and atrocities
that have been committed against the Palestinian
people. It is no longer possible to continue tolerating
the occupation while treating Israel as a State above
the law that practices terrorism and arrogance with
impunity. The perpetrators of those heinous crimes
should be prosecuted and brought to justice, and the
foreign occupation must end.

In the light of the daily onslaught of violence,
we reiterate the importance of maintaining security
cooperation between the Israeli and Palestinian
authorities. Furthermore, while we recognize the
necessity to maintain order, we call on Israel to exercise
its law enforcement with proportionate measures and
to refrain from collective punishment, including the
demolition of homes, which may exacerbate an already
volatile situation.

The current serious developments affirm the call
issued at the recent meeting of the Organization of
Islamic Cooperation’s Council of Foreign Ministers
for the Security Council to intervene earnestly and
immediately with a view to providing international
protection for the Palestinian people. The Council
must take a decision that establishes a political path to
preserve the two-State solution, based on the relevant
United Nations resolutions, and set a time frame
for ending the Israeli occupation, with international
guarantees and binding implementation mechanisms.
We expect the Council to do its best to restore security,
stability and peace, based on right and justice for the
peoples of the region rather than violence, occupation
and conflict, and to work towards enforcing its many
resolutions that seek to ensure the Palestinian people’s
exercise of their inalienable and legitimate national
rights, particularly the right to self-determination in
their independent State of Palestine with East Jerusalem
as its capital.

The current situation did not arise in a vacuum.
Grim economic prospects, social marginalization,
illegal settlements and the stagnation of the peace
process have all served as fodder for discontent. Too
often, the international community, including the
Council, has remained silent. We have offered neither
tangible advances towards peace nor concrete visions
of a viable economy in a future State of Palestine.

The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Japan.
Mr. Yoshikawa (Japan) (spoke in Spanish): It is a
great pleasure for me to see my friend, the Ambassador
of Spain, presiding over the Security Council of the
United Nations.
(spoke in English)
In reference to the Middle East peace process,
nowhere is a political solution more overdue than in
Palestine. Japan is concerned by the latest surge of
violence, in particular the conflict at the holy sites,
because of its potentially inflammatory implications.
We welcome Israeli Prime Minister Netanyahu’s vow
to maintain the status quo at Al-Haram Al-Sharif/
Temple Mount, and Palestinian President Abbas’s swift
condemnation of the arson attacks against Joseph’s
Tomb. We call for the cessation of violence and condemn
all forms of incitement, including those from Hamas.

18/39

The stagnation and difficulties in the peace
process must not stop us from making progress when
possible. Firm in our belief that a viable economy
underpins the feasibility of a two-State solution, Japan
has contributed $1.6 billion in support since 1993.
Through such projects as the Jericho Agro-Industrial
Park, which can provide up to 7,000 jobs with annual
economic benefits totalling $40 million, Japan hopes to
offer real prospects for a viable Palestinian economy.
Countries with the will and capacity to provide
concrete contributions to the political process and
on the ground can strengthen rather than dilute the
traditional framework of the peace process. We
therefore value the initiative taken by the Middle East
Quartet to convene a high-level outreach meeting as
a side event at the seventieth session of the General
Assembly. At that meeting, the Minister for Foreign
Affairs of Japan, Mr. Kishida, offered additional aid
totalling $12 million and reaffirmed our commitment
to play a more proactive role in the peace process.
With regard to the situation in Syria, the Syrian
crisis has, over the past five years, taken more than
250,000 lives and uprooted approximately 12 million
citizens. In the face of one of the worst humanitarian
crises of our generation, Japan will spare no efforts
to address both the immediate challenges and the
underlying factors of the instability. This year, Japan
will provide approximately $810 million in assistance
to refugees and internally displaced persons from Iraq
and Syria. With particular attention to the Syrian crisis,
Japan has already extended more than $1.1 billion in such

15-33018

22/10/2015

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

assistance as relief and vocational training, with a view
to empowering individuals and building communities
that are resilient to the allures of extremism.
Japan condemns the rampant acts of terrorism
that have taken countless lives and destroyed cultural
heritages throughout the region. Such heinous acts of
terror have also taken Japanese victims. We note that
the situation in Syria has taken on a new dimension
with the military involvement of Russia. In that regard,
Japan looks to Russia to strictly limit its air strikes to
those against the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant
(ISIL) in Syria. Any actions against non-ISIL forces
could worsen an already volatile situation in Syria and
would be a cause for concern.
We reiterate that there can be no military solution
to the Syrian crisis. We therefore underline our support
for the United Nations Special Envoy of the SecretaryGeneral in his efforts to work towards a political
solution, based on the implementation of the Geneva
communiqué (S/2012/523, annex).
The increasing volatility in the Middle East calls
for concerted effort by the international community,
including the Security Council, to facilitate the return
of peace and stability to the region. I would like to
conclude my statement by assuring the Council that
Japan will continue to play a proactive role, both on the
ground and in the Council, in contributing to the peace
and stability of the region.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of India.
Mr. Paswan (India): I thank you, Mr. President, for
convening this quarterly open debate at the ministerial
level on the situation in the Middle East, including the
Palestinian question. I also thank the Deputy SecretaryGeneral for his briefing.
Our position on the Middle East peace process
is very clear. India supports a negotiated solution
resulting in a sovereign, independent, viable and united
State of Palestine with East Jerusalem as its capital,
living within secure and recognized borders, side by
side and at peace with Israel, as endorsed in the Quartet
road map and the relevant Council resolutions. India
has always played a proactive role in garnering support
for the Palestinian cause in multilateral forums. We
supported the recent adoption of General Assembly
resolution 69/320, on raising the flags of non-member
observer States at the United Nations.

S/PV.7540 (Resumption 1)

Recently, the President of India concluded a State
visit to Palestine, where he met with the Palestinian
leadership and discussed a whole range of bilateral,
multilateral and regional issues. That visit reinforced
India’s strong commitment to the Palestinian cause
and renewed our political and diplomatic support for
the State of Palestine in its endeavours to realize an
independent and sovereign State of Palestine.
Apart from giving political support to the
Palestinian cause, India continues to support Palestine’s
development and nation-building efforts with ongoing
technical and financial assistance. During a visit to
Ramallah, the President of India inaugurated the IndiaPalestine Centre for Excellence in information and
communications technology at the Al-Quds University,
and handed over a cheque for $5 million as budgetary
support to the Palestinian Authority. We have announced
several other new projects, in addition to the important
bilateral development projects in health, education,
skill development and vocational training that we are
currently undertaking. India contributes $1 million
annually to the United Nations Relief and Works Agency
for Palestinian Refugees in the Near East, and has
pledged and contributed $4 million to the Palestinian
National Early Recovery and Reconstruction Plan for
Gaza. We are also implementing development projects
in Palestine jointly with Brazil and South Africa within
the India-Brazil-South Africa framework.
We are holding today’s debate at yet another
unfortunate time, when violent incidents and military
responses to them, regardless of the reasons for them, are
once again taking a toll on people’s lives on both sides.
We are distressed and saddened by the ongoing situation
and the loss of life. We welcome efforts to mitigate
the situation and urge both sides to exercise restraint,
in order to reduce the levels of tension and create an
environment conducive to the resumption of peace
talks. India remains firmly convinced that dialogue
is the only viable option for effectively addressing
the issue. Restraint is imperative if provocation and
unilateral actions are to be avoided and a return to
the peace process achieved. We remain hopeful and
urge both sides to resume the peace process as soon as
possible in order to work towards a comprehensive, just
and lasting resolution of the Palestinian issue.
India remains deeply concerned about the worsening
political and security situation in Yemen. We have
urged all the parties concerned in Yemen to resolve their
differences amicably, and we hope that the mediation

15-3301819/39

S/PV.7540 (Resumption 1)

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

efforts of the United Nations can help the people of
Yemen to find a consensus-based solution.
Turning to Syria, we continue to be very concerned
about the ongoing violence and loss of human life in
Syria. India has consistently called for a comprehensive
and peaceful resolution of the crisis that can bring all
the parties to the conflict to the negotiating table. This
must be a Syrian-led process that takes into account
the legitimate aspirations of the Syrian people.We also
derive hope from and support the efforts of the Special
Envoy of the Secretary-General for Syria, Mr. Staffan de
Mistura, to advance the political process by conducting
parallel negotiations with four sub-groups focusing on
various issues.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Kazakhstan.
Mr. Abdrakhmanov (Kazakhstan): We would
like to thank the Spanish presidency for convening
today’s open debate on the current, unprecedented
and extremely grave crisis in the Middle East, which
we hope is compelling Member States to act with a
sense of responsibility and urgency. If it is not speedily
addressed, the current situation in the region will
destabilize security globally.
The prevailing tensions in the Middle East are
primarily concentrated on the Palestinian issue,
and which should begin to ease once the problems
there are resolved. Kazakhstan therefore recognizes
the Palestinian people’s legitimate right to selfdetermination and strongly supports the creation of an
independent State of Palestine, coexisting peacefully
with Israel within the 1967 borders. We also support fullfledged membership in the United Nations for Palestine
and welcome the raising of the Palestinian flag on the
grounds of the United Nations Headquarters. We see a
two-State solution as the only viable option for lasting
peace, and we call on Israeli and Palestinian leaders to
demonstrate the political accountability and goodwill
they need to reach a historic peace agreement. We also
urge calm over the situation around Haram al-Sharif.
The devastating situation in Syria, which has now
spread beyond the region, is one of great concern to
the rest of the world. Kazakhstan has continued to
support the steps taken by members of the international
community, including the United Nations, the League
of Arab States, the United States and the Russian
Federation, as well as the actions of the Syrian
Government and the opposition that are aimed at

20/39

22/10/2015

deciding Syria’s political future through dialogue and
reconciliation and bringing a speedy end to the violence
and bloodshed. We hope that negotiations will continue
between the Government and the opposition in the
effort to solve the Syrian conflict within the framework
of the Geneva II process. Kazakhstan believes firmly
that the crisis can be resolved only by peaceful means.
We believe it is critical to establish a counterterrorism coalition led by the United Nations, with
a unified mechanism designed to defeat this scourge
and bring its perpetrators and their supporters to
justice. The current United Nations mechanisms
aimed at countering terrorism, including the United
Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy, should
be made legally binding through appropriate Security
Council resolutions. During his address to the General
Assembly last month (see A/70/PV.13), my President,
Nursultan Nazarbayev of Kazakhstan, called for
strengthening the global anti-terrorist network by
bringing together existing measures under the auspices
of the United Nations. We call for the speedy adoption of
a comprehensive document on international terrorism,
which has challenged our efforts for the past 20 years.
We call on all delegations to support this bold and
forward-looking approach.
The growing speculation about issues between
the two major denominations of Islam has little basis
in reality, but tension is nonetheless increasing over
the spread of extremist ideology. In that regard, my
country proposes to establish an international forum
entitled “Islam against Terrorism”, with the aim
of demonstrating religious unity in the face of the
destructive nature of terrorism and violent extremism.
We must recognize that the activities of terrorist groups
undermine the foundations of the existing world order
far beyond the conflict zones of the Middle East. The
escalation of violence has resulted in more victims
among the civilian population, mainly women and
children, as well as the forced migration of civilians
from the Middle East and North Africa to Europe. This
is the largest exodus of populations since the Second
World War, and is of great concern not only to the
European Union but also to all of us, the United Nations
community.
Finally, we reiterate our robust commitment to
ensuring peace in the Middle East, based on freedom
and justice for all.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Indonesia.
15-33018

22/10/2015

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

Mr. Percaya (Indonesia): I would like to begin by
expressing Indonesia’s appreciation to the presidency
of Spain for convening this open debate. Our thanks
also go to the Deputy Secretary-General for his briefing
earlier today.
I would also like to align my statement with those
made earlier by the representatives of Iran and Kuwait
on behalf of the Non-Aligned Movement and the
Organization of Islamic Cooperation, respectively.
This debate is very timely, being held as it is amid
the increasingly worrying escalation of violence in
the occupied Palestinian territory. The international
community, especially the Council, must therefore do
its utmost to ensure that all sides exercise restraint and
defuse tension. We welcome the Secretary-General’s
recent visit to Israel and Palestine and hope that it
will help to end the spiraling violence in the occupied
Palestinian territory.
That spiral of violence has worsened the hatred
and mutual suspicion among the people of Palestine
and Israel that has the potential to further complicate
efforts to restart the political process. With that in mind,
Indonesia underlines once again that there is no feasible
solution to the situation in the occupied Palestinian
territory other than an immediate start to a meaningful
and credible peace process with a view to ending the
Israeli occupation. To delay is to permit those feelings
of hatred and suspicion to make the prospects of peace
more intractable.
Indonesia firmly believes that a just and lasting
peace will be sustainable only a through political
process and when the peoples of Palestine are
allowed to exercise their long-overdue right of selfdetermination. On that account, we stress the need of
the Security Council to create a climate favourable to
the resumption of the peace process. The Council must
ensure that Israel remains true to its commitment to
two-State solution. In this regard, all Israel’s illegal
activities in the occupied Palestinian territory must
come to an end. The air strike on Gaza on October 11,
for example, as well as continued provocation in East
Jerusalem, notably in the areas of the holy sites, not
only are contrary to international law but also generate
more tension and anger on the ground.
Certainly, the Security Council cannot continue
to sit idly by and retire to its routine activities of
convening briefings and debates. We again call upon
the Council to assert its Charter mandate and act

S/PV.7540 (Resumption 1)

as a matter of urgency to bring an end to the Israeli
occupation. The raising of the Palestinian flag at the
United Nations weeks ago was, in our view, not only a
symbolic act but also a strategic one. It was a natural
consequence of the growing international recognition
of the State of Palestine and its rightful place among the
community of nations. It was also a necessary building
block towards the eventual two-State solution.
On a different matter, Security Council must also
uphold the principle of the protection of civilians in
times of international armed conflict. The continued
violence committed against the Palestinian people
and their properties clearly underlines the urgency of
securing international United Nations protection for
Palestine. We therefore encourage the Council to work
together with the relevant United Nations bodies to
respond favourably to that urgent need.
Let me now turn to the situation in Syria. Indonesia
wishes to register its outright discontent at the lack
of unity of Security Council members in ending the
violence and address the humanitarian crisis there,
which have spread beyond the region. This organ’s lack
of political will to even deliberate the Syrian issue, let
alone find a resolution to the conflict, demonstrates the
dysfunctional nature of the Council. How many more
innocent people must die before the Council decides
that the time is ripe for it to act?
Indonesia therefore reminds and calls upon Council
members to honour their Charter responsibilities in
the maintenance of international peace and security,
to act immediately and decisively, to end unilateral
actions that only complicate the situation, and bring
the relevant parties back to the negotiation table to
find a comprehensive and inclusive political solution.
Indonesia firmly believes that this is the only way to
resolve the conflict once and for all.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I give the floor
to the observer of the Holy See.
Reverend Monsignor Kassas (Holy See) (spoke
in Arabic): My delegation wishes to thank the Spanish
presidency of the Security Council for convening
this open debate on the situation in the Middle East,
including the question of Palestine, which could not be
more timely as the region is literally on fire.
As the entire world counts the dead, we must not
obscure the plight of the wounded, the displaced and the
refugees who are continually subject to great fear and
apprehension, even as they flee the senseless violence in

15-3301821/39

S/PV.7540 (Resumption 1)

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

the Middle East, which completely disregards the most
elementary terms of international humanitarian law
and, indeed, of humanity. This horrific picture plays
out daily in the media as migrants and refugees flood
the European continent, seeking some small measure
of peace and security, but who are not always welcome.
What of the children and the women? What of the
elderly, the maimed and the handicapped? Where is the
distinction between combatants and non-combatants?
My delegation believes that it has a solemn duty
to remind the international community once again that
extremists are seeking to eradicate religions, ethnic
groups and cultures that have been in the Middle East
for millennia. My delegation is deeply concerned over
the plight of Christians and other groups in territories
controlled by the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant,
in particular those who are held captive for ransom
and in conditions of enslavement. The Holy See also
highlights with sadness the wanton destruction of
the priceless cultural patrimony of humankind in the
region. Pope Francis, in his address to the General
Assembly on September 25, renewed his
“repeated appeals concerning the painful situation
in the entire Middle East, North Africa and other
African countries where Christians, along with
other cultural and ethnic groups, and including
those adherents of the majority religion who have
no desire to be caught up in the hatred and madness,
have been forced to witness the destruction of
their places of worship, their cultural and religious
heritage and their homes and property, and are
faced with the alternatives either of fleeing or
of paying with their lives or with enslavement”
(A/70/PV.3, p. 5).
Grave conflicts have been waged in the Middle
East, including in Palestine, ever since the birth of
the United Nations. The violence that characterizes
the present situation proves that not only have these
problems not been solved or gone away, but that they
seem to be increasingly intractable. In recent years,
other very serious conflicts, in particular the Syrian
crisis, have added to the complexity of the problems in
the region.
It is deeply regrettable that the Middle East — a cradle
of great civilizations and the birthplace of the three
main monotheistic religions of Judaism, Christianity
and Islam — should be immersed in a situation that
combines every form of conflict and every possible
actor: State and non-State combatants, ethnic and
22/39

22/10/2015

cultural groups, fundamentalist terrorism and organized
criminality, religious and ethnic hatred, regional and
international geopolitical rivalries. In such a context,
flooding the region with more and more destructive
weapons will not end the conflicts. Instead of arms
and munitions, the international community needs to
endow the region with more courageous, impartial and
persevering negotiations and mediations.
My delegation takes this opportunity to reiterate
the Holy See’s profound gratitude to those countries of
the region that, in spite of their own difficult situations
and limited resources, have welcomed and taken care of
millions of refugees. On its part, the Catholic Church
remains active at the forefront in providing, to all
those in need and with all the means at its disposal,
humanitarian aid through churches, schools, medical
facilities, rehabilitation centers and pastoral care
institutions.
My delegation calls on the international community
to assist and support the countries of the region in
maintaining their political stability and to mobilize
the economic resources necessary to enable them to
deal appropriately with the ever-increasing number
of displaced persons and migrants. We also call on
the international community to take action with
regard to the situation in Lebanon, with a view to
restoring political stability through a revitalization
of the country’s constitutional institutions through
presidential elections.
Let me conclude by citing the words of Pope Francis
in his letter to the Secretary-General of 9 August 2014:
“The most basic understanding of human dignity
compels the international community, particularly
to the norms and mechanisms of international law,
to do all that it can to stop and prevent further
systematic violence against ethnic and religious
minorities and to protect innocent peoples”.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of the Syrian Arab Republic.
Mr. Ja’afari (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in
Arabic): I wish to thank you, Mr. President, for having
convened this important meeting. Permit me to address
the Council today as a main party in the context of this
item.
On 24 October, the United Nations will celebrate
its seventieth anniversary. However, the question
should be: do we have the right to celebrate, and what

15-33018

22/10/2015

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

are we celebrating? Perhaps we do not, in fact, have
that right, given that we are seeing that the aspirations
of the founding fathers of the United Nations in the
area of peace, security and development have come to
naught because of the policies of certain influential
States that disregard the principles of the Charter and
of international law.
How can we celebrate when we are witnessing
mass violations of the provisions of the Charter, leading
to acts of aggression, instability and threats to the
peace that hinder the development of relations between
nations based on respect, the rights of peoples and the
principles of non-intervention and of the inadmissibility
of the threat or use of force against the sovereignty and
independence of States? Perhaps some would say that
we do not have the right to celebrate after 70 years of
suffering on the part of the Palestinian people.
How can we celebrate the vision of our peoples,
particularly the Palestinian people, who have a
completely just case that is being undermined because
the power of the law is giving way to the law of power?
How can we celebrate when we see States using the
United Nations as a pretext for invading other countries,
toppling their legitimate Governments, killing their
leaders and turning them into failed States that have
become breeding grounds for international terrorism?
How can we celebrate when they are changing the very
definitions of concepts — for example, a certain degree
of terrorism is termed “moderate terrorism”?
Perhaps we should not celebrate that some have
caused the United Nations to fail to uphold its mandate
with regard to the Israeli occupation of Arab territories
in Palestine, Syria and Lebanon. How can we celebrate
half a century of occupation, of turning Palestine into a
mass prison, and of apartheid against the Palestinians,
the legitimate owners of the land, in Jerusalem and
other occupied territories? How can we celebrate the
escalating violence and barbarism of settlers, under
the protection of the Israeli Government? How can we
celebrate the cancerous settlement policy that allows
building on any part of the Palestinian territories?
How can we accept that some members of the
Security Council have irresponsibly provided support
and protection to Israel so that it can continue its
provocative policies, in violation of all international
instruments? How can we not deal with the question of
Palestine in its factual context? Can we really be trying
to project the image that this is reciprocal violence and
that our differences are only over the degree of that

S/PV.7540 (Resumption 1)

violence? How can we ignore the main reason for this:
the Israeli occupation of the Palestinian territories?
Yes, in two days we will celebrate the seventieth
anniversary of the United Nations. But on that
occasion, what will the United Nations do to help
displaced Syrians and those who have been living under
Israeli occupation for over half a century? Indeed, the
Organization has failed to take any real action aimed at
making Israel implement United Nations resolutions on
this issue, primarily resolution 497 (1981).
The displaced Syrian citizens in the occupied
Golan have legitimate questions about the effectiveness
and credibility of the United Nations vis-à-vis their just
cause. How could they not ask those questions, given
Israel’s incessant settlement activities and policies of
oppression, suppression and racial discrimination? How
could they not when they see Israel supporting terrorist
groups, including Al-Qaida’s Al-Nusra Front in the
Golan region, even as the United Nations does nothing?
How could they not, when they see Israel arresting the
Syrian Mandela, who spent 27 years in their prison for
one reason only: exposing Israeli support for terrorists?
We want to celebrate the seventieth anniversary of
the United Nations, but we want the celebration to be
meaningful, a celebration of real accomplishments, not
one of words, statements or interventions. We want to
realize the aspirations of the founding fathers and their
dream of a world of peace, stability and prosperity,
based on respect for the sovereignty of States and
non-interference in their affairs — a world that is free
of occupation and colonization and in which there is no
manipulation of the fate of peoples or changing their
governing regimes through foreign intervention. That
is what we want; that is the one thing towards which
we should work collectively, so that we can hold a
celebration that is truly meaningful and satisfies our
consciences and the conscience of our peoples.
In conclusion, I would like to denounce in the
strongest terms the desperate attempts made by certain
delegations, whose names I will not mention, to defend
Israel and try to cover up its crimes, particularly
through desperate, Don Quixote-like attempts to
bring causes before the Security Council that have no
relation to the situation in the Middle East. Every time
Israel escalates its aggression against the Palestinian
people, we find those delegations making misleading
statements that escalate the situation, with the aim of
diverting attention from the crimes committed by Israel
and alleviating international pressure.

15-3301823/39

S/PV.7540 (Resumption 1)

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

For that reason, I am not going to respond to the
empty claims made against Syria by those delegations,
in spite of the fact that we could say much to refute
their claims, as they support and arm terrorists — the
artifically created moderate terrorists who are waging
destruction in Syria and oppose any peaceful settlement.
Those countries are intervening in the internal affairs
of Syria and using the Syrian diaspora as a weapon to
bring pressure to bear on the Syrian Government to
force it change its positions and independent political
choices.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Costa Rica.
Mr. Mendoza-García (Costa Rica) (spoke in
Spanish): We congratulate the Spanish delegation on
assuming the presidency for the month of October. We
thank Deputy Secretary-General Jan Eliasson for his
briefing and the Minister for Foreign Affairs of Spain,
Mr. José Manuel García Margallo, for his statement.
Costa Rica has decided to participate in this
open debate because of the importance it attaches to
the situation in the Middle East. As a peace-loving
country that has not had a standing army by its own
volition for more than 65 years, Costa Rica is a firm
believer in the peaceful settlement of conflicts between
peoples and States in the context of international law
and multilateral diplomacy. As stated by His Holiness
Pope Francis, war brings destruction and multiplies the
sufferings of peoples.
My delegation is deeply concerned about the IsraeliPalestinian conflict, and especially the escalation
of violence in recent months, which we vigorously
condemn and in which civilians, including women
and children, continue to pay a high price. During the
emergency meeting convened by the Security Council
on 16 October (see S/PV.7536), it became clear that
it was necessary for the international community to
take action because it can no longer stand by and bear
witness without doing anything about this conflict. As
the Assistant Secretary-General for Political Affairs,
Mr. Tayé-Brook Zerihoun, warned, we should ponder
the serious consequences of turning this conflict into
one of a religious nature. He also underscored that the
Israeli occupation and the dwindling prospects for a
Palestinian State have contributed to worsening the
situation.
My country will never cease to urge that parties
resume negotiations on the core issues of the conflict

24/39

22/10/2015

that still exist, based on the obligations already acquired
and the agreements previously agreed among the parties
and supported by international law and the decisions of
the Security Council and the General Assembly.
For Costa Rica, it is crucial to bring an end to the
armed conflict in Syria and to seek an early political
solution, especially with regard to the humanitarian
crisis. We hope that it will be possible to explore the real
and tangible options, as was recently stated by the United
States, to achieve a political transition in Syria, whose
civil war has intensified with Russia’s intervention on
30 September in support of the Damascus Government
against the insurgents. The extension and deepening
of the conflict is causing unprecedented humanitarian
effects. Every day that tensions increase, there is an
exponential increase in the violations of rights and the
suffering of the Syrian people.
We are pleased that, due to the ceasefire agreements,
the United Nations system, together with its partners
the
International Committee of the Red Cross and
the Syrian Arab Red Crescent, has managed to deliver
medical supplies in several cities in Syria. However,
many people in need are still trapped without access
to humanitarian assistance. That is why we urge that
assistance be allowed to reach its destination and that
humanitarian issues remain outside of conflicts.
One might think that at this point, and given the
developments in the conflict, it would be resolved by
one or two Powers. On the contrary, we believe that the
Security Council is called upon to play a role in order to
diversify the conversations and bring about interactions
and dialogues that are different from those that have
occurred around the crisis in recent weeks.
With regard to the current situation in Yemen, my
delegation looks favourably on the statements made by
the officials of the Yemeni Government expressing the
willingness to participate in peace talks. We welcome
the work Special Envoy Cheikh Ahmed has planned
with Government representatives and with the Houthis
and their allies to complete the preparations for the
negotiations, the aim of which is to lay the foundations
for a lasting peace that will benefit the Yemeni people.
For all these reasons, we hope the Security
Council can fully carry out its mandate in the Middle
East to maintain international peace and security and
fulfil its duty to promote the full implementation of
international justice and the rule of law. As reaffirmed
by the President of the Republic of Costa Rica, Mr. Luis

15-33018

22/10/2015

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

Guillermo Solís Rivera, in his statement in the general
debate (see A/70/PV.19) at the opening of the seventieth
session of the General Assembly, to strengthen the
United Nations at the epicentre of global governance,
the Security Council must assume its responsibilities
in the maintenance of international peace and security,
take into account human rights considerations in its
operations and improve its work on conflict prevention.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Bangladesh.
Mr. Mahmuduzzaman (Bangladesh): I congratulate
Spain on assuming the presidency of the Security
Council and thank it for arranging this debate, which
shows its sense of responsibility and commitment with
regard to the issue of the situation in the Middle East,
including the Palestinian question. The Palestinian
issue is now the number one long-standing issue in
the field of international peace and security and its
resolution deserves the utmost priority. The people of
Palestine cannot live with this uncertainty of life and
livelihood forever.
We regret the appalling human rights and
humanitarian situation in the occupied Palestinian
territories and that the repeated appeal of the international
community to improve the deteriorating conditions of
the Palestinian people remains unheeded. Furthermore,
the slaughter of innocent Palestinian children, women
and men; the wanton destruction of homes, schools,
hospitals and vital civilian infrastructure; and the
terrorizing and traumatizing of the entire civilian
population in the Gaza Strip in Palestine have become
very frequent. The people in the occupied territories
continue to suffer due to Israeli blockades, closures, the
confiscation of land and the demolition of houses. The
illegal separation wall continues to divide and isolate
communities, destroying livelihoods and preventing
access to their jobs, families, markets, schools and
hospitals.
Gaza’s borders have been subject to a regime
of closure that is without precedent anywhere. The
closure is tantamount to the strangulation of an entire
population in the form of collective punishment. The
quality of life of the Palestinians had already diminished
to subsistence level. The periodic escalation of violence
only leads to further despair and destitution. Israel is
doing so purposefully to generate fear, fury and distress
among Palestinians.

S/PV.7540 (Resumption 1)

We deplore the Israeli policy of collective
punishment, forcing Palestinian people off their land,
detaining people for a long time without charge,
restricting the freedom of movement of and property
ownership by Palestinian people, the deportation of
Palestinian inhabitants and depriving people from their
legitimate claim to natural resources, including scarce
water resources. The Government of Israel has continued
its settlement campaign in the occupied Palestinian
territory, with a particularly aggressive settlement
expansion in East Jerusalem. Those measures have
been soundly rejected by the international community
and their illegality unanimously confirmed.
Having monitored the situation closely, we would
like to register our concern about the grave crisis, in
which not a single day passes when civilians are not
intimidated, arrested, detained in inhuman conditions
and subjected to constant abuse and torture. As a result,
the humanitarian and security situations continue
in a downward spiral and tensions continue to rise,
destabilizing the total peace initiative.
We urge Israel to fulfil its legal obligation, as the
occupying Power, to ensure that all inhabitants are
safeguarded against all acts of violence or threats;
to cease the illegal detention of Palestinian people,
including children; to stop the destruction of homes and
land confiscation; to allow Palestinian people access to
their lands, employment and natural resources; to desist
from transferring its population to the territories it has
occupied; and to lift its embargo against Palestinians
and immediately open all border crossings to allow free
movement of goods, persons and humanitarian aid.
We express our total solidarity with the Palestinian
people and reiterate our full and unwavering support
for their legitimate and inalienable rights to a sovereign
and independent State. At this juncture, we demand an
end to the Israeli occupation that began in 1967, the
establishment of a two-State solution on the basis of the
pre-1967 borders, the just resolution of all final-status
issues and the mobilization of international support for
assistance to the Palestinian people without delay.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Morocco.
Mr. Atlassi (Morocco) (spoke in Arabic): I would
like to start by congratulating you, Mr. President, on
your assumption of the presidency of the Security
Council this month and on your presiding over this
very important meeting at a time when the situation in

15-3301825/39

S/PV.7540 (Resumption 1)

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

Palestine is deteriorating in an unprecedented manner. I
would also like to thank the Deputy Secretary-General
for his comprehensive briefing, which covered all of
the developments in the Middle East region, including
the question of Palestine. We also back the SecretaryGeneral’s good offices aimed at finding a fair,
lasting solution to spare the Palestinian people more
bloodshed, which has, however, reached such a scale
that the international system bears an unprecedented
responsibility for finding a rapid, fair and lasting
solution to the Palestinian question in order to extricate
the Palestinian people from the current horrendous
situation, including that in occupied East Jerusalem.
The situation in Palestine more generally speaking,
and in Jerusalem more specifically, which is the third
holy site of Islam, has experienced some very alarming
developments. There have been brazen violations
of international law. Moreover, the sensibilities of
Muslims throughout the world have been offended as a
result of the actions of the Israeli army and settlers, who
have killed innocent people and demolished buildings
and homes, and who are systematically attempting to
Judaize the city and change the facts on the ground. Such
acts are fraught with the risk of igniting a religious war,
which will do nothing more than fuel obscurantism and
terrorism, which will, in turn, threaten international
peace and security.
My delegation thanks Spain for responding to the
request by Jordan, the Arab member of the Council, to
convene a meeting to consider the question of Palestine
and to examine the very serious consequences of Israeli
arrogance and its misguided policies, which we entirely
reject because they simply disregard international law
as they attempt to Judaize Jerusalem and change the
status quo through the lynching and massacring of
innocents. His Majesty Mohammed VI of Morocco,
who is the president of the Al-Quds Committee of
the Organization of Islamic Cooperation, has warned
against the very situation that we are witnessing today.
He rang the alarm bell, and the international community
should have taken up its responsibilities vis-à-vis the
Palestinian people and Jerusalem more specifically.
His Majesty has repeatedly stressed through all the
means available to him, including bilateral meetings
and international forums, the need to put an end to the
settlements and the Judaization of Al-Quds. He warned
against any unilateral actions that could undermine,
even harm, Muslim monuments in Jerusalem. His
Majesty exchanged letters and correspondence with

26/39

22/10/2015

the relevant international stakeholders regarding the
very serious actions in Jerusalem being carried out by
the Israeli authorities as part of a plan to change the
legal, historical, spiritual and demographic status of
Jerusalem. His Majesty has forged many contacts with
leaders, including President Abbas, aimed at addressing
the very alarming situation in Jerusalem. During the
inauguration of the Al-Quds Committee under his
current chairmanship in Marrakesh in January 2014, His
Majesty stated that we needed to stress that Jerusalem
lies at the very heart of the Palestinian question and
the Palestinian cause, and that there can be no peace
without clarifying the final status and situation of East
Jerusalem as the capital of an independent Palestinian
State.
We need to focus on the statement that resulted
from that meeting, given the fact that the issue of
Jerusalem is crucial for the Umma. It lies at the very
heart of any political solution, and any harm brought
to the Al-Aqsa Mosque will inevitably exacerbate
tensions. In following the instructions of His Majesty,
the Minister for Foreign Affairs and Cooperation
organized a meeting of a ministerial contact group on
26 September to consider the international measures that
could be introduced in East Jerusalem and Palestine. At
that meeting the aggression against Jerusalem and the
Al-Aqsa Mosque were both condemned.
A request was addressed to the Security Council
that it assume its responsibilities to ensure that the
Israeli authorities put an end to their practices and
provide security for the Al-Aqsa Mosque, so as to
ensure that those violations are not repeated. The
only solution to the question of Palestine lies through
diplomacy, not war, not the killing of civilians and
not or bloodshed. We need negotiations within the
established frameworks to forge two States, living side
by side in peace and security, two States that cooperate
and that we respect. And we insist on the respect of the
June 1967 borders.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of South Africa.
Mr. Mminele (South Africa): My delegation is
grateful to be able to participate in this debate, and we
thank the Secretary-General for his report (S/2015/677).
South Africa appreciates the statements made by the
Foreign Minister of the State of Palestine and the
Permanent Representative of Israel.

15-33018

22/10/2015

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

We also align ourselves with the statement delivered
by the representative of the Islamic Republic of Iran on
behalf of the Non-Aligned Movement.
We meet at a critical moment of great concern. The
escalation of violence and inflammatory rhetoric in the
occupied Palestinian territories and East Jerusalem,
especially around the holy sites of the Temple
Mount — the Haram Al-Sharif compound — including
the Al-Aqsa Mosque and Joseph’s Tomb, are a source of
great concern. South Africa denounces all attempts to
change the decades-long status quo in the Holy Land,
which has preserved mutual respect for the holy sites
of the world’s three major monotheistic religions. It is
especially disconcerting that the reverence for those
sites has been exploited politically and used to incite
violence.
South Africa reiterates, in the strongest terms, its
condemnation of violence in all its forms, regardless
by whom it is perpetrated. We convey our sincere
condolences to the families and friends of the victims
on all sides who have been killed or injured. We support
calls for both the Government of Israel and the State
of Palestine to conduct investigations into the latest
killings and to ensure that the perpetrators are held
accountable for their actions.
We call upon the authorities in Israel and Palestine
to respond to the current developments with restraint
and in a measured manner. South Africa agrees with
the assessment by the Assistant Secretary-General for
Political Affairs on Friday, 16 October, when he stated
that the collective punishments carried out by the Israeli
Defence Forces are in contravention of international
law and should be terminated without delay.
Israel and the international community must
understand that the outrage among Palestinians has been
created by developments on the ground, which have
rendered a viable Palestinian State nearly unattainable.
In addition, the depressed economic situation in the
occupied Palestinian territories, especially in Gaza, and
the illegal settlement activities that continue unabated
have compounded the rage of the Palestinians, who
believe that violence is the only option left to them.
Statements and debates in the Security Council over
the past years have proved ineffective to address the
deteriorating situation in Palestine. We keep meeting
in this Chamber to no effect, and it is depressing to
realize that the Council has become unable to address
major crises, mainly because the narrow interest of

S/PV.7540 (Resumption 1)

a few member States has rendered it toothless. The
Council’s unwillingness to take meaningful action to
move the peace process forward has led directly to the
complete breakdown of the negotiation process and to
the resulting escalation of tension and violence in Israel
and Palestine.
South Africa calls on the Security Council to
urgently respond to the situation in Israel. Unified and
impartial action by the Council is long overdue. As a
first step, we believe that the Council should urgently
pave the way for the cessation of violence and create the
opportunity for the parties to be able to meet. It is clear
that there is no trust between the parties and that the
restoration of some degree of trust is required to begin
the long road back to the negotiations on a two-State
solution. The Council should also adopt measures for
the cessation of collective punishment and settlement
activities, which are illegal, as well as for lifting the
blockade against Gaza. Urgent measures are required
to alleviate the suffering on the ground. We believe that
only then can a timeline be set for the resumption of the
peace process.
My delegation has taken note with interest of the
report of the Secretary-General submitted to the Council
on 21 October, which provides ample examples of the
deployment of international protection forces, and we
look forward to further discussions on those options in
the Council as well as in the General Assembly.
South Africa views developments in the Middle
East as intrinsically connected and believes that the
only way to achieve sustainable peace in the region is
for the international community to work on multiple
fronts to bring about the resolution of conflicts. We
remain deeply concerned by the civil war in Syria,
which has wreaked havoc in that country and beyond
for four years. The instability in Syria has affected the
entire region and has created ample breeding ground
for extremists and terrorism. However, we do not
believe that continued or increasing military activity by
major Powers can resolve the situation in a satisfactory
manner. We believe that concerted and unified action
by the Security Council is required to restore peace and
stability in the entire Middle East, with due respect for
the principles and purposes of the Charter of the United
Nations.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Turkey.

15-3301827/39

S/PV.7540 (Resumption 1)

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

Mr. Çevik (Turkey): The Middle East is confronted
with an alarming situation. Sectarian and divisive
policies, brutal oppression of legitimate demands
for democracy, terrorism, and unresolved conflicts
result in humanitarian crises, mass displacements and
feelings of resentment.
The Israeli-Palestine conflict remains the core
challenge and undermines the prospects for lasting
regional and global peace. The increasing number of
crises in the wider region must not distract us from
the urgent need to relaunch the peace process. On
the contrary, failing to address that issue will only
destabilize the region further, deepen the despair and
suffering and lead to more extremism.
The tragedy of Palestinians continues unabated. As
tensions recently escalated in the occupied Palestinian
territory, particularly in East Jerusalem, we were
reminded once again of how dramatic the situation is
in the absence of any real hope for peace. We are very
concerned about the latest developments although we
are slightly relieved to see that what has been going on
for the last months is finally receiving the attention it
merits.
Our immediate priority should be a rapid
de-escalation of tension. We should not see the current
situation as another in a perennial round of skirmishes
and wait for the situation to calm down. However, at the
same time, we should all be very clear about the root
cause of the problem, which is the illegal occupation
of East Jerusalem and other Palestinian territories by
Israel.
The current escalation began following the entry
of Israeli security forces into Al-Haram Al-Sharif, The
ban preventing Palestinians from entering the Old City
of Jerusalem for two days caused great outrage. It then
spread to Gaza when Israeli soldiers opened fire on
demonstrators and Israeli air strikes once again took
civilian lives. Casualties have been mounting ever
since. We strongly condemn the disproportionate use
of force by Israeli security forces, which inflames the
situation.
Needless to say, at the epicentre of the Palestine
cause lies Jerusalem. Jerusalem matters to all
humankind. A city that is sacred to Islam, Judaism and
Christianity should be treated with utmost respect. The
expansion of illegal settlements, violations targeting
holy sites, and all other provocative activities aimed
at undermining the status and sanctity of Al-Haram

28/39

22/10/2015

Al-Sharif must immediately and unconditionally stop.
We consider the Jordanian role as the custodian of the
holy sites in Jerusalem crucial for the preservation
of the historical status of Al-Haram Al-Sharif as an
Islamic sanctuary in all respects.
The situation in Gaza also remains worrying. In
addition to eight years of illegal blockade, Gaza has
endured three Israeli military operations in the past six
years. The humanitarian conditions are so disastrous
that, according to the United Nations Conference on
Trade and Development, Gaza could become inhabitable
in less than five years if current trends persist. People
who live in tremendous despair and insecurity lose
their belief in the possibility of a solution and peaceful
coexistence. The international community cannot
afford to stand idle in the face of that tragedy and allow
2 million people to continue living in such isolation.
While the immediate priority must be to address the
grave situation and growing frustration in Gaza, only
long-term solutions can turn the tide with respect to its
reconstruction. In that vein, lifting the illegal blockade
and all other restrictions in accordance with resolution
1860 (2009) is of paramount importance.
The historical injustice against the Palestinian
people, reinforced by Israel’s daily illegal practices on
the ground, is fueling hatred, alienation and radicalism
in the region and beyond. Palestinians are still deprived
of their right to a decent life with dignity, respect and
freedom. As the Secretary-General’s report rightly
underlines, the Palestinians’ hopes for peace have been
dashed countless times.
We all agree that the status quo is not sustainable.
Israel’s continuing occupation and its practices in
contravention of international law hamper the efforts
for permanent peace. The need to find a negotiated
political settlement to the Israeli-Palestinian conflict,
achieving a two-State solution and ending the longest
occupation in modern history in accordance with the
relevant United Nations resolutions and the Arab Peace
Initiative, remains an urgent priority.
Palestine’s just cause has been once again
confirmed on a global scale by General Assembly
resolution 69/320, which paved the way to the raising
of the Palestinian flag at the United Nations. That was
a significant symbolic step towards full recognition of
Palestine.
On the Palestinian side, the need for Palestinian
reconciliation is more relevant than ever. The consistent

15-33018

22/10/2015

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

support and encouragement of the international
community is vital in that regard. Once established, the
Palestinian National Unity Government, with strong
and inclusive institutions, should establish control over
the entire Palestinian territory.
The current situation is a sombre image of what is
going to happen if the prospects for a two-State solution
are lost. Thus the international community should
renew its engagement for the solution of the problem
and assume its responsibilities. This is long overdue.
We need to intensify our efforts towards the adoption of
a Security Council resolution that sets a timeframe and
that establishes the parameters for peace negotiations
based on the vision of a two-State peace. The Council
should assume its primary responsibility vis-à-vis
international peace and security.
Turkey’s commitment to supporting the Palestinian
people’s right to a dignified life will never cease. We
will support efforts to find a just, comprehensive
and lasting solution to the conflict and to establish a
sovereign and independent Palestinian State within the
pre-1967 borders and with East Jerusalem as its capital.
Today, I want to focus my remarks on the alarming
situation in the occupied Palestinian territory, which
requires our imminent attention. However, let me say
a few words on the Syrian crisis across our borders,
which has left a nation with severe wounds, with more
than 350,000 lives lost and over 12 million persons
displaced. We see with every passing day that the Syria
crisis continues to be a major factor of instability for
the entire region and beyond, and a collective response
to address it is still lacking.
We continue to assume more than our fair share of
the burden of the ongoing devastation. We are extremely
concerned by the humanitarian and security impacts of
the crisis, which constitutes a major national security
threat to us. The current vacuum created on our southern
borders as a result of the chaos in Syria has played into
the hands of terrorists, who are targeting our citizens as
well. In addition, we are currently faced with the risk
of a new wave of refugees that has been triggered by
the Syrian regime’s most recent offensive on Aleppo,
as well as by attacks by Daesh. It is neither possible
nor just to expect Turkey or any other neighbouring
country to face that challenge alone.
The international community should keep in mind
that the ongoing atrocities and humanitarian disaster in
Syria can be addressed only by tackling the root cause

S/PV.7540 (Resumption 1)

of the problem: the violent oppression of the democratic
aspirations and legitimate demands of the Syrians. That
tragedy will not end until the people of Syria have a
legitimate Government that truly represents their will
and enjoys their full consent. On that score, the Syrian
people have already spoken. They do not want to live
under the authority of a regime that has waged a war
against its people.
The international community and the Security
Council need to address the Syrian crisis through
resolute action. A comprehensive strategy with political,
security and humanitarian pillars is long overdue and
should be established.
First, we need to respond to the needs of millions of
Syrians through the meaningful sharing of burdens and
responsibilities. It is a disaster and needs to be treated
as such.
Secondly, the international community must act
swiftly to provide the Syrians with safety in their
homeland by creating safe areas in Syria, free from
aerial bombardment by the regime and ground assaults
by Daesh. Parallel to those efforts, we must do all that
we can to defeat terrorist organizations, such as Daesh
and the Nusrah Front and others designated by the
Security Council, while keeping in mind that terrorism
is a by-product of the crisis in Syria, The challenge
of countering terrorism should not harm moderate
elements that will play a vital role in the future of Syria
and should not delay a political solution.
Thirdly, we should all work for a solution that meets
the legitimate demands and aspirations of the Syrian
people and ensures a managed and orderly transition to a
real political change based on the Geneva communiqué
(S/2012/523, annex). The political process that we
should revitalize would lead to a united, democratic,
nonsectarian, secular and multicultural Syria with its
own territorial integrity.
Let me conclude by reiterating our strong commitment
to the peace and security of the overall region and our
full solidarity with the Palestinian people.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I would like
to inform the Council that we still have more than
10 speakers inscribed on the list. I therefore remind
speakers that they have a maximum of five minutes in
which to deliver their statements.
I give the floor to the representative of Pakistan.

15-3301829/39

S/PV.7540 (Resumption 1)

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

22/10/2015

Mr. Munir (Pakistan): We thank the Minister for
Foreign Affairs of Spain and the Minister for Foreign
Affairs of Palestine, Mr. Malki, as well as the other
Ministers, for coming to address the Council this
morning. We also thank Deputy Secretary-General Jan
Eliasson for his briefing.

sites in Jerusalem is real and needs to be addressed,
and not just by words but by actions. The Council has
a responsibility to ensure peace and security in what
is the most volatile region of the world. We must never
forget the Palestinian civilians, whose struggle for selfdetermination is epic yet remains unfulfilled.

The entire Middle East today is in turmoil, and
the conflagration in the occupied Palestinian territory
is worsening. We are sitting on a powder keg. If that
is not threatening international peace and security, we
do not know what is. Israeli restrictions on Palestinian
freedoms and rights, harassment by Israeli settlers,
tensions around the holy sites and the bleak prospects
for peace have pushed Palestinians onto the streets.
There is talk of the beginning of the third intifada.

The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Algeria.

This morning, Deputy Secretary-General Eliasson
was categorical in his briefing. The reason for the current
crisis is that the Palestinians do not see any hope. We
agree with Foreign Minister Malki that the status quo
is unacceptable. We appreciate the Secretary-General’s
visit to the region. He said in Ramallah yesterday,
“The only way to end the violence is through
real and visible progress towards a political
solution, including an end to the occupation and the
establishment of a Palestinian State”.
We believe that time is quickly running out, and the
Council cannot remain a spectator as hope continues to
fade. By holding two emergency meetings over the past
week, the Council has shown that it is fully seized of
the matter, but much more is required. We support the
Palestinian demand for international protection. The
paper on the subject that the Secretary-General shared
with the Council yesterday provides options that the
Council needs to discuss seriously. We, the international
community, cannot allow the wanton disregard for
international human rights and humanitarian law.

Mr. Boukadoum (Algeria): I would like to express
our deep appreciation to the Spanish presidency for
having organized this timely open debate, coinciding
with the shocking developments in the occupied
Palestinian territories. I also thank Deputy SecretaryGeneral Jan Eliasson for his very candid briefing.
I wish to join the voice of Algeria to those of the
overwhelming majority of speakers who have so clearly
expressed themselves on what is happening at this very
moment in the Middle East and, in particular, in the
occupied land of Palestine. While it is unnecessary to
add to or go into the details that Minister Riad Malki
mentioned earlier, we share and live his feelings. Let
me add that in my country the outrage over the images
carried by all media is immense. Injustice, abuses and
arrogance continue to guide the behaviour of those who
think that there are no limits — not even concerning
the most sacred and dearest places, such as the Haram
Al-Sharif.
The recent and tragic developments and the
suffering of the Palestinian people demonstrate that
prospects for a peaceful settlement are becoming
increasingly unattainable. That is why my country
reiterates the following in the strongest possible terms.

The Council can help with both protection and
final status issues. Setting timelines and parameters to
make the two-State solution a reality is both urgent and
critical. That will provide the hope that the Palestinian
youth yearn for. Only hope can bring the region back
from the precipice. The Palestinian flag has found its
place at the United Nations. We hope that Palestine will
soon be accepted as a full Member as well.

First, the very core of the issue of Palestine and the
Middle East is the illegal occupation of Arab territories.
Whatever happens or by whatever angle one sees the
entire question of the situation in Palestine, there is
one fundamental issue that should never be forgotten
nor set aside: the illegal occupation of Arab land. As
long as we — the Security Council, the international
community and all stakeholders — ignore or belittle
that, there will be increased suffering, injustice and
violations of all kinds that will occur before our eyes. It
is appalling that settlers and other civilians have been
given no more and no less than a kind of licence to kill.

Lasting peace can be achieved only through political
solutions, not through heavy-handed tactics and the use
of live ammunition against unarmed civilians. The fear
among the Palestinians of a changed status of the holy

Secondly, as long as a solution to the illegal
occupation is not envisioned and the Palestinian
people’s legitimate national rights, with Al-Quds
Al-Sharif as the Palestinian State capital, are not

30/39

15-33018

22/10/2015

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

recognized, the international community must protect
Palestinian civilians, in accordance with all the relevant
international conventions. In that regard, I welcome
the document issued today by the Secretary-General
that provides historical examples, many of the utmost
importance and relevance, and could serve as a model
for the protection of civilians.
Thirdly, the international community, individual
States, the Quartet and the Security Council have
a specific responsibility. Debates like today’s are
necessary, but they must be fruitful and lead to
operational measures to de-escalate the crisis and set
the conditions to break the current impasse. There is
no wall high enough to block the legitimate grievances
of young and old alike. Israeli practices are not simply
illegal, they are wrong. Just a month ago, the Palestinian
flag was raised on the United Nations premises. It is
our shared responsibility to make that flag again fly
high over its own land, with the establishment of the
Palestinian State and Al-Quds Al-Sharif as its capital.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the Ambassador of Tunisia.
Mr. Khiari (Tunisia) (spoke in Arabic): As the
international community commemorates the seventieth
anniversary of the founding of the United Nations, we
remember the horrors that led to its creation and the
hope of saving the world from another world war. For
the past 50 years, the forces of the occupying Power, in
full view of the eyes of the international community,
have attacked generations of Palestinians, including
women and children. Israel has consistently violated
every relevant international instrument and United
Nations resolution.
Days, weeks and years pass and nothing happens,
except that the situation deteriorates further. Israel does
not end its usual practices against the Palestinians and
the holy sites in East Jerusalem, or in the West Bank,
and Gaza. Israel persists in its colonialist expansion
and its attempts to change the status quo with respect to
the holy sites and continues to put obstacles in the way
of any peace initiative. In 2013 and 2014, the United
States attempted to mediate between the parties, but to
no avail.
There is no denying that the international community
and the Security Council have a responsibility in
this matter. Meanwhile, Israel persists in its illegal,
immoral practices against Palestinians. It has given
free rein to its settlers and to terrorist groups to carry

S/PV.7540 (Resumption 1)

out acts of aggression in Jerusalem, to attack citizens
and holy sites, including the Al-Aqsa Mosque. Those
actions seriously aggravate the situation and are a clear
indication of Israel’s plans to change the traditional
status quo in that area and escalate the situation.
Israel must shoulder its responsibilities. We
condemn all attacks in East Jerusalem and on the
Al-Aqsa Mosque. We consider them to be in flagrant
violation of the holy sites of the Muslims and their
religion. We have warned the Council that there is
bound to be a reaction against the aggression and
violence; and, indeed, religious hatred and extremism
have been growing. We also condemn the serious
military escalation and the unjustified use of force by
the occupying Power to prevent the Palestinian people
from defending their holy sites, even including extrajudicial executions.
The international community and the Security
Council must now change their approach to the question
of Palestine. A two-State solution that is just and lasting
and that will enable the people of Palestine to recover
their legitimate rights must be found. If the current
situation is allowed to continue, it will simply get
worse. The growing sense of frustration and injustice
will have devastating consequences for all the parties.
In order to put an end to the tension and uprisings in
the region, it is necessary to end the occupation and
settlement policy, which is, after all, the root cause of
the conflict.
I commend the efforts of the various parties to try
to find a just solution to the question of Palestine. We
appreciate the endeavours of the Security Council, of
the Quartet in its new format, of the Secretary-General
and of United States Secretary of State John Kerry to
defuse the current situation.
In conclusion, I reaffirm that it is high time to
consider what can actually be done to protect the
Palestinian people and the holy sites of Islam. Tunisia
supports the request of President Mahmoud Abbas to
the United Nations to provide international protection
to the Palestinian people in keeping with international
norms and laws.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of the Republic of Korea.
Mr. Oh Joon (Republic of Korea): I thank you,
Mr. President, for convening this meeting at a time when
the situation in the Middle East, especially in Israel
and Palestine, is on a dangerous course. The recent

15-3301831/39

S/PV.7540 (Resumption 1)

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

cycle of violence arose across the occupied Palestinian
territories and Israel, particularly Jerusalem, reminds
both the Israelis and Palestinians of the fact that mutual
provocations and unilateral actions will not resolve the
Israeli-Palestinian issue. That simple and powerful truth
has been echoing within this Chamber for decades.
The Republic of Korea once again urges all parties
to put an end to violence and return to the negotiating
table to work out a viable framework to resolve the
conflict, with the two-State solution at its core.
Preserving the historic status quo for the holy sites in
Jerusalem and stopping the expansion of settlements in
the occupied territory should be the first step towards
that goal. The leaders of both Israel and Palestine
must not forget that today’s violence and hatred not
only destroy their present lives but also deprive their
children of any hope for a peaceful future. The past
several decades of violence and intolerance are proof
of that grim reality, and today’s dangerous threats of
violent extremism further increase the likelihood of
that bleak future. We call upon both sides to have more
courage and take more responsibility.
The Republic of Korea appreciates the timely and
urgent efforts by the Secretary-General, especially his
recent visit to the region, in order to prevent escalation
and restore a long-term political horizon of peace. We
also look forward to recharged mediation efforts by
the Quartet. Every possible avenue should be explored
to create a more favourable environment for dialogue
between Israel and Palestine for a sustainable peace.
On Syria, the Republic of Korea remains deeply
concerned about the heavy toll on civilians as the
conflict enters its fifth year. The key stakeholders should
immediately sit down together to discuss the common
denominator with which to start. In this regard, the
Republic of Korea fully supports the ongoing efforts
of Special Envoy De Mistura in seeking a political
solution, which is the only viable option.
We also strongly urge all relevant parties to prevent
and minimize civilian casualties and humanitarian
crises. It has been reported that an additional nearly
50,000 Syrian people have been displaced following
military offensives around Aleppo. The international
community must pay closer attention to the
unprecedented humanitarian crisis involving refugees
and displaced persons and urgently take all necessary
measures to address the related human tragedies.
We oppose any actions by any party that hinder the

32/39

22/10/2015

delivery of humanitarian assistance and urge all parties
to fully cooperate with the international community’s
humanitarian efforts.
We also believe that seeking legitimate accountability
is part of a sustainable solution. The use of barrel
bombs is an explicit violation of resolution 2139 (2014).
We welcome the establishment of the Organization for
the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons-United Nations
Joint Investigative Mechanism, and urge that all parties
responsible for the use of chlorine as a weapon be held
accountable.
Turning to Yemen, the Republic of Korea welcomes
the Yemeni Government’s statement on 18 October in
which it expressed its willingness to participate in peace
talks with the Houthi rebels. We further call on all the
parties to make maximum use of this opportunity to
forge a sustainable peace and defend the territory of
Yemen from the terrorist threat of the Islamic State in
Iraq and the Levant.
We are witnessing the increasing vulnerability of
the Middle East as the region faces the multifaceted
challenges of violent extremism, terrorism and the
vicious cycle of violence and intolerance. This has
serious negative impacts on the stability of other
regions as well as the entire world. This is also warrants
an enhanced role for the Security Council to maintain
peace and security in the region. The Republic of
Korea will continue to support the Security Council in
fulfilling its mandate.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Ukraine.
Mr. Fesko (Ukraine): At the outset, I would like to
thank you, Mr. President, for convening today’s open
debate. Ukraine associates itself with the statement
made by the Observer of the European Union earlier
today.
Our country is committed to maintaining a
balanced and impartial position on the Middle East
peace process. We are willing to develop stable and
constructive relations with both Israel and Arab States.
On the issue of resolving the Israeli-Palestinian
conflict, Ukraine supports the principle of the
coexistence of Israel and the Arab States living side by
side in peace and security. We support the Middle East
peace process and believe that peace in the region can
be achieved only if viable mutual concessions are made
at the negotiating table. Unfortunately, we are currently

15-33018

22/10/2015

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

observing the deterioration of the situation in the West
Bank and in East Jerusalem, where tensions continue
to rise.
Ukraine is deeply concerned about a long-lasting
worsening of the situation around the Al-Aqsa Mosque.
We call on all parties to show restraint and moderation
on this issue. We believe that it is important to avoid any
provocations that could lead to further confrontations
in a very tense regional context. It is important for
both parties to find the courage to respect the holy
places in accordance with the principles specified in
fundamental international documents, particularly
those of UNESCO, and the agreements that regulate the
status of the Temple Mount complex.
We believe that direct negotiations between the
parties is the only way to achieve a peaceful solution,
and any unilateral steps will not solve the key problems
standing in the way of a peace settlement. The strategic
outcome of the direct negotiations is to create two
States that will coexist in peace and security, based on
the expectations of the international community for a
stable, democratic and prosperous Middle East. Ukraine
reiterates its position that the Israeli-Palestinian peace
agreement should lie within the framework of the
unconditional fulfilment by the parties to the conflict
of relevant Security Council resolutions, the Madrid
principles, including land for peace, the agreements
previously reached by the parties and the 2002 Arab
Peace Initiative.
With respect to the situation in Syria, Ukraine
reaffirms its commitment to the universal principles
and basic norms of international law and advocates
strict respect for the territorial integrity and
sovereignty of Syria. Ukraine strongly condemns the
ongoing violence and systematic violations of human
rights in the country. We consider that the Syrian
Government bears full responsibility for the present
condition of the country and for the sufferings of its
people caused by the bloody conflict. Fighting between
Government forces, non-State armed groups and listed
terrorist groups continues to result in death, injury and
displacement of civilians and the destruction of property
and infrastructure. Parties to the conflict continue
to disregard their obligations under international
humanitarian law, specifically regarding the protection
of civilians.
Ukraine calls for an immediate end to the bloodshed
and for the greater use of political and diplomatic
means to resolve the conflict. In expressing solidarity

S/PV.7540 (Resumption 1)

with the international community on the urgent need to
eliminate the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL)
as a global threat, Ukraine believes that sustainable
peace and stability in the region can be achieved only
through a political process aimed at establishing a
Syrian Government of national unity and restoring the
country’s sovereignty and territorial integrity.
Ukraine is concerned over Russia’s latest aggressive
movements in the Middle East, in particular in Syria.
While using the slogan of confronting international
terrorism as a cover, the Kremlin is yet again carrying
out its policy of breeding and exploiting instability
along with the backing of anti-democratic regimes.
In the light of Russia’s continuing military aggression
against Ukraine, which is accompanied by direct
support and funding of terrorism in Ukraine’s Donbas
region, Moscow’s declared goal of fighting terrorism
in Syria appears especially disingenuous. The attacks
by the Russian Air Force in Syria, which have led to
civilian deaths but have not caused substantial damage
to ISIL, raise serious doubts over Russia’s ability to
play a constructive role in the Syrian crisis settlement
process.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Iceland.
Mr. Hannigan (Iceland): I would like to thank the
Spanish presidency for convening today’s meeting.
Iceland joins others in expressing grave concern at
the present spike in violence in the occupied State of
Palestine, including East Jerusalem, and in Israel. Acts
of terror are unacceptable in all circumstances.
As has been stated, these acts of violence do not
occur in a vacuum. Assistant Secretary-General TayéBrook Zerihoun highlighted a number of key elements
of the context in his briefing to the Security Council
last week (S/PV.7536). Among them, he identified
demolitions of Palestinian dwellings, ongoing
settlements, heavy-handed Israeli military action
against civilians and the blockade of Gaza. Collective
punishment of the Palestinian population is not only a
breach of international law, but it is also demonstrably
counterproductive. These ongoing developments
on the ground have a key significance for the wider
context of this conflict. They add up to the dangerous
undermining of the only viable course to peace — a
two-State solution.
Yes, there is incitement — on both sides, through
the social media, according to Assistant Secretary-

15-3301833/39

S/PV.7540 (Resumption 1)

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

General Zerihoun. But incitement also has a context.
Incitement is a part of the violence and is facilitated
and given credibility by the wider context of loss of
political perspective and a growing despair among
the Palestinian population and fear among Israeli
civilians. Political leaders on both sides bear a heavy
responsibility to encourage restraint.
It is vital that the Council respond urgently and
effectively to this crisis. There must be de-escalation
and a cessation of all violence from both sides. But
the deep distrust that exists between the two parties
puts a large question mark over whether de-escalation
is possible without external assistance. One Security
Council member has commented on the tendency for
each side to highlight the provocations and acts of
violence by the other side, while seeking to minimize
its own actions. There is little chance in the present
situation that Palestinians could see the Israeli forces
as acting even-handedly.
The Council should look at ways to assist in starting
on the long road back to some kind of mutual confidence
between the parties. In that regard, we should not forget
the huge potential that exists in involving women on
all sides. The importance of getting women involved in
peace processes was proclaimed by the Council earlier
this month, when it marked the fifteenth anniversary of
the adoption of resolution 1325 (2000) (see S/PV.7533).
In the short term, Palestinians need a sense of security
for their own people. The Security Council should look
at ways of bringing that about. Palestinians also need
confidence that there is a political route to the twoState solution within a finite time period. Israelis must
have confidence that their security is not compromised.
The urgency is redoubled by the religious dimension,
which has become more present since the violence at
the holy places in Jerusalem. It is vital that the status
quo be maintained, not only in word but also in deed.
The Security Council must ensure that the parties are in
no doubt as to the importance of that.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Botswana.
Mr. Nkoloi (Botswana): At the outset, my
delegation wishes to extend its warmest congratulations
to the President and his country on its assumption of the
presidency of the Security Council for this month. We
also appreciate the insightful briefings that we received
this morning from various persons, including the
statements by the representatives of Israel and the State
of Palestine, as well as the Deputy Secretary-General.
34/39

22/10/2015

My delegation welcomes the continued focus by the
United Nations, particularly the Security Council,
on this very important topic. Let me express my
delegation’s profound appreciation for the opportunity
accorded to Member States to debate the pressing
matter of the situation in the Middle East, which is
taking place against the backdrop of rampant violence
in that region.
Botswana attaches great importance to the
fundamental principle of self-determination for peoples
under foreign occupation. It is for that reason that we
remain deeply concerned that, despite the sustained
efforts of the Security Council, the Palestinian people
continue to be denied their inalienable right to selfdetermination and independence by the occupying
Power, Israel. Botswana continues to believe that
there is no alternative to the two-State solution, which
implies the coexistence of Israel and Palestine, living
side by side, as two sovereign States. That cannot be
overemphasized.
Botswana joins the international community in
deploring the continuing human rights violations in
the Middle East, especially in the interactions between
Israelis and Palestinians, in which thousands continue
to lose their lives, while many remain displaced with
no homes, no access to the basic necessities of life
and no hope for the future. We call for an end to the
horrific situation that innocent civilians continue to
endure, which has resulted in millions seeking refuge
in neighbouring countries. The living conditions to
which the Palestinian people continue to be subjected
are appalling and dehumanizing.
In his briefing to the Security Council on
15 September 2015, the Special Coordinator for the
Middle East Peace Process, Mr. Nickolay Mladenov,
said that
“the Israeli-Palestinian conflict has left an indelible
scar on the people and landscape of the region.
Frustration, fear and violence have continued to
spiral, undermining belief in finding a way out of
the impasse” (S/PV.7521, p. 2).
In the light of that statement by Mr. Mladenov, my
delegation wishes to encourage the parties to the
conflict to return to the negotiating table and resume
the long overdue talks and to approach the talks with a
spirit of compromise and mutual respect, with a view
to reaching a just, lasting and mutually acceptable
solution. Nonetheless, we note and welcome the

15-33018

22/10/2015

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

continued efforts of the Secretary-General, the Middle
East Quartet, the Security Council and all those who
continue to be committed to the peace process for their
relentless efforts to see a peaceful end to the conflict.
It is my delegation’s belief that those efforts require the
full support of the international community.
In conclusion, let me reaffirm Botswana’s strong
support for the right of the Palestinian people to selfdetermination. We remain hopeful that someday their
plight will become history. Both the Israelis and the
Palestinians should give proof of their will and desire to
shape their future and end this long, drawn-out conflict.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Sri Lanka.
Mr. Perera (Sri Lanka): I join other speakers in
commending the President for convening this important
debate.
The Sri Lanka delegation associates itself with
the statement made by the representative of the
Islamic Republic of Iran on behalf of the Non-Aligned
Movement.
Finding a just and durable solution to the
situation in the Middle East has been a priority for
the international community since 1948. As long as
the question of Palestine continues to be unresolved,
the Middle East will never achieve the peace desired.
A just and lasting solution to the question of Palestine
and an end to the suffering of the Palestinian people
can be achieved only through negotiations and a
political process that delivers real results and hope. The
international community has repeatedly encouraged
concrete, credible steps, including a freeze on illegal
settlement building, so as to jump-start meaningful
negotiations. The parties must refrain from unilateral
measures, which undermine the peace in the region.
The ongoing settlement activities, which are illegal
under international humanitarian law, need to end at
the earliest, which would enable a sustainable peace.
All sides should refrain from confrontational actions,
which lead to a spiral of violence. The parties should
build upon existing agreements, including the relevant
Security Council resolutions.
The blockade of the Gaza Strip is another obstacle
to the peace process. Those restrictions need to be
lifted within the framework of resolution 1860 (2009).
That would contribute significantly to the economic
advancement of Gaza and the well-being of the people.
We note with concern that the United Nations is hard-

S/PV.7540 (Resumption 1)

pressed to keep the vast majority of the people of Gaza
supplied with the minimum necessities. More than
one year after the widespread destruction in Gaza
last year, thousands of families continue to live in
their damaged homes, with winter approaching. As of
August 2015, only one third of the $4 billion pledged by
the international community in Cairo in October 2014
has been disbursed. Non-governmental organizations
(NGOs) have noted that up to 100,000 Palestinians
remain displaced and live in precarious conditions,
struggling to gain access to basic services such as
electricity, water, sanitation and medical services.
We also strongly support the work of the United
Nations agencies in the occupied Palestinian territory,
including the United Nations Relief and Works Agency
for Palestine Refugees in the Near East (UNRWA)
and the Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian
Affairs, which play key roles in serving Palestinians
in the areas of their operations. Those areas include
Jordan, Lebanon, Syria, the West Bank and the Gaza
Strip. Recently, UNRWA experienced a financial crisis
that nearly affected the operations of hundreds of
schools run by the Agency. It is critical to avoid such
situations in the future, as they aggravate the already
difficult conditions faced by Palestinian children,
which may, in turn, also encourage them to engage in
acts of violence through desperation.
The situation of Palestinian detainees, including
women and children, remains a serious concern.
Palestinians are being held under administrative
detention without charge or trial for an indefinite
period of time. Administrative detention is permitted
under international law only exceptionally and
for short periods of time, but, regrettably, in the
occupied Palestinian territories it remains the norm.
Indiscriminate attacks against civilians will only
enhance feelings of desperation and insecurity and
widen the gap between the parties. The security needs
of the people of Israel must also be respected. A climate
conducive to peace will be encouraged if each side takes
an approach sensitive to the other’s concerns. We hope
that all parties will engage constructively and sincerely
to end the conflict and enable lasting peace.
Terrorism originating from the Middle East region
has the potential to pose a serious threat to the security
and stability of many countries. In today’s interconnected
world, it is very easy for agents of extremism to spread
their ideologies across national borders. In that regard,
the lingering question of Palestine is one of the main

15-3301835/39

S/PV.7540 (Resumption 1)

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

factors driving the recruitment of terrorists in the
region, as well as worldwide. We also call for respect
for the sovereignty and territorial integrity of Syria,
which is essential for the preservation of overall peace
in the Middle East.
In conclusion, Sri Lanka wishes to reiterate its
support for Palestine’s application for admission to full
membership of the United Nations.
We also support the implementation of United
Nations resolutions, including resolution 242 (1967),
regarding the inalienable rights of the Palestinian
people to statehood, and the achievement of the twoState solution on the basis of the 1967 borders.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Bahrain.
Mr. Alrowaiei (Bahrain) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, we would like to thank the Kingdom of Spain
and its Minister of Foreign Affairs and Cooperation,
Mr. García Margallo, for presiding over the Security
Council this month and for convening today’s open
debate at the ministerial level on the situation in the
Middle East, including the question of Palestine. I also
thank Deputy Secretary-General Jan Eliasson for his
briefing at the beginning of this meeting.
The Council is meeting today to debate an item on
its agenda that is discussed in open debate on a quarterly
basis, namely, the situation in the Middle East, including
the Palestinian question. This meeting is being held at a
time when the region is witnessing worrisome turns and
developments, all under the shadow of the violation by
the occupying Power, Israel, of the sanctity of Al-Haram
Al-Sharif and the killing of many innocent people.
There is no doubt that the exacerbation of the crisis
will continue until Israel abides by the provisions of the
Fourth Geneva Convention relative to the Protection of
Civilian Persons in Time of War, of 12 August 1949,
which is applicable to all the occupied Arab territories,
including occupied Palestinian land.
Such confrontations have led to the killing of
many Palestinians and to the injuring of many others
by the Israeli occupation forces in the West Bank and
the Gaza Strip. The Kingdom of Bahrain, in the face of
such deplorable acts, expresses its strong condemnation
of the continued aggression and the ongoing breach of
international law, as well as of the flagrant violations of
humanitarian and moral norms. Such illegal, inhumane
acts are likely to snuff out any possibility for peace, as
well as to further fuel tensions, violence, extremism and
36/39

22/10/2015

hatred, which will not build human relations or build
bridges of respect, as called for by all religions. Indeed,
such acts will not lead to building peaceful societies that
uphold dignity, culture and peaceful coexistence. There
is no doubt that for Israel to terrorize the Palestinian
people by using violence and brutal force will do grave
harm to the peace process and will place additional
obstacles in the path of any peaceful settlement.
International intervention is urgently required to
put an end to Israeli aggression against the Palestinian
people, to provide appropriate protection and to avoid
any setbacks that could lead to further deterioration
and bring harm to the entire region. The international
community should create the environment necessary
for the resumption of negotiations between Palestinians
and Israelis, in order for them to take up fundamental
issues in accordance with the relevant United Nations
resolutions and internationally agreed terms of
reference.
The position of the Kingdom of Bahrain is firm
when it comes to Palestine. It is a position based on
fundamental pillars, namely, the need to implement
the relevant Security Council and General Assembly
resolutions; to respect the international terms of
reference and the Arab Peace Initiative; to apply the twoState solution; to establish an independent Palestinian
State within the pre-1967 borders and with East
Jerusalem as its capital; and to lift the unjust and illegal
siege of the Gaza Strip. In that regard, the international
community must shoulder its responsibility to ease the
suffering of the Palestinian people in the Gaza Strip.
Without question, a peaceful settlement to the problems
of the Middle East must include an end to Israel’s
occupation of Arab and Palestinian lands held since
1967, including East Jerusalem and the Syrian Golan;
the total withdrawal by Israel from remaining occupied
Lebanese lands, in accordance with the relevant
Security Council resolutions; the establishment of an
independent and fully sovereign Palestinian State; and a
just solution ensuring the return of Palestinian refugees
to their towns and villages, in accordance with General
Assembly resolution 194 (III). We stress the need to
implement the relevant Security Council and General
Assembly resolutions and for unconditional respect for
the principles of international legitimacy.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Cuba.
Mr. León González (Cuba) (spoke in Spanish): We
support the statement delivered by the representative
15-33018

22/10/2015

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

of the Islamic Republic of Iran on behalf of the
Non-Aligned Movement.
The situation in the region of the Middle East
continues to be of grave concern to the international
community. Just a year after Israel’s most recent
attack on the Gaza Strip, in which more than 2,000
Palestinians lost their lives, among them at least 299
women and 556 children, and which plunged that
territory into terror, death and mass destruction, the
Palestinian people continue to be the victims of acts
of aggression perpetrated by Israel, which continues to
occupy their land, murder their children, destroy their
homeland and shred their inalienable rights, including
the right to self-determination.
Despite the periodic open debates in the Security
Council, which have demonstrated overwhelming
support for the Palestinian cause, the Council has
unfortunately failed to adopt a single resolution
demanding that Israel put an immediate end to its
military occupation of Palestinian and Arab territories;
that it lift the blockade against the Gaza Strip; that it halt
the construction and expansion of its illegal settlements
and of the separation wall in the occupied Palestinian
territory; and that Israel be held accountable for the war
crimes it has committed and its collective punishment of
the Palestinian people. We cannot allow the Palestinian
cause to continue without a just resolution.
This organ must fulfil its obligation to promote
a negotiated settlement that guarantees the end of
the Israeli occupation of Palestinian territory; the
peaceful coexistence of two independent States; the
establishment of the independent, sovereign and viable
State of Palestine, with its capital in East Jerusalem and
with the pre-1967 borders; along with a just solution to
the problem of Palestine refugees, in accordance with
General Assembly resolution 194 (III).
We are convinced that the solution to this longstanding conflict could contribute to significantly
reducing current tensions in the Middle East.
My delegation once again reiterates in this Chamber
its strong condemnation of the Israeli settlement
campaign in the occupied Palestinian territories,
including East Jerusalem, and of all the measures,
policies and practices connected to that campaign,
which, in addition to the construction and expansion of
illegal settlements and the wall, includes the destruction
and confiscation of Palestinian land and property,
the forced displacement of hundreds of thousands of

S/PV.7540 (Resumption 1)

Palestinian families and the transfer of settlers into
occupied Palestinian territory, among other violations
of international law, international humanitarian law
and United Nations resolutions. My delegation also
condemns the violence, provocations and incitement to
hatred and terror by Israeli settlers, and the arbitrary
detentions and mass incarcerations, and demands
that they end once and for all. Cuba reaffirms its full
support for the admission of Palestine as a full Member
of this Organization.
Many of the pledges made for the reconstruction
of the Gaza Strip following the terrible bombings and
massive destruction inflicted by Israel in July and
August 2014 have not materialized. We call on all
members of the international community to fulfil their
commitments and work to rebuild that devastated area.
Achieving peace in Syria will be possible only
through respect for its people’s right to decide their
own destiny. A political solution through dialogue and
negotiation is the only alternative to the conflict in
Syria. Anyone fuelling the conflict from outside with
a declared goal of regime change bears responsibility
for the thousands of civilian casualties that have
mounted up during four years of fighting. We would
like to once again emphasize our alarm at the loss of
innocent lives as a result of the conflict in Syria and
once again condemn every act of violence committed
against civilians there. But claiming to protect human
lives and combat extremist elements cannot be a pretext
for foreign intervention. That is why we call for the
withdrawal of any foreign presence in Syria without
the consent of the Syrian Government and appropriate
coordination with its authorities. The United Nations,
particularly the Council, should urge for an immediate
ceasefire as a preliminary to dialogue and negotiations,
and should not promote initiatives that encourage
further tensions and that have yet to produce concrete
results.
The world’s leaders recently adopted the new 2030
Agenda for Sustainable Development for the next 15
years (General Assembly resolution 70/1). Now begins
the most difficult stage, which will require significant
financial and human resources to implement. We have
no right to sacrifice present and future generations
to the horrors of war and the devastation it causes,
no matter where it occurs. The Security Council has
a crucial role to play in helping all the peoples of the
Middle East to achieve their aspirations to the wellbeing, peace and development that they deserve. Its

15-3301837/39

S/PV.7540 (Resumption 1)

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

members should be advocates for peaceful solutions,
without foreign interference, that will safeguard
States’ sovereignty and territorial integrity and make
a decisive contribution to preserving the lives of the
people affected by the conflicts in the region.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Zimbabwe.
Mr. Ntonga (Zimbabwe): I would like to thank
the Spanish presidency for convening this important
open debate and for giving this issue the significance
it deserves. I would also like to thank the Deputy
Secretary-General, Mr. Jan Eliasson, for his insightful
briefing, and the Ministers who participated in the
debate for their constructive proposals.
Zimbabwe aligns itself with the statement delivered
by the representative of the Islamic Republic of Iran on
behalf of the Non-Aligned Movement.
We are seriously concerned about the acts of
violence in and around the holy sites and by any
attempt to change the status quo in East Jerusalem.
Access to the Temple Mount and other holy sites must
be preserved under the status quo arrangements. The
recent tragic events are a stark reminder of the plight
of the Palestinian people, owing to a systematic denial
of their right to self-determination. We welcome the
insistence of the President and other Council members
that urgent steps must be taken to stop the violence.
Furthermore, as some other delegations have pointed
out, this is not a conflict between equal forces. The
Council must therefore take appropriate measures to
ensure the protection of Palestinian civilians.
The current violent actions are a direct result of
hopelessness and despair at the grim prospects for
a two-State solution, which nonetheless offers the
best prospects for peace. Israel’s security cannot be
guaranteed by using excessive force to inflict collective
punishment on defenceless Palestinian civilians. The
spiral of violence feeds into extremism and terrorism.
The situation requires that the Security Council
act decisively to put a halt to all such violations of
international law, including humanitarian and human
rights law.
The Security Council shares the blame for the
longest continuous occupation in modern history.
No measures have been taken to stop the aggression
against the Palestinian people, and that has emboldened
the occupying Power to act with impunity in blatant

38/39

22/10/2015

violation of Security Council and General Assembly
resolutions. The Council must protect the people
in the occupied territories. In that regard, we look
forward to the Secretary-General’s report on ways to
respond to President Abbas’s request for international
protection for the Palestinian people in accordance with
international law and the relevant resolutions.
The deteriorating situation in the occupied
territories makes it even more urgent to relaunch the
political process, end the impasse and restore hopes
for a two-State solution. We welcome the recent
initiatives taken by the expanded Quartet to revive
the peace process, and those by some members of the
Security Council. The Council should shoulder its
responsibilities and create conditions conducive to
negotiations by engaging both parties to the conflict,
and other international partners, in discussions on a
time frame for commencing negotiations. We would
like to underscore the importance of salvaging a twoState solution, based on the pre-1967 borders and the
need for a just and comprehensive peace for Palestine.
Zimbabwe reaffirms its solidarity with the Palestinian
people and supports realization of their legitimate
national aspirations and inalienable rights, including
to self-determination and freedom in an independent
State of Palestine with East Jerusalem as its capital,
living side by side in peace and harmony with the State
of Israel.
The President (spoke in Spanish): The representative
of Israel has asked for the floor to make a further
statement. I intend to accede to her request. However,
I would remind all delegations that are not Council
members that they are limited to one additional
statement only.
Ms. Meitzad (Israel): Israel cannot remain silent in
the face of the reckless and inflammatory allegations
about my country made earlier by several delegations.
Sitting here today in the Council, I was amazed to hear
that several Arab countries still insist that the IsraeliPalestinian conflict is at the centre of the problems in
the Middle East. They say this while thousands of their
brothers are being massacred by the Syrian regime,
slaughtered and executed by the Islamic State in Iraq
and Syria, or terrorized by Hizbullah, Jabhat Al-Nusra
or Ansar Beit Al-Maqdis.
Turning to Lebanon, I find it amazing that the
representative of a country that for two years now has
failed even to elect a president has the nerve to criticize

15-33018

22/10/2015

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

the Prime Minister of a democratic country. Let us not
forget that in Lebanon a terrorist group that assists the
Al-Assad regime in slaughtering civilians is part of the
Government — half of the Cabinet, in fact.
Regarding Saudi Arabia, it is the height of audacity
for the representative of a country that routinely carries
out public beheadings, including of teenagers, to
criticize the measures that Israel takes to defend itself.
A young Saudi protester, Ali Mohammed Al-Nimr,
age 17, is set to be beheaded for encouraging protest
during the Arab Spring. This is a country that engages
in indiscriminate bombing and is attacking anything
that moves. It recently killed at least 70 civilians when
it bombed a wedding party in Yemen. Perhaps countries
that engage in the indiscriminate bombing of innocents
should not raise the issue of war crimes.
Earlier, we heard the representative of one of the
world’s worst human rights abusers, Venezuela, accuse
Israel of abusing human rights. That Jeffersonian
democracy deprives its citizens of democratic rights by
repressing and imprisoning opposition members. Here
in the Council, Venezuelan leaders enjoy full freedom
of speech; the same is not true for their constituents
back home. Venezuela’s accusations and conspiracy
theories cannot be answered in a brief right of reply.
It is disheartening that one of the 15 representatives on
the Council should utter such baseless accusations.

S/PV.7540 (Resumption 1)

As for the Palestinians, it is unfortunate that they
are repeating their false accusations and breached the
protocol of the Security Council by disrupting the
Israeli representative’s speech. Interestingly enough,
no one seemed surprised. The Palestinian observer did
not answer one particular question: Why does Palestine
refuse to negotiate? Its baseless accusations and
malicious lies have been answered time and time again,
including in our speech this morning, and I do not want
to waste the Council’s time by discussing them. An
offer was made yet again in the Council for President
Abbas to discuss peace here at the United Nations or in
Ramallah, Jerusalem or anywhere else.
For those who have spent the entire meeting
listening to hateful incitement, let me repeat the words
of Israel’s Permanent Representative: “Like people
everywhere, the people of Israel seek to live in peace
and to see their children prosper”. Despite the difficult
time my country is facing, we remain confident in the
promise of Israel’s future. We call on the Palestinians to
join us on the path to peace and reconciliation. Together,
we can create a better future for both our peoples. As
we said this morning, we aspire to peace and we are
committed to the status quo.
The President (spoke in Spanish): There are no
more speakers on my list.
The meeting rose at 7 p.m.

15-3301839/39
