A

UNITED
NATIONS

General Assembly
Distr.
GENERAL
A/RES/54/30
6 December 1999

Fifty-fourth session
Agenda item 20 (a)

RESOLUTION ADOPTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY
[without reference to a Main Committee (A/54/L.17/Rev.1 and Add.1)]

54/30. Emergency response to disasters
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 44/236 of 22 December 1989 on the International Decade for Natural Disaster
Reduction and agreed conclusions 1999/1 of the humanitarian affairs segment of the substantive session of
1999 of the Economic and Social Council, 1
Deeply regretting the great number of casualties and the unprecedented devastation caused by one of
the most powerful earthquakes of the century, which struck the north-west region of Turkey on 17 August
1999,
Expressing its deep sorrow at the loss of lives and devastation caused by the earthquake on
7 September 1999 in the north of Athens,
Noting with appreciation the prompt response of Governments, international agencies and
organizations, non-governmental organizations and individuals throughout the world in providing search and
rescue and emergency relief assistance to the victims of the earthquake in Turkey,

1

See Official Records of the General Assembly, Fifty-fourth Session, Supplement No. 3 (A/54/3/Rev.1),
chap. VI, para. 5.
99-77635
99-77635

/...

A/RES/54/30
Page 2

Expressing its satisfaction for the timely assistance provided by Governments, international agencies
and organizations, non-governmental organizations and individuals throughout the world to the search and
rescue and relief efforts undertaken by Greece in the aftermath of the 7 September earthquake,
Welcoming the efforts of the Secretary-General as regards the urgent steps he has taken to mobilize
humanitarian assistance and to coordinate activities of agencies of the United Nations system in the field for
purposeful and unified assistance by the international community,
Deeply concerned about the fact that natural disasters in every corner of the globe continue to claim
high numbers of casualties and cause immense material damage and that the frequency and magnitude of
these catastrophes place an ever-increasing material and moral burden on nations,
Reiterating the importance of mounting prompt and effective rescue operations in the aftermath of such
deadly calamities in the future, as evidenced by the exemplary response of the international community to the
earthquakes in Turkey and Greece,
1. Expresses its solidarity with the Governments and the peoples of Greece and Turkey as they cope
with the consequences of the disasters;
2. Expresses its appreciation to all States of the international community, international agencies and
organizations and non-governmental organizations and individuals that are providing emergency relief to the
affected areas;
3. Notes with satisfaction the decision taken by the Governments of Greece and Turkey to establish
a joint standby disaster relief unit comprising contingents drawn from governmental and non-governmental
organizations and agencies of both countries to reinforce and expand existing standby arrangements of the
United Nations system with no financial implications to the programme budget of the United Nations;
4. Requests the Secretary-General, through the Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs
of the Secretariat, to formulate the modalities for the utilization of the standby disaster relief unit by the
relevant agencies of the United Nations system;
5. Requests the Secretary-General to report to the General Assembly at its fifty-fifth session on the
progress made in the implementation of the present resolution.
60th plenary meeting
22 November 1999
