._-----

27th

United Nations

GENERAL

PLENARY MEETING

ASSEMBLY

Friday, 30 June 1978.
a16.25 p.m.

TENTH SPECIAL SESSION

Official Records

NEW YORK

5. Furthermore, the change in the political and socio~
economic situation of the world brought to the fore new
forces calling for drastic action to alter a situation that
threatens to lead the world towards catastrophe.

President: Mr. Lazar MOJSOV (Yugoslavia).

AGENDA ITEMS 9, 10, 11 AND 12
It was against this background that the desire was
growing for international action for the achievement of real
disarmament. It was against this background that the spe~
cial session was convened, on the initiative of the non~
aligned countries.

6.

Review and appraisal of the present international situation in the light of the pressing need to achieve subgtant!a! progress in the field of disarmament, the
continuation of the arms race and the close interrelationship between disarmament, international peace
and security and economic development

The report I am introducing today also has a background of a large number of documents, working papers
and valuable contributions by delegations. The results of
these long months of negotiations and drafting are to be
found in this draft final document which, in accordance
with the recommendation of the Preparatory Committee, as
endorsed by the General Assembly, consists of the follow~
ing sections: one draft resolution embodying the draft final
document, an introduction, a declaration, a programme of
action and, finally, a section on machinery.
7.

Adoption of a declaration on disarmament
Adoption of a programme of action on disarmament
Review of the role of the United Nations in disarmament and of the international machinery for negotiations on disarmament, including in particular the
question of convening a world disarmament conference

During its meetings, the Ad Hoc Committee received
some 40 documents and working papers from delegations,
containing further proposals to be included in the draft fi~
nal document. Those documents are listed in paragraph 9
of the report.
8.

Mr. BENSMAIL (Algeria), Rapporteur of the Ad Hoc
Committee of the Tenth Special Session: I have the honour
to present to the General Assembly the report on the work
of the Ad Hoc Committee relating to agenda items 9, 10,
II and 12 of the tenth special session of the General As~
sembly, devoted to disarmament. The report is contained
in document A/S-IO/23 and consists of two parts, the first
part being a description of the work of the Ad Hoc Committee and the second part the draft final document.
I.

9. The Ad Hoc Committee also received a number of
draft resolutions: one draft resolution sponsored by 33
countries (AlS~lO/AC.l/L.l and Rev. I); one draft resolu~
tion submitted by India and also sponsored by Cyprus and
Ethiopia (AlS~ 10/AC.l/L.10) and another by Ethiopia and
India (A/S~ 10/AC. l/L. 11); three draft resolutions submitted by France (A/S-1O/AC.l/L.14, L.15 and L.16); and,
finally, a draft resolution presented by Sri Lanka (AlS~ 10/
AC. l/L. 17). At the last meeting of the Ad Hoc Committee
it was announced that those draft resolutions would not be
pressed to a vote.

2. The Ad Hoc Committee recommends to the General
Assembly the adoption of the draft resolution embodying
the draft final document.
3. May I be permitted to say that the draft final document which is submitted for the consideration of the Gen~
eral Assembly is the culmination of much hard work and
the result of long months of continuous efforts, long delib~
erations and delicate negotiations. Agreement was finally
reached in the Ad Hoc Committee early this morning on
the so~long-awaited document.

10. In the case of draft resolution A/S-lO/AC.I/L.l/
Rev.1, the sponsors, responding to the appeal of the Chair~
man, decided not to press it to a vote. Furthermore; the Ad
Hoc Committee decided to take note of that draft resolution and to transmit it to the plenary Assembly with the
recommendation that it be referred for consideration to the
thirty-third session of the General Assembly.

4. When the General Assembly decided, at its thirtieth
session, to convene a special session devoted to disarmament in May and June 1978, it was responding to a growing feeling of concern and a sense of desperatioln at the
fact that not enough was being done to slow down the
arms race or stop the escalating expenditure on armaments
in the world. Despite the realization of the difficulty and
comple'dty of the problem, the international community
entertained the hope that a new approach might reverse the
trend of the arms race and bring about results that previous
efforts had been unable to achieve.

11. It was agreed from the beginning that every effort
should be made to ensure that the draft final document was
adopted by consensus. It was so adopted in the Ad Hoc
Committee earlier this morning and I hope that the Assembly will adopt it in the same manner.
Pursuant to rule 66 of the rules of procedure, it was decided not to discuss the report of the Ad Hoc Committee.
465

AlS-IO/PV.27

1
'I

'\
'\

.
-:-,-

-

466

General Assembly - Tenth Special Session - Plenary Meetings

12. The PRESIDENT: I understand that there is general
agreement that the .Assembly should proceed immediately
to the adoption of the recommendation of the Ad Hoc
Committee. on the understanding that any delegation wishing to do so will be free to make a statement of position or
reservation on the subject after the adoption of that recommendation. May I take i! that it is the wish of the General
Assembly to follow that proledure?
It was so decided.

13. The PRESIDENT: The report of the Ad Hoc Committee is contained in document A/S-I 0/23.
14. In paragraph 26 of the report. reference is made to
the financial implications for 1978 of the draft resolution.
In this connexion. I have been asked to inform the Assembly that the Secretary-General is seeking the agreement of
the Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary
Questions to allow him to enter into the necessary commitments initially under the terms of General Assembly resolution 32/214 on unforeseen and extraordinary expenses
for the biennium 1978-1979. The requisite appropriation
action will be tal'l'n at the thirty-third session of the Assembly. at which time the Assembly will also consider the
financial implications of the draft resolution now before us
for the second year of the biennium 1978-1979.
15. Before we proceed to a decision on the draft resolution. I call on the representative of Belgium who wishes to
make a statement of clarification.
16. Mr. ERNEMANN (Belgium) (interpretation from
French): We have just spent a few moments looking at the
french version of documt'nt A/S-10/23. We understand the
difficult situation in WhlUI the Secretariat had to work and
wc also know that the original of this document was in English. The brief examination which certain Frenchspeuking delegations have made in the few minutes availahie has brought to light a certain number of errors and
omissions. These might have resulted particularly from the
fact that the translution seems to have made on the basis of
a non-final English version of the document.
17. A glance. for example. at paragraph 58 shows that
there an.: important divergencies between the two versions.
Therefon: I think that the French-speaking delegations
must reserw their right to communicate to the Secretariat
any ohservations thcy fcel they should make. In particular.
we would likc to express the hope that the Secretariat will
be good enough to review the French translation of this
documcnt very carefully and issue a revised version. There
is no need to emphasize that this makes it necessary for the
Frenrh-speaking delegations to renounce their right under
the rules of procedure of the General Assembly and rely
temporarily on the original English text only.

I

I

(
I

18. The PRESIDENT: In connexion with the statement
of the representative of Belgium, I would like to state for
the record that the original text of the document before us
is English, us clearly stated in the document. All remarks
concerning the translation into other languages should be
transmitted to the Secretariat, and. the members of the Sec-

II

retariat will take them into account during the final redaction of the texts of the documents in other languages.

I

19. We shall now proceed to the adoption of the draft
resolution recommended in paragraph 28.

r

20. At the 16th meeting of the Ad Hoc Committee, held
early this morning. the draft resolution was adopted without a vote. May I consider that the General Assembly also
adopts that draft resolution?
The draft resolution was adopted (resolution 5-1012).

21. The PRESIDENT: In the final paragraph of document A/S-I 0/23. the Ad Hoc Committee also recommends
that the General Assembly should refer to its thirty-third
session the consideration of draft resolution A/S-l 0/AC. 11
L.l/Rev.1.
22. May I take it that the General Assembly adopts that
recommendation?
The recommendation in paragraph 29 of document A/510/23 was adopted (decision 5-10/24).

23. The PRESIDENT: I call on the representative of Israel.
24. Mr. CAHANA (Israel): If this recommendation had
been put to the vote. the delegation of Israel would have
voted against it.
25. The PRESIDENT: The position stated by the representative of Israel will be reflected in the verbatim record.
26. I now call on the Secretary-General. who would like
to make a statement.
27. The SECRETARY-GENERAL: When this Assembly
convened on 23 May, I stated that this unprecedented special session would be the largest, most representative
meeting ever convened to consider the problem of disarmament. I am now able to add that at this session there has
been the most extensive and useful discussion of disarmament on a world-wide basis that has yet been held. The
breadth and level of participation in this historic session
have been remarkable. This fact has demonstrated clearly
that Governments and peoples throughout the world are
profoundly aware of the threat posed to their survival by
ever-growing armaments and arms technology. As a result
of your deliberations, this awareness has been further
heightened.
28. Prior to this session. it was increasingly evident that
the disarmament problem had become so complex that it
had to be dealt with within a comprehensive framework.
One of your great achievements has been the construction
of such a framework, with agreement on the basic principles and priorities to which we must address ourselves in
moving toward the goal of general and complete disarmament.
29. In a relatively short period of time, there has been a
thorough-going discussion of all major aspects of disarma-

I

:"

I

I

I
f

27th meeting - 30 June 1978

ment. New elements, both for study and negotiation, have
been introduced and a larger area of consensus among
Member States has emerged.

[
30. These positive results reflect in part the effectiveness
of the prior preparations accomplished under the able leadership of Mr. Gritz de Rozas, to whom we all owe so
much for his dedicated efforts throughout this session.
31. The results also reflect the unstinting and untiring efforts of the Chairmen of the working groups and the coordinators, as well as the many delegations which worked
day and night to arrive at this agreed outcome.
32. The Assembly has every right to take pride in this
accomplishment, and we are all in their debt for the constructive, serious and effective way in which the business
of this session has been conducted. I wish to take this opportunity to express my sincere thanks to all members of
the Secretariat who have worked so hard and for such long
hours in assisting delegations to achieve this result.
33. It is a source of satisfaction as well that the substantive advances in new ideas, new perspectives and newly
broadened areas of consensus have been matched in practical terms by improvements in disarmament machinery. A
negotiating forum has now been agreed upon on the basis
of the consensus of the United Nations membership. This
is a significant move, opening the possibility of participation by all nuclear-weapon States.
34. I should also like to express satisfaction that Member
States have continued the active involvement of the United
Nations in the disarmament process. A deliberative body
of the United Nations, the Disarmament Commission, will
follow this up by giving a meaningful role to all Member
States in considering, on a continuing basis, the elements
of a comprehensive programme for disarmament.
35. I am particularly gratified at the positive response of
Member States to my proposal for the establishment of an
advisory board of eminent persons.

t

r

36. Theie has been progregg in the direct involvement of
peoples as well. An unprecedented role has been accorded
to the non-governmental organizations. They have made a
very meaningful contribution at this special session, and,
through their participation, have stimulated the debate and
enriched the exchange of ideas. I very much hope that
their commitment to the cause of disarmament will ensure
that the momentum that has been created by the special
session will be sustained in the future.

.-

37. These are the tangible and specific accomplishments
of this session. One senses here a climate of increased political commitment at the highest governmental level to
getting on with significant disarmament in the interests of
security, in the interests of economic progress and development, and in the interests of human rights and social iustice.

a

38. Mr. President, I cannot conclude my remarks without paying a special tribute to you. It would not be fitting

1

11

1-

467

and proper for this session to close without an expression
of the deepest appreciation on the part of the United Nations for your capable and dedicated eff0l1s in guiding the
work of this General Assembly. You have established a
record of presiding over the largest number of sessions of
any president in the history of the United Nations. That we
have accomplished so much is in large measure due to
your skill as presiding officer and negotiator. You have
gained the respect and admiration of all those who have
worked with you throughout the many months you have
been with us, and before this assembled audience I wish to
convey to you my personal gratitude. I am sure that in doing this I am also expressing the sentiments of the entire
membership.
39. The PRESIDENT: I thank the Secretary-General for
his statement and particularly for the kind words he addressed to me.
40. I shall now call on those representatives whose
names are inscribed on the list of speakers to make statements in explanation of their positions. In view of the
great number of speakers-44 up to now-and the limited
time at our disposal, I should like to make a personal appeal to all of them to be as brief as possible.
41. Mr. FUENTES IBANEZ (Bolivia) (interpretation
from Spanish): At this last meeting of the tenth special ses-

sion of the General Assembly devoted to disarmament,
when it can be affirmed that the international community
has embarked on one of its most ambitious endeavours,
namely, that of achieving agreement which will make possible general and complete disarmament, I should like to
express my delegation' s satisfaction at the work accomplished.
42. Impressions of the session vary, but, although the
results were modest in relation to the magnitude of the
problem, we cannot fail to acknowledge that a highly
promising process has begun. An issue which gave rise to
fear and hence seemed always shrouded in mystery, accessible only to the initiated, has now been subjected to discussion.
43. This step has been taken in a spirit of sincerity, despite limitations and the powerful interests at stake, thus
revealing that our Organization has reached a high degree
of maturity and that it is able to assume great responsibilities when these involve ecumenical interests based on justice and international security.
44. The Bolivian delegation would like to make a few
comments, which we hope will be reflected in the voluminous documentation which will remain as testimony of the
work of this Assembly and a source for consultation and
research for the future.
45. We hope that, when the proposals which have been
left pending are again considered, when we are less
pressed by time and hence more rested and serene, it will
be possible to broaden and deepen the programme of
action, so that its aims may be more objective and realistic. Only in this way will it be possible to dispel the anxi-

468

General Assembly - TenQh Special Session - Plenary Meetings

ety of peoples, who see in general and complete disarmament the most constructive effort to strengthen peace.

those weapons are intended and cannot fail to feel their
own security endangered.

vided and
progressing
ture.

46. My delegation regrets that the memorandum dated 8
June 1978 addressed to the Secretariat by the representatives of Belgium, Canada, Denmark, the Federal Republic
of Germany, Ireland, Italy, Japan, Luxembourg, the Netherlands, New Zealand, Norway, Sweden, the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland and the United
States of America, entitled "Strengthening of the security
role of the United Nations in the peaceful settlement of
disputes and peace-keeping", in connexion with agenda
item II [A/S-1O/ACl/26 and Corr.l and 2] did not play a
more important rele and was not better reflected in the resolution before us.

52. Moreover, the classic concept of the non-revision of
treaties becomes controversial when these instruments
cease to have logical validity and effectiveness, because
tirn~ has revealed the anomalies they contain and the occasional injustice of the circumstances that gave rise to them.

58. With
morning ar
Assembly,
comments.

Sometimes they are no longer consistent with reality
or with the ever-growing needs of peoples. To this we
should add the need for new approaches arising out of interdependence and the legitimate aspirations of strong nations which cannot develop satisfactorily because they are
asphyxiated within historically invalid boundaries which
were imposed upon them by force; or the aspirations of
peoples whose necessary communication with the world is
restricted and whose rights to integration and equal development are diminished by obstacles beyond their control
created by situations of injustice, as is the case of Bolivia.

59. Far b
work accon
umentation
the irregula
English as
stand that
worked wi
none the le
risky for n
and princip
language (
knowledge,

The ideas expressed in that communication coincide
with the Bolivian Government's view that there is a need
to consider in due time all situations which might eventually affect international relations and the maintenance of
peace before they become disputes or give rise to conflicts.
Otherwise, we run the risk of pressures being exerted for
an increase in armaments as a precautionary measure.
47.

48. The United Nations should endeavour to establi,
and, as far as possible, refine machinery to detect and control potential dangers before they become crises. Thus the
ability of the Organization to consider cases which deserve
preventive treatment would be strengthened and we would
avoid the paradox of countries having to devote a sizeable
part of their incomes to the acquisition of military equipment and thus being unable to meet such substantive needs
of their peoples as those relating to healtb, food and education.

49. Parag'raph 4 of the memorandum in question contains
comments which my delegation fully endorses, especially
where ,t mentions that the United Nations has not yet considered such a "vital issue" as "the question of crisis anticipation or, in the words of the Charter, 'prevention ...
of threats to the peace' ".
50. Up to now the Security Council has acted only in
cases of flagrant violations of peace and security. It would
obviously be unjust not to acknowledge how effectively it
has acted in such cases, but we should not forget that there
are other situations which, because they have not provoked
serious breaches of the peace with acts of violence, have
been overlooked. Hence the need to identify latent anomalies and injustices which have the potential to cause conflicts if circumstances bring them into the open.

51. From this derives the effectiveness of preventive
action; and it is not so difficult. Often it would be a simple
task to diagnose the existence of such situations from the
presence of related symptoms, for example, an excessive
increase in arms expenditures, news of which filters
through the smokescreen of declarations of peace, despite
intl;rnational treaties that are in force. It is impossible to
prevent such acquisition of arms from provoking a sense of
insecurity caused as much by the action of those who accumulate weapons that will some day have to be used or by
the concern of their neighboul's who wonder for whom

53.

54. For all these reasons, my delegation feels in duty
bound, on an occasion as significant as this one, to draw
the attention of the international community to the fact,
recognized in important international forums, by State dignitaries and, just a few days ago, by the President of the
United States of America, Mr. Carter, that the problem of
the geographically land-locked situation of Bolivia deserves the attention and consideration of the United Nations.

On the basis of our own experience, we feel that this
Organization is the only persuasive force which could act
as a benevolent mediator to resolve this situation. If we
failed to request its co-operation, we would be leaving the
decisions to the will of only one of the parties. This would
also be the result of returning to direct negotiations without
offering alternative solutions or setting time-tables and
without providing guarantors or guarantees for both parties
on an agreed basis, thus relying on good faith which does
not ensure political will for solution and which therefore,
in the long run, would only generate new frustrations and
greater distrust.
55.

56. It should be repeated once more that Bolivia is a
peace-loving country by temperament and by tradition, .
weak in its military coefficient, but not defenceless, because it is certain of its moral strength as well as of the validity of its fundamental rights.

Our demand for free and sovereign access to the sea
is not a passing aspiration with purely economic causes,
nor is it an emotional reaction or whimsical desire for territorial expansion. The sea is the natural complement of its
varied and complex geography, as well as of its status as a
contact point. This geopolitical reality has rendered possible the new inter-oceanic channel between the Brazilian
port of Santos on the Atlantic and Arica on the Pacific.
Here again, as a further demonstration of its moderation
and its peace-loving nature, Bolivia is prepared to offer
any type of compensation which would not imply the cession of territory. An exchange of territory would be unacceptable for a people which has often seen its territory di57.

60. Wea
to this conl
sirn of this
of brackets
dangered a
gations.
Havi
like to sta1
Bolivarian
tive, whic1
Tlateloloc
Latin Ame
laration 01
June of th
eight coun
61.

62. But 1
ate form i:
is defined
forceful c(
tries to eff
on peacefl
concept an
able major
trust shoul

63. The
Ministers
days ago,
the interm
arms race,
need to str
inequality,
any actioll
mere potit
ing or hus
ate false it
essence of
I

United ~

27th meeting - 30 June 1978

vided and which none the less has not lost faith and is
progressing calmly and with determination towards. the future.

58. With regard to the draft resolution adopted tltis
morning and now to be given the verdict of the General
Assembly, may I be permitted to make a few preliminary
comments. ,
59. Far be it from my delegation to criticize the vast
work accomplished by the staff of the conference and documentation services, but I do feel it is necessary to note
the irregular way in which the delegations that do not use
English as a working language had to work. We understand that the staff of the general conference services
worked with maximum efficiency and selflessness, but
none the less we should point out that it is anomalous and
risky for many of us to assess the considerations, views
and principles that are to commit our leaders in a foreign
language of which not all delegations have thorough
knowledge.
We are aware that this short-coming is not peculiar
to this conference. Perhaps it is almost inevitable in a sessir-n of this magnitude, which could be called' 'a marathon
of brackets". But we cannot gloss over it since it has endangered and obstructed the proper fulfilment of our obligations.
60.

Having expressed these reservations, I should also
like to state the full agreement of my delegation with the
Bolivarian proposal regarding zones of peace. This initiative, which has a well-known precedent in the Treaty of
Tlateloloco for the Prohibition of Nuclear Weapons in
Latin America, I was given significant impetus in the Declaration of Ayacucho signed in 1974 and ratified on 22
June of this year by the Ministers for Foreign Affairs of
eight countries of the southern hemisphere.
61.

62. But the establishment of zones of peace in an inchoate form is only the cornerstone of something which, if it
is defined and perfected as a doctrine, would become a
forceful contribution on the part of the developing countries to efforts for the consolidation of a new world based
on peaceful and harmonious coexistence. The purity of the
concept and the hope of nJlecting the wishes of a respectable majority to protect America from suspicion and mistrust should be taken very carefully into account.

63. The agreement expressed by eight Latin American
Ministers for Foreign Affairs in 1974, as well as a few
days ago, pointing out that the subsistence of problems in
the international sphere is one of the major causes of the
arms race, is explicit recognition of the fact that there is a
need to strengthen preventive action since, if the causes of
inequality, discrimination or injustice are not rooted out,
any action which does not aim to correct them would be
mere political speculation or a game of semantics; concealing or hushing up the existence of these causes would create false illusions of peace and security harmfUl, to the very
essence of peace.
I United Nations,

Treaty Series. vo!. 634, No. 9068, p. 326.

469

64. At the same time it 'should be recalled that the patience of people who suffer injustices has its limits. History abounds in examples. Stretching the limits of prudence and reason can cause a loss of faith in international
solidarity and provoke a natural fl;action on the part of
those who are beset by misery and oppression and feel forgotten by their fellow men.
We do not feel that this is our situation. The Declaration signed by the eight Ministers for Foreign Affairs at the
recent meeting of the Organization of American States
demonstrates clear poJ.itical will to serve the cause of
peace; but not a fragile peace sustained by bayonets or by
lyrical statements; rather a genuine, true peace that aims to
tackle the latent causes of situations of uncertainty and discouragement that foster the arms race.
65.

If the injustices of the past are not redressed, any
agreement would merely be temporary. It would be disregarding history, and therefore unable to stand the test of
time and to meet the insistent demands of new generations.

66.

My delegation regrets the fact that tne concept of
preventive action has not been more explicitly and forcefully reflected in the document which today has finally
been adopted. In all other respects we associate ourselves
with the majority view, especially with the decision to
continue the study of the question of disarmament either
through the First Committee of the General Assembly or
through a special committee adequately structured to meet
the needs of the situation. We feel that this should be the
case and we hope that the task will not be downgraded or
passed on to a private committee, as did happen a few
years ago when an initial group was reduced in terms of
participation and membership until its work became that of
a few, fruitless and without effect in regard to its objectives and as far as the rest of the world was concerned.
67.

The document which we have adopted is not, nor
could it be, perfect, given its highly complex nature and
the short time which was available. If it were perfect, this
would mean that we had overestimated the magnitude of
the problem of disarmament and its vast scope and difficulties, which is not the case. We must accept the fact that
the international community is barely beginning to stammer out its condemnation of the arms race that up to now
has been a forbidden subject open only to the warlords ..
But it has faced the situation with courage. We should like
to pay a tribute to the fact that the initiative was taken by
the countries which are truly peace-loving and which have
never benefited from war, since they find sufficient the
battle of their daily confrontation with the ills of underdevelopment which afflict them from within and from
without.

68.

69. Now, at the conclusion of this first stage and, thanks
to it? with renewed hopes, we must see to it that the ml"::'Ires agreed upon are fully implemented. Although the
proposal on a moratorium has not really been put into effect, may it remain as a moral obligation, a solemn commitment to the will for peace and co-existence of mankind,
which, in the last analysis, is the mandate of this Assembly.

47(

-

70
prt
C~

tht
wi
LiJ
in!
orl

on
thi
71
tht
w~

thi
dh

72
thl
ciJ
orl

inl
thl
ti<J
po
73

co
an
on
nit
[41

na
an

74
fn
thl

un
de

75

mi

of
wi
ti~

7~

p<J

n<J
p<J

fu
thl

of
pr

77
on

410

General Assembly - Tenth Special Session - Plenary Meetings

70. I do not wish to conclude this statement without expressing the sincere appreciation of my delegation to the
Chairman of the Ad Hoc Committee and the Chairman of
the Preparatory Committee, Mr. Ortiz de Rozas, for his
wisdom and patience in leading and guiding our work.
Likewise, we convey our thanks to the Chairmen of working groups A and B and especially to the main coordinator, Mr. Garda Robles, and to the other coordinators, to whose zeal, dedication and efforts we owe
this resolution which has been adopted by consensus.
71. Mr. ULRICHSEN (Denmark): Speaking on behalf of
the nine countries of the European Community I wish to
welcome the eleventh-or rather twelfth-hour result of
this special session of the General Assembly devoted to
disarmament.
72. First of all I wish to pay tribute to the Chairman of
the Ad Hoc Committee, Mr. Ortiz de Rozas, and his principal co-ordinator, Mr. Garcfa Robles, and the other fOordinators. They have conducted the negotiations and the
informal consultations in an outstanding way. Thanks to
them and to the spirit of compromise shown by all delegations we are now able to conclude this special session on a
positive note.
73. Our deliberations have once again confirmed the
complicated nature of problems of arms control and disarmament. I may refer in this connexion to the statement
on behalf uf the nine countries of the European Community which was made in tht. Ad Hoc Committee on 26 June
[4th meeting], in which we expressed the view that the final document did not in all fields reflect fully the purposes
and principles of the Charter.
74. It is a fact that the obligation of all States to refrain
from any use of force which is contrary to the Charter of
the United Nations, as well as the inherent right of individual or collective self-defence, are basic principles embedded in the Charter.
75. In view of the complicated problems confronting us,
it is the more remarkable that we have succeeded in hammering out a final document which marks a certain degree
Cif international consensus on these difficult and urgent issues. No doubt many of us feel that the Programme of
Action is not fully balanced and does not go so far as
m8~y of us would have wished. But it does convey a sense
of urgency regarding the dangers of the continuing worldwide arms race, and it does set out certain relevant priorities.
76. During the general debate a number of new and important ideas and proposals emerged. Unfortunately, it has
not been possible during the short span of time' at our disposal and owing to the complexity of the issues to deal
fully with these new initiatives. It is our understanding that
these initiatives-many of which emanated from members
of the European Community-will be referred to the appropriate bodies for consideration in depth.
In the field of machinery agreement has been reached
on a new structure which we trust will give a new impetus
77.

We welcoffil
clear-weapon Stat
erations on disam
open exchange of
differences of op
tinue to exist am
views is a preconl
understanding. 11
tinues to fulfil a (

to the multilateral negotiating process with an enlarged
participation of the mem 'rs of the international commu:"
nity. This is a significant result of the special session.

85.

78. Let me also stress some other positive aspects of the
special session. For all of us, our discussions have contributed to a better understanding of national positions in the
field of arms control and disarmament which are closely
interrelated with vital national security considerations and
witich reflect widely differing perspectives and convictions. These discussions have certainly also stimulated
public interest in the cause of disarmament.

86. The fmal dl
adopted by consel
of that process.
been made in sora
liberations and n
which satisfies b
participation and
strument for negc
at the special ses~
for an enlarged p
of disarmament p

79. In the view of the nin~ countries of the European'
Community the steps taken and initiated at this special session are but a starting point of a process which must and
wiH be pursued on a continuing basis to halt and reverse
the international arms race. As the Danish Minister of
State, Mrs. Oestergaard, said on behalf of the nine during
the general debate on 25 May: "I wish to record the common conviction of the nine that there is an alternative to an
unrestrained, costly and potentially destabilizing worldwide arms race. The nine feel strongly that a disarmament
process should go hand in hand with a sustained effort to
eliminate the sources of tension and injustice in the
world." [4th meeting, para. 41.]

We have be
ment on the Nord
of the complex f(
velopment [AIS-],
are convinced th
necessary suppor
eventually lead t<
least of the devel,
87.

80. Mr. THUNBORG (Sweden): The Swedish delegation wishes on this important occasion to express satisfaction that a successful outcome of the special session has
been possible. I wish to pay tribute to you, Mr. President,
for your wise leadership which undoubtedly played an important role in securing this outcome.
81. The Chairman of the Ad Hoc Committee, Mr. Ortiz
de Rozas, will occupy a very special place in future assessments of the negotiating process during the first special
session of the General Assembly devoted to disarmament;
I wish here to place on record the profound gratitude and
admiration of the Swedish delegation for the highly skilful
manner in which he conducted the business of the Ad Hoc
Committee and the intensive informal negotiations.

82. i wish also to express my thanks to Mr. Gfu-cia Robles who played a key role in the difficult final stages of
the negotiations. The other co-ordinators and, indeed, the
Secretariat also deserve our gratitude for their untiring efforts.

j:
;i

~ !

Ii

iI

t
Il
I!

1,I1

11
I

The special session on disarmament has provided an
opportunity to conduct far-reaching deliberations and consultations on the critical problems of the arms race. Our
discussions have covered the whole range of disarmament
issues. However, special emphasis has rightly been put on
problems relating to nuclear weapons and to the risk of
further proliferation of such weapons.
83.

84. Inevitably, expectations in advance of this session
varied. Few had expected major break-throughs. After all,
disarmament problems are at the same time politically fundamental and technically complex. However, every participant now has a responsibility to continue the work initiated by this, the most representative gathering of States in
a session devoted solely to disarmament.

Many docUl
In some cases the
in others conflic
consensus docun
proposals; it wi
among Sta!es wh
gotiating process
substantial progn
armament and ne
sponded to the gl
88.

89. Suffice it I
thirty-second ses:
draft comprehem
on strategic arm
before the specia
been able to regi
ter to further act
the drawn-out tr
test ban to be bre

90. The text 0
gramme of Actio
Government con:
a value in its ow
the efforts to pn
nuclear weapom
An effective con
a disarmament n
tion to the proce
91.

The particl

27th meeting - 30 June 1978

85. We welcome the fact that for the first time all the nuclear-weapon States have taken an active part in the deliberations on disarmament. We have been encouraged by the
open exchange of views which has taken place. Whatever
differences of. opinion and of national interest may continue to exist among nations, such an open exchange of
views is a precondition for the emergence of greater mutual
understanding. In that context the United Nations continues to fulfil a central role.
86. The fmal document-which the Assembly has now
adopted by consensus-will be valuable as an integral part
of that process. It testifies to the fact that progress has
been made in some important areas. The machinery of deliberations and negotiations has been modified in a way
which satisfies both the clear interests of broader direct
participation and the necessity of retaining an efficient instrument for negotiations. It is also important to note that
at the special session the Assembly has charted the course
for an enlarged programme of studies for further analysis
of disarmament problems.
87. We have been encouraged to note the general agreement on the Nordic proposal concerning an in-depth study
of the complex relationship between disarmament and development [AIS-lOIl. vol. V, document AIAC.l87180]. We
are convinced that the study [AIS-lOI9] will receive the
necessary support among Member States and that it will
eventually lead to substantive results-for the benefit not
least of the developing countries.
88. Many documents have been presented at this session.
In some cases they represent concurring national views and
in others conflicting or diverging interests. Evidently, a
consensus document will embrace only part of all those
proposals; it will reflect the degree of understanding
among States which can be reached at this stage of the negotiating process. There is no doubt, however, that a more
substantial programme of action in the areas of nuclear disarmament and non-proliferation would have better corresponded to the grave situation of the arms race.
89. Suffice it here to note that it was expected at the
thirty-second session of the General Assembly that both a
draft comprehensive test ban treaty and a new agreement
on strategic arms limitation would have been concluded
before the special session. Th.e Assembly would then have
been able to register substantial results and contribute better to further action-oriented measures. We now look for
the drawn-out trilateral negotiations on a comprehensive
test ban to be brought to an end without any further delay.
90. The text of a comprehensive test ban in the Programme of Action requires special comment. The Swedish
Government considers the comprehensive test ban to have
a value in its own right; it would be highly instrumental in
the efforts to prevent further qualitative improvements of
nuclear weapons and the proliferation of such weapons.
An effective comprehensive test ban would not in itself be
a disarmament measure, but indeed a substantial contribution to the process of curbing the nuclear arms 'race.
The particular respc}fisibility of the leading nuclear-

91.

n- ,

11

"'.'11017

7' -"]'fl :.,,

471

r

weapon Powers for undertaking the measures required-to
achieve nuclear disarmament is clearly expressed in the
Programme of Action. In the Swedish view, concrete measures must be undertaken in the following areas for negotiation: the fr~ezing of the qualitative improvement of existing nuclear weapons and delivery systems; the cessation of
the research and development of new types and new systerns of nuclear weapons and their means of delivery and
guidance; the cessation of the production of nuclear
weapons and of fissionable material for weapon purposes;
the balanced reduction of stockpiles of nuclear weapons
and of their delivery systems; and the prevention of the
proliferation of such weapons and systems.
92. Sweden has not proposed a time schedule for negotiations; however, substantial results at an early date are
necessary. The nuclear build-up accelerates the whole
arms race. Furthermore, it undermines the potential of
detente, both globally and in sensitive regions.
93. In this context, I wish to make it clear that the necessity of early action does not refer solely to strategic
weapons. Great risks are also inherent in a continued development of the large group of non-strategic nuclear
weapons not included in strategic arms limitation agreements. Adequate attention must be focused on those
weapons in the negotiating process.
94. One of several extremely worrying examples of the
development of such non-strategic weapons is the neutron
weapon. As we see it, the neutron weapon is a specialized
nuclear weapon that might lower the nuclear threshold.
That is one of the unacceptable properties of that weapon,
and it is the reason why we equate it vyith th~ so-called
mini-nuclear weapons-to which Sweden has raised strong
objections in various forums.
95. The medium-range nuclear missiles are another category of weapons whose further development causes great
concern. One example is the mobile missile known as the
SS-20. That missile could be employed with great precision and terrible destructive power. The development of
cruise missiles and satellite-killers is another example of
an arms race actuaiiy in progress which raises new obstacl't::s on the road to disarmament.

,.1

'1

,\
"j

I

96. The close link between nuclear disarmament and
non-proliferation has characterized the deliberations of the
special session. It is of central importance that a basic
agreement should be reached on the fact that all States
have a national, as well as a common, interest in seeing to
it that the number of nuclear-weapon States does not increase.
97. Three years have passed since the first Review Conference of the Parties to the Treaty on the NonProliferation of Nuclear Weapons took place [resalution
2373 (XXII). annex]; two years from now the next Review
Conference is due to be convened. No efforts should be
spared during this time to maintain ana strengthen an effective and universally accepted non-proliferation regime.
98.

The risk of the proliferation of nuclear weapons is

77'7

I'M

•

7

ll'IIIIIII-----....
4U

iiiiJ _ _I!t'--ijjij·-Iiil.VWilliii!··ill.IMi!!!liii!!!·iIli!fr.~.[niiii!ijM!ii!!lI~!iII;!iiiiiiiili:liii_IWMlilJW,ifiiiiii!Miliriiii!!il~ii!j@Mil.-_i\i\!:fiJ~-~Ji~'.!m!i";l!i1J~i&w*';';»'ii::i,~:·;.i:,':I;:;;;;.~=.

:;;:.:::2",·2;,;,:"];;",c:s."Ez.:c.;;;r,;:,c;'·.;:;:;.;,::.L·c,::,:C.:,;':;~'"

must work, ~e~arately and jointly, ~o open new ave~ues: It
is our conviction that a more active and broade~lOg. 10volvement o~ the part of non-govemme~tal.org~Jl1za.t1ons
and the publIc can make a valuable contrIbUtion m thiS regard.

also closely linked with the peaceful use of nuclear energy.
All States have the right to decide how they can best ensure their energy supplies. As regards nuclear power for
peaceful purposes, international co-operation and concord
are of decisive importance. In order to avoid discrimination all States must, in our view. accept comprehensive
and effective international safeguards for all fissionable
material in the nuclear fuel cycle. The risks inherent in a
rapid and uncontrolled development of nuclear power must
be pointed out, and advantage should be taken of the possibilities now provided by alternative energy conservation
technologies.

104. Against the background I have sketched here, I believe it is not unrealistic to finish by striking a note of
hope. What we need now is to muster the will for political
action and constructive co-operation. Let us all work in
such a spirit in the years to come, until we convene here
again at the next special session.

The Swedish delegation would like to stress the importance it attaches to the problems relating to the wor~d­
wide accumulation of conventional armaments and the 10ternational transfer of such arms. As a result of the special
session a consensus has been achieved to the effect that the
limitation and gradual reduction of such weapons should
be resolutely pursued. This is the first time that it has
proved possible to consider that important question in a
constructive way in the United Nati.ons. The issue has now,
been firmly established as one of the priority items for the
deliberations in the United Nations on disarmament.

105. Mr. BARTON (Canada): Mr. President, may I at
the outset congratulate you most warmly for having guided
this historic session to a successful conclusion. At times
the gravity of the issues involved and the often sharp differences in the positions of many participating countries
threatened to be too much for us. But your skilful efforts
and the invaluable contributions of the Chairman of the Ad
Hoc Committee and his dedicated team of co-ordinators
have earned our admiration, respect and gra~itude, as all
obstas;les to progress succumbed one by one to the persistence of their goodwill.

110. As rn
bate, a gl~a
this special
negotiate ag
it has been·
That task I
Moreover, v
will be avail
nize better f
reverse the I
try continue

;!
!J

106. Our Final Document. despite many prophecies of
doom, has emerged as a consensus in which all of us can
take pride. It sums up in quietly compelling language the
demand of all mankind that somehow swords must be
beaten into ploughshares. It goes beyond, to point the way
to concrete steps and practical activities that will serve our
shared priorities and goals.

101. Each participant in this session knows the importance of the question of openness regarding military
bud2ets as a step on the way to agreed reductions acceptable- to all. Achieving such -openness would be an important confidence-building measure. In view of the difficulty
of the problems involved, it is important to continue deliberations on that subject. The session has established an adequate basis for such deliberations.

108. Of course, no Assembly of this size and momentous
concern to the world could ever promise to satisfy in full
the bill of particulars of each individual participatin~ country. My country would have preferred to see several questions dealt with differently from the way in which the consensus solutions were worked out in our Final Document.
Certainly our deeply held convictions of the necessity of
strengthening the internation,l1 non-proliferation system
and for encouraging broader adherence to the Treaty on the
Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons are not reflected in
the terms in which we would have drafted them if we had
not been loyal to the agreed objective of one document, a
consensus document. The fact is, of course, that all of us
have had to make significant concessions on many points
of special interest to our Governments and peoples. In .doing so we have, nevertheless, managed to create a fmal
consensus document that is important, both for what it
contains and for the fact that it carries with it the agreement of virtually the whole world.

103. In future efforts at disarmament, Governments,
non-governmental organizations and research institutes

few short w
the interim t
sion on dis,
now that m~
conclusions
Sweden and

.'

100. International action with regard to the issue of particularly inhumane weapons has also been discussed at this
session. We take note of the fact that agreement has been
reached that such action should be taken to prohibit or restrict, for humanitarian reasons, the use of specific, excessively injurious or in~iscriminate conventional ~eapo~s.
The Swedish delegation appeals to all States-mcludmg
those which are members of the two major military 'alliances-to make full use of the opportunity that will be provided by the 1979 United Nations conference on this s~b­
jecr: that is, to bring about agreement on the e.ffectlve
prohibition or restriction of the weapon categorIes concerned, and to participate actively in the preparatory work
for that conference.

102. Every concrete step which would contribute to the
prevention of a continuation of the arms race remains
highly important. Jointly preserved national and collective
security at successively lower levels of armaments remains
the overriding goal. The special session has indicated
where difficulties lie, what can be achieved at this stage,
and which measures should be urgently undertaken. The
second agreement on strategic arms limitation and the
comprehensive test ban will be the first "touchstones" of
the further course of the disarmament process.

"'''~

I

General Assembly - Tenth Special Session - Plenary Meetings

99.

.. -.• ,.

107. For my delegation, and for others who share our
views, it is especially gratifying that the main elements of
what my Prime, Minister described as a strategy of suffocation for resisting the dynamic of the nuclear arms race [6th
meeting] are explicitly or implicitly covered in the Programme of Action.

109. It is hard to believe that the general debate, which
attracted so many distinguished world figures and put such
a seal of importance on our work, was concluded only a

,I
, I

,I

Ill. Sir I
dent, before
the work of
ciate the Bri
ready been I
duct of our
as the origiI

i!
(i

l"j

112. I sho
of the Ad 1.
larty for thl
through the
last few da)
Garda Rob
patient neg(
113. The
great impor
ament. My
June [14th
draft papers
We attache
Action, and
fiificant pr
ideas, whet
nal Docum
114. At t1
would act I
isting nego
We hoped
tracted to c
field of dis
Conference
sentative.
115. Whl
has been (
have been
before. Th;
ing interesl
ing in disa
play some
tions and)

17th meeting - 30 June 1978

few short weeks ago. So much has been accomplished in
the interim that a full and fair evaluation of the special session on disarmament cannot yet be made. But I can say
now that my delegation subscribes without reserve to the
conclusions drawn for us by the delegations of Mexico and
Sweden and now incorporated in our Final Document.
110. As my Prime Minister suggested in the general debate, a gl~at responsibility has rested on the Assembly at
this special session. It has not been our business here to
negotiate agreements. That is 8. task for other forums. But
it has been our responsibility to take stock and prescribe.
That task has been accomplished-well accomplished.
Moreover, we have ensured that the appropriate machinery
will be available to help the international community organize better for its newly affirmed determination to halt and
reverse the arms race. To that unrelenting effort, my country continues to be unreservedly dedicated.
Ill. Sir Derick ASHE (United Kingdom): Mr. President, before I make some comments on the conclusion of
the work of this session, it gives me great pleasure to associate the British delegation with the tributes which have already been made to you personally, Sir, for your wise conduct of our affairs and, through you, to your Government
as the originator of this session.
112. I should also like to pay a tribute to the Chairman
of the Ad Hoc Committee, Mr. Ortiz de Rozas, particuhirly for the way in which he has so skilfully piloted us
through the difficult waters that we have traversed in the
last few days, and to his co-ordinator and conciliator, Mr.
Garda Robles, for the contribution made by his firm and
patient negotiation on many intractable matters.
113. The British Government has manifestly accorded
great importance to this special session devoted to disarmament. My Prime Minister made a major speech here on 2
June [14th meeting]. Britain was among the sponsors of
draft papers for the three sections of the Final Document.
We attached particular importance to the Programme of
Action, and the Western draft contained a number of sig_!~!_--~

........ 1 ....

\1.\1.. . _1- .... 11

nlllcaUl 1'1 UPU:Hl1~. ,. c

":_n.a fort. .......

~IHlIl \"UIILlIIU,",

0110

thAQD

.V pU10U,",

"''"'0'"'

ideas, whether or not they appear now in the session's Final Document.
114. At the outset our hope was that the special session
would act as a stimulus to progress towards success in existing negotiations and towards starting new negotiations.
We hoped that greater intemational attention would be attracted to disarmament. We wanted sensible reform in the
field of disarmament ma~hinery, particularly to make the
Conference of the Committee on Disarmament more representative.
115. What has been achieved? Certainly greater attention
has been drawn to disarmament. Certainly many issues
have been discussed on a wider basis, perhaps, than ever
before. That is positive in itself. We welcome the increasing interest which Governments and peoples alike are taking in disarmament and are very glad to have been able to
play some part in bringing the non-governmental organizations and research institutes concerned with disarmament

473

into closer association with the activities of the special session, recognizing, as we do, their important role in guiding
and enlightening public opinion.
116. Progress has also been made at this special session
on the question of machinery. In particular we have agreed
on a sensible package of changes concerning the negotiating body ~ It will now be more representative and better
structured. We welcome this result and are glad to have
played a role in achieving it. We shall continue to play our
part as actively as before in the negotiating body, where
we look forward to co-operating closely with the new
members as well as our old friends.

1

i

I

i
,

117. These are the good points in what has happened. As
we consider in the coming weeks our over-all assessment
of the session,. we shall give them due weight. But I cannot conceal that I also feel disappointment at other aspects
of the outcome of this first attempt at tackling disarmament
by new means. I wish, above all, that we could point to
agreement on one or more realistic new ideas launched at
the session which might produce specific results to enhance international security. I wish the Final Document
and the covering resolution were more balanced in the emphasis they place on conventional and nuclear disarmament
and on the measures to prevent nuclear proliferation. Of
course, Britain well understands the strength of feeling
about nuclear weapons, but we should not forget that the
Charter of the United Nations enjoins us, to use its own
words, "to save succeeding generations from the scourge
of war". Disarmament is a means to that end and must involve parallel progress with regard to weapons of every
kind as well as being ~alanced and verified so as to enhance stability and reduce the risk of conflict.
118. In connexion with the Final Document just adopted,
I should like to make the following observations with regard to my Government's positions.
119. We wish to make it clear, with regard to the references in paragraphs 22 and 83 to the limitation of transfers
of conventional arms, that the requirement of taking into
account the right of peoples to self-determination does not
in any way imply our acceptance of the desirability of using force to resolve conflicts arising from the search for
self-determination. We have always taken the view that
these matters should be resolved by peaceful means.
120. We are glad that in paragraph 50 of the Final Document, in the passage on further measures of nuclear disarmament, it is recognized that negotiation of agreements
must take place at appropriate stages of our progress towards the ultimate goal of eliminating nuclear weapons,
and with adequate measures of verification.
121. In connexion with paragraph 56 of the Final Document: under the Charter of the United Nations, Member
States are, in their international relations, obliged to refrain from the use or threat of use of force in any manner
inconsistent with the purposes of the United Nations. The
Charter also maintains the right of States to individual or
collective self-defence. My Government has made it clear
that we will not use nuclear weapons except in self-

I

I

t

I

414

General Assembly - Tenth Special Session - Plenary Meetings

defence as provided for in the Charter-that is, in the case
of an a<:tual armed attack on the United Kingdom, its dependent territories, its armed forces or its allies. My Government cannot renounce or circumscribe in principle its
right to use, if necessary, any of the means available for
defence.
122. On the subject of security assurances, which is dealt
with in paragraphs 32 and 59 of the Final Document, I
should like to recall the statement I made at the 26th plenary meeting. In that st.atement, I gave, on behalf of my
Government, a negative security assurance which effectively assures non-nuclear-weapon States, as appropriate,
against the use or threat of use of nuclear weapons.
123. Regarding paragraph 77 of the Final Document, on
weapons of mass destruction based on new scientific principles, the British Government's position remains as set
out in General Assembly resolution 32/84 B.
124. Concerning paragraph 120 of the Final Document,
it is my Government's understanding that the agreement on
the negotiating body was reached on the basis that present
members of the negotiating body should, if they so
wished, remain members of the Committee on Disarmament.
125. I should like to end my last remarks of the session
on a hopeful note. A little progress, although far too little,
has been achieved. Many of us here may be disappointed
in the Final Document. I must confess that there were
times when our discussions on it seemed to me more like
the ritual death dance of dying elephants than the greatest
and most hopeful gathering of the powers of this earth
united in a common search for disarmament and international security. But this is a far cry from saying that our effOl1s have failed; manifestly. we have some solid achievements to our credit. At an international meeting like this,
called to discuss matters of such complexity. matters that
touch upon the most vital and fundamental interests of
Stlltes, it was hardly to be expected that conflicting points
,~~. "i....,

,,'.

• Ii'" TY

tun"I,I
n ....t
ari"
",
...,.
Ma IU

r "that thA"
,...... "IA _all
h.. •r ..,......
n_
'" J
"'...,_.•• --..., ••

...,.

ciled. Let us take encouragement from what we have been
able to do and from the knowledge that for the first time
ever the whole world has been able to agree on a single
document about disarmament.
126. For its part, Britain will continue in all the appropriate forums to strive for progress in disarmament through
multilateral, balanced and verified disarmament agreements that lead us towards a safer world. Our immediate
and most urgent task is to achieve success in the tripartite
negotiations on a comprehensive test ban treaty at Geneva
and to maintain the new momentum recently injected into
the negotiations at Vienna on mutual and balanced force
reductions.

I
I

!

127. Mr. HOVEYDA (Iran) (interpretation from
French): Although my delegation participated in the consensus. I must state that the text that has just been adopted
does not satisfy us completely. That is so because it does
not truly fulfil the hopes that the convening of this special

session had aroused throughout the world. We still face the
same problems of substance. It is true that some modest
progress has been at;hie~ed i~ certain fields:-:for eXaI?ple,
those related to the dehberatmg and negottatmg bodlesbut we must acknowledge that the essential issues and the
differences of view remain almost completely intact, just
as they were before this special session began.

Asseml
majorit
be eph(
sensus
operati,
the pol
to inCH
regard,
documl
Arabc
over pi
such c(

128. For our part, we have always participated in good
faith in the efforts towards general and controlled disarmament. What is more, we have attempted to take in this
field initiatives that, although symbolic. are none the less
specific. The most recent of these initiatives was taken
only some two weeks ago, when my Sovereign announced
that $7 million would be allocated from our defence
budget as a contribution towards the implementation of
plans related to the International Year of the Child. We
hope that such gestures will proliferate everywhere and
will thereby contribute to the establishment of an atmosphere conducive to the success of the efforts of the international community.

133.
not me
tences
our agl
existec
neous
bly. Tl
our aul
not bel
our agl
tude; i
graphs

Mr. N'Dong (Gabon), Vice-President, took the Chair.

129. To revert to this session that is about to conclude, I
believe that. despite the disappointments, it has been useful. Indeed, it has made possible a wide-ranging exchange
of views and a better understanding of the problems. And
if the decisions taken-however modest they may be-are
followed up, there can be no doubt that they will facilitate
negotiations and discussions.

134.
regard
tion to
Rules
of pm
plicity
same I
of the
multar
it diffi
have i
made
due til
that th
dent. .
just e)

130. Aware as I am of the enormous difficulties encountered during our work-difficulties illustrated by the innumerable brackets that encumbered our working documents
-I cannot conclude without expressing our gratitude to all
those whose efforts made possible the achievement of a
consensus. We should like to thank above all the President
of this session for the admirable way in which he guided
Ol!:r work. We wish, too, to congratulate Mr. Ortiz de Rozas, the Chairman of our Ad Hoc Committee, as well as
Mr. Garcfa Robles and the Chairmen and co-ordinators of
the working groups and the drafting groups, who worked
day and night to bridge differences of view and to ensure
that the very idea of disarmament would not end up by being placed in brackets.

135.
they ~
Denm
countl
behalf

131. Mr. ERNEMANN (Belgium) (interpretation from
French): Rarely has a committee chairman played such an
important and decisive part as Mr. Ortiz de Rozas, the
Chairman of the Preparatory Committee and then of the Ad
Hoc Committee of the tenth special session. We attribute
much of the success we have achieved to him. A tribute
must be paid also to the members of the Bureau of the Ad
Hoc Committee; its Rapporteur, Mr. Bensmail; the coordinators of the working groups; and, in particular, Mr.
Garcfa Robles of Mexico. To him, too, we owe in large
part the results achieved.

136.
major

137.
Howe
likely
tion v
less p

138.
mise
be as!
questi
and \\

132. The success of our work can be attributed also to
the spirit that prevailed. The faithful observance by all of
the rule of consensus, both in the small groups and in the
Ad Hoc Committee itself, is noteworthy. In the General

j

"

.~

27th meeting - 30 June 1978

Assembly. arithmetics can command dominance. and the
majority can therefore prevail. But the effect of this would
be ephemeral. We should like to see in the practice of consensus the development of the spirit of international cooperation. Consensus is born of tolerance. of respect for
the policies and opinions of others. Its practice contributes
to increasing the value of the Organization's work. In this
regard. we should like to pay a tribute to the sponsors of
document A/S-IO/AC.l /L. 1/Rev. 1. and in particular to the
Arab countries for having allowed consensus to prevail
over particular concerns. in spite of their conviction that
such concerns are legitimate and shared.
133. The fact that we have supported the consensus does
not mean that we approve of all the thoughts. all the sentences and all the words in the Final Document. We gave
our agreement last night in order that a document which
existed only in English. incompletely printed and erroneous in part. could be submitted to the General Assembly. Today. again. we have joined in the consensus; yet
our authorities have not had the final French text and have
not been able to study the scope of each provision. Thus
our agreement is above all a reflection of our positive attitude; it does not mean that we agree with all the paragraphs of the document.
134. That leads me to formulate some reservations with
regard to the methods of work used-reservations in addition to those expressed at the beginning of this meeting.
Rules 51, 56, 78 and 120 of the General Assembly's rules
of procedure have not always been respected. The multiplicity of working groups, the fact that they met at the
same time. the frequency of their meetings, the small size
of the meeting rooms, the failure to publish documents simultaneously in the official languages: all this often made
it difficult for everyone to attend all the discussions or to
have adequate information about the work going on, or
made it impossible to take valid opinions into account in
due time. We have to deplore this and to express the hope
that this experience will not be allowed to serve as a precedent. This in no way detracts from the satisfaction we have
just expressed about the actual conduct of our work.
135. As for the results themselves, our judgement is that
they give reasonable satisfaction. The representative of
Denmark, the country that holds the chairmanship of the
countries of the European Community, stated this on our
behalf at the beginning of this meeting.
136. I shall take up, in order and very briefly, the three
major headings of the Final Document.
137. The Declaration is a generally valid document.
However, we should have preferred a shorter text, more
likely to make an impact on public opinion. The introduction would have benefited from being more concise and
less polemical.
138. The Programme of Action is the result of a compromise between different points of view and will obviously
be assessed in different ways. Some will lay stress on the
questions on which it was not possible to reach agreement
and will regard them as more important than the few mea-

475

sures which were unanimously approved. I think, for my
part. that a realistic analysis would place the Programme
of Action within a context of continuity; and this continuity is particularly reflected in the decision to hold another
special session. That is also one of the essential results of
our work.
139. Decisions affecting machinery are of vital importance for the future. The arrangement made with regard to
the deliberative and negotiating bodies take account of two
essential principles: that of universality, which gives every
country a right to participate, and that of effectiveness,
which imposes a certain limitation on participation in the
process of negotiation. The search for a balance between
these two contradictory principles led us, at the 16th meeting of the Ad Hoc Committee, to attempt to clarify an obscure point affecting the interpretation of paragraph 120 of
the Final Document. Belgium is satisfied that Mr. Ortiz de
Rozas, on behalf of the Committee, gave the proper interpretation, to the effect that at each periodic review of the
composition of the Committee on Disarmament there will
be consultation between Member States of the General Assembly and the President of the General Assembly.
140. My country accepted the consensus subject to the
general reservation I have mentioned, but at this stage I
should like to stress certain points which for us are of particular importance.
141 . We are pleased to see the question of conventional
arms retained as one of the priorities which should be dealt
with at the same time as the question of nuclear arms.
142. We are also pleased to see the extent to which the
regional aspect of security problems, and hence of disarmament, grew in importance in the course of the work of the
special session and also in the Final Document itself. Belgium will continue to press its proposal for the undertaking of a systematic study of regional disarmament questions, in accordance with resolution 32/87 D adopted at the
thirty-second session of the General Assembly. A decision
:1'0 "..f'f'__ .. nt tho ·I'h ....... u th;rrl
Will nave 1U uc 111r.CII LV UIlO) "11"'.... a. '11'" .1111 •.1;........ "',.,"'~
sion. We shall have to take account of, among other
things, national contributions submitted to the SecretaryGeneral, and also the conclusions of the special session. A
considerable number of these relate to the possibilities offered by the regional approach.
__ .!11

L __ ._

.. _

L_

...... 1.. __

.. -.

.......

C,:lC

143. Finally, Belgium would like at this stage to express
two specific reservations with regard to the Final Document.
144. First, on the subject of non-proliferation, we regret
the inadequate nature of the reference to the Treaty on the
Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons. We consider that
Treaty to be a basic instrument for the non-proliferation
regime. We are awar6, of course, of its short-comings, but
it is and must remain, in our opinion, a universal instrument. This point is not sufficiently stressed, in our view,
in paragraph 67 of the Final Document. The result of this
is a lack of balance in the part of the Programme of Action
which deals with non-proliferation.

',:

416

General Assembly - Tenth Spedal Session - Plenary Meetlnp

145. Secondly, with regard to the non-use of force,
which is dealt with in paragraphs 32 and 58, I shouid iike
to state that for Belgium any form of recourse to force
must be condemned if it occurs in contravention of the prescriptions of the Charter of the United Nations. The nonuse of force or of the threat of force is an absolute principle which is not limited to the use or threat of use of
nuclear weapons, as the language of these two paragraphs
might suggest.
146. My country also wishes to reserve its position, until
it is better informed, with regard to the preparation of a
code of peaceful conduct of States referred to in paragraph
58.
147. This session of the General Assembly will be a
landmark on the road to disarmament if the political will
which was made manifest in the later phase of our work
continues to inspire the international community when the
measures advocated in the Final Document are being implemented.
148. Of course, this session marks in practice the end
of the mandate which Member States entrusted to Mr.
Mojsov, when electing him to the presidency of the General Assembly. I should like to say to him, both on behalf
of the Belgian Government and on my own behalf, that
our hopes have been more than fulfilled. It is a long time
since the General Assembly has been able to work under
the auspices of, at the same time, such wisdom and moderation, political sense, firmness and cordiality. We pay a
tribute to the Socialist Federal Republic of Yugoslavia and
to Mr. Mojsov, whom we thank for his devotion.
149. Mr. CESKA (Austria): As the first special session
devoted to disarmament comes to an end, the Austrian delegation, like the delegations of the other Member States,
wiil have to draw conclusions from the results of this huge
undertaking-a general mobilization of the combined efforts of all United Nations Member countries to advance
the cause of disarmament.
150. 1 wish to state clearly that, despite all the difficulties encountered, our over-all balance is a positive one. It
seems of particular importance to us that all United Nations Members, including all nuclear-weapon States, have
participated actively in the work of this special session,
thus giving proof of their understanding of the necessity
for concrete and significant steps to halt and reverse the
arms race.
151. Taking into account the complexity of the task, the
results of this first special session of the General Assembly
on disarmament as expressed in its Final Document, incomplete as they may appear in some parts, are quite remarkable. They will constitute a good basis for further
work. [ wish to stress how important it is that we have
reached a very large measure of understanding as far as
concerns the Introduction and the Declaration, including
the principles of disarmament. Substantial agreement has
also been reached on important elements of a Programme
of Action for disannament. We hope that in the near future
further progress in this field will be possible. To this end it

will be necessary for the nuclear-weapon States, and in
particuiar the two leading nuciear-weapon States, to acknowledge the special responsibilities they bear in the field
of disarmament.

15f

not
SOli

not
intl
gar

152. The decisions of this special session on the future
machinery for disarmament efforts are far-reaching. In the
opinion of the Austrian delegation it is important that we
have all agreed on the necessity of having deliberative as
well as negotiating bodies and bodies to carry out the research work indispensable to serious disarmament efforts.

IS'
nUl

COl

thi

153. Certainly not all our initial hopes and expectations
have been met so far. We should have liked to see more
far-reaching decisions taken here and now. In this connexion, 1 should like also to turn briefly to one subject to
which my delegation has attached particular importance
from the beginning even of the preparatory stages of our
work. It is the subject of verification of disarmament. We
note with satisfaction that the concept of verification and
its relationship with mutual confidence is reflected in the
Declaration as well as in the Programme of Action. I
should like, in this context, to recall the working paper on
this subject submitted by Austria [AlS-101 J, vol. VI. document AIAC.1871101] in which we proposed not only concrete language for the section on principles, but also the
carrying out of an expert study on different aspects of this
problem.
154. My delegation was gratified by the interest and support which those proposals elicited, in particular from the
delegations of Peru, Sweden, the Netherlands, Italy and
France and many others. This, as well as many statements
during the general debate, the discussions in the drafting
groups and also a number of new and very ambitious related proposals, demonstrated very dearly that there is a
case for more detailed consideration of different aspects of
verification. There is a similar assertion in the background
paper produced by the Secretariat [ibid., document AI
AC.187/I09]. My delegation has already had occasion to
thank the Secretariat for the considerable effort involved

1St

tha
nat
wh
tiol
for
tha
prc
su~

15~

intl

wh
am
mi l
16l

Pn
th~

be
le!!
,I

i
~'1

,,

: J

. I

!

11
;1

there,

U

On the other hand, the argument presented by a
number of delegations in the course of the discussions,
namely, that verification has to be viewed in close conjunction with specific disarmament agreements, cannot be
overlooked. This is why my delegation felt that, as a first
step, an expert study on all aspects of verification, which
necessarily would endeavour to draw some general conclusions, might be premature at this time. We therefore proposed to request the Secretary-General to seek the views of
Member States on this subject and to transmit the replies to
the General Assembly. In particular, views on the following points would be of interest: previous experience with
the verification of disarmament agreements, proposals for
agreed concepts and definitions, different approaches to
verification, the implications of modem technology and its
development for verification, and wider international participation, active or passive, in verification procedures, including organizational aspects. The replies on these points
would then serve as a useful point of departure for any further discussion.

Ii

155.

~

!I'!
I!
ii
11

I~

I
I
I

1

j

I

I
I

!
j

Tb

or
pR
dUI
to
16
of
he
se:

fOI
da
d(J
m:
WI

dr
V(J
m
pr,
ct)
ati

·1

j

:1

:·1
.~

I~

pr,
an
W
an
wi

Z7th meeting - 30 June 1978

156. In view of the widespread interest in this issue, we
note with particular regret that, owing to the objections of
some delegations, a consensus on our proposal so far has
not been possible. We would, however, like to add that we
intend to pursue this matter further in the appropriate organs of the United Nations.
157. The Final Document before us contains a certain
number of points which we have accepted in the spirit of
compromise but which do not fully reflect our way of
thinking. May I point out some of these texts.
158.
Paragraph I, in the Introduction, states, inter alia,
that the time has come to abandon the use of force in international relations. This phrase could be misunderstood. I
wish to stress the view of my delegation that United Nations Member States have already abandoned the use of
force through their commitments under the Charter and
that there was never a time when the use of force was appropriate, as the particular phrase I am referring to might
suggest.
159. In the Declaration, it is stated in paragraph 41 that,
inter alia, "all States should . . . refrain from actions
which might adversely affect efforts in the field of disarmament... ". This wording is very general and vague and
might be interpreted rather di.fferently by Member States.
160. The third point I want to raise is contained in the
Programme of Action where it is stated in paragraph 54
that: "Significant progress in nuclear disarmament would
be facilitated both by parallel political or international
legal measures to strengthen the security of States... ".
This formulation seems to us rather unclear. What political
or international legal measures ~lre meant? We would have
preferred thoroughly to discuss lilnd specify these measures
during our drafting work, but that was not possible owing
to a lack of time.
161. The document which we have before us is the result
of the serious consultations and negotiations which were
held in the course of the preparatory stage of the special
session, as well as during the session itself. Intensive efforts, furthermore, have been made during these last few
days and nights to get final agreement on many parts of the
document. I should like in particular 'to thank the Chairman of the Ad Hoc Committee, Mr. Ortiz de Rozas, as
well as Mr. Garda Robles and the co-ordinators of the
drafting groups, and all delegations that have been involved in these efforts, for the result that has been transmitted to us today. We believe that the document in its
present form constitutes the highest level of consensus that
could be reached at this first special session devoted to disarmament.
162. In the course of this session we had to realize that
progress in disarmament is even more difficult to achieve
and more time-consuming than we had initiaJlyexpected.
We must, however, realize that time is working against us
and that we are engaged in a race which we will have to
win if we want to survive.

477

163. Therefore, this first special session on disarmament
must be seen as the turning-point towsids combined and
successful efforts for genuine disarmament. We do hope
that early and positive developments in the field of disarmament will soon meet this expectation.
164. I cannot conclude my remarks without paying special tribute to the outstanding guidance and leadership
which the President of this Assembly, Mr. Mojsov, has offered to this special session. If we can successfully conclude this session today, it is largely due to his well-known
personal commitment to the cause of disarmament.
165. Mr. PASTINEN <Finland): The purpose of my
statement is to present some comments of the Finnish delegation on the Final Document.
166. On the basis of its active policy of neutrality, Finland has a natural interest in disarmament. This explains
my country's long and sustained involvement in disarmament matters and .its interest in this special session.
167. I wish to express the satisfaction of my delegation
at the fact that the Final Document of this session was
adopted by consensus. Indeed, any other result would have
been a setback to the efforts of the international community in pursuit of disarmament. In a very real sense, then,
the result that we have reached by consensus is the common achievement of us all.
168. We have been aware throughout of the importance
of the special session, the first of its kind. We have been
aware of the importance of reaching decisions by consensus. Now, consensus inevitably implies compromise.
The end-product of the process of bargaining and mutual
accommodation can never be one that wholly pleases everyone. The essence of consensus is that everybody can
live with it and, at best, without too much difficulty.
169. The most tangible outcome of the special session,
and one that can be readily implemented, is the decision
on disarmament machinery. It is natural, therefore, that
this particular aspect should have been the subject of intensive negotiations. The General Assembly decisions now
provide for machinery consisting of two deliberative
bodies, the First Committee of the General Assembly and
the Disarmament Commission, and a negotiating body
with a central position and limited size, the Committee on
Disarmament. We are convinced that the new negotiating
body will be able to discharge its duties effectively. One of
the conditions for its efficiency is that all members, particularly the new members, have the necessary experience
and expertise to fulfil their duties.
170. An overwhelming indication of the importance that
Governments attach to disarmament is the seriOl..sness of
their involvement in the special session and its preparations. Thus the general debate itself was a valuable contribution to disarmament efforts. Both the contents of the debate and the level of representation reflected a sense of
urgency. More perhaps than ever before, world public
opinion has been focused on the issues of disarmament in

',., -. _.-,'<-'-' "'..

~."

.. ...
~

,~~~-

....

>~~::_:e",;}\:;._.:,;..;_:~;.:~":,-~,,-':';:;';\':S"""~ J

418

General Assembly - Tenth Special SeNion - Plenary Meetings

their entirety. Disarmament negotiators should v;,ew this as
creating both an incentive and an obligation.
171. During the preparatory stage, and in the course of
the session itself, a number of delegations put forth well
prepared and thoroughly considered pmposals. Although
some of them cannot be implemented nl'W, and although
some of them are not reflected in the Final Document to
the extent that their sponsors certainly would have hoped,
they will nevertheless, we believe, give fresh impetus to
disarmament deliberations and negotiations in future.
172. By refraining from making reservations, my delegation does not wish to imply that the Final Document fully
corresponds to the wishes of the Finnish Government. With
regard to some issues, we would have preferred seeing
Governments assume more explicit obligations. This is
particularly true in the case of the non-proliferation of nuclear weapons and the security of non-nuclear-weapon
States. To come to grips with such issues, the international
community will have to exert further joint efforts.
173. Many delegations, including my own, had considerable difficulty with the sections on the non-proliferation of
nuclear weapons. In our view the Treaty on the NonProliferation of Nuclear Weapons remains the best instrument to combat the proliferation of nuclear weapons. We
had hoped, therefore, that the Final Document would take
due note of the fact that non-proliferation and increased international co-operation in the peareful use of nuclear energy are not contradictory but complementary. There may
be disagreement on specific formulations. Yet, as we see
it, the main thrust of non-proliferation action must be towards an international consensus on these questions.
I

174. The danger posed by nuclear weapons is rightly
considered a major threat to international peace and security, to the security of all States. It is natural, therefore,
that the non-nuclear-weapon States in particular should expect the nuclear-weapon States to give assurances against
the use or threat of use of nuclear weapons against States
that do not possess them. Although the relevant passage in
the Programme of Action may be considered far from satisfactory, we hope that discussions on the subject will expedite the process towards the elimination of the use and,
eventually, of the existence of nuclear weapons altogether.
175. With regard to nuclear-weapon-free zones-another
item of specific interest to my delegation-the language of
the Programme of Action reflects a wide measure of agreement on the purposes and modalities of such zones. My
delegation hopes that the experience already accrued from
existing nuclear-weapon-free zones and the provisions now
agreed on will promote the establishment of such zones in
various parts of the world, including the region where my
country is situated.

116. To my Government's regret, and contrary to the anticipation of the General Assembly, neither the text of a
comprehensive test-ban treaty nor an agreement on the second round of talks on strategic anns limitation were ready
to be reported at the special session as having been negoti-

ated. We dare to hope for early results from these two negotiations, as indeed called for in the Final Document. A
comprehensive test ban and a second agreement on strategic arms limitation would, more than anything else, have a
positive impact on disarmament and on relations between
the major parties concerned in the negotiations and would
thus, we believe, strengthen detente to the benefit of all.
177. My delegation believes that the special session has
provided considerable impetus for future dis?..rrnament efforts. We also hope that the session has generated the necessary political will to resolve arms control and disarmament questions however complex. In this work, we want
to pledge our Government's co-operation in pursuing the
course charted by the special session and in its Final Document.
178. I would be remiss if I did not take this opportunity
to convey our gratitude and appreciation to the President of
the General Assembly as well as the Chairman of the Ad
Hoc Committee, Mr. Ortiz de Rozas, his main coordinator, Mr. Gareia Robles, the C airmen of the two
working groups, Mr. Jaroszek and Mr. Iempleton and the
other co-ordinators. Without their tireless efforts and persistence, we might well not have had a Final Document today, at least not one adopted by consensus.
179. Mr. TAITTINGER (France) (interpretation from
French): I should like first of all to associate myself with
the compliments which have been addressed to the President of this Assembly for the mastery which he has shown
in the conduct of our work. 1should also like to pay a very
warm tribute to the Chairman of the Ad Hoc Committee,
Mr. Ortiz de Rozas, who during these past weeks has
shown both his skUl and his tllents--and I would say that
we have in fact not seen all his talents. This tribute is also
directed to those who have helped him in the accomplishment of this task, and I refer to the other officers of the
Committee and the co-ordinators. I should like to congratulate especially Mr. Garcfa Robles, whose great authority
in the field of disarmament was extremely useful for the
work being carried out by the co-ordinators. I would not
wish to overlook the members of the Secretariat, who carried out their work successfully and made considerable efforts in a very short period of time; we all appreciate the
importance of what they did.
180. This tenth special session of the General Assembly
of the United Nations devoted to disarmament represents a
major event for three reasons: first, because of the magnitude of the tasks which were assigned to it by those who
conceived it, namely, to take stock of the results achieved,
to draw up a programme of action, to lay the foundations
of new bodies and new negotiating procedures; next, the
fundamental nature of the questions involved, namely,
peace and security, the stages of and the conditions for
genuine disarmament; and finally, it must be emphasized,
the quality of the debate which has occupied us for a
month now. The number of Heads of State and Government who have been present, the level of participation, the
diversity and the interest of the proposals made, bear this
out.

27th meeting - 30 June 1978

181. In speaking at the end of this special session, I
should first, therefore, like to say how pleased France is
that it was able to take place. For years now, endeavours
to brb",g about disarmament, despite certain partial results,
have l.J~en marking time. This session, by changing the
spirit of this undertaking, has provided us with new prospects. Now, disarmament, we believe, it going to seem
much more the concern of one and all.
182. At the session whi~h we are going to close today
the Assembly has adopted a Final Document. The very
first lines of its Introduction state that security '" has always
been one of the most profound aspirations of humanity".
This acknowledgement of the legitimate right of every
State to security, a universal right, the same for all and enshrined in the Charter of the United Nations, is, as I see it,
the essential prerequisite for a concrete and realistic approach to the work of disarmament.
183. The document concludes with the decisions of the
General Assembly setting up institutional machinery which
will follow up the efforts made at this session. The Assembly has taken a decision on the creation of new forums for
negotiation and for deliberation. The Committee on Disarmament, quite obviously more democratic, more open
and more closely connected to the United Nations, has
been born. The principle of consensus will make for effectiveness in its work. The appointment of a secretary by the
Secretary-General of the United Nations will also help to
provide the element of co-ordination and action that is required in such a complex field. The possibility of periodically reviewing the composition of the Committee will allow the desirable adjustments to be made at the appropriate
time. This Committee on Disarmament should, we believe, permit further progress along the road to disarmament.
184. The French Government, when it has drawn its conclusions regarding the work of this session, will have its
word to say on the question of its own participation in this

-_••.

.. ..:_nr hr."'.t
~n

ncw IIc5vuauII5 UVU].

185. In actively taking part in the work of the General
Assembly, France never lost sight of the purpose of general and ~omplete disarmament under effective international controls. We were guided, however, by the dictates
of realism in presenting a new approach to the problems of
disarmament, based on a concrete analysis of the world as
it now is.
186. We have found particularly that, because of geographical and strategic situations, problems did not appear
in the same light for all States. All the regions of the world
today in this regard present special features. There are certain areas where the nuclear deterrent is an element making
for equilibrium, and others, on the contrary, where the introduction of nuclear weapons would constitute a powerful
factor of imbalance. It would be as unrealistic to ignore
this as to deny the common responsibilities which we all
bear for this reason.

479

187. Thus, in the light of the practical approach to the
problems of disa.-mament proposed here in t.ltis very ha!!
by the President of the French Republic [3rd meeting], I
am obliged to state that the document which has been
adopted does not really reflect in certain of its sections this
desire for realism and equilibrium, which appears to me to
be the fundamental prerequisite for any undertakings regarding disarmament.
188. We said yesterday, in our statement at the 16th
meeting of the Ad H QC Committee, that we would have to
enter reservations on paragraphs 32, 51, 58 and 59 of the
Final Document.
189. In connexion with the non-use of nuclear weapons,
which is described in the nrst sentence of paragraph 32
and in paragraph 58 of the Final Document, my delegation
has to state its disagreement with texts that are incompatible with the position taken by my Government. These paragraphs make reference in effect to proposals regarding the
limitation or the prohibition of nuclear weapons. France's
defence strategy has been based Gn fOlmdations which
have frequently been made clear publicly. The French
Government therefore could not go along with these two
formulations.
190. Furthermore, as regards paragraph 59 concerning
assurances of the non-use of nuclear weapons against nonnuclear States, the delegation of France would recall that
France is prepared to give such assurances, in accordance
with arrangements to be negotiated, to States which constitute non-nuclear zones.
191 . The French delegation does not intend to impede
any consensus on the Programme of Action. However, we
would like to make it clear that we cannot accept the second sentence of paragraph 51, which, speaking of the cessation of nuclear tests, says: .. It would make a significant
contribution to the above aim of ending the qualitative improvement of nuclear weapons and the deveiopment of
new types of such weapons and of preventing the proliferation of nuclear weapons. ' ,

192. France considers that the cessation of nuclear tests
should be seen in the context of a genuine disarmament
process. We are therefore prepared to go along with the
idea expressed in the firsC sentence of paragraph 51 which
advocates: "the cessation of nuclear-weapon testing by all
States within the framework of an effective"-and I would
like to stress the word "effective"-"nuclear disarmament
process". But we consider that it would be erroneous to
believe that a balt to testing would in fact produce a qualitative freeze in nuclear weapons. The two most heavily
armed Powers have, by means of numerous tests which
they have carried out, accumulated data adequate to allow
them to make any qualitative improvements they may desire without carrying out new tests. The cessation of tests,
therefore, in itseif would make no decisive contribution to

1

_00

.0'

480

"~;_m._" ~ _•• ~ - - - ~ - ~ - ~ ' ~ ~
General Assembly - Tenth Spedal Session - Plenary Meetings

preventing the pl."Oduction of new types of weapons or to
non-proliferation.

treaties concerning general and complete disarmament and
a balanced arms limitation.

193. For these reasons the French delegation would like
to dissociate itself completely from the <:onsensus on this
particular passage. We would like to muke it clear that th~
fact that we raised no objection to the over-all consensus
should not be construed as signifying that in the framework of that consensus France can accept this particular
sentence. It is quite obvious, furthermore, that this position means that we cannot accept the idea which is expressed in the penultimate sentence of paragraph 51 which
reads as follows: "In this context, various views were expressed by non-nuclear-weapon States that, pending the
conclusion of this treaty, the world community would be
encouraged if all the nuclear-weapon States refrained from
testing nuclear weapons. "

199. Because we are convinced of the need for consensus, we did not deem it apprl)priate to adopt certain
draft resolutions which could not have been adopted in that
manner, because conflicting opinions had been expressed
here in regard to the contents of those drafts.

194. This brings me to considentions of a somewhat different order. I would recall that in a spirit of conciliation,
the French delegation agreed yesterday, in order not to
hinder in any way the consensus which was being arrived
at on the draft final document, not to press to the vote its
three draft resolutions on the establishment of an international satellite monitoring agency, the setting up of an international disarmament fund for development, and the establishment of an international institute for disarmament
research [A/S-JO/AC.1IL.J4, L.15 and L.J6].
195. These three proposals, which my Government continues to regard as being of major importance, are referred
to explicitly in the Final Document as proposals which it
was n0t possible for the Assembly to examine in detail at
~he special session. My Government will therefore reserve
its right to suhmit these proposals to the next regular session of the General Assembly. I have no douat that the detailed studies which they require will be undertaken by the
appropriate bodies of the Organization.

196.

Mr. L ... JIA (El Salvador) (lnrerpretation from
Spanish;: The delegation of El Salvador, in the final moments of this special session of the General Assembly devoted exclusively to disarmament, wishes briefly to state
its views on the work accomplished in regard to vital questions which have been the subject of arduous negotiations
and prolonged debate.

200. The Final Document, the text of which was approved by consensus in the Ad Hoc Committee when dawn
was about to break and was adopted in this final, closing
meeting in the same manner, contains sections in respect
of which differences of opinion still subsist among delegations, not so much in the Introduction or in the following
Declaration but in the Programme of Action and in the
final chapter on machinery.

i

207. We
owners are
sufficient {
gratuitous (

208. It w
has conclu
would be ;
than a sta~
eyed coul,
brought us

t.

;

i 1
'··l

! iI
~'

ij

fl
,I

:1

,

201. Yet withal, this document is of-great importance. I
shall not comment on it in detail because this has already
been done by some speakers, and other speakers on the list
will probably also do it-at least some of them. We are
sworn enemies of prolixity and repetition, particularly in
circum.'itances such as these when we are all weary and
anxious to put an end to these long weeks of activity and
uncertainty. Suffice it to say that we are extremely pleased
with the establishment of the new disarmament bodies-~
deliberative and negotiating body-to replace the existing disarmament organs.

a

,
it

!i

j"l
.I

ij

:1

:1,
.

11

i

:-1

,I
( j
Id

I

I.'

:1
:I
i1
1/

202. The Final Document is t.he resub of most intense
work on questions of vital international policy, the review
and solution of which require much patience, much perseverance and much time.
203. In the enormous effort made here, day and night,
numerous representatives have participated as negotiators
or conciliators, among them two outstanding Latin American diplomats: Mr. Ortiz de Rozas of Argentina and Mr.
Garcia Robles of Mexico. To uH, we express our deeply
reit gratitude and congratulations.
204. The cont.ibution of Latin America to disarmament
is manifest not only in the Tlatelolco Treaty and in the
Ayacucho Declaration, which are rightly mentioned in the
Final Document; it is SI matter of public record that the two
ambassadors I have mentioned have been unflagging in
their endeavours.

197. The successive draft nnal documents, from the one
which was recommended by the Preparatory Committee in
1978, have been plagued with brackets. This is proof not
only of the complexity of the various aspects of disarmament but also the reluctance of some States for it to become a reality. We have heard a plethora of promises and
expressions of good wishes; but in negotiations consensus
often seemed impossible and brackets continued to disfigure the draft final document. Unexpectedly, the brackets
disappeared last night as though someone had waved a
magic wand.

205. In the las~ two paragraphs of the Final Document it
is stated that it must be emphasized that the special session
of the Assembly marks not the end but rather the ~egin­
fling of a new phase of the efforts of the United Nations in
'he fi ,J of disarmament, and that the Assembly is convm",tJ that the discussions of the disarmament problems at
the special session and its Final Docllnent will attract the
attention of all peoples, further mobiHze world public
opinion and provide a powerful impetus for the cause of
disarmament.

198. We believe in the need for consensus. Otherwise
there would be no possibility of arriving at conventions or

206. We completely endorse these ideas. Will they also
be endorsed by the various media of the transmission of
ideas, or the mass media, as we sa~ nowadays?

209. But
flects a pol
lacking all
above all a
tive and va
of informal
measured I
surely lighl
process.

L!

ii
1'1

iul
11

!I !
i

11
11

nU

11

:1

!1
I1

I
I
1
1

1
I
i

I

210. Mr
hours ago
Ad Hoc C

document
adopted. V
which all
speak, are
this docun
than ordim
in saying t
realization
far back al
211. It i:
joined in tl
or a voice
in all t.hat I
departure
movemen l
goals who
disarmamf
212. We
paratory C
causes of 1
ament neg'
process of
we do tak,
basic POSil
ment, we

1

I

1

I
t'

L

213. .In
preferred
present sit
the accul
weapons; ;
sifying COl
acceptanc(
tional inte
and the ri'

-

in• •1

p

27th meeting - 30 June 1978

207. We believe that there are voices and pens whose
owners are knowledgeable about these matters and possess
sufficient equanimity to make favourable comments. But
gratuitous censure is to be expected.
208. It will be said, perhaps, that the General Assembly
has concluded this session with neither pain nor glory. It
would be an unfair assessment. This has been no more
than a stage in a process. Only dreamers and the starryeyed could have thought that this session would have
brought us close to its completion.
209. But besides the Final Document, which not only reflects a political and diplomatic rapprochement previously
lacking among some Members of the United Nations,
above all among the most powerful, but also contains positive and valuable decisions, we have accumulated a wealth
of information and views, the importance of which can be
measured by the understandings reached and which will
surely light the way in the future stages of the disarmament
process.
210. Mr. FERNANDO (Sri Lanka): It was barely 18
hours ago that we met for the concluding meeting of the
Ad Hoc Committee at which we adopted the draft final
document that this plenary Assembly has itself just
adopted. We have adopted it by l,onsensus, a consensus in
which all the non-aligned countries, on whose behalf I
speak, are happy to join. For the non-aligned countries,
this document and the consensus it received are of more
than ordinary significance. I think we should not be wrong
in saying that this special session on disarmament was the
realization of an initiative by the non-aligned launched as
far back as 1961.
211. It is not my wish on a day like this, after having
joined in this consensus, to introduce a note of disharmony
or a voice of dissent. But sile~ce or a passive acquiescence
in all that is contained in this document would amount to a
departure from the principles to which the non-aligned
movement has long adhered and an abandoning of the
goals whose achievement we have t:rged on questions of
disarmament.
212. We have, in the documents placed before the Preparatory Committee, set out our appraisal of the principal
causes of the arms race, the unsatisfactory state of disarmament negotiations, the principles which should govern the
process of disarmament and an order of priorities. While
we do take some satisfacHon in the fact that some of our
basic positions have been incorporated in the Final Document, we are less than content.

I

~

\'1
I

I

I

213. .tn the section on the Declaration we would have
preferred to hfive seen a more accurate appraisal of the
present situation, ,,·,jely, of those dangers resulting from
the accumulatiOl: of weapons, in particular nuclo,ar
weapons; and of the arms race aggravating tensions, intensifying conflicts and impeding detente. Nor could we gain
acceptance of the obvious link between the conflicts of national interests, uncertainty and distrust, on the one hand,
and the rivalry among major Powers on a global scale, on

481

the other. Rather than subscribe to a dilution of that basic
appraisal, we preferred a total deletion of reference to it.
214. We were able to agree on objectives and an order of
priorities and to focus attention on th~ need for nuclear disarmament and the prevention of nuclear war. However, to
secure that we accepted as a principle the parallel treatment of nuclear and conventional disarmament. In doing
so, we also obtalia~d the ~doption of the principle of undiminished security of States and the right of peoples under
colonial or foreign domination to self-determination and
independence.
215. We wanted to see the United Nations play the primary role in the field of disarmament, but protracted negotir,tions and the need for consensus obliged us to accept
less, both in the area of principles and in the Programme
of Action. We believe that, in the last analysis, that is a
needless restriction of the principle that has now been acknowledged: that all States have the right to participate in
disarmament negoti(itions and the United Nations is the
only body in which all States are represented. We do not
deny that a distinction must be drawn between deliberation
and negotiation, but the primary role of the United Nations
in disarmament is one which could have been accommodated without the deliberative and negotiating functions encroaching on each other.
216. We found the same hesitation in regard to the acceptanr.:e of the principle of the interdependence of disarmament and development. While it may appear that in doing
so we were seeking to emphasize the impact of that interdependence on the economic development of developing
countries, we do not think there could be any doubt about
the proposition that th~ arms race is distorting the economies of the developed world, with consequences for the
developing countries, and that disarmament would have
both immediate and long-term beneficial impact on the
economies of the developed world. In the same context,
we were able to secure the reassertion of the right of all
countries to develop, acquire and use without discrimina_"Al~.n... .._,.. ..... __ 1.,... __ , ~_. ~.a.n".a.f".,11 .... 1 ........ _~.oC'
UVU uu"a"aa \""UUVIV5] I VI }"o'a""1 UI pUl pv""".

..:_-

217. It was a matter of particular regret for the nonaligned countries that we could not incorporate the principle of the incompatibility between the maintenance of mili- .
tary bases and the presence of foreign troops in foreign
territories, on the one hand, and international peace and
security, on the other. There was resistance to that from
the major military alliances, but I need not repeat that opposition to military blocs, their bases and the presence of
foreign troops has been cardinal to the non-aligned movement from its inception.
218. In the Programme of Action we received onl/ limited satisfaction on the subject of nuclear disarmament.
While the steps recommended by the non-aligned countries
for halting the arms race, its reversal and the final elimination of nuclear-weapon stockpiles found a place in the Programme, we were resisted to the very end when we asked
for urgent negotiations and binding commitments for implementing those necessary measures. It was the same resistance we met with when we asked for a reduction of nv,-

48Z

General Assembly - Tenth Spec:ial Session - Plenary Meetings

clear-weapon stockpiles and their delivery systems,
leading to their complete elimination. For the nuclearweapon States, security was still based on the theory of
mutual nuclear deterrence, and the survival of mankind
was subordinated to their security. In the same context, at
least four of the five nuclear States would not agree to a
renunciation of the first use of nuclear weapons. We could
obtain no binding commitments or assurances from the nuclear-weapon States that they would not use or threaten to
use nuclear weapons against any non-nuclear-weapon
State. We had to be content with declarations setting out
the circumstances and conditions under which such assurances would apply.
219. On the questions of nuclear-weapon-free zones and.
zones of peace, our proposals were incorporated with qualifications that reduced the validity of such measures in the
process of disarmament. While those qualifications were
entered in regard to the indian Ocean area, it was particularly regrettable that the proposal to declare the Mediterranean as a zone of peace was summarily rejected-even after the offer of every conceivable qualification.
220. In contrast to all that, the nt;clear-weapon States
and their allies came out stronBest on the subject of nonproliferation. The approach appears to be to impose obligations and restrictions on the non-nuclear-weapon States
when they seek to advance their own programmes for the
peaceful uses of nuclear energy, without the nuclearweapon States themselves assuming any obligations in the
field of nuclear disarmament and the non-use of nuclear
weapons.
221. I shall move next to the section on machinery. That
is by far the shortest section. But we approached it as an
area in which this special session could produce tangible
results having a direct and measurable impact on progress
in disarmament. There were in effect two main proposals,
namely, for the creation of a deliberative body and the reform of the existing negotiating body. While not detracting
from the role of the First Committee in disa.rma.ment, we
could not agree to the First Committee's being the deliberative organ, either in its own capacity or sitting as the Disarmanlent Commission.
222. We are satisfied thai our views prevailed and that
the Disarmament Commission is to be established as the
deliberative body. Its terms of reference have been formulated. Those terms of reference were a compromise, and it
is our hope that they will be interpreted in the spirit of the
principle on which we have all agr~ed: that all States have
a duty to contribute to efforts in the field ei disarmament
and a right to participate in disarmament negotiations. We
do not regard tbe Disarmament Commission as a device
for paying mere lip-service to that principle, but rather as a
vindicatlon of it.
223. Thi::; forum is not the place in .::: ~h to recount the
arduous and protracted neg\.. dations tl~ ~(ve taken place
in order to bring about a reform, or, may ~ .. ~y, a rebirth of
the negotiating body. We do not claim to be competent to
do that, since we were not privy to all those negotiations.
Nevertheless, the non-aligned countries can claim to have

made some modest contribution to making possible this
new negotiating body because the pressures for change
originated with and were sustained by the non-aligned
countries. It remains to be seen whether, with these two
institutional changes, the shortcomings in the field of disarmament will now be rectified.
224. My delegation would like to extend our appreciation to all those delegations which joined us in supporting
the proposal of my President, Mr. J. R. Jayewardene, for a
world disarmament institution. It was made in the context
of a goal which may seem distant but should not be lost
sight of: general and complete disarmament. Even though
we are preoccupied with the urgent present-the immediate
realities, as they are called-some contemplation of the
better world we seek should not be beyond our capacity.
My delegation remains confident that well before we approach general and complete disarmament the international
community would acknowledge the need for a world disarmament institution on the lines of my President's proposal.

drafted and is the
see beyond the \
which it was undt
what we alI aspir

i

I[

'j

1
I

!
:)
f

i,!
I)

11

1I
i j

,'

I:

t' ~

225. The comments of other delegations of the nonaligned countries should amplify our views on these and
other aspects of the document. My delegation has a last
duty. In the early hours of this morning the Chairman of
the Ad Hoc Committee, Mr. Ortiz de Rozas, paid an eloquent and well-deserved tribute to colleagues who took
charge of working groups and drafting groups. I would
like to add our own voice to those sentiments of appreciation, mentioning, in particular, the silent and overworked
members of the Secretariat, and Mc. Garda Robles of
Mexico, who toiled for long hours in a cause personally
dear to him and his country.
226. There was an unavoidable omission this morning
which my delegation must now make good. Mr. Ortiz de
Rozas, with typical modesty, adjourned our meeting, preempting any attempts by delegations to thank him. With
the Vice-President, Mr. N'Dong, in the Chair, we have
that oDDortunitv. Mv dele2ation has seen Mr. Ortiz de Ro~~~. w~~king a~ Ch~irman - of five sessions of the Preparatory Committee and finally in the Ad Hoc Committee, the
hardest and most difficult times being those devoted to informal consultations. We marvelled at his patience and
tact, the leadership be gave and, above all, the courage he
showed in difficult times, especially during these last two
weeks. This consensus document which we have-the fIrst
coming from a special session on disarmament-is an acknowledgement of his personal contribution to this great
endeavour. I am confident that the non-aligned group joins
me in this tribute.
227. I have to offer a word of appreciation to all our colleagues who participated in this special session. During
these last five weeks our exchanges were more in the form
of disagreement and there were times when we may have
been disagreeable and less then ready to accept compromises. These experiences are ineviteble in a task such as
this. We had differences of approach, sometimes differences over the short-term objectives; but there was no dispute about our common goal of disarmament. With all its
short-cornings, this document is the best we could have

228. My last re
presidency .has bl
presided over r.10
cessors in this hil
warding. That he
ament which prO!
we believe, the 1
country, Yugosl~
shall conclude b
well.

U
11

,

l'

11
1'1

!!

~ 1

,,

r,l

i!

I

! I

ill

1)

1.j

,I

I,

:1
H
, ,
H

i'1

tl
-I

1

i

229. Mr. VELI
speaking from th
the Assembly at
this' Assembly, re:
kind, to launch a
embark on the gn
nation not to COl
para. 28.] This t
participants in the
extent materializl
tions we have ad<
Final Document.
non-aligned coun
special session ha
fied with its resul1
ceeded in getting
tedly falls far she
only of the very
all of us, individl
the genuine desil
break-through in '
the most pressing
230. The delegl
of this speda.1 ses
pledge given by I
Throughout the s
tee, the working
motivated solely
problem of disar
substantial headVl
tie or no progres!
231. On behalf
had the privilege
wish to take thi~
have conveyed to
to the work of th
232. The cons!
has some positiVI
in several areas.
had referred to ill
and quantitative
freezing of prese
stockpiles with a
all nuclear weap'

_ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _2_7t_h....
,m_e_et;",.in..:;g:,..-_3_0..;;J;",.u_ne;..!?78

drafted and is the reward for our joint efforts. If we could
see beyond the words and implement it in the spirit in
which it was undertaken, we should come a little nearer to
what we all aspire to-general and complete disarmament.
228. My last remarks are addressed to Mr. Mojsov. His
presidency ,has been one of great events. He has perhaps
presided over r.1ore special sessions than any of his predecessors in this high office, and each of them has been rewarding. That he has presided over this session on disarmament which produced this consensus Final Document is,
we believe, the fulfilment of his hopes and those of his
country, Yugosl<ilvia. There is yet work to be done and I
shall conclude by congratulating him and wishing him
well.
229. Mr. VELLODI (India): Exactly three weeks ago,
speaking from this rostrum, my Prime Minister exhorted
the Assembly at this special session. He said: "It is for
this· Assembly, representing the collective wisdom of mankind, to launch a movement in the conscience of men and
embark on the great adventure of survival, with a determination not to compromise with truth." [24th meeting.
para. 28.] This hope, which \\- ..s shared by most of the
participants in the General Assembly, has only to a limited
extent materialized with the decisions and recommendations we have adopted here and which are reflected in the
Final Document. We have all of us, and particularly the
non-aligned countries, as a result of whose initiative this
special session has been held, little reason to be fully satisfied with its results. At the same time, the fact that we suc~
ceeded in getting a consensus document, although it admittedly falls far short of our expectations, is indicative not
only of the very hard and at times exhausting efforts that
all of us, individually and collectively, put in, but also of
the genuine desire on the part of all of us to achieve a
break-through in what is undoubtedly the most crucial and
the most pressing problem that confronts mankind today.
230. The delegation of India has participated in the work
of this special session in keeping with the commitment and
pledge given by our Prime Minister before this Assembly.
Throughout the session, whether in the Ad Hoc Committee, the working groups or the drafting groups, we were
motivated solely by our deep commitment to solve the
problem of disarmament and by our keen desire to make
substantial headway in this area, where there has been little or no progress in recent years.
231. On behalf of Mr. Gharekkan of our delegation, who
had the privilege of working as one of the co-ordinators, I
wish to take this opportunity to thank all of those who
have conveyed to him their appreciation of his contribution
to the work of this special session.
232. The consensus document we have adopted today
has some positivt~ elements. At the same time, it is weak
in several areas. Whereas the measures my Prim~ Minister
had referred to in his address with regard to the qualitative
and quantitative limitations on nuclear disarmament, the
freezing of present stockpiles and the gradual red'uction of
stockpiles with a view to achieving the total elimin'ation of
all nuclear weapons are included in the Final Document,

r

483

the document does not at all reflect the sense of urgency
and, therefore, the need to formulate a time-bound programme for the implementation of these measures.
!

233. The document does call for urgent negotiations and
agreements in the field of nuclear disarmament, and we
expeGt the nUclear-weapon States to act promptly in this
regard.
234. My Government has repeatedly asked for the early
conclusion of the comprehensive test ban treaty. We trest
that the results of the tripartite negotiations on this subject
will be submitted without further delay to the negotiating
body for detailed study. It is our firm view that the treaty
will be meaningless if it does not cover all weapons tests
or if it does not have adequate provisions for safeguards to
prevent breaches of the treaty, which safeguards, as our
Prime Minister indicated, can be achieved only through independent inspection. In this connexion, my delegation
has proposed that, pending conclusion of the treaty, all nuclear-weapon Powers should refrain from further testing of
nuclear weapons. We presented a draft resolution on the
subject [A/S-10/AC.l/L.10]. However, in keeping with
our desire to co-operate fully in the work of the special
session, we decided not to press the draft resolution to a
vote; but we reserve our right to return to the subject at the
thirty-third'session of the General Assembly, if the nuclear-weapon States do not respond positively to the view
held by all the non-nuclear-weapon States, and clearly reflected in paragraph 51 of the Final Document, on the need
for an immediate moratorium on the testing of nuclear
weapons.
235. Similarly, my delegation had pressed for the initiation of measures to achieve the prohibition of the use of
nuclear weapons and thereby ensure that the survival of
mankind is not endangered. Here again we agreed, in a
spirit of co-operation, not to press our draft resolution to a
vote. If, however, no action is taken in response to the recommendation contained in paragraph 58 of the Final Document, which deals with this issue, we intend to reactivate
our proposal at the thirty-third session of the General Assembly.
236. While the section of the Final Document dealing
with the Programme of Action is very inadequate, we are
satisfied with the decisions taken with regard to future machinery in the field of disarmament. We are particularly
happy with the decision to establish a deliberative forum in
the United Nations and thereby enable the Organization to
resume the primary responsibility it had in the field of disarmament. We trust that the new negotiating body, the
Committee on Disarmament, which will not have the inadequacies and the shortcomings of the Conference of the
Committee on Disarmament, will commence its work
without delay.
237. Before I conclude I wish to refer to two issues mentioned in paragraphs 63 (e) and 64 of the Final Document.
Paragraph 63 (e) refers '(0 the question of the establishment
of a nuclear-weapon-free zone in South Asia. I should like
in this connexion to recall the strong reservation we placed
on record regarding this proposal when it was considered

~II
'1

,\

:1

484

('eneral Assembly - Tenth Special Session - Plenary Meetings

at the thirty· second session of the General Assembly. In
his address to the special session, my Prime Minister said
that the problem of disarmament, particularly in the nuclear field, •'can only be solved in a total manner keeping
in view the whole of the globe and not the regions into
which, presumably as a matter of political convenience or
strategy, some countries seek to compartmentalize the
world... We are convinced that there cannot be a limited
approach to the question of freedom from nuclear threats
and dangers, but that the whole world should b~ declared a
nuclear·free zone." [24th meeting, para. 17.]
238. My delegation is extremely unhappy with the casual
and summary manner in which in paragraph 64 the Final
Document deals with the establishment of a zone of peace
in the Indian Ocean, which continues to be an issue of the
greatest importance to the States of the region. The declaration adopted by the United Nations on the subject several
years ago [re!1OIution 2832 (XXVl)] is clear and unambiguous with regard to our objective, which is the demilitarization of the Indian Ocean. We shall not depart from this
objective. We sincerely hope that the talks between the
United States and the Soviet Union, which we note with
deep regret remain suspended, will be resumed promptly
and that in future negotiations they will abandon the concept of reduction or stabilization and return to their own
earlier publicly stated commitment to work for the complete demilitarization of the Indian Ocean.
239. In conclusion, my delegation wishes to place on
record our deep gratitude h the President of the special
session of the General Assembly, Mr. Mojsov, for the admirable way in which he has guided our deliberations. We
should also like to pay a special tribute to the Chairman of
the Ad Hoc Committee, Mr. Ortiz de Rozas, for the dynamic leadership he provi.ded and for the exemplary manner in which he presided over our deliberations in the
Committee and in the formal and informal consultations.
We all owe him a debt of deep gratitude. I should also like
to express our great appreciation for the very valuable cont..'h"t;nn
..... arlA vh"
thA rhni
",.v •• ......'-J "••- "'

".. a "

n nf th.. \lJn..
lt-ino
ornllnc
,.,. _. •
0 o· --.t"U' ,

- •• _. "'1""

co-ordinators, and to the Rapporteur, as well as to the
members of the Secretariat.
241. May 1express the deep conviction of my delegation
that the entire work of this session, with the adoption of
the Final Document, represents substantial progress towards opening a new phase in the process of disarmament
with more direct participation by the world international
community. Through the work of the Preparatory Committee and deliberations in the course of the session we have
actually initiated a dialogue on all the major issues of disarmament, peace and security. The great importance of
this special session is borne out by the very fact that it has
taken place and that all States have taken part in its work.
The session has fully expressed the keen awareness of all
of us that disarmament has become an historical necessity
and the only means conducing to the security of all nations and that we no longer have the right to close our eyes
to this reality and eschew our inevitable responsibilities.
242. There is no doubt but that the present international
situation has imposed limits on our desire fully to express
in the Final Document the objective needs of the international community and the expectations of world public
opinion. We have taken an important step, but a step that
is neither complete nor adequate in scope.
243. The Declaration contains a number of very important "and universally accepted assessments, priorities and
principles. Therefore, it provides a framework and a basis
for our future efforts in the process of disarmament. However, I wish to recall that some substantive principles proposed by the non-aligned countries have not found their
place in the Final Document.
244. The non-aligned countries have insisted, above all,
on the adoption of a concrete and substantive Programme
of Action. But the militarily most powerful States, which
have a special responsibility in the process of disarmament, have failed to give proof of sufficient readiness to
accept such a programme.

endorsed an<
of the Indian
fact that the 1
nal Documer
some delega
unconvincinl
prets the pr<
peace as app
fore as const
be exerted in
peace.
Mr. Mojs(

248. As is
special impol
and the with(
other States
This principl,
the Final 001
jor Powers,
taining of su
even of Statl
their continul

249. I welc
mantling of :
foreign troop
ence of Heal
Countries hel
conversion oJ
been includel
the appropria

250. The n
ment are sigl
tion there shl
peoples, and
tion movem
means indisp
rI"nAnrt..n"..
'-&"".t'''''••,.....

f • • ,." .......

nnd in particular to the co-ordinators, without whose untiring efforts we should not have achieved results which in
some measure seek to fulfil the expectations of the world
community. Our thanks are also due to the members of the
Secretariat, many of whom have spent sleepless nights to
assist us in our work. Last but not least, all of us have
been deeply impressed and encouraged by the continuing
interest and support the non-governmental organizations,
which in a sense represent the world community, have provided to the cause of disarmament, as evidenced by their
active and at times almost overwhelming participation in
our common endeavours during the past five weeks.

246. Yugoslavia, as a signatory of the Treaty on the
Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons and as a nonnuclear-weapon State, cannot but regret the lack of readiness on the part of nuclear-weapon States to offer to nonnuclear-weapon States unequivocal security guarantees
concerning the non-use or threat of use of nuclear
weapons.

240. Mr. PETRIC (Yugoslavia): First of all I wish to say
that I am in agreement with the statement of the representative of Sri Lanka, who has so ably presented the views of
the non-aligned countries. At the same time I wish to pay a
wann tribute to all those who have successfully completed
the drafting of the Final Documeni, to the Chairman of the
Ad Hoc Committee, Mr. Ortiz de Rozas, to Mr. Garcfa
Robles, to the Chairmen of the working groups, to the five

247. We believe also that resistance, at this session, to
the endeavours of non-aligned countries to ensure the
adoption of clearly defined recommendations on the establishment of zones of peace in various regions is an expression of a bloc policy and of the tendency of certain States
and military alliances to leave the door open to the policy
of spheres of influence. We were particularly surprised by
the opposition in the case of the Indian Ocean, since the
General Assembly of the United Nations has repeatedly

245. Although the primary importance of nuclear dis~rm­
ament has been generally recognized, the measures that
have been taken in this connexion cannot fully satisfy us.

251. May)
session has r
the further a(
field of disal
armament Cl
ticular, the I
disarmament
forums on a
pices of the
the fruitful d
252. We a
to the establi
mittee on Di
is that the pr
mittee on Di
the Committ
sion on the
.States, we il
existing nucl

_ ,'" ' ,~_ "'''='''W.'~''''~_'''''dW''~''"'''''''",'_',,",''W'_''''''''~'5!!:!i1ii''ii ~_titi i ! n:!i!i ~ifi !O !iI iIl:lIi l'JIil!I~i fi li i li li l:iM: .:I !JI.: .._ _I.111I__
' 1

--'1

r. ....,.[1II11II0rl l.••1111I11I1_--11I

I

485

endorsed and supported the concept of the transformation
of the Indian Ocean into a zone of peace. We deplore the
fact that the Mediterranean has not been included in the Final Document as a zone of peace. The negative attitude of
some delegations towards this demand seems to us quite
unconvincing. In lhis connexion, my Government interprets the provisions of the Final Document on zones of
peace as applying to the Mediterranean as well, and therefore as constituting a basis for further efforts that have to
be exerted in order to transform that region into a zone of
peace.
Mr. Mojsov (Yugoslavia) resumed the Chair.

248. As is well known, Yugoslavia has always attached
special importance to the dismantling of all military bases
and the withdrawal of foreign troops from the territories of
other States and from Non-Self-Governing Territories.
This principle and measure has not been included at all in
the Final Document because of the resistance of some major Powers, which seem to wish to perpetuate the maintaining of such bases and foreign troops on the territories
even of State~ and peoples that are resolutely opposed to
their continued presence.

253. The Final Document and other proposals call f o r :
further concrete negotiations and actions. What is "re-j
quired, however, is political will on the part of all of us,,1
and in particular on the part of the militarily most powerful
I
States in order to pass from declarations to the achieve.1
ment of concrete programmes and measures of both nUclear and conventional disarmament. The consistent imple-)
mentation of the Final Document, under the auspices of
'I
the United Nations, will make it possible to achieve that
goal.
i

,:

"

,I

:\

i

254. Mr. CORREA DA COSTA (Brazil): As we approach the end of this special session, I should like to express our gratitude to you, Mr. President, for your wise
guidance throughout the deliberations. My delegation
wishes also to express its appreciation for the untiring efforts of the Chairman of the Ad Hoc Committee, Mr. Ortiz
de Rozas, as well as to the Chairmen of the working
groups and the co-ordinators.

256. Hopeful that the session would promote significant
progress towards the adoption of effective measures of disarmament, in particular of nuclear disarmament, Brazil
sponsored the resolution which set in motion the process of
preparation for this session. We contributed actively to the
work of the Preparatory Committee which, in the course of
its five sessionr!, established the basis for the achievement
of what we felt we had reason to believe would be meaningful and generally acceptable results.

250. The measures in the field of conventional disarmament are significant, but we feel that in their implementation there should always be full respect for the right of all
peoples, and of the peoples under colonial rule and liberation movements io particular, to have at their disposal
means indispensable to their struggle for freedom and in-

257. We participated in a constructive spirit both in the
preparatory work and in the work of this special session,
the Ad Hoc Committee and the numerous working and
drafting groups. We co-operated with all other delegations
in efforts to elaborate solutions worthy of approval by consensus. In the course of those negotiations the Brazilian

~~~n~~n~~

'a&...,~.

,

25 I. May I express my delegation's gratification that this
session has represented an important step forward towards
the further active involvement of the enited Nations in the
field of disarmament. The revival of the work of the Disarmament Commission and its mandate to consider, in particular, the elements of a comprehensive programme on
disarmament, together with parallel efforts exerted in other
forums on a bilateral or multilateral level under the auspices of the United Nations, make it possible to continue
the fruitful dialogue we have started at this session.
252. We also regard as significant the decision relating
to the establishment of a new negotiating body-the Committee on Disarmament. May I add that our understanding
is that the present members of the Conference of the Committee on Disarmament are included in the composition of
the Committee on Disarmament. With regard to the provision on the openness of this body to nuclear-weapon
,States, we interpret that provision as applying to the five
existing nuclear-weapon States only.

1

i
I

I

I

'I,j

'f

255. Brazil supported from the very beginning the idea
of holding this special session of the General Assembly devoted to disarmament.

249. I welcome the fact that both the request for the dismantling of foreign military bases and the withdrawal of
foreign troops, as well as the proposal of the Fifth Conference of Heads of State or Government of Non-Aligned
Countries held at Colombo in August 1976, concerning the
conversion of the Mediterranean into a zone of peace, have
been included in the list of proposals to be followed up in
the appropriate organs of the General Assembly.

'-&""1"""••,.,....

I

'1

Ao.l.onn":"n ..: ...... 4

n .... A nl'Yn.:..., ,1;~_lnu.oaA

:tC'l • .,:II:

U,",I'"'6'UIVII "1111'" a l l u "6AUI UIi.')}JIG]","U U.i.')

d>C'C'

VV 11111161J\,,~iJ1

. ._

,.., ........

lV \"VII-

sider appropriate compromise formulations on many different and important aspects of the draft final document.
258. In spite of these efforts, in spite of the year and a
half of preparations, we were called upon to approve a .
document 129 paragraphs long which was presented to us
in its final form only yesterday evening and which contains
a number of formulations on which we had, in fact, been
unable to agree and on which we had expressed reservations in the course of our lengthy and painstaking deliberations. What is even more unexpected, the final document
also contains changes, omissions and additions which were
introduced at the last moment and were not subject to the
necessary process of careful examination and discussion.
259. The Brazilian delegation is compelled to state its
reservations about the procedures that have been employed
in these last days and hours of the session in order hastily
to put together certain fundamental sections of the final
document. While attaching high importance to its subject
matter, we regret that, after a year and a half of preparations, we were confronted with certain provisions that we

I

I,

t

!

l

'~.'.=
....'".:.'

.e<'-

~

,,
b

~

were not given the o~,portunity to consider with the necessary attention.

260. I therefore wish the records of this meeting to indicate clearly the general reservations of the Brazilian delegation on the final document as a whole. We did not stand
in the way of the adoption of the document by consensus,
but we reserve the right to comment on specific provisions
and sections of the Final Document, after our Government
has had the chance to consider it carefully, during the
forthcoming regular session of the General Assembly or in
the new disarmament forums which will emerge as a welcome result of this special session.
261. It may be rec.dled that during the thirty-second session of the Assembly the Brazilian delegation stated that:
"The special session would have more than fulfilled our
expectations if it were just to produce a true commitment
to nuclear disarmament by the international community,
and in partiCUlar by the nuclear-weapon States.,,2 Most unfortunately, it has not.

262. We hope, however, that in spite of the shortcomings of its results the special session of the Assembly
will have contributed to stimulating the long overdue implementation of effective measures of disarmament, and in
particular of nuclear disarmament.
263. Mr. AKHUND (Pakistan): My delegation has followed closely and participated in the negotiations during
the past weeks to produce a document for adoption at the
special session. The fact that the General Assembly has
adopted a Declaration and a Programme of Action on disarmament by consensus is a result of the tireless efforts of
all concerned and in particular the Chairmen of the working groups and their team of co-ordinators working under
the able and dedicated guidance of Mr. Ortiz de Rozas,
Chairman of the Ad Hoc Committee. To all of them we
owe a debt of gratitude. Your own guidance and direction
of this session, Mr. President, has been invaluable and I
••. _ _•

t_

Walll. \V

-ut n.......4.n"""..r1 mu AAJACfoti.nn 'c t ..ihllt,* tn "nil
1'""
VII J.t.,t,,",V.lU IIIJ U"."lS~uv"
v ....'" . - J--'
10:7

....

264. The Pakistan delegation welcomes this consensus,
but, like many others, we do so with a sense of disappointment. No one can say that the results of the special session
have fulfilled the hopes and aspirations with which it was
summoned or that they are commensurate with the months
of preparation which preceded its convening. The consensus which enabled the document to be adopted without
a vote is only in part the result of genuine compromise and
owes not a little to verbal ambiguity, which serves to postpone debate or shift it to other forums.
265. Our disappointment must be tempered, however, by
two considerations. One of these is that this is the first
meeting held with the pa,rticipation of all States to deal
with the entire spectrum of disarmament issues-issues of
extreme complexity, not merely in technological and political terms but also in a psychological sense, since security
has an intangible and subjective dimension, that this ses2 Sce Official R~r:ords of the Gentral Assembly, Thirty·second session
First Committtt, 23rd meeting.
'

sion aroused world-wide interest and that a number of
Heads of State or Government made a personal contribution to its deliberations. The association in our work and
the efforts of non-governmental organizations and of eminent individuals who have made disarmament their life's
work must also be noted, for it served to broaden the horizons of the possible. The Introduction and Declaration of
the Final Document express the hopes and aspirations of
mankind to live in a world free from the fear of war and
the terror of nuclear weapons. This is t~mely reaffirmation
of the direction in which the world must move.
266. Secondly, we have at this session set up new fora
for deliberations and negotiations on disarmament issues in
the coming years. This is a most worth-while outcome of
the session. My delegation hopes that the work of the new
negotiating body will be initiated in such a way as to open
the door to participation in its work by all militarily significant States, notably the five nuclear-weapon Powers.
267. It is known that the negotiations on the elements of
the Programme of Action, particularly the so-called nuclear complex of issues, were most difficult. Many of the
differences have been reconciled in the Final Document,
but unfortunately only in a textual sense. Behind the differing texts put forward on various questions there are
deep underlying differences of philosophy and approach
among the various groups and Powers. There are those
who, even while they are willing to make efforts to control
the arms race and reduce its dangers, view the future essentially in terms of rationalizing the existing strategic balance. This balance is seen as essential to their own security, of course, but they seem to consi,der that the so-called
strategic balance is indispensable also to the security of the
world. It is an unfortunate reflection of the state of international relations that in present circumstances there is a
grain of truth in this assessment.
268. We are therefore encouraged by the commitment
the two major nuclear-weapon Powers have given that the
second round of talks on strategic arms limitation will be
concluded soon and that it will be followed by a third
round. We earnestly hope that progress will be made in
these talks between the world's two most powerful nations. However, to achieve a truly universal system of collective international security as well as genuine disarmament, we must look beyond the present balance-of-power
relationships, for even a series of agreements on strategic
arms limitation will not of itself lead to the goal of disarmament.
269. The Programme of Action adopted at this session
quite rightly affirms that the goal of general and complete
disarmament must remain the ultimate goal, but realistically it also underlines the fact that the reversal of the nuclear arms race is the first imperative and must be initiated
without delay. This objective has become all the more urgent because developments which are taking place in the
political and technological fields can change the premises
Oh which the present so-called strategic balance and mutual deterrence are structured and start a new cycle in the
vertical as well as in the horizontal arms race.

270.
weapo
cal ar~
Assem
indefeJ
no mo
justify
agaim
weapo
\ions i
non-m
States
which
declar,
non-m
ity, the
sal fra
nation;
271.
ing ev
their s
hand,
strictio
fied, il
peace.
larly te
for cut
nuclew
througl
clear te
same t
stockp:
nopoly
dence
oping
Develc
oping
the pri
handfu
1973 .
272.
friend
States,
some e
by "ij
aside 1
to dete
At var
comm
ble or
t t itsl
States,

273.
becom
cannot
an iDte
halt ar
clear 2
respOll

27th meeting - 30 June 1978

487

270. While acknowledging the reality that nuclear
weapons form the major portion of the strategic and tactical arsenals of the leading nuclear-weapons Powers, the
Assembly has made it clear that the use of such weapons is
indefensible. There is general recognition, above all, that
no moral, political or strategic grounds exist which can
justify the use or threat of the use of nuclear weapons
against non-nuclear-weapon States. The five nuclearweapons Powers have made declarations as to the conditions in which they will not use nuclear weapons against
non-nuclear-weapon States. But not all the nuclear-weapon
States are agreed on the manner and circumstances in
which such assurances are to be extended. Some of these
declarations fall short of what is needed to reassure the
non-nuclear States. If these assurances are to have credibility, they must be given in a binding form, within a universal framework and as part of the process of building international confidence in the disarmament process.

law is consent, and this is even more true in the field of international relations. The entities in the international field,
while sovereign, independent and equal in a formal sense,
in reality are very unequal in size and power. The assumption by any State of the right to compel responsible behaviour on the part of another State will only lead to a resurgence, though in another form and for other reasons, of the
system of domination and exploitation from which the
third world is still seeking to free itself.

271. While the major Powers seem hesitant about accepting even such minimal obligations on the grounds that
their strategic interests may be jeopardized, on the other
hand, they seek to impose all kinds of restraints and restrictions on the non-nuclear-weapon States. This is justified, in their view, on the grounds of maintaining world
peace. Concern is expressed about arms transfers, particularly to the third world, but the mere mention of the need
for cutting back the production 'of arms is rejected. Some
nuclear-weapon States wish to prevent or to prohibit, even
through coercive and punitive measures, the transfer of nuclear technology, particularly to third-world States. At the
same time, they themselves retain the right to produce and
stockpile unsafeguarded fissile material and to retain a monopoly over the supplies of nuclear fuel. Energy independence is as important, if not more important, for the developing countries as it is for the industrialized States.
Developing nations which are being dissuaded from developing fuel cycle independence cannot ignore the fact that
the price of nuclear fuel, which is under the control of a
handful of advanced nations, has multiplied eightfold since
1973.

275. My delegation is pleased that the Programme of
Action does acknowledge the necessity of developing an
international consensus on universal and non-discriminatory ways and means to prevent the proliferation of nuclear weapons. This provision is based on the assumption
that the negative and discriminatory features of the current
policies of some States in the field of non-proliferation will
be reversed. We earnestly hope that this view will come to
prevail over the present policies of some supplier States
which, to say the least, are based on subjective considerations.

272. It was particularly regrettable to hear our eminent
friend and colleague, Mr. Andrew Young of the United
States, expressing the fear in the Ad Hoc Committee that
some of the so-called sensitive technologies may be seized
by •• irresponsible Governments or terrorists". Leaving
aside this question of Governments and terrorists, who is
to determine whether a Government is responsible or not?
At various moments in history, various Governments have
committed actions which history has judged as irresponsible or worse. No individual State, however powerful, can
t l itself up as judge of the credentials of other sovereign
\
States.
273. It seems that for some countries non-proliferation is
becoming an end in itself. In our yiew, non-proliferation
cannot be achieved as an end in itself, but only as part of
an ioterrelated and comprehensive system of measures to
halt and reverse the nuclear arms race and to eliminate nuclear arms. It can be promoted only on the basis of mutual
responsibilities av.d obligations. The ultimate sanction of

274. It is against this background that my delegation is
obliged to enter a formal reservation on paragraph 36 of
the Final Document which, even while it recognizes the inalienable right of States to acquire and develop nuclear
technology for peaceful purposes, contains language which
because of its ambiguity is capable of being used to justify
policies of restraint and restriction, deprivation and discrimination.

276. The Final Document of the special session has affirmed that the creation of nuclear-weapon-free zones in
various parts of the world provides an equitable, nondiscriminatory and, provided the will is there, practicable
way in which the ultimate objective of a world free of nuclear weapons can be approached. Concret~ steps have
been recommended to promote the creation of such zones
in the Middle East, Africa and South Asia, regions where
the danger of proliferation is real. The encouraging feature
in South Asia is that all States in that region have unilateraiiy renounced nuciear weapons. it is important now to
give these declarations legal form and binding effect.
277 . In this context, we have noted with satisfaction the
declaration made by the Prime Minister of India at the 24th
meeting, that his country will not develop or acquire nuclear weapons even if the rest of the world were to do so,
and that it will not carry out any more peaceful nuclear explosions.
278. It seems to my delegation, therefore, that all the
necessary conditions exist for the establishment of a nuclear-weapon-free zone in South Asia. We are glad that the
relevant provision of the Programme 9f Action supports
this view. Consultations have been held among the South
Asian States on this subject, and while differences undoubtedly exist, we very much hope that time and patience
will enable these States to find ways and means of reaching agreement.
279.

The vast majority of the peoples and countries of

~i' • •'IU~~• • ' • • • ,.~.~

~_.~

_:

the world arc convinced that the imperatives of peace do
not coincide, in the long term, with the exigencies of
maintaining the sWtllS quo and the present unequal distrihution of power and influence in the world. They envision
,the world as evolving towards a new order in which peace
win be maintained through a system of universal collective
security instead of a balance of terror; an order which shall
be based on equality of all nations and equal opportunity
for all to share in the truits of progress and prosperity.
280. The struggle to establish a new international economic order, which is integral to the endeavour for a new
world order, was launched by this Assembly four years
ago, but is still a long way from realization. Today, we
have embarked on a similar struggle in the arena of disarmament. We have accepted a phased approach to disarmament but only because the final goals are clearly defined, and on the understanding that the initial steps
towards these goals will be undertaken without delay.
While the achievements of this special session have fallen
short of our expectations and, we believe, those of the
peoples of the world, the struggle for equity must start
somewhere. We can be satisfied that we have made a beginning. The value and impact of the decisions taken today
will be judged by the success of efforts to reconcile the
different approaches to disarmament and to evolve common premises on which to pursue the goals of peace and
security.
281. Mr. CHEN CHU (China) (interpretation from Chinese): The specinl session of the United Nations General
Assembly devoted to disarmament, convened on the initiative of the non-aligned countries, is drawing to a close. At
this international forum. the numerous third-world and
other small and medium-sized countries offered their analysis of the prevailing international situation, condemned
super-Power policies of arms expansion and war preparations and aggression and expansion, expressed their unshakable determination to preserve national independence
and security as well as international peace, and emphatically voiced the demand that th~ s!!per-P()w~rs halt the
anns rnce and effect genuine disarmament. This will undoubtedly have a positive effect in alerting the people of
the world to the ever-increasing threat of war and in consolidating the struggle to safeguard world peace. This, in
our view, is the main accomplishment of the special session.
282. The numerous third-world and other small and medium-sized countries have made a tremendous effort to
produce a good document for this session. Now the pieMry Assembly of the special session has considered the
Final Document submitted by the Ad Hoc Committee, I
wish to state the views of the Chinese delegation on the
text of the said document.

283. We notice that, as a result of the efforts and struggles of the numerous third-world and other small and medium-sized countries, some of their ju~t propositions and
reasonable demands are now reflected in the Final Document. For instance,. the Document points out that there has
been no real progress so far in the field of disarmament,
that the arms race continues unabated t that the threat of a

new world war is becoming ever more acute; it stresses the
necessity for the total destruction of nuclear weapons in order to remove the threat of a nuclear war and affirms the
importance of reducing conventional arms; it provides for
the equal right of all countries to participate in disarmament negotiations and specities that all disarmament measures should ensure the right of States to security; it calls
on all the nuclear-weapon States to undertake the commitment not to use or threaten to use nuclear weapons against
non-nuclear-weapon States and affirms the inalienable
right of all countries to peaceful use of nuclear energy; it
reiterates the necessity for all countries to abide by the
principles of respect for the sovereignty, territorial integrity and political independence of other countries and noninterference in the internal affairs of others; it points to the
need for a reform of the existing disarmament machinery,
and so on. These positive elements should be endorsed and
supported.
However, we must point out that, owing to obstructions by the super-Powers at every turn, it has not been
possible to incorporate in the Final Document the many
reasonable amendments and proposals put forward by the
numerous small and medium-sized countries and by the
Chinese delegation in the course of drafting the Final Document. On the other hand, some of the specious and spurious formulations of the super-Powers have been included
in the text. Therefore, the Chinese delegation deems it
necessary to state its position and reservations on a number
of questions of principle.
284.

285. First, in the course of the general debate, valid
views were expressed by representatives of many countries
in their analysis of the present international situation. They
pointed out that the developments in the international situatio!' entail grave dangers for the destiny of mankind, including the danger of a new world war, that super-Power
confrontation constitutes a serious threat to world peace
and security, that the real cause for this spiralling arms
race is to be found in the struggle on the part of superPow~rs for world hegemony and control over the destiny
of others and that the arms race between the super-Powers
has been a dominant and disturbing feature of international
relations for over 30 years. They denounced all the commitments made by the super-Powers to disarmament as "a
dead letter" and stressed the utter futility of trying to secure even partial disarmament through the super-Powers'
policy of balancing of forces rooted in mutual suspicion
and fear. These heartfelt words tally completely with the
reality of the world today.
286. As some representatives have pointed out, effective
disarmament is impossible without a clear understanding
of the root cause of the arms race. This is quite correct. It
is precisely through the distortion of the real nature of the
threat of war and the arms race, exaggerating the horror of
war, on the one hand, and spreading the illusion of
"peace" and "disarmament", on the other, that the superPowers hope to realize their sinister designs. The Introduction and Declaration of the Final Document have failed to
pinpoint the intensifying rivalry between the two superPowers for world hegemony as the source of a new world
war and their stepped-up arms race as a threat to interna-

tiona!
refere
amon
with
race;
This'
fuse 1
arms
super
expar
the F
the w
tions,
1

polic~

ing tt
the 0'
The s
the ~
deteD
comp
abanc
seek
view
only
again
one e
287.

merol
ment
per-P
view
spom
soleI)
Powe
with I
disarr
senal!
that (
shoul
ment
was r
super
the cl
State
Coun
upon
It is ,
whicl
same
them
only:
meas
every
armaJ
pletel
arms
tentia
as to
288.
eye. '
sion (

"'""""1'' ' ' '""""~" j'2T"""'~~",""'~"'""""~~ ~"17lh
t

!
l

-Iloa _ 30 J... 1978

tional peace 8...l'ld security. Instead, there is only a vague
reference to the threat to mankind posed by the arms race
among States and the massive accumulation of weapons
with the implication that everyone is involved in the arms
race and every country is to blame for the threat of war.
This will only make it easier for the super-Powers to confuse the issue and escape the blame for intensifying the
arms race and cresting the threat of war. In the light of the
super-Powers' intensified global rivalry and all-out arms
expansion and the increasing danger of a new world war,
the Final Document should have called on the people of
the world to heighten their vigilance, make better preparations, intensify their struggle against hegemonism and the
policy of aggression and war of the super-Powers, induding the struggle for genuine disarmament, try to postpone
the outbreak of a world war and safeguard world peace.
The super-Powers must not be allowed to lull the people of
the world with such hollow words as "the process of
detente", "to establish lasting peace through general and
complete disarmament" and "the time has come... to
abandon the use of force in international relations and to
seek security in disarmament". Moreover, we are of the
view that reference to the horror of a nuclear war could
only be used by the super-Powers for nuclear blackmail
against the people of other countries and would benefit no
one else.
287. Secondly, it is the common demand of the numerous small and medium-sized countries that disarmament begin with the reduction of the arms of the two super-Powers. Many representatives have expressed such a
view in their statements. They have pointed out that the responsibility for the specific problem of disarmament is
solely and exclusively within the competence of the superPowers, that any meaningful disarmament should begin
with them and that the first and foremost objective of any
disarmament strategy must remain the reduction of the arsenals of the two super-Powers. The unassailable principle
that disarmament must start with the two super-Powers
should have been explicitly written into the Final Document and embodied in the relevant sections. However, this
was not possibie owing to the obstinate obstruction of the
super-Powers. On the other hand, in a number of places in
the document, "all the States", or "the nuclear-weapon
States", or "the permanent members of the Security
Council", or "militarily significant States" are called
upon without any distinction to take disarmament actions.
It is unfair and unreasonable to put the two super-Powers
which posse'1s super-arsenals of nuclear weapons, on the
same footing with other countries which lag far behind
them in armaments. This is unacceptable to us, for it can
only facilitate the super-Powers' stalling on truly effective
measures of disarmament. The Soviet Union has made
every effort to include in the document its so-called disarmament programme "for the purposes of ending completely any further quantitative and qualitative build-up of
arms and armed forces of States with a large military potential". This is obviously intended to confuse the issue so
as to maintain its military superiority over other countries.
288. It should be transparent to anyone with a discerning
eye. The Chinese delegation has on more than one occasion explained that, when we say disarmament should start

489

with tlte super-Powers, we do not suggest tltat other countries should take no disannament action whatsoever. What
we mean is that, given the enormous lead of the two superPowers over all other countries in both nuclear and conventional armaments, they must take the lead in disarmament. Take, for instance, the question of reducing military
budgets to assist the developing countries. We have nothing against it. But, be it reduction in terms of percentage
points or absolute tigures, let the two super-Powers, whose
military spending accounts for two thirds of the total world
military expenditure, be the first to take concrete action.
We must not ask all countries without distinction to freeze
and gradually reduce their military budgets, or put special
emphasis on reducing the military budgets of the pennanent members of the Security Council and other militarily
significant States. In short, the principle that disannament
should start with the super-Powers is indisputable. The
representative of a third-world country has put it aptly: the
super-Powers' attempt to shift the responsibility for disarmament to the vast majority of countries which maintain
only a minimum level of armaments compatible with defence requirements "would not fail to be interpreted as a
subterfuge". The people of the world must not relax their
vigilance in this respect.
289. Thirdly, it is understandable that the numerous
third-world countries, faced with nuclear threat from the
super-Powers, urgently demand nuclear disarmament.
However, a perusal of the statements in the general debate
reveals that an increasing number of countries have recognized the importance and urgency of reducing the conventional armaments of the super-Powers. A number of representatives stated emphatically that our preoccupation
should be with conventional weapons and that negotiations
on conventional and nuclear disarmament should be held
simultaneously. It is to the credit of the Final Document
that it has listed the reduction of both conventional arms
and nuclear weapons as priority items for disarmament negotiations and emphasized that nothing should preclude
States from conducting negotiations on all priority items
concurrently.
290. However, we feel that the document as a whole has
failed to lay enough stress on the reduction of the superPowers' conventional armaments. This leaves a loophole
that the super-Powers can easily exploit as a pretext to
drag their feet on conventional disarmament, to continue
their build-up of conventional weapons, to threaten other
countries' independence and security, and to intensify their
preparations for a new world war. The document seems to
be inadequate in this respect.
291. Fourthly, everyone knows that only by completely
prohibiting and thoroughly destroying nuclear weapons can
mankind be truly freed from the threat of a nuclear war.
But one can hardly speak of reducing the danger of a nuclear war when the two super-Powers have in their possession such an enormous amount of nuclear armaments. We
have repeatedly pointed out with ample evidence that the
so-called "total prohibition of nuclear tests" and "nuclear
non-proliferation" advertised by the super-Powers, as well
as the recently unveiled proposal for the so-called "cessation of the production of nuclear weapons", are solely for

490

General Assembly - Tenth Special Session - Plenary Meetings

th~ purpose of maintaining and consolidating their nuclear
monopoly and nuclear slApremacy and tying the hands of
the other countries. Such measures cannot reduce in the
least their enormous nuclear arsenals or prevent them from
launching a nuclear war when they consider it necessary.
292. We hereby reiterate that we will have absolutely no
part of the nuclear hoax of the super-Powers. Those parts
of the Final Document which contain these measures are
totally unacceptable to us. We insist that the two major nuclear Powers take concrete actions to reduce drastically
and by stages their nuclear weapons. When major progress
has been made by them in both nuclear and conventional
disarmament, the other nuclear countries should join them
in destroying all nuclear weapons. This would be the correct way to remove the threat of a nuclear war. At the
same time, we reiterate that China will not be the first to
use nuclear weapons at any time or under any circumstance and that China stands ready to do its part for the
realizlt.tion of the complete prohibition and thorough destruction of nuclear weapons.
293. Fifthly, facts have proved that the so-called international treaties and agreements on disarmament concocted
by the super-Powers do not have the least effect on curbing
the arms race or reducing the threat of war. On the contrary, they are nothing more than tools for the superPowers to cover up their arms expansion and war preparations and to prevent other countries from strengthening
their defence capabilities. At the present session, the representatives of many countries have justly denounced some
of the existing international treaties and agreements. They
have pointed out that not a single weapon has yet been destroyed as a result of any disarmament agreement, that certain treaties did not impose on the nuclear Powers clear-cut
obligations to disarm in their area, but that other countries
are to be subjected to restrictions and that it was not only
discriminatory in principle, but also proved to be so in
practice, etc. In these circumstances, what reason is there
to ask more countries 10 accede to these treaties and agreements'! We cannot agree to imposing on the other countries.
the so-called international treaties and agreements on disarmament concocted by the super-Powers.
294. Sixthly, the decision in the final document on the
reform of the existing disarmament machinery reflects, to
a certain extent, the demand of the small and mediumsized countries to put an end to the manipulation of the
disarmament negotiations by the super-Powers. This is
something positive. It is clear to everyone how the superPowers, particularly that super-Power which professes to
he the most ardent supporter of disarmament, have resorted to all kinds of tactics to obstruct the refonn of the
disarmament machinery. On this question, the Chinese
delegation has put forward its own proposals during this
special session to the effect that:
•'The questions of disarmament and international security, which concern the interests of all countries,
should be deliberated by an international organ with the
participation of all countries under the auspices of the
United Nations, and the reduction of the armaments of
the super-Powers should be given priority for consider-

atio; The n-egotiating body for disarmament should
truly be free of super-Power control, and it should be organized through consultations by the above-mentioned
deliberative organ and should be responsible to the organ. The negotiating body should be composed on a fair
and equitable basis, so that it can be fully representative. The specific items and procedures for negotiations
should be determined by the aforesaid deliberative organ." [See A/S-JO/AC.JI17.]
295. We believe that a reform of the existing disarmament machinery along the lines of such a proposal would
be in conformity with the desire and interests of the majority of countries. It is difficult to ensure that the new negotiating body Ciln further remove and weaken the control
and influence of the super-Powers and really accomplish
anything, in view of the fact that the decision in the Final
Document on the reform of the disarmament machinery
has failed to specify explicitly that this new negotiating
body be composed on the btlsis of equitable geographical
distribution. Furthermore, the negotiating body is not responsible to the deliberative organ and the specific items
for negotiation are not determined by the deliberative organ through consultations. In our opinion, further efforts
on the part of the numerous third-world and other small
and medium-sized countries will be required to make the
new negotiating body on disarmament a better one that satisfies the aforementioned requirements. It is worth noting
that in one of his statements in the Ad Hoc Committee, the
Soviet representative, obviously with ulterior motives.
tried his best to peddle the hoax of a world disannament
conference which wou~d brush aside the United Nations.
We categorically reject such a proposal.
296. It isamestness and sincerity that the Chinese
delegation palucipates in the work of this special session.
In the course of revising the Final Document, we put forward many positive views and reasonable proposals and
consuited with the deiegations of other countries. We are
certain that more and more people will see through the super-Powers' trick of sham disarmament and real arms expansion. The proceedings of this special session have been
an excellent lesson for all of us. Everyone has witnessed
the performance of the super-Powers, particularly that super-Power which claims to be more enthusiastic about disarmament than anyone else. On the one hand, they indulge
in the rhetoric of "peace" and "disarmament", producing
disarmament programmes of one kind or another: on the
other hand, they do their utmost to avoid undertaking any
real and meaningful commitment for disarmament, obstructing the adoption by this session of a document of
practical significance and resisting a thorough reform of
the disarmament machinery. It goes to show how difficult
it is to have even a single reasonable proposal of the numerous third-world and other small and medium-sized
countries on disarmament accepted by the super-Powers,
to say nothing about asking the latter to take real disarmament measures. The struggle for genuine disarmament is
an arduous one. Facts have repeatedly shown that the
people's struggle for disarmament must be closely linked
up with the stnlggle to defend national independence, State
sovereignty and territorial integrity and to cs,.'ose and con-

27th meeting - ~ June 19?8

tinuously thwart super-Power hegemonism and aggression,
interference, subversion and control. Only thus can it really help to safeguard world peace and postpone the outbreak of a new world war. The Chinese people will, as always, firmly side with the people of the third world and
other countries and fight resolutely for the realization of
this noble aim.
297. Mr. DATCU (Romania) (inierpretation from
French): The Romanian delegation, which participated in
the consensus which has this evening been endorsed by the
General Assembly, would like to express its appreciation
of the results which have been achieved as a result of intensive efforts made in recent weeks by all delegations.
298. While welcoming the positive results which have
been obtained, the Romanian delegation is at the same
time aware of the limitations and the gaps in the Final
Document, particularly in connexion with the adoption of
specific disarmament steps, primarily in the nuclear field.
299. We should like to take this opportunity to reiterate
our firm conviction that the adoption of such steps which
should be both firm and binding, is one of the essential
tasks of the United Nations and one of its prerogatives, as
it is the principal task to be carried out by the new bodies
which have been established during this session.
300. Romania, which has given great attention to the
work of this session, has, as the Assembly knows, presented a programme of specific steps which is capable of
halting the arms race, improving the international climate
and strengthening international trust; a programme which
would make it possible by successive stages to reach
abceements which would involve a substantial reduction of
armaments in order to attain the final objective: general
disarmament and, above all, nuclear disarmament [see
A/S-10/AC.l/23].

I

301. These proposais which have been motivated by the
constant concern of the Romanian people and the President
of the Socialist Republic of Romania, Mr. Ceausescu, we
believe will in the future constitute, together with the proposals which have been made by other States, an important
fund of ideas and initiatives for consideration and for use
in the disarmament negotiations, a new phase of which has
been ushered in by this session.
302. Thus the decisions which we have just taken
should, as we see it, be regarded as only the beginning of
a fresh approach, an approach which implies our acting,
with heightened awareness and a clearer outlook, energetically and resolutely through c-Jncerted efforts, to put an
end to the serious dangers which the arms race represents
for the peace and security of all peoples on earth.
303. For this reason the Romanian delegation attaches
particular importance to the decision adopted at this session, in paragraph 125 of the Final Document, that stresses
the importance of the active participation of all States in
the debate on disarmament and also the need to have a
more detailed study of the proposals and initiative~ which

491

have been put forward at this special session devoted to
disarmament.
304. Before concluding my brief remarks, I should like
warmly to congratulate you, Mr. President, and to express
to you and all those who have contributed to bringing
about today's consensus our gratitude and admiration for
the sustained efforts that you have made.
305. The Romanian delegation wishes to pay a special
tribute to the Chairman of the Ad Hoc Committee and the
Preparatory Committee for this special se3sion, Mr. Ortiz
de Rozas, who, with his eminent diplomatic qualities and
his inexhaustible energy, has played a pre-eminent part in
bringing about the results of this session.
306. We should also like to express our appreciation to
the Vice-Chairmen and the Rapporteur of the Ad Hoc
Committee, the Chairmen of the working groups and the
co-ordinators; in particular, to Mr. Garcfa Robles, a distinguished negotiator and co-ordinator.
307. The very skilful and effective work done by members of the Secretariat and the technical services for long
hours, very often during the night, deserves our sincere
and warm gratitude.
308. Mr. ABE (Japan): On behalf of the Japanese delegation, may I express to you, Mr. President, to Mr. Ortiz
de Rozas, the Chairman of the Preparatory Committee and
of the Ad Hoc Committee of this special session, to Mr.
Garcia Robles, to all the other co-ordinators and the Chairmen of the various working groups the deepest gratitude
for the dedicated guidance and the great efforts they made
to assist in the adoption of the Final Document by consensus.
309. Never have so many countries gathered and discussed so intensively and comprehensively the problems of
arms control and disarmament. It was only natural for the
world community to focus its closest attention on the proceedings and the outcome of this special session. It was indeed the indefatigable efforts and spirit of goodwill and
co-operation of all the participants which at last made it
possible to adopt the Final Document by consensus.
310. As my Foreign Minister, Mr. Sonoda, stated during
the general debate al the 9th meeting, Japan, the only
country which has experienced the horrors of nuclear
weapons, is of the firm belief that progress in negotiations
for nuclear disarmament, with the ultimate goal of eliminating all nuclear weapons, is the task to which the highest
priority should be given. My delegation has therefore
called upon all the nuclear-weapon States urgently to take
the necessary steps to halt the nuclear arms race. We are
pleased that our appeal was responded to by all the participating countries and was reflected in the Final Document.
The concrete and feasible measures that we suggested to
achieve nuclear disarmament were made a part of the Programme of Action of the Final Document.
311. Together with nuclear disarmament, Japan has long
been advocating that the international community should

I
~1
,I:1

I
I

I:

li

492

General Assembly - Ttnth Special Session - Plenary Meetings

take up the question of conventional arms control and disarmament and, in particular, the question of curbing the
intemational transfer of conventional arms. Here we are
glad that, with the support of a large number of countries,
a consensus has been reached in the Programme of Action
of the Final Document, paragraph 85 of which states:
"Consultations should be carried out among major arms
supplier and recipient countries on the limitation of all
types of international transfer of conventional
"
weapons....
312. It is also gratifying that a consensus was achieved
on paragraph 22, in the Declaration which states: •'There
should also be negotiations on the limitation of international transfer of conventional weapons... ".
313. We earnestly hope that those consultations and negotiations will be vigorously pursued effectively to place
restraints on the international transfer of conventional
weapons.
314. This is the first time that the United Nations has
recognized the gravity of this problem and has made a specific recommendation for dealing with it. In so doing, the
special sessbn has provided an excellent starting point for
further consideration of this matter by the United Nations.
315. One of the positive results of this special sessionthe one which we hope will have far-reaching salutary consequences for the future-is the establishment of new machinery for deliberations and negotiations on disarmament.
My delegation warmly welcomes the fact that at the special session the General Assembly was able to establish
one deliberative body open to all States Members of the
United Nations and one negotiating forum with limited
membership but open to all the nuclear-weapon States.

I

316. It is indeed an encouraging fact that we have succeeded ifi producing a consensus text of the Final Document which is entirely without brackets, thanks to the
spirit of compromise that has prevailed throughout the special session. That is, I think, an asset for future efforts at
disarmament, in the sense that it demonstrates that each
and every nation in the world-despite all the differences
in viewpoint and in security interests among them-is capable of finding common ground of interest for furthering
the disarmament process.
317. It is the fervent wish of my delegation that our common efforts made during the special session may bring
about a new and vigorous impetus to further constructive
deliberations and negotiations through the new machinery
on disarmament, and particularly to further the negotiations whose goal is the abolition of nuclear weapons.
318. Mr. BOATEN (Ghana): Mr. President, at the end
of this historic special session of the General Assembly devoted to disarmament it is only fitting that the Ghana delegation should express its profound gratitude to you for the
able manner in which you have steered the affairs of the
special session through some of t"~ most difficult moments
in the Assembly's history. Our thanks go in equal measure
to Mr. Ortiz de Rozas of Argentina, whose diplomatic skill

tional communil
flected in the vi
the negotiations
words agreed uJ
pletely meet Oll
tion is pleased
able to accept tI1
It is our earnest
Document will
remove the seril
as he' in liquic
the S-"Jth Afric;

and positive personality became the guarantee of success
for one of the most troubled gatherings of the world body.
Similarly, we are indebted to the various co-ordinators of
the respective drafting groups, especially Mr. Garcfa Robles of Mexico, whose diplomatic experience, assiduity
and leadership have determined the quality of our consensus document at the end of the session.
319. The long cherished wish of the non-aligned countries to focus the world body's attention on the biggest
threat ever to mankind has now been realized, and, e'Ien if
we have not achieved general and complete disarmament
or committed Member States to a binding reduction of
their respective nuclear arsenals, the Ghana delegation is
by no means disappointed at the outcome of the spedal
session. Our consensus document articulates in very realistic language our hope for a future for mankind and its civilization such as has never before been achieved. Within
the relatively short time at the disposal of the Assembly at
the special session, we have been able to adopt a meaningful Declaration and a Programme of Action and establish
the machinery for the negotiation of disarmament. From
what appeared at the beginning of the session to be irreconcilable views and positions, we have reached a consensus which should give satisfaction and hope to all who
are concerned about the future of our planet.

323. Perhaps c
tiations has bee.
ture conduct of
we are not daul
between Membc
tion would then
we are in agree.
and reorientate t
concern for the
margin of expa
does not meet tt
sentational, nor
sible contributio
as the increase<
posing views, 1
that it can be all
the justice and (
tied to.

320. It is true that we have not achieved a unanimity of
views on several fundamental aspects of disarmament, but
perhaps this in itself reflects the complex nature of the subject. Rather than feel despondent, we should encourage
ourselves to continue to strive for progress at all future
meetings until we save the world unquestionably from the
total nuclear holocaust that would be almost certain to consume our planet if we were to remain unconcerned.
321. As a small non-nUclear-weapon State that is none
the less concerned with international peace and security,
Ghana placed great faith in the prospect of a special session of the General Assembly devoted to disarmament. Aithough events over the last five weeks have shown that our
faith was not misplaced, we cannot fail to note with considerable disappointment the general political backdrop to
our strenuous efforts at this session. In our view, it was
unfortunate that during this session there were reports of
the worsening of relations between two leading nuclear
Powers, of nuclear tests and of the show of other nuclear
might, which could not constitute the best atmosphere for
our negotiations or help in promoting international detente.
Indeed, these events detracted from a consolidation of international detente and peace which, it was our common
wish, should rather have been strengthened at this time. It
is our hope that the international political atmosphere will
have improved considerably by the time we reconvene, in
the near future, to continue our efforts in pursuit of disarmament.
322. It will be recalled that my delegation drew particular attention, during the general debate, to the nuclear collaboration between some Member States of the United Nations and South Africa [15th meeting]. We did so because
this partnership constitutes a horrific threat to the peace
and security of our continent, as well as to the interna-

f

324. Finally, I
special session
should propel tl
necessary arran
safer place for a
is our view that
significant coun
gard. If we all c
fears, we may
without the thn
ever, we will al
perdition. As h
and understandi
far as Ghana is
tory and convi<
salvation of hur
325. Mr. HA
rises to make a
draft resolution
thirty-first regu
resolution, sub.
statement we
mittee's gener~
that draft was I
AC.l/35] on 2
Both of those i
dent, Mr. Ton
philosophy on
I

""3

Document Ale

27th meeting - 30 June 1978

tional community as a whole. This concern was further reflected in the views we expressed at the various stages of
the negotiations during the session. Although the form of
words agreed upon to convey that concern does not completely meet our wishes in this reg£J'd, the Ghana delegation is pleased that the international community has been
able to accept the formulations in our consensus document.
It is our earnest hope that the views expressed in the Final
Document will be translated into practical action that will
remove the serious threat to our security in Africa as well
as he' in liquidating the unacceptable apartheid policy of
the S ~"iJth African Government.
323. Perhaps one of the most difficult areas of our negotiations has been that concerned with machinery for the future conduct of negotiations on disarmament. However,
we are not daunted by the substantial lack of agreemer.'
between Member States on this issue. The Ghana delegation would therefore like to state at this point that, whilst
we are in agreement with the arrangement made to expand
and reorientate the negotiating body to reflect the universal
concern for the arms race, we are all of the view that the
margin of expansion in the Committee on Disc:\rmament
does not meet the need to make the Committee more representational, nor does it do justice to the anxieties and possible contribution of the non-nuclear countries. In as much
as the increased number represents a compromise of opposing views, we accept the present decision, but hope
that it can be altered in the not too distant future to reflect
the justice and equity which the non-nuclear world is entitled to.

I

324. Finally, the Ghana delegation is of the view that the
special session has provided the political impetus that
should propel the international community on to make the
necessary arrangements to make the world a happier and
safer place for all. We are all committed to this goal and it
is our view that the nuclear Powers as well as the militarily
significant countries have a special responsibility in this regard. If we all can cast away our parochial prejudices and
fears, we may be able to enter the twenty-first century
without the threat of nuclear eJS,tinction. If we fail, however, we will almost certainly condemn the human race to
~.,1:*;

......_

A In

p"'..... UVII . . . ."

......

--..n_ ....._: __,... •• ,n. ......

IIUlllall u\';1I1l5"

.0.

.a_...I_•• ,_,.1 •• ,: ....... __ .,.,, __

vv\.< al\.< \.<IIUVVV\OiU

VV 1L1I

l~a"VII

and understanding that should guide us in our choice. As
far as Ghana is concerned, we shall remain true to our history and conviction by offering our total support for the
salvation of humanity.
325. Mr. HARMON (Liberia): The Liberian delegation
rises to make an appropriate statement in the light of the
draft res<;,>lution we presented in the First Committee at the
thirty-first regular session of the General Assembly. 3 That
resolution, submitted on 29 November 1976, reflected the
statement we made in the 24th meeting of that Committee's general debate on disarmament. The essence of
that draft was circulated as an official document [A/S-JO/
AC.J /35] on 23 June, during this tenth special session.
80th of those initiatives were taken by order of our President, Mr. Tolbert, under the title "Declaration of a new
philosophy on disarmament".
"'3

Document A/C.l/3l/L.28.

493

326. To refer to this briefly: it was President Tolbert's
conclusion, after much pondering with almost a sense of
despair on the fatal direction taken over many years of an
expanding armaments race, that a new beginning must be
made, a new approach fashioned to mobilize the peoples
of the world in a radically new and more effective endeavour to reverse the fatal armaments madness.
327. As delegations wPl recall, our submission was favourably received by a Committee already weary and despondent over three decades of United Nations failure to
meet the disarmament challenge. For us, therefore, that
day marks an historic turning-point in the United Nations
long disarmament history.
328. If we recall these developments it is to emphasize a
point that needs emphasizing for the future, and one that
has become an axiom at this session: that the solution of
the vast problem we have dealt with here can no longer be
the exclusive monopoly of the major military Powers, that
important ideas can be contributed by the smaller nations
as well, particularly since they are not bogged down by the
self-serving possession of huge accumulations of military
hardware.
329. On this question of democratization, if this session
has any significance at all it is that for the first time in the
long history of disarmament this has been a gathering of
the almost total universality of 149 nations and, I might
add, the creative ideas it has produced, regardless of the
last-minute bickering over words, are not the kind that
come out of the barrel of a gun.
330. Another important point we wish to underscore is
that the idea of the session itself constitutes a new approach to the now vast and complicated disarmament problem. Our esteemed Secretary-General, who made the keynote speech at the 1st meeting of this session, stated with
inspired simplicity that we need a strategy for disarmament. At the same time, when we begin to study the concepts, ideas, formulations and interpretations embodied in
the many high-level statements made in the general debate,
the most striking impression my delegation gets is t~at of a
veritable thought explosion of many new concepts of the
whole issue of disarmament, ranging from new- relativity
concepts, such as the linkage of disarmament with the
whole United Nations range of new economic and social
problems, to a new political relationship among nations,
and especially to the relaxation of tensions among nations
euphemistically called detente. It was a proliferation of
ideas in which we think the special session has opened up
an entirely new book that will confront the scholars of the
world, who, we would submit, have not given the arms
problem its rightful place in the profundity of their political science, their educational and political activities.
331. Arms have become a fetish romanticized as a tool
of the hero. Nations will not get rid of them by exposing
their villainy, their wickedness or even their astronomical
cost. My delegation is of the belief that nations are more
likely to discredit arms by exposing their purported value,
as the agents of national security rather than by exposing
them as the enemies of life itself, capable of annihilating
the human race.

,.,
'I

i

{'I

;'\

~I
;1
1I

j

~
:!

~

I

-~\

'I

~1

I

I

Ili

494

Geooral AsIIlembly - Tenth SI*IaI Sesakm - Plenary Meetings

332. While my delegation may have experienced disappointment at the advefse developments in the various
working groups of the Ad Hoc Committee, 'we feel that
this session was already a success when it was conceived
and executed. The session has successfully been able to
develop a world-wide spirit and an awareness of the nature
of the crisis man has created in his quest for an albeit
warped sense of security.
333. After many hard weeks of difficult discussions and
negotiations, this special session has been able to reach a
consensus on the Declaration on disarmament and the Programme of Action on disarmament, as my delegation had
anticipated. We are gratified to have achieved such results
in such circumstances. Even though agreement has been
reached, we make an appeal for the realization of our earnest hope that all efforts will be made to prevent the text
from becoming a welter of contradictory decisions and
vain commitments. The measure of success we have been
able to achieve should be retained, implemented and followed up. Let us be unrelenting in our duties and responsibilities in urging our Governments, and our peoples in particular, the world over to press harder for the goals we
have envisaged in the field of disarmament. The proble~
of disarmament was not to negotiate even a single item on
the ladder to complete and general disarmament but to develop a world-wide spirit and awareness of the nature of
the crisis man has create<! in his quest for security.
334. Happily, a new ~pirit has been born bere, within
these walls. It is an undeniable lesson of history that, when
a new spirit sweeps the world, everything is possible.

I

335. Therefore, in concluding this statement, the Liberian delegation wishes to state that if we were to catalogue
the positive results of this special session, we wou~d use
the formula put forward by the Secretary~General-that is,
"an effort of totally new dimensions". As the SecretaryGeneral said, this effort "must encompass a broader and
longer-range perspective than any previous effort; it must
be more deeply rooted in the democratic involvement of
peopies and nations-all natioi1s-tt-~n :my effort that has
gone before; and it must rally an unprecedented measure of
the world's reserves of talents and resources to the task".
[1st meeting. para. 49.]

336. As we see it, the magic force exerted by this session has been such that, as we hope, there will be a positive answer in the near future.
337. Finally, we, the members of the Liberian delegation, could not allow this opportunity to pass without giving very high marks and great credit to you, Mr. President,
for your efficient leadership and the important role you
have played during this session. We are grateful to Y9U
and through you to your Government for what you have
been able to accomplish in this historic special session. We
should like to express appreciation also to our esteemed
and dedicated Secretary-General, Mr. Waldheim, whose
keynote speech to this session set us off to a good start.
We should like to compliment all his able assistants in the
Secretariat and all the members of the General Committee.

338. We wish to pay a special tribute to the Chainnan of
the Ad Hoc Committee, Mr. Carlos Ortiz de Rozas, who·
by his acts has demonstrated to us that he is an astute di~lomat worthy of the highest respect.

son to whol
self. To on
close quarte
diplomatic '
'tal endurar
achievemen
tina may ril

339. We wish to pay a tribute, too, to the Chairmen of
the various working groups and to the co-ordinators, as
well as to the dedicated and efficient men and women of
the Secretariat who have worked so energetically to make
this special session a signal one.

344. Any
this docume
issues was
tired repre~
clock. Bec~
not have th
formUlation
ment we no
reservations
sentence in
part in the I
reservations
genuineness
own delegal
tory. I shall

Mr. PALMA (Peru) (interpretation from Spanish):
My delegation would have expected from this special session of the General Assembly two basic achievements, at
least: a general express condemnation of the use of nuclear
weapons as being contrary to the spirit and the principles
of the Charter and a crime against mankind; and a specific
guarantee that non-nuclear-weapon States would not be attacked with nuclear weapons. We regret also the absence
of a specific and final commitment to channel to development some of the enormous funds now devoted to the arms
race. By that we do not mean to overlook the advances
made in other .areas, the most important of which is p~r­
haps the re-democratization implied by the reorganization
of the Conference of the Committee on Disarmament. Nor
have we any intention of denigrating the intense efforts towards conciliation made principally by Mr. Ortiz de Rozas
and Mr. Garcia Robles, who, working under your auspices.
and with your encouragement, Mr. President, earned our
great appreciation.
340.

341. For the Latin American countries what has been
particularly encouraging has been the recognition of the
historic and exemplary initiatives represented by the Treaty
of Tlatelolco, now being strengthened and perfected, and
the Ayacucho Declaration, now open to all countries of the
region as a result of the declaration which was signed by
the Ministers for Foreign Affairs of the signatory countries
on 22 June and which was circulated on 23 June as Assembly dOCument A/S-lOlAC .1134. In that context, my delega-tion regards the document we have approved here as a first
step in a process which, as all mankind hopes and demands, will acquire a pace and a dynamism in keeping
with mankind's aspirations to peace and security. Accordingly, we reiterate our firm intention, along with the other
countries that advocated the convening of this special session of the General Assembly, to redouble our rigorous efforts to ensure that in the next stages of this process which
is now only beginning the objectives that we have set for
ourselves will be achieved.
342. Mr. TEMPLETON (New Zealand): All those who
participated constructively in the negotiation of the Final
Document deserve the warmest praise. Few of us who
were engaged in that task would have believed, at the end
of last week, that we would find it possible to wind up our
labours with a consensus text which covers the full range
of issues without significant gaps.
343. Many have contributed to this happy result, and
tributes were paid to all of them by the Chairman of the Ad
Hoc Committee when its work came to an end in the early
hours of this moming-but not, of course, to the one per-

Mr. Sche
Chair.

,,

I

345. New
in urging th
sive test-bat
in the direct
of paragrapl
differently,
fect of a Cor
ment concel
we would if
however, th
tion had tal<
of the cons(
component
value a con
both vertic
weapons. T
completing
correspondil
on this issUl
346. It ha
therefore, n
ference of t
Assembly, i
the negotiati
tries subscri
conclusion (
ity. We WOI
51 of the Fi
treaty "to t
Assembly"
,'at the earl:
ter wording
three nuclea
speedily so 1
sider a draft

495

27th meeting - 30 June 1978

son to whom we owe the most: Mr. Ortiz de Rozas himself. To one who had the opportunity of Qbserving it at
close quarters, his chairmanship was not only a triumph of
diplomatic virtuosity, but also a feat of physical and men'tal endurance which few athletes could emulate. Jlis
achievement is one in which he and the people of Argentina may rightly take pride.
344. Any consensus requires compromise. In the case of
this document, compromise on some of the most important
issues was achieved only in the last few hours by very
tired representatives working under the pressure of the
clock. Because of this time factor many delegations did
not have the opportunity to review the final compromise
formulations before they were incorporated in the document we now have before us. It is thus understandable that
reservations are expressed about this or that paragraJih or
sentence in the document both by delegations which took
part in the negotiations and by some which did not. These
reservations do not, in our view, undermine in any way the
genuineness of the consensus. In a number of respects my
own delegation finds the document less than fully satisfactory. I shall enumerate only .the more important of these.

Mr. Scheltema (Netherlands), Vice-President, took the
Chair.

,

I

345. New Zealand has consistently been in the forefront
in urging the earliest possible conclusion of a comprehensive test-ban treaty. We regard it as an essential first step
in the direction of nuclear disarmament. The first sentence
of paragraph 51 of the Final Document might h;we been
differently worded to make it clear that the entry into effect of a comprehensive test ban is not dependent on agreement concerning later steps; but that, in any event, is how
we would interpret the paragraph as a whole. We are glad,
however, that the second sentence, to which one delegation had taken exception, was eventually retained as part
of the consensus. We regard this sentence as an essential
component of the paragraph, highlighting as it does the
value a comprehensive test ban would have in inhibiting
both vertical and horizontal proliferation of nuclear
weapons. The third sentence, emphasizing the urgency of
completing a comprehensive test-ban treaty, reflects the
corresponding sense of urgency evident in the discussions
on this issue at the thirty-second session of the Assembly.
346. It has been a considerable disappointment to us,
therefore, that a draft treaty has not yet reached the Conference of the Committee on Disarmament, still less the
Assembly, as contemplated in resolution 32178, to which
the negotiating nuclear-weapon States and 123 other countries subscribed in December last. In our view the urgent
conclusion of an agreement is a matter of the highest priority. We would therefore have greatly preferred paragraph
51 of the Final Document to call for submission of a draft
treaty "to the thirty-third regular session of the General
Assembly" rather than contain the much vaguer phrase
..at the earliest .possible date". We have accepted ,this latter wording in the interest of consensus, but we urge the
three nuclear-weapon States to conclude their negotiations
speedily so that the Assembly may, in fact, be able to consider a draft treaty this year.

347. We are glad that paragraph 51 contains a reference
to the desirability of a moratorium. Although, regrettably,
not all the nUclear-weapon States agree, there is no doubt
that an overwhelming majority of States would wish them
to refrain from further testing until a comprehensive testban treaty can be brought into effect.
348. I should like to add a few words on the question of
machinery. The positive decisions we have reached offer a
great opportunity. I fully agree with the statement in paragraph 113 that the existing machinery has not produced ad..
equate results. It is an understatement. I agree also on the
need to revitalize the machinery and give it a more representative character.
349. The reconstitlltion of the Disarmament Commission
as a deli~rative body with universal membership is potentially an important step. It offers all Member States the opportunity to participate actively in debate on current disarmament issues outside the regular Assembly sessions at a
time when those very issues may be under negotiation in
t~e Committee on Disarmament. I hope all will take advantage of it.
350. The negotiating body is also to be reformed, but the·
reforms do not go far enough. New Zealand wholeheartedly shares the view expressed by the President of
France that disarmament is not.exclusive to a few countries
but is the business of everyone; that the possibility must be
created for all States to take part in the bodies in which
disarmament.is discussed [3rd meeting]. In our view this
means the negotiating body as well as the deliberative
body. At the same time, the membership of the negotiating
body must be kept within reasonable limits. Therefore, to
give all those States which wish to do so a periodic opportunity to participate directly in disarmament negotiations,
there must be some rotation of membership.
351. . This idea did not attract a wide measure of support
at this session, but it has a logic which is difficult to refute. We believe it will attract a wider measure of support
when those States which are desirous of joining the Comnnuce un UlSiIIIIlillllCfil;-ilIlU UlCy uu nut at present mClUoe
New Zealand-discover that the current enlargement will
permit only a minority to satisfy their legitimate ambition..
___ ! .........

r-...!

..

...

__ ..I ...L

....1

....

._4'

'"

. . .

352. We are therefore pleased that there is provision for
you, Mr. President, to be consulted in the selection of the
members of the Committee on Disarmament, and for the
membership of the Committee to be reviewed at regular intervals. Equally, we should expect that review to be conducted in consultation with your successors. We hope that
before the session ends some more precision may be given
to the expression ..at regular intervals". We would consider it appropriate for the first review to be put in hand
before the second special session on disarmament begins,
and to be completed at that session.
353. Finally, I welcome the inclusion in the document of
paragraph 116, which affirms that draft disarmament multilateral conventions should be subjected to the normal procedures applicable in the law of treaties. We believe that
all the potential parties to such treaties should have a say

I

496

General Assembly - Tenth Spedal SessJoo - Plenary Meetlnp

in their formulation before they are opened for signature.
We believe that the Assembly has treaty-making powers. It
may be that those powers could be further examined and
defined, but in our view they are extensive. At any rate,
the Assembly should have the power to review the content
of multilateral disarmament treaties and should not be
asked to rubber-stamp them.
354. I believe that the immediate prospects for progress
on disarmament should be viewed with a blend of optimism and caution. There is no doubt that the special session has stimulated public awareness of the need for more
active efforts by Governments, and that Governments may
be expected to react to this concern by trying harder to
reach agreements that really mean disarmament. But experience teaches caution. It is salutary to recall that, despite
all the efforts so far made either within the United Nations
or elsewhere, nc multilateral agreement which would effectively reduce either nuclear or conventional armaments
has been conc1uded. In the interval between now and the
second special session on disarmament we must surely do
better.

I

355. Mr. ROSSIDES (Cyprus): I wish in the first place
to commend the work of this special session. It is important to be to a great extent indulgent about what has been
achhwed, because this is the first special session on disarmament that has been held. After a long period of years
in which there was inactivity in efforts towards disarmament, after that period of passivity in which nothing was
done, we could not expect to get more than we have.
There are many merits in the results of this special session,
first and foremost the fact that there has been a consensus
Final Document, and particularly that it was achieved in
the last days. This was really a great achievement and
credit is due to those who brought it about. All the
brackets have been eliminated and there is now a very
good Introduction and a splendid Declaration; the Programme of Action and the section on machinery are not so
good, but anyway it is a praiseworthy achievement that
there has been a spirit of mutual understanding and cooperation. The very fact of consensus means a move forward towards co-Opeiatioil, a."d that is important; it is already an achievement. We must hope that this spirit will
prevail in all disarmament negotiations so that there will at
last be fruitful results, because so far there has been none.
We must not forget that nothing has been achieved really.
It had been expected that we would at least have had a
comprehensive test-ban treaty or some important progress
in the strategic arms limitation talks. But never mind; as I
said, in the circumstances we could not expect more.
356. However, I wish on this occasion to pay a tribute to
all those who have had a vital part in the success of the
special session, particularly those who were protagonists in
bringing about the required agreement on disarmament
measures, that is, the Chairman of the Ad Hoc Committee,
Mr. Ortiz de Rozas, who has shown extraordinary talent
and skill in his difficult task; and the co-ordinator, Mr.
Garcia Robles, who has equal ability and who has shown
great concern in this matter. Both of them have given generously of their time and energy in providing constructive
leadership for the achievement against all adversity-and

there was much adversity-and at the last moment, the
positive outcome of consensus:', This was achieved after
long deliberations for weeks on end at this special session.
357. I wish on this occasion to place on record our profound admiration for the President of the General Assembly, Mr. Mojsov, who with such signal success has presided over four consecutive sessions of the General
Assembly with exemplary calm and detachment and with a
spirit of positiveness which has been instrumental in bringing about mutual accommodation on all that was to be discussed. It is important to note that it is not merely a question of skill. It is a question of Mr. Mojsov's humanislli
and his innate sense of justice which have a positive influence and lead to the success that we have witnessed.
Herein lies the secret of wise leadership. It lies really in
the moral content of that leadership. This tallies well with
the role of his country, Yugoslavia, for Yugoslavia is the
best conceivable bridge between East and West and embodies the concept of non-alignment born at Belgrade in
1961. Indeed, it may be said that this special session had
its roots in the first conference of the non-aligned countries
hi 1961.
358. As I said before, among the merits of this session is
the fact that it resulted in consensus. But there are other
merits also and these are very important. It has brought
widespread awareness that the arms race is the main cause
of the threatening situation in our world of today and halting it should be the main target of any international conferences on disarmament. It has been stressed here that arms
are no longer a source of security but the very reverse. So,
we now find ourselves in a different world.
359. Furthermore, among the merits of the session is the
fact that a new disarmament negotiating forum has been
established with France participating and soon, we hope,
China-a great improvement.
360. Another aspect is that the session enhanced the roie
in disarmament affairs of non-governmental organizations;
those organizations represent a section of public opinion
~--~--- :.:~ :-_~""n.. t tn.
alrQ thQrn
ana, lnenauu:;,
1L ." .u.pv.~Q.n .v
MoB'"
_,"',., _~U1~r~
•• _~ of the
_
necessity of disarmament. They have shown an extraordinarily sound approach to the problem and they have displayed imagination regarding the problems of disarmament.
I

Ii

intema
in the
tion, tt
to a DI
operati
place {
which
arms Cl
I

362.

provid(
can ne'
armam
there h
that the
arms Cl
escalat
munity
laxatiol
363.

'"
furth
peac

It conti

'"
pose
Chat
toria
And in
"1

built
ance
rene,
lastil
impl
the (

.1.

Perhaps Jl10st vital of all, this session has made
clear to the Members of the United Nations the inseparable
link between disarmament and international security. In
this session a preliminary study was made of this relationship. It originated in a draft resolution submitted on the
initiative of Cyprus, with 10 non-aligned countries as cosponsors, a resolution that was adopted by consensus during the thirty-second session of the General,Assembly [resolution 32/87 Cl. A very sound, important and useful study
has been presented showing the linkage between the two
[A/S-lO/7 and Corr.l], which was not so clearly in the
minds of the Memoor States when the session began. The
importance of this linkage appeared during the work of the
session. Not only has the study brought it out; the study
also helps as a means of transition, for this relationship of
361.

. 'i;;i~'
·---r'_

364. '
it has t
ing int(
To thir
Utopial
there is
VII of
We kn(
destruc
365.

stop thl
ties of
escalati
cally, [
arms n
in the I
now ha
assurin,

27th meeting - 30 June 1978

international security and disannament means a revolution
in the old concept of security through power and domination, through military alliances and so on. Here, we come
to a new concept of national security achieved by cooperative, collective security through tile United Nations in
place of anantagon1stic security achieved by armaments
which has resulted in the grave threat of the escalating
anns race.
362. Therefore, the only way to halt the anns race, is to
provide its antidote, which is international security. You
can never stop the anns race by trying to reduce existing
annaments. The trouble in our world is not so much that
there is an excessive quantity of anns. The real trouble is
that there is an escalating anns race and it is that escalating
anns race' that causes the drainage of resources; it is that
escalating arms race that prevents the international community from developing peaceful coexistence and the relaxation of tension.
363.

Paragraph 12 of the Final Document states:

"The anns race . . . runs counter to efforts to achieve
further relaxation of international tension . . . based on
peaceful coexistence" .
It continues to accuse the anns race:
"The arms race impedes the realization of the purposes, and is incompatible with the principles, of the
Charter. . . especially respect for sovereignty . . . territorial integrity" and the non-use of force.
And in paragraph 13 it says:
"Enduring international peace and security cannot be
built on the accummulation of weaponry by military alliances nor be sustained by a precarious balance of deterrence or doctrines of strategic superiority. Genuine and
lasting peace can only be created through the effective
implementation of the security system provided for in
the Charter of the United Nations".
364. The great achievement of this special session is that
it has brought a realization of the importance of establishing international security if we aim at all at disannament.
To think that we can disarm in a world of insecurity is
Utopian. No nation can disarm in a vacuum. As long as
there is no international security as provided for in Chapter
VII of the Charter, there will necessarily be an arms race.
We know from this document that the arms race spells the
destruction of humanity.

e
e
n
l-

e
1-

'-

365. Therefore, the logical sequence is that we have to
stop the anns race; not merely try to resolve the technicalities of reducing armaments, which is impossible with an
escalating arms race, but go more logically, more practically, more rationally towards eliminating the causes of the
arms race. The causes are there before us. The causes are
in the outdated concept of the balance of power-which
now has become the balance of weapons-as the means of
assuring the security of nations.

1-

:y
'0

le
le
le
ly
)f
--,..

497

366. That is a fallacy that this special session has recognized in the Declaration, which very clearly states that security no longer lies in weaponry, that there must be genuine international security .. What is astonishing is that this
Declaration has not been followed up by dealing in the
Programme of Action with the means to achieve internatioilal security. It is inconsistent with the Declaration to
proceed in any other manner than by taking steps to put an
immediate end to the aIms race. In other respects, this session has been a success, it has been a success as far as its
Declaration is concerned, but only if this Declaration is
eventually followed up by the implementation of its provisions.
367. Furthermore, the Declaration states that it is vital
for the success of disarmament that "all States should
strictly abide by the provi::;ions of the Charter". So we
have it in the Declaration that all States must abide by the
provisions of the Charter. Can we not see that we are not
abiding by the provisions of the Charter if we violate its
basic provision, that dealing with international security?
The Declaration states that we have to increase and enhance the role of the Uriited Nations, which has "a central
role and primary responsibility in the sphere of disumament". What does the Charter say? Article 11 states: "The
General Assembly may consider the general principles of
co-operation in the maintenance of international peace and
security, including the principles governing disarmament
. . . ". It makes disannament directly dependent upon international security. The Declaration states that we must
comply with the Charter. Therefore, in complying with the
Charter we have to establish the responsibility of the Member States lor international security through the United Nations Charter and its provisions, if we want to have disarmament. The Charter clearly provides in Article 2,
paragraph 4 that: "All members shall refrain in their international relations from the threat or use of force against the
territorial integrity or political independence of any State
... ". That is repeated in the Declaration, but the Pro-

gramme of Action has not ta..ken into account that this provision does not stand alone but is followed by paragraph 5
of Article 2, which specifically spells out that: "All members shall give the United Nations every assistance in ...
preventive or enforcement action".
368. Therefore, it follows directly that, if we wish no
use or threat of the use of force, we must have preventive
or enforcement action under the Charter-and such
action is provided for in subsequent Articles: Articles 39,
41 and 42.
369. I say this because, in accordance with its own Declaration, this session should have proceeded to define the
means of stopping the arms race through compliance with
the essential provisions of the Charter. But, as I said, this
is not so vital at this session because it is the first special
session devoted to disarmament, and I have no doubt that
the second such special session will proceed, in accordance with the Declaration of this special session, with the
implementation of the provisions of the Charter which ensure international security and legal order in the world.

,
I

370.

I

With reference to the study on the interrelationship

I

498

General Assembly - Tenth Special Session - Plenary Meetings

between disarmament and international security, the decision of the session for its continuation in depth will faeilio
tate the success of the next special session devoted to disarmament.
371. I wish now to mention the proposal made by the
President of Cyprus, Mr. Kyprianou, for the total demilitarization and disarmament of the Republic of Cyprus. This
proposal is in keeping with the spirit of the special session
and is, moceover, an initiative taken by a sman State in
keeping with the purposes of disarmament. President Kyprianou expressed it in the following terms during the general debate of the special session: "I propose total demilitarization and disarmament of the Republic of Cyprus and
implementation of the resolutions of the United Nations"
[2nd meeting. para. /45].
372. That proposal was repeated in the Ad Hoc Committee and also submitted to the Secretary-General. As a
result, it is officially listed among the proposals which
form an integral part of the work of this session as deserving of further study. We believe that there is a positive and
constructive spirit in this proposal. It aims at the abandonment of armaments in Cyprus-a trouble spot-to be
replcced qy genuine security through the United Nations
and the Charter, thus facilitating an atmosphere of conciliation, mutual understanding and peace within the principles of the Charter and United Nations resolutions on the
subject will lead small countIies to set the example in being the first to pave the way for demilitarization and disarmament and that will also represent a constructive contribution.

I

373. In the context of the work of this session, the delegation of Cyprus proposed that, in view of the close link
between disarmament and international security and the
dependence "f disarmament on international security, in
accordance with Article 11 of the Charter, the next special
session on disarmament be named special session on disarmament and international security. This proposal was
noted by the Chairman of the Ad Hoc Committee and referred in writing to the co-ordinators. It is now pending for
consideration when the time for the next speciai sessiOn is
decided. Our hope is that the next session will provide the
opportunity for progress in disarmament through international security and legal order.
374. Mr. ROA KOURl (Cuba) (interpretation from
Span/.s·h): I should like first of all to express to the President, Mr. Mojsov, my delegation's appreciation of the expertise and zeal with which he has guided the work of this
special session. Our appreciation also goes to Mr. Carlos
Ortiz de Rozas and Mr. Alfonso Oarcia Robles, who have
done praiseworthy work in their respective capacities as
Chairman of the Ad Hoc Committee and co-ordinatorgeneral, as weli as to the other co-ordinators, who made
such great efforts so that our task might be concluded successfully.
375. The Cuban delegation considers that the Final Document prepared by this Assembly reflects such results as
could be achieved at this stage. As was to be expected, it
does not satisfy the aspirations of the vast majority of the

peoples of the world regarding the solution of the dramatic
diIemm.a of peace or war and the prevention of the threat
of a world thermonuclear war-far from it.
376. In our opinion the document omits matters of vital
importance. Nothing is said about the true causes of the
arms race. No reference is made to the legitimate demand
of the vast majority of the nations Members of the Organization that military bases be removed from foreign territories.
377. An attempt was even made not to mention the right
of peoples to use every means within their power to
achieve and defend their independence, and no more than
a mild reference was made to the urgent question of prevent\ng racist regimes from continuing to ann and from acquiring or expanding a nuclear capability so as to be able
to occupy and exploit the countries in southern Africa and
in the Middle East.
378. Non-nuclear countries and others in which there are
no nuclear bases are still under the threat of a possible nuclear attack.
379. Endless debates have been held on the use or the
threat of the use of force, including nuclear weapons-as
though the right of peoples to live free from the fear of foreign aggression could be questioned.
380. Obviously, the tenacious opposition of a handful of
capitalist countries, those who lack the political will
needed to face squarely the task of general and complete
disarmament and really get down to it, prevented this Assembly from taking decisive steps in the discharge of its
duty. This makes it all the more necessary to convene a
world disarmament conference in the near future, with universal representation and full powers to adopt the solutions
which our peoples demand.
381. It is not yet possible to assess the scope of the
results obtained at this sPecial session, but its limitations
and omissions are glaringly obvious. No doubt, our peoples will evaluate what we have done, will arrive at their
_ ...... , - ,n,.",n",lultt:.n.no onA Qccinn

rt:llcn.nncihilitu

vvvu .... VU.... ~UOIVIlO AI..U "OD£6&& ... "'Qy"'....:7&u ......J.

382. Without anticipating their judgement, I should like
to reiterate here the firm conviction, which was already expressed 18 years ago at this same rostrum by President Fidel Castr04: that only when the philosophy of exploitation is
abandoned will the philosophy of war also cease to prevail.
383. Cuba will continue to participate resolutely in all international bodies and forums in the urgent struggle for
general and complete disarmament, for detente and for ensuring a just and lasting peace throughout the world.
384. Mr. OYONO (United Republic of Cameroon) (interpretation from French): The Cameroonian <leJegattoa
supported the draft resolution containing the Final Document on disarmament that has just been adopted by the Assembly. It did so because, despite its ambiguities and imbalances, this document provides a substantial basis for the
4 OffiCial Records of. the General Assembly, Fifteenth Session, Plenary
Meetings, 872nd meetmg.

27th meeting - 30 JunE' 1978

:ic

:at

:al
~e

!ld

li0-

.ht
to
an
'elC-

)le
nd

implementation of a process of general and complete dis~
armament acceptable to all States.
385. That is why it is a pleasant duty for us to express
our gratitude to the President, Mr. Mojsov, for the dynamic impetus that he constantly gave to our negotiations.
I wish also to pay a tribute to Mr. Ortiz de Rozas, Chairman of the Ad Hoc Committee, together with all the Chairmen of the working groups and all the co-ordinators, for
the rp-ally superhuman efforts they have made, day and
night, in order that our work should be successful.
386. However, my delegation, like most of those of the
non-aligned countries, is wondering about the applicability, the impact and the real scope of this document, many
of whose provisions are still the subject of strong reservations, despite all efforts made and the intensive negotiations carried out to disptl all the hesitations and mental
reservations of some nuclear-weapon States.

Ire

uhe
-as
:>r-

of
ill
~te
~s­

its
~

a

nims

the
Ins
~o-

eir
lke

:xFit is

reinfor
enin-

loa
cu-

l\s.m-

387. When I spoke in the general debate [23rd meeting],
I had the opportunity to describe at length the aims and objectives which in the opinion of the Cameroonian delegation and that of the very large majority of States represented her.e were to be defined by this session and the
ways and means to attain them.
388. Our ,;oncerns, which, as has been shown by the
very great interest caused by our discussions, are also
those of the other peoples in the world as a whole, unfortunately do not seem to have been capable of engendering
among Governments, particularly those of countries with
large military arsenals, sufficient political will to make a
practical and determined start on the process of general
and complete disarmament.
389. We in the United Republic of Cameroon regret in
particular that we have not received from all the nuciearweapon States, as we requested, clear and unambiguous
guarantees that they would refrain from the use or threat of
use of nuclear weapons against non-nuclear-weapon
States.
390. Also, we denounce the scandalous disproportion between the vast resources devoted to undertakings of destruction and the pittances set aside for the alleviation of
poverty, since we had hoped that during this session the
countries of military importance would demonstrate by
specific, albeit symbolic, acts their willingness to reduce
their military expenditure in favour of social and economic
development.
391. In this respect and in my capacity as Chairman of
the Executive Board of the United Nations Children's
Fund, I have addressed to the General Assembly at this
special session a message, contained in document AlS-lO/
AC.1I5, drawing attention to the particularly precarious
and disquieting situation of more than 400 million children
throughout the world .

the
rary

392. We welcome the fact that at least one State replied
to our appeal by announcing its intention to earmark from
its military budget an amount of $7 million for the Interna-

499

tional Year of the Child. We earnestly hope that this initiative will be followed by other countries and that the richer
countries will give the example, so as to make of this session, which is coming to an end, the beginning of a new
era based no longer on confrontation but on solidarity.
393. I cannot fail to welcome the broadening of the negotiating machinery at Geneva. It is quite proper that the
replace the
new Committee on Disarmament, which
Conference of the Committee on Disarmament, should be
more representative and reflect the features of contemporary international soci~ty, which is characterized by universality, the interdependence of States and the fact that all
nations share a common destiny.

will

394. The United Republic of Cameroon feels that this
measure, which will enable all States to take an active part
in the important deliberations and decisions in this highpriority field of common security, should be based on a
system of rotation of membership, with terms of one or
two years at most, in order to ensure an effective chance of
participation for an States at reasonable intervals.
395. Mr. KAPLLANI (Albani~): During the general debate of the tenth special session the delegation of the
Pe"'ple's Socialist Republic of Albania expressed the position and the view of its Government on the issue of disarmament [2200 meeting]. Now that the session is drawing
to a close, the Albanian delegation would like to explain
briefly its position with regard to the Final Document and
to the consensus by which it has been said this document
was adopted-if there really was any consensus at all.
396. In our view, the Final Document repr~sents in ma!1Y
ways an ama[gam of ideas, viewpoints and concepts, the
main bulk of which are contradictory and give rise to opposite interpretations. The Final Document does not reveal, nor does it touch upon, the real causes of the am!lS
armament",
.. 1"'0 .LUIIO"
f .. il", to l-'
nl·O........l·nt
bu ild
.1 - un
.t" and the
11
-.u.
I . 1.1
.".0 r"'''''''
"'\of""'. It"".10
apv I
the true factors which hamper genuine disarmament.

1.'.:'11

11

1
II

··'····1
..'.

397. The Albanian delegation deems it necessary to state
that it does not approve of many parts of the document,
that it is against a number of formulations contained in it
and that it has reservations as regards some of its formulas.
for reasons we made clear in our statement in the general
debate,
some points of which we, are reiterating at this
.
Juncture.
398. We think that the Fin~ Document, like the proceedings of this session, has shown that the tenth special session devoted to disarmament has failed to achieve any concrete results. Once again it can be seen clearly that the
opponents of genuine disarmament-the imperialist
Powers, primarily the two super-Powers, the United States
and the Soviet Union-are trying by all ways and means to
make the disarmament issue ever more complicated and
the goal of real disarmament an unattainable goal.
399. As in the past, at present, too, the imperialist superPowers intend to use the various debates and discussions
on this issue in international forums to impose their views
on others, to deceive and hoodwink peoples, to justify and

....~::/~{

-

500

General Assembly - Tenth Special Session - Plenary Meetings

to mask their own armaments and the armaments race between them, together with their war preparations.
400. The whole of this session has been clear evidence
of their ambitions and the tactics they used to introduce
into the Final Document their deceptive ideas and slogans,
their worn-out concepts, through which they aim at creating illusions and spreading confusion. The two superPowers have used and continue to use far and wide their
slogans about so-called detente, international security and
military balance, about the need to strengthen the military
blocs, about the horrors of nuclear war and other such
stuff, to deceive people and to frighten them so that they
will give up the struggle for their own rights.
401. The two imperialist super-Powers always advertise
the talks they conduct and the bargains they strike as steps
towards disarmament. They make a big fuss about their
agreements on the so-called limitation of their arms and
the armaments race, about the nuclear tests and the production of nuclear weapons. In fact, they have increased
and continue to increase ceaselessly their amlamenls, the
armaments race, their military budgets and war preparaI tions.
402. It was in the same vein that the imperialist Powers
insisted that their dangerous concepts and theses be incorporated in the Final Document of this session. In their formulations we can see clearly the ambition to secure for
themselves the role of the arbiter in the world and to keep
the freedom-loving peoples and countries under the constant threat of their classical and nuclear weapons.
403. The United States imperialists, precisely when the
discussion on disarmament was taking place, came up with
a request for the creation of a permament United Nations
rese-'- " lee which would be used whenever the Security
Council would so require. It is not difficult to tell what
purposes such an international gendarmerie would serve.
The hitherto bitter experience with the various United Nations forces should serve as a warning lesson. That is why
we are resolutely opposed to such a dangerous idea.
404. We are similarly resolutely opposed to the efforts
made by the Soviet socialist imperialists to exploit docu:
ments adopted by the United Nations for propagating their
deceptive proposals, such as those on the conclusion of a
so-called treaty on the non-use of force and on the convening of a world disarmament conference, through which
they intend to cover up their aggressive policies.
405. As in its statement in the general debate, at present
too, the Albanian delegation wishes to point out that forums and organs for disarmament have not been lacking.
On the contrary, there are many of them, within and outside the United Nations framework. Moreover, a great
abundance of documents and resolutions have been produced and adopted. But the truth is that none of these has
been any obstacle to the arms build-up and the armaments
race. The fact is that they have not contributed to the cause
of real disarmament. We hold that even at present it cannot
be expected that there will be any change in this direction
or that the negotiating machinery, whether in the present
fonn or when refonned, will produce any better results.

'

406. The strategic arms limitation talks, the Vienna ta~ks
on the mutual reduction of forces in central Europe and
other negotiations of this kind are exploited by the two super-Powers to programme their own arms race ~md to legalize the presence of their military forces and bases ,'~ Europe and in other regions.
40';-. As in many other documents adopted in the past,
mention is made in the Final Document of nuclear-freezones or zones of peace. The Albanian delegation wishes
to reiterate its view that the so-called zones of peace or nuclear-free-zones in various regions do not make the danger
of war and of weapons a distant thing. The fact that the
imperialist super-Powers express their support for or even
encourage the creation of such zones goes to show that in
this way they intend to lull to sleep the peoples' vigilance.
408. In conclusion we should like to emphasize that it is
of great importance not to allow the imperialist Powers and
other opponents of disarmament to speculate with the aspirations of the peoples. It is important that the peoples be
spoken to openly, that they be told the truth as it is, something which in our view the Final Document fails to do.
409. Having explained some of the reasons why the Albanian delegation cannot accept the Final Document, we
should like to state that our delegation does not join in the
consensus.

414. Secon
peace in SOl
delegation is
that region p
establishmen
When it is es
clearly defin
region, with(

Mr. I
French): Th
outcome of t
armament an
ation and co
Assembly, l'
Hoc Commi
bles and to 1
this importar
415.

416. We t
foundation (
complete an
national pea
peoples for 1

410. Mr. CU DINH BA (Viet Nam) (interpretation from
French): Tht. delegation of the Socialist Republic of Viet
Nam participated in the consensus because the Final Document, in spite of its gaps, does reflect the constructive efforts made by the majority of delegations within the Preparatory Committee and also during this tenth special
session of the General Assembly.

417. So th
tion would I
tiating body
ument. That
Committee (
tervals". 01
ally accepte
tions. Accol
that paragra
even while 1
nuclear COUl

411. The document contains a number of provisions
which reflect one of the most deeply felt aspirations of
mankind, that is, opposition to the arms race and a desire
to live in peace and security. Nevertheless, my delegation

418. It is
Greece amo
pate, at a Sll
disannamer:

wnl1l£1
lilrp tn
m!llrp
thp
fnllnwina
('nmmpntl:
1'''' _ _ a _ aaa.._
..._
..........
_
....
_
a
_ •• _ . . . . . . 0
__ •••• "._.........

mon to aB )

tinction.
412. First of all, any measure for disarmament will be
positive only if it marks progress towards general and
complete disarmament and does not seek the supremacy of
imperialist and reactionary forces and so long as it does
not tie the hands of peoples in their struggle to defend
themselves and their struggle for national liberation with a
view to peaceful construction and development. The close
link between disarmament, the relaxation of international
tension, respect of the right to self-determination and independence of peoples, the peaceful settlement of disputes in
keeping with the Charter of the United Nations and the
strengthening of international peace and security is well
known. We have to make a clear distinction between arms
possessed by the forces of aggression and those held by
patriots struggling to free themselves from the colonial and
racist yoke or to safeguard their national independence.
413. Accordingly, the Vietnamese delegation has a formal reservation concerning paragraph I of the Final Document.

419. I sho
of the claril
Committee
ing to whic
the Commil
President 01
the rotation
That is in k
between the
armament.
420. Mr.
from Frenl
adoption by
the Ad Hoc
come it pat
General ASI
ament. Thh
of the Unitl

27th meeting - 30 June 1978

501

414. Secondly, so far as the establishment of a zone of
peace in South-East Asia is concerned, the Vietnamese
delegation is happy to say that delegations of countries in
that region present at this session share the view that the
establishment of such a zone of peace is a desirable thing.
When it is established, all aspects of such a zone should be
clearly defined by agreement among the countries of the
region, without interference from countries outside it.

disarmament. It was not easy to each this outcome. The
Algerian delegation, which participated actively in all the
stages of the drafting of the Final Document, wishes now
to pay a tribute to the tiJ;"eless work of the Chairman of the
Ad Hoc Committee, Mr. Ortiz de Rozas, the Chairmen of
the working groups, the co-ordinators of the drafting
groups and, lastly, Mr. Garcia Robles, whose devotion to
disarmament is now well known to us all.

Mr. PAPOULIAS (Greece) (interpretation from.
French): The Greek delegation welcomes the successful
outcome of the work of the special session devoted to disarmament and would like to express its deeply felt appreciation and congratulations to the President of the General
Assembly, Mr. Lazar Mojsov, to the Chairman of the Ad
Hoc Committee, Mr. Ortiz de Rozas, to Mr. Garcia Robles and to all those who have made their contribution to
this important result that was attained by consensus.

421. The consensus we have reached was made possible
only because all delegations, anxious to avert a dange~' thaa
threatens us all, were able, individually, to make the necessary concessions and agree that the Final Document
would not in every case reflect exactly the concerns of
each and all of us. Of course that is how a consensus is
reached, each delegation being able to make any specific
comments which it deems useful. The representative of Sri
Lanka, as the current Chairman of the non-aligned group
of countries, expressed the general views of our countries.
My delegation fully shares those views, but we should like
to make a few additional comments.

415.

416. We hope that this outcome will provide a solid
foundation on which we may progress towards general,
complete and effective disarmament and strengthen int~r­
national peace and security and co-operation among the
peoples for their common well-being.
417. So that it can be reflected in the record, my delegation would like to clarify its position concerning the negotiating body established in paragraph 120 of the Final Document. That paragraph states that: "the membership of the
Committee on Disarmament will be reviewed at regular intervals". Our interpretation of that wording is that generally accepted for the principal organs of the United Nations. Accordingly, the "regular intervals" referred to in
that paragraph cannot be longer than three-year intervals,
even while taking into account the important role that the
nu.clear countries are called upon to play.
418. It is quite natural that all interested countries,
Greece among them, should have an opportunity to participate, at a subsequent stage, in that negotiating body, since
disarmament and international security are a cause common to all Members of the Organization without any distinction.
419. I should also add that my delegation has taken note
of the clarification made by the Chairman of the Ad Hoc
Committee at the 16th meeting of the Committee, according to which the procedure for choosing the members of
the Committee on Disarmament in consultation with the
President of the General Assembly will also be applied to
the rotation of the members of the Committee in future.
That is in keeping with our conviction that there is a link
between the General Assembly and the Committee on Disarmament.
Mr. BOUAYAD-AGHA (Algeria) (interpretation
from French): The Algerian delegation welcomes the
adoption by consensus of the draft document submitted by
the Ad Hoc Committee to the General Assembly. We welcome it particularly because this is the first time that the
General Assembly has devoted a special session to disarmament. This is certainly a very important phase in the work
of the United Nations in promoting general and complete
420.

422. In the text of the Declaration, the section which
dealt with the principal causes of the arms race was deleted
at the last moment. Not only does my delegation feel that
that section could have been retained as it stood originally
in the version proposed by the non-aligned countries, we
also feel that another equally important factor in the arms
race should have been mentioned, namely, neo-colonialist
and imperialist designs, particularly in Africa. This is a
particularly important factor in that it is tragically relevant
today. We were not able to reach a consensus on t>'" question of military bases. My delegation would recall here
that the dismantling of foreign military bases is a fundamental principle of the movement of the non-aligned countries and should have been reflected in a document of this
nature, particularly since today we are witnessing a reactivation of those bases for aggressive purposes. Nonproliferation is dealt with in the Declaration and also in the
Programme of Action. However, we feel that that problem, which is one of extreme importance, was not dealt
with in the most satisfactory way.

Mr. Ulrichsen (Denmark), Vice-President, took the
Chair.
423. On the one hand, the attainment of the objective ot
non-proliferation requires the establishment of a system of
adequate safeguards of security based on the principle, affirmed unambiguously and without restriction, of nuclear
Powers not using or threatening to use nuclear weapons
against States which do not possess such weapons. On the
other hand, as far as access to nuclear technology is concerned, we cannot accept the idea that the objective of the
non-proliferation of nuclear weapons will automatically be
compromised by the dissemination of nuclear technology
or allow this to serve as a pretext for restrictions on the
transfer of that technology. The inalienable right to have
free access to nuclear technology must be solemnly recognized and guaranteed for each and every country. Above
and beyond the affirmation of that right, concrete measures
must be taken to make access to nuclear technology effective and to facilitate such access for the developing countries.

50%

General Assembly - Tenth Special Session - Plenary Meetings

424. Lastly, my delegation does not fully understand the
opposition which has prevented us from attaining a consensus on a declaration of intent concerning the establishment of a zone of peace in the Mediterranean. We remain
convinced that such a declaration, which would have reflected the desire of the coastal States to co-operate to promote common interests, would not have jeopardized the
disarmament cause, in fact quite the contrary.
425. Mr. VINCI (Italy): The current President of the European Community has already eloquently expressed the
views of its nine members. While we fully share and support your statement on their behalf, I should like to add a
few comments, on behalf of the Italian delegation, with regard to the Final Document submitted to this special session.
426. But before doing so, I should like to join previous
speakers in conveying once more to our President, Mr.
Mojsov, the deep gratitude of my delegation, together with
the expression of my personal admiration for the way he
has presided over this special session on disarmament.
427. Thanks to his strong leadership, we have had in him
a stabilizing centre around which all operations have revolved during this memorable session. He has been, from
the beginning, our lucky star, lighting the way and giving
all of us a sense of direction. And we have been fortunate
enough to have as his associates two outstanding personalities: the former Chairman of the Preparatory Committee
and subsequent Chairman of the Ad Hoc Committee, Mr.
Ortiz de Rozas, and Mr. Alfonso Garcia Robles, who has
been the main co-ordinator in the final, decisive stage of
our work. To sum up what I would call their miraculous
achievement during these last incredible days and nights, I
have to resort to ancient mythology. I saw them in action
as Castor and PoUux, directing our navigation and, by a final titanic effort, guiding us through rough seas into the
peaceful harbour of consensus. In shurt, our fortune was
so great that instead of one leader we had three, together
functioning literally as the deus ex machina of the classic
drama. Aii three deserve, with our gratitude, comfortabie
places at the summit of Mount Parnassus.
428. We are also grateful to the Chairmen of the two
working groups of the Ad Hoc Committee, Mr. Templeton
of New Zealand and Mr. Jaroszek of Poland, as well as to
the co-ordinators of the drafting groups.
429. Our appreciation goes equally to the UnderSecretary-General, Mr. Sytenko, to all the members of the
Secretariat-it would take too long to name each of
them-those we see and those we do not see, who have
I carried out silently but efficiently, their duties and, in this
case, their night tasks.
430. I must add, coming back to earth, that the main prerequisite for slicr a successful operation was the goodwHl
of all delegations. This goodwiU has been present and able
to rise tL, the occasion, except perhaps in a few cases. And
we take it, indeed, as a good omen for the future that the
Final Document of this first speci,aI session devoted to disarmament has been adopted by consensus.

431. Although the document before us does not contain
all the elements we would have liked to see in it, we believe that it reflects the highest possible common denominator of consensus which could be reached in this first
world-wide gathering devoted to disarmament.
432. With your permission, I should like now to submit
a few comments of the Italian delegation on this point. I
refer in particular to the chapter of the Programme of
Action devoted to the comprehensive programme for disarmament. I wish to express, in this regard, our satisfaction at the inclusion of this chapter in the document, and to
convey our gratitude to the delegations of Mexico and Yugoslavia for joining us in preparing its text. I also thank
the United Kingdom delegation for its important contribution, which served to bridge the gap existing at the last
stage between us and some other delegations on this chapter.

437. Allow me tl
gramme of Action
sures to be adopted
eration. We are fl
since we participat
nal Document-thl
compromise formu
ceptable wording. ]
the Italian delegati
not recognize, as
view, the central r,
the Non-Proliferat
fully and correctly
national communit
ation. It is well kI1
already signed the
and necessity Italy
participated in its {
feel strongly that
munity should ha'
universal adheren
mankind.
1

433. The crucial chapter to which I have just referred
setS forth our original and deepest conviction, which is that
intense negotiations must be pursued towards the ultimate
goal of general and complete disarmament under effective
international control, and that to this end the negotiating
body-the Committee on Disarmament-should undartake,
with fresh impetus, the elaboration of a comprehensive
programme for disarmament. We are gratified by the widespread support evoked by our approach, which maintains
that even in a Programme of Action contemplating shortterm measures, the long-term perspective must be borne in
mind in order that these short-term efforts may be infused
with a sense of purpose and direction.
434. The chapter stresses, moreover, in detail, the necessity for progress in the field of disarmament to be accompanied by measures designed to strengthen institutions for
maintaining peace and for settling international disputes by
peaceful means. We are encouraged anew by the inclusion
of these concepts, since we have for many years expressed
our deep belief that, in order to make effective progress on
the road to disarmament, every concrete disarmament measure should be aCCOmpanied by the pwallel adoption of adequate procedures for collective seclJrity so that all countries may feel truly and adequately protected.
435. In other words, each stage of disarmament should
be accompanied by progress in seeking methods for the
peaceful settlement of disputes, in peace-building and in
organizing international security forces. At first sight, this
last-mentioned objective, set forth in Article 43 of the
Charter, seemed to some delegations to constitute the culmination of a fairly advanced stage in the process of disarmament and in the establishment of a new international
order more suited to the needs of our times. We have always, however, expressed the opinion that it would not be
superfluous to start work now on this aspect of the problem, since any rapprochement of our respective viewpoints would make it eas-ier to solve the basic issues with
which we are faced.
436. As I said earlier, we are most gratified that these
basic concepts have finally been included in a consensus
document.

438. It was not {
choice it made in
faith in the future
one hand, some g
porters of the Tre~
tries that have les!
less confidence in
national instrumeI1
439. I should li
gratitude to those
ing the considera
connexion, I am I
tria and Sweden,
of the special ses~
recommendation c
in outer space. I s
France for its SUI
concerning the ro
disarmament in a<
We are happy to J
appropriate negoti
440. Finally, I ~
Document dealinl
graphs concerninl
the Committee 01
our confidence th
bership of the C
will be taken of tl
contribution to tl
tries such as Ital~
gan in this field.
441. I shall cc
strong commitm
timely implemenl
ommended at thi:
442.

Mr. B01

27th meeting - 30 June 1978

437. Allow me to turn now to another part of the Programme of Action, namely, the section concerning measures to be adopted in order to halt nuclear-weapons proliferation. We are fully aware, of course-all the more so
since we participated actively in the elaboration of the Final Document-that it was necessary to adopt a number of
compromise formulas in order to arrive at a generally acceptable wording. However, this part does not fully satisfy
the Italian delegation. It does not satisfy us since it does
not recognize, as would have been appropriate in our
view, the central role that can be played by the Treaty on
the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons, especially if
fully and correctly implemented, in the efforts of the international community to halt vertical and horizontal proliferation. It is well known that more than 100 countries have
already signed the Treaty, whose fundamental importance
and necessity Italy has always upheld, especially since we
participated in its elaboration from the very beginning. We
feel strongly that this gathering of the international community should have encouraged much more emphatically
universal adherence to the Treaty in the interests of all
mankind.
438. It was not easy for a country like mine to make the
choice it made in adhering to this Treaty. It was an act of
faith in the future. We can hardly understand how, on the
one hand, some great Powers that were the strongest supporters of the Treaty and, on the other hand, several countries that have less to lose than us, have apparently shown
less confidence in the potential further impact of this international instrument.
439. I should like to use this occasion to express our
gratitude to those delegations that have supported us during the consideration of other Italian proposals. In this
connexion, I am pleased to thank the delegations of Austria and Sweden, which have, since the preparatory stage
of the special session, supported our efforts to introduce a
recommendation concerning the prevention of an arms race
in outer space. I should also like to thank the delegation of
France for its support in the discussion of our proposal
concerning the role of the Security Council in the field of
disarmament in accordance with Article 26 of the Charter.
We are happy to note that this proposal will be sent to the
appropriate negotiating body for further consideration.
440. Finally, I should like to refer to the part of the Final
Document dealing with machinery, in particular the pa1'agraphs concerning the newly constituted negotiating body,
the Committee on Disarmament. I should like to express
our confidence that now and in future reviews of the membership of the Committee on Disarmament full account
will be taken of the uninterrupted, unceasing and dedicated
contribution to the cause of disannament made by countries such as Italy ever since international efforts first began in this field.
441. I shall conclude my remarks by confirming the
strong commitment of my Government to the full and
timely implementation of the proposals and measures recommended at this special session devoted to disarmament.
442.

Ill.

Mr. BOTERO (Colombia) (interpretation from
In~

J

fiN"

Tm _ I f

503

Spanish): I wish to express our appreciation to all delegations present for .the efforts made in these five weeks of
hard work. I particularly wish to mention the work of the
President. Mr. Mojsov, the officers of the Assembly, the
Chainnan and officers of the Ad Hoc Committee and the
co-ordinators of the various groups. Day after day and
night after night, dedication, talent, wisdom and intelligence have been brought to bear in an attempt to achieve
the consensus we have today formalized.

443. All in all, we should analyse our own work. Disarmament is a difficult objective and can be attained only
after overcoming innumerable obstacles. The modest progress made in these meetings is a step towards the objective we are seeking. This Assembly has worked under the
expectant gaze of the wotld' s people who were and are
anxious to know the outcome. The entire world north and
south of the Equator, east and west, wants peace and tranquillity, security and progress. Therefore I think we are in
no wise mistaken in saying that the expectations raised by
t:-te convening of this special session of the Assembly
were, sad to say, greater than its meagre results. We have
gone along with the consensus because any step towards
disarmament deserves our complete support. We established our position in this field in the statement made in
the general debate in this hall [12th meeting], and we shall
not repeat ourselves. What we were hoping for was more
positive and courageous action towards disarmament by
the countries with the most advanced weaponry, by the
most highly armed countries, by those with the highest
military budgets, and by those which produce and sell
arms. We were hoping for less mistrust and, above all, we
believed that the convening of this session presupposed international political will in favour of detenfe. All in all we
noted, to our surprise, a simultaneous resurgence of the
cold war and increased tension in various parts of the
world, precisely when we were meeting to talk about disarmament. We cannot disguise our concern at this contrast. We had faith that the Assembly would unconditionally condemn nuclear war and nuclear tests without
exception as to country or environment. We also hoped to
see embodied in the Final Document precise rules for limitation of the international transfer of arms of aH kinds and
a denunciation of those international consortia which benefit from warfare. Finally, we were hoping to see the establishment of sure guidelines concerning the transfer of re-.
sources now earmarked for the arms race to the
development of peoples. Unfortunately, that has not been
achieved. On the contrary, we are leaving the Assembly
noting that some international relations are more fraught
with ominous presages and that confrontations and balance-of-power games have intensified in recent days.
444. We are sure that the agreements achieved in this
Assembly, though dilatory to a large extent, will allow the
proposed machinery for deliberation and negotiaton to continue with increased effectiveness the work on real and sincere disarmament that has been begun. My delegation has
not lost the hope it felt when it came to this session; it is
still hopeful about the results to come.
445. Mr. YANKOV (Bulgaria): On behalf of several socialist countries, I should like to take this opportunity to

I

.!
,'I

r

SOot

General Assembly - Tenth Special Session - Plenary Meetings

extend to you, Mr. President, and to the President of this
special session of the General Assembly our congratulations on the successful completion of the work of the spc~
cial session. We also express our appreciation for th() most
valuable contribution to the positive outcome of our deliberations made by the Chairman and the other officers of
the Ad Hoc Committee.
446. In this connexion, I should like to express our particular gratitude to Mr. Ortiz de Rozas, Chairman of the
Ad Hoc Committee, to the Chairmen of the two working
groups, Mr. Templeton of New Zealand and Mr. Jaroszek
of Poland, to the main co-ordinator, Mr. Garcia Robles of
Mexico, and to the co-ordinators of the drafting groups,
for their exemplary devotion, persistence and competence
in conducting the negotiations in connexion with the drafting of the Final Document.
447. We are most pleased to note that despite the complexities of the problems under consideration and the differing views on many outstanding issues, goodwill and
mutual accommodation have prevailed and have pi ovided
the atmosphere favourable to the adoption of the Final
Document by consensus. That is the most convincing evidence of the common concern about the danger of catastrophic military confrontation and the outbreak of nuclear
war, and of the strong desire for peace and security among
the nations of the world.
448. Disarmament, and in the first place nuclear disarmament, has acquired a most imperative and urgent character. We fully agree with the assertion contained in the Final Document adopted by this session that the continuing
arms race leads to a growing threat to international peace
and security and that, as stated in paragrat'h 3 thereof:
"The dynamic development of detente, encompassing
aU spheres of international relations in all regions of the
world, with the participation of all countries, would create conditions conducive to the efforts of States to end
the arms race, which has engulfed the world ... ".
449. In our view, a positive feature that emerged from
the general debate and is reflected in the Final Document
is the fundamental perception that disarmament, detente,
international security and development are closely interrelated and complement each other.
450. I need not say that the People's Republic of Bulgaria and the other socialist countries have always considered that the halting of the arms race and the adoption of
effective measures in the field of disarmament have been
and will continue to be among the main objectives of their
foreign policy. At this special session the Soviet Vnion
and the other socialist States have once again come out
with a constructive and comprehensive programn.e of
practical measures-and have proposed a number of urgent
steps towards halting the arms race and paving the way to
the ultimate goal in the field of disarmament: general and
complete disarmament under effective international control.
We are pleased to note that most of these measures are affanned in the Final Document-measures such as the cessa·
tion of the productiol1 of all types 'of nuclear weapons, the

cessation of the production of, and prohibition of, all o'ther
types of weapons of mass destruction', the cessation of the
development of new types of conventional armaments of
great destructive capability, the reduction of conventional
armaments and the implementation of other measures in
the field of nuclear and conventional disarmament, the enhancing of the universality and effectiveness of international agreements in the field of disarmament and the implementation of such agreements by all States.
451. We are in general agreement with the basic principles and priorities for action and the guidelines for future
negotiations to be undertaken at the global, regional and
bilateral levels. In our view, an important stage in the
over-all strategy of disarmament would be a world disarmament conference, which would combine the deliberating
and negotiating functions with th~ competence to take legally binding decisions and to acquire treaty-making functions. The earliest convening of such a conference may
contribute to the further promotion of the disamlament efforts.
452. While expressing in general terms our positive assessment of the final results and the great political significance of this special session-we should like to point out
that, like some other delegations, we would have preferred
on some substantive issues more precise and more farreaching solutions which could be conducive to the acceleration of the efforts towards real disarmament. However,
I should like to conclude this brief statement on a positive
and optimistic note. What matters now, in our view, is to
proceed from general statements to the implementation of
the practical measures to achieve our common goals: to
halt the arms race, to eliminate the threat of military confrontation, to move farther down the road to real disarmament and international understanding and co-operation.
453. Mr. GAVCI (Malta): On this auspicious occasion
my delegation wishes once again to congratulate Mr. Mojsov of Yugoslavia on his record performance and to commend Mr. Ortiz de Rozas of Argentina and his colleagues
=_

___ ... L _ n.
. r __ ... L ....
...I_~.: __..: __
:_ .... :.....,.._..:_..........0.
on lnc DUrC(lU IVI LIlCII UCUI\"ULlUII III UU\;i"'UU5

: . . " . . " " " ". .

.u'" ....1""'.;

tant work of this special session.
454. We are pleased that the initiative and constant striving of the non-aligned countries have been crowned with
success. To have removed all the square brackets that
faced us in the draft text at the beginning of this session
was no mean feat. As a result, the aspirations of mankind
to disarmament have for the first time surfaced in a consolidated text.
455. But in the marathon process of removing the square
brackets, allld under the constraints of time, we must honestly admit that the content of the Final Document as
agreed to by consensus has been deprived of much of its
substance, clarity and detennination. It will not have a sufficiently dramatic impact on public opinion. It is not the
clarion call to effective disarmament efforts that an impatient world has the right to expect. A survey of newspapers
over the past six we~ks during the cOurse of this session
only confirms the lethargy of the news media on disarmament issues, and the Final Document by itself is not likely

to change this.
mulations will
tions in our fUI

456. It is als
there were ins
importance to I
to negotiate in
operation with
tive results. T
tance, on the p
consider conce
result that sigil
nal Document.
disappointmer
with danger, c'
ation, or at lea
pensable and i
mitted. No SI
appear in the I
most turbulen
For my delega
alarming. We
mined to brin~
co-operation, j
we must act ir
ing statement I
a positive con
opera.lon.
~.

457. Despite
the Final DOCI
armament can
delegation, thl
even though I
such small do
stark contrasl.
lethal weapol1
but this appar
by those coun
and under COl
maticaUy be i
doses, and th1
mine what ch
458. This is
balance sheel
least now we
newapproad
excuse that j
time, when "
same excuse.
we need; by 1
for the impac
lic opinion to
of bilateral r
are prepared
ways a chanc
prevalent and
tervening pel
459. After
symptoms of

27th meeting - 30 June 1978

to change this. Moreover, the contorted compromise formulations will also inevitably lead to unilateral interpretations in our future work as negotiations resume.
456. It is also pertinent to observe, unfortunately, that
there were instances in which, on issues of fundamental
importance to many countries, little or no effort was made
to negotiate in the spirit of mutual understanding and cooperation without which it is impossible to achieve positive results. There was a hesitancy, an unyielding reluctance, on the part of members of military alliances even to
consider concepts of peaceful change, with the inevitable
result that significant matters have been left out of the Final Document. For small unarmed countries this was a big
disappointment. Where situations are obviously fraught
with danger, concerted political action to improve the situation, or at least not to allow further deterioration, is indispensable and indifference to the need for it cannot be admitted. No such agreed formulation was permitted to
appear in the Programme of Action in regard to one of the
most turbulent regions of the world, the Mediterranean.
For my delegation this is not only unacceptable but rather
alarming. We ourselves, with our friends, remain determined to bring about the lessening of tension and peaceful
co-operation, and our efforts will not cease. But obviously
we must act in concert with others. As I said in my opening statement [7th meeting], we wish to exclude none with
a positive contribution to make, and we will seek this coopera~ion.

457. Despite such serious, even ominous, deficiencies in
the Final Document, a consolidated approach towards disarmament cannot but commend itself to our sympathy. My
delegation, therefore, will not stand in the way of progress
even though progress can apparently only be achieved in
such small doses, is far less than is really required and a
stark contrasl to the rapidity of technological advances in
lethal weapons systems. We are already losing the race,
but this apparently was the extent of the progress allowed
by those countries which want us to believe that all is well
and under control; that the present methods should auto_~",':~~lt ••

IIIi1U\,;i1I1Y

""'.0

L. _ _ .._:_" .. _...1 :_.._
4-"'''
0
UC PlVJC\"lCU lUlU Ill"" lU1Ul ,

tl"'\.4t"'honc in cft"lallpr

F

!'''

"

.

doses, and that those countries and they alone are to determine what change may be possible, if any.
458. This is the challenge we still have to overcome. The
balance sheet of the past is not very encouraging, but at
least now we have laid the consolidated foundations for a
new approach. On this occasion we may have the plausible
excuse that it is our first comprehensive attempt; next
time, when we meet in a follow-up, we shall not have that
same excuse. By that time we shall have had all the studies
we need; by that time we shall have had a sufficient period
for the impact of improved machinery and an alerted public opinion to be felt and for declared intentions and results
of bilateral negotiations to be translated into action. We
are prepared to wait for a review until 1981; there is always a chance that a better political climate will by then be
prevalent and that real progress can be registered in the intervening period.
459. After all, we are trying to grapple only with the
symptoms of a disease. Unless we are prepared resolutely

50S

and objectively to tackle the root causes, and unless we
have the determination to succeed, the best-prepared programmes of action and the most intricate machinery will
just be in future what they have proved to be in the past-a
platform for immobility or a scapegoat for failure. This
session has remedied the administrative lacunae which it
was necessary to rectify. It has also given an unmistakable
signal of what needs to be done. From now on, the major
Powers have a particularly heavy responsibility. We have
done all the talking that is necessary. Now is the time for
action. The question before us is whether we shall succeed
through conviction and effort or collapse in chaotic selfannihilation.
460. Mr. HARRY (Australia): The Australian delegation
is pleased to associate itself fully with the consensus on the
Final Document that has been achieved at this special session of the General Assembly on disarmament. Working
together, we have overcome many obstacles to achieve this
result.
461. Australia does not wish to enter any formal reservations on the text that we have adopted. Of course, no delegation can be completely satisfied with the result. I should
like, however, to comment briefly on those paragraphs of
the Declaration and the Programme of Action which deal
with the question of the non-proliferation of nuclear
weapons. The Australian Government has long made clear
the importance which it attaches to this issue, most recently in our Prime Minister's address to this special session [16th meeting].
462. My delegation welcomes the recognition that has
been given at the special session to the interrelationship
among all aspects of nuclear-arms control and disarmament and to the need to identify the conditions that can
generate a well-founded confidence between nuclearweapon and non-nuclear-weapon States and among the nuclear States themselves. This is a positive achievement. At
the same time we had hoped that this session might have
extended the basis for agreement on measures to prevent

the proliferation of nuclear weapons.
463. There are some matters on which these hopes of my
Government have not been fully realized in the Final Document.
464. First, it does not give explicit recognition to the fact
that the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear
Weapons is the only comprehensive international instrument directed against the proliferation of nuclear weapons,
or to the fact that it is accepted by a substantial majority of
the international community.
465. Secondly, the document does not, in the view of
my delegation, make sufficiently clear that the right of all
nations to develop nuclear energy for peaceful purposes
calls for a reciprocal obligation, indeed a binding commitment, not to develop or acquire nuclear weapons.
466. Thirdly, the document does not make it explicit that
arrangements for international safeguards may need to be
strengthened to provide the necessary climate of confi-

506

General Assembly - Tenth Spedal Session - Plenary Meetings

dence that will foster stable nuclear trade and closer internationai co-operation in the peaceful development of nuclear energy.
467. The text we have adopted goes some way to meeting our concerns on the above matters, but we wanted the
record to reflect the full extent of those concerns.
468. This is the last time I shall speak in this forum. It
was 32 years ago that I first took part in a debate on disarmament, on the first resolution of the General Assembly
which established the Atomic Energy Commission.

469. I should like tonight to convey my thanks and admiration to the President, the Chairman of the Ad Hoc Committee and the co-ordinators of the final negotiations. In
the words of the Declaration we have adopted: "Removing
the threat of a world war-a nuclear war-is the most accute and urgent task of the present day" .
470. This special session shows that mankind has made
the choice. We shall halt the arms race. We shall proceed
to disarmament. We have rejected annihilation and have
set out on the road of peaceful co-operation.
471. Mr. CAHANA (Israel): The delegation of Israel participates in the general sense of gratification at the fact that
the General Assembly has been able to conclude on a note
of consensus regarding a Final Document which marks a
significant contribution to the search for disarmament. Although we share with other delegations certain misgivings
and apprehensions regarding different issues and formulations included in the Final Document, this does not detract
from the tribute we pay to all those who endeavoured to
make it possible. We are particularly satisfied to see a document containing principles that if earnestly respected and
put into practice, for example, in the Middle East, would
take us a considerable way towards security and peace.
472. Among other things, Israel attaches great importance to the establishment of a nuc1ear-weapon-free zone
in the Middle East and considers that this would be a desirable step toward a just and durable peace in the region. In
view of the language of the Final Document on this matter,
as well as the deliberations in the special session of the Assembly touching upon this subject, our position is reaffirmed that an indispensable requirement for the establishment of this zone would be negotiations among all the
States of the region leading to a formal, contractual, multilateral convention along the lines of such a notable precedent as the establishment of a nuclear-weapon-free zone in
Latin America.

473. Out of a willingness to co-operate in facilitating the
work of the Ad Hoc Committee, my delegation refrained
last night from pronouncing itself on the procedural problem concerning the Iraqi draft resolution. As I explained at
a preceding meeting of the Ad Hoc Committee, the introduction of that draft had been, and remained, a completely
unwarranted act of political warfare against Israel, in utter
contradiction of the principles and ideas advocated in this
special session. In an Jmpartial and unprejudiced examina-

tion, such a document would surely be dismissed and rejected.
474. Obviously, as I noted earlier in this session, my
delegation cannot be a party to a recommendation which
takes note of that draft resolution and refers it to the next
session of the General Assembly.
475. This special session of the General Assembly has
brought out both dark and bright aspects of the international reality and endeavour. May we hope to work together for a brighter continuation of the quest for security
and peace for all nations.
476. The PRESIDENT: I call on the representative of
Iraq on a point of order.
477. Mr. KUBBA (Iraq): This is the second time that the
General Assembly has experienced an unfortunate and unwarranted intervention by the Zionist representative. As all
representatives are fully aware, the understanding reached
in the Ad Hoc Committee and the comments of the President of this august body expressed only a few hours ago,
made it clear that there should be no debate on this question. It is obvious that the Zionist representative is trying
to disrupt the work of this session and the result achieved
by tremendous effort.
478. I would have liked these destructive manoeuvres to
be halted.

479. Mr. SHAMMA (Jordan): Mr. President, I should
like to express my delegation's warm and sincere gratitude
for your efforts and the efforts of all, present and absent,
who have made it possible to bring this special session on
disarmament to a successful conclusion. During the past
five weeks we have been working on a very vital principle,
that of the continued preservation of the human race on
this planet. My delegation believes that we have succeeded
in this endeavour, and this Final Document stands witness
to this achievement. We succeeded because we had the
backing of our Governments and our people and, most of
all, because we have the will to remove all obstacles which
stand in the way of our survival.
480. This document contains the principles and mechanism for removing the dangers leading to the extinction of
mankind. We all witnessed the hardship involved in producing this document. It was a great challenge to us and
we can be proud of the results of our work. But the greatest challenge of all will be translating these principles into
reality and putting the mechanism contained in this Final
Document into action.
481. I do not wish to give the impression that this document is without fault, intentional or otherwise, for in many
instances it falls short and fails to deal with certain issues
which, in our view, are vital to the well-being of the people of the Middle East region.

482. First, this document deals with the issues of disarmament but fails to deal with the causes leading to nuclear
and conventionaV armaments. In our belief, once these

causes aI1
the Midd
great stel
fields, an

483. Se
nuclear P
not wage
are partit
clear We
tations of
nuclear a
tion with
that this
to give n
in ~~:e M
nuclear II
the Midd
our survi
allies are
484. TI
year on;
lars' wor
deprived
raw matt
ures allo
to a little
any corn
pIe I W(J
money (J
ginning
means t1
all over
485. T
process
Nations

486. ,
course I,
We aiso
us, the
hang ov
oal Do
process
nuclear
ment h~
487. I
mean tb
tial eler
ment aJ
delegati
device J
that, fo
special
clear at
488. J
is gratiJ
devot~

the Pre

27th meeting - 30 June 1978

causes are dealt with-especially the ClJ,l)ses of conflict in
the Middle East-and eventually removed, it will be a
great step leading to the process of disarmament in all
fields, and a great contribution to world peace.
483. Secondly, while we are happy to knC'w that some
nuclear Powers have lately given assurances that they will
not wage a· nuclear war or attack non-nuclear States that
are parties to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons, this, in our view, falls short of'the expectations of the non-nuclear States in our area. In view of the
nuclear activities of Israel in the Middle East in collaboration with a State in Africa, namely, South Africa, we feel
that this document failed to.call upon the nuclear Powers
to give non-nuclear States which are parties to the Treaty
in t~~e Middle East and Africa assured guarantees against
nuclear attacks by a third party. I say this because we in
the Middle East and in Africa are very much worried about
our survival, just as much as the nuclear Powers and their
allies are worried about theirs.
484. Thirdly, the world spends $400 thousand million a
year on armaments, and that means taking that many dollars' worth of fOoOout of the mouths 'of the hungry and the
deprived all over the world, not to mention the waste of
raw materials and resources. Listening last night to the figures allocated for disarmament, we find that they amount
to a little over half a million dollars. I do not wish to make
any comparison between these two figures. But in principle I would like to say that we spend a huge amount of
money on armaments and yet we are in the process of beginning to spend more money on disarmament, which
means taking more food out of the mouths of the hungry
all over the world.
485. The process of disarming should be a self-imposed
process carried out by the existing bodies of the United
Nations at no extra cost.
486. We believe that this special session has set the
course leading mankind to an era of peace and prosperity.
We aiso beiieve that, as long as nuclear weapons are with
us, the danger of mankind's extinction will continue to
hang over our heads. Therefore, we had hoped that the Final Document would have provided for a continuous
process of dealing with the de-escalation of the arms racenuclear and conventional. But the provisions of this document have fallen short of our hopes.
487. Finally, I do not wish to sound unhopeful nor do I
mean that this Final Document did not contain very essential elements that will contribute to international disarmament and peace. Rather, I wish to place on record my
delegation's view that, as the explosion of the first nuclear
device marked the beginning of the nuclear age, we hope
that, for the sake of human survival on this planet, this
special session will mark the beginning of the age of nuclear and conventional disarmament.
488. Mr. TURKMEN (Turkey): The Turkish delegation
is gratified at the positive outcome of this special session
devoted to disarmament. I should like to pay a tribute to
the President of the General Assembly, Mr. Mojsov, for

__-

. . .- - - - -_ _!llllJ_ _~--_·-~·,.,*'.;i'''~''!1~~-_.lIIiIiI

507

his dedicated leadership and diligence in guiding the delib;
erations to a reasonable and balanced conclusion. I should
also like to say how much we are indebted to the Chairman
of the Ad Hoc Committee, Mr. Ortiz de Rozas, and the coordinators for their vital contributions to the result
achieved. We should like equally to thank the members of
the Secretariat for their untiring efforts.
489. During the deliberations of the Preparatory Committee as well as those of the General Assembly, my delegation repeatedly stated the need to ensure a greater and
more flexible participat~on in the negotiating body, which
will henceforth be called the Committee on Disarmament.
To this end, we advocated a system of rotation on a regional basis in a way which would take into account the
need for adequate continuity as well as the special responsibilities of certain Members in the field of disarmament.
490. The Final Document just adopted by the General
Assembly enlarges the membership of the negotiating
body. We welcome this development, which, we hope,
will give new impetus to disarmament negotiations in the
light of the Final Document. Turkey for its part is greatly
interested in becoming a member of the Committee on
Disarmament.
491. The Final Document, in paragraph 120, provides
for a system of review of the Committee's membership at
regular intervals. It is our view that this review process
should be carried out regularly at intervals not exceeding
three years.
492. I wish also to draw the General Assembly's attention to a procedural point in connexion with the report of
the Ad Hoc Committee, contained in part one of document
AlS-10/23. Paragraph 9 of the report enumerates the documents which the Ad Hoc Committee had before it. It includes also a reference to a letter dated 29 June 1978 from
the representative of the Greek-Cypriot community addressed to the Secretary-General, contained in document
AlS-lO/AC.1I39.
493. The reference to this letter in the report is not in
conformity with established procedure. Indeed, the letter
had not been communicated to the Ad Hoc Committee before it concluded its work. Up to this evening the document had not been circulated and nobody knew its contents. It was only upon request that we were provided with
a copy of it by the Secretariat at 6 p.m. yesterday.
494. The letter from Mr. Rossides refers to the statement
made by Mr. Kyprianou in the general debate, at the 2nd
meeting, which included a proposal for the tot.al d~militari~
zation and disarmament of the Republic of Cyprus. Since
this letter, as I have already underlined, has been mentioned in the Ad Hoc Committee's report in a way incompatible with orderly procedure, and since Mr. Rossides returned to the subject, I am compelled to deal briefly with
the substance of the issue.
495. Even if we stretch our imagination to the utmost, it
is impossible to see how the proposal of Mr. Kyprianou regarding the demilitarization of Cyprus can be related to

-----_I

.......

IIIl!M_

)

J.,

51ft
General Atsembly - Tenth Special Session - Plenary Meetings
disarmament issues. The demilitarization and disarmament
weapon States to give undertakings with respect to such
of Cyprus can be decided only by the people of that counzones, the modalities of which are to be negotiated with
try t as is the case for all countries of the world. There is
the competent authorities of the respective zones. I wish to
no need for the consideration of this issue by the General
note our understanding that the term "modalities" refers
Assembly within the framework of its deliberations on disto both the substantive provisions and the procedures to be
armament.
included in such undertakings.

496. Mr. Kyprianou is not in any way entitled to make a
statement concerning the demilitarization of Cyprus, as he
cannot represent Cyprus as a whole. He represents only 'ihe
Greek community of Cyprus. Any decision affecting the
island will require the concurrence of the Turkish community. Mr. Denktash, the leader of the Turkish community~
has clearly stated in the Security Council that, although he
was ready to consider the idea of demilitarization favourably, this issue could only be decided upon by the two
communities, either during the negotiations on the future
of the island or at a later stage when the Republic has been
constituted on a bicommunal basis.
497. Furthermore, the statement of Mr. Kyprianou is
misleading. If the demilitarization of Cyprus is to have any
significance on a regional or global basis, it will have to
encompass the foreign military bases which operate on the
territory of the island. Mr. Kyprianou, however, carefully
excludes these bases from his concept of demilitarization.
He is using the expression "the Republic of Cyprus" ,
which clearly excludes the foreign bases situated on the island.
498. The reference to the letter from Mr. Rossides in the
report of the Ad Hoc Committee is therefore not only a
procedural irregularity but also totally irrelevant to the subject of disarmament.
499. Mr. LEONARD (United States of America): We
have come together today for the final meeting of the largest gathering of States to discuss and deliberate on disarmament in the history of our small planet. We came together
with many differing viewpoints reflecting the inevitable
and healthy variety that results when 149 States attempt to
address themselves to a subject as complicated and important as disarmament. Our meeting together at this session
has itself been an important event. Our consensus agreement on a Final Document is, in the view of many here, a
miracle-and not a small miracle.
500. That the effort to achieve consensus was successful
is due to the sincere efforts made by all delegations and the
seriousness with which the world community today takes
the subject of disarmament.
501. As must be the case in any consensus document,
the text does not in some cases have the wording that individual States would have preferred. That applies to the
United States delegation as well, and I shall comment on a
few instances of this nature.
502. The United States supports the creation of nuclearweapon-free zones under appropriate circumstances and, at
this very time, is proceeding to the ratification of Additional Protocol I to the Treaty of Tlatelolco. In this connexion, the Programme of Action calls upon the nuclear-

,-.

..

achieve,
cleai te
Therefo
who ha'
thize Wl
at our (
ment 0
confide
at Gen
United
these nl

503. The United States also supports the general proposition that the establishment of an appropriately defined zone
of peace, freely determined by all States concerned wherever situated, can be a way to promote international peace
and security, in conformity with the Charter of the United
Nations. The United States considers that the es~ablish­
ment of zones of peace must be consistent with, and capnot abridge, the inherent right of individual or collective
self-defence guaranteed in the Charter or other rights recognized under international law, including the right of innocent passage and historical high-seas freedoms. The
United States position on the creation of any particular
zone of peace will depend on its characteristics.

508.
reducti
noted 1
tional I
militar:
fore, v
sensus
standat
of tech
-whi(
ated re
tance t
sembl)
it in a

504. In addition, I should like to address myself to an aspect of the vital question of non-proliferation which is of
concern to many States.
505. We recognize the right of any State to peaceful nuclear development and the United States will continue
strongly to support international co-operation in this area.
This was further evidenced during this special session by
our announcement of a programme designed to strengthen
our peaceful nuclear assistance programmes, particularly
through the International Atomic Energy Agency. Any such
co-operation, however, must be carried out in the realization that we all share in the responsibility for the safe utilization of nuclear power. It is essential that each nation
plan its peaceful nuclear programme with full consideration for non-proliferation concerns. In the long run, this is
the best insurance that all nations will be able to realize the
substantial bent'
,uclear energy without increasing the
risk of catastnl
mclear conflict, and with assurance
that the prospects for nuclear disarmament will not be endangered. 506. Regarding nuclear testing, the United States Government fully shares the desire, expressed by an overwhelming majority of the participants in this special session, for an early suspension of all nuclear tests. This
objective has occupied a central place in our approach to
arms control and disarmament, and has guided our efforts
in the trilateral negotiations currently under way at Geneva. We should like, however, to explain the reasons
why an immediate moratorium on nuclear testing, which
we recognize is strongly desired by many nations, does not
seem to us to be a good idea.
507. We have strongly and consistently held the view
that a comprehensive test ban, in order to promote stability
and mutual confidence among its participants, must be
based on adequate measures of verification. At this moment, we are engaged in the detailed and technically complex process of elaborating such measures. We have made
steady progress in these efforts and we are confident that
effective and mutually acceptable solutions can be

509.
procec
ject te
implic
sessio:
signif
sessio
tariat
ganiz~

cated
of prc

I

510.
teode,
tache
portal
511.
larly
brea~

nego
Unitt
nego
forw:
Repll
stam
body
Dis31
512.
been
ticipl
our I
canCt

area.

27th meeting - 30 June 1978

achieved before long. But an immediate cessation of nuclear testing could seriously complicate these efforts.
Therefore, while we understand the motivations of those
who have called for a moratorium, and indeed we sympathize with them, we believe that the surest way of arriving
at our common goal-that is, the earliest possible achievement of a comprehensive test ban that can truly promote
confidence among the parties-is through the negotiations
at Geneva. And we can assure the Assembly that the
United States Government will make every effort to bring
these negotiations to a prompt and satisfactory conclusion.
508. I also wish to say a word about the que£tion of the
reduction of military budgets. This session has correctly
noted the excessive amount of resources devoted to national military capabilities. The limitation or reduction of
military budgets holds promise of benefits for all. Therefore, we regret that it was not possible to reach a consensus on language identifying the essential first stepsstandardized measurement and reporting, the development
of techniques for international comparison and verification
-which must be taken if we are to advance toward negotiated reductions. My government continues to attach importance to this subject and it is our hope that the General Assembly, at its thirty-third session, will be able to return to
it in a constructive manner.
509. I should also like to make a brief comment on a
procedural matter. My delegation does not at this stage object to the procedures suggested concerning the financial
implications of proposals adopted by the Assembly at this
session. The growing frequency of special sessions and the
significance of the financial implications of this special
session, however, suggest that in the future both the Secretariat and delegations should plan the scheduling and organization of special sessions so that sufficient time is allocated to permit full compliance with rule 153 of the rules
of procedure.

I

510. These few comments I have made are in no way intended to reflect on the high significance our delegation attaches to the document we have just adopted, or on the im~
portance of the fact that it has been adopted by consensus.

S09

513. This was one of the objectives of the non-aligned
nations in calling for this session. In that, as in the
achievement of other objectives, they have succeeded, and
we wish to commend them for their efforts.
514. There are many in fact who deserve credit for the
success of this session. Mr. Mojsov, of course, is one of
them, and we are grateful to him for his leadership.
515. To the distinguished Chairman of the Preparatory
Committee and the Ad Hoc Committee, Mr. Ortiz de Rozas, whose skill, patience and devotion to his task leave us
all in his debt, we can only say thank you, and we are
sorry that we made his task so difficult. For that admirable
man, of whom we are all so fond, and who has brought his
tremendous human and professional skills to our labours,
Mr. Garcfa Robles, we know that the reward is in the
results he has so greatly helped to' bring about. To all the
co-ordinators, we are all deeply indebted.
516. I note in closing, on behalf of the United States,
that we have been very pleased to see this special session
convened here at United Nations Headquarters in New
York City. We have been proud once again to serve as
host country to the United Nations, and in this case to the
first but not the last convening of the international disarmament community.
517. The United States expresses its appreciation for
their presence, our hope for still further positive contributions to the causes of humanity and the fulfilment of the
Charter, and our best wishes of Godspeed and good fortune.
518. Mr. GARCiA ROBLES (Mexico) (interpretation
from Spanish): I already had the opportunity in the general
debate, when our deliberations had scarcely begun, to pay
a tribute of sincere gratitude to the President, Mr. Mojsov,
for his inestimable contribution to the success of this first
special session of the General Assembly devoted to disarmament. I also had occasion to express the great appreciation we have for the Secre~ry-General. It would be superfluous to enlarge on what I said then.

511. With regard to disarmament machinery and particularly the negotiating body, we have achieved a significant
break-through in having agreed on a somewhat enlarged
negotiating body open to all nuclear-weapon States. The
United States welcomes the return to active participation in
negotiations of our old friend and ally, France. We look
forward to participation at an early date ot the People's
Republic of China. I should note that there is an understanding that those members of the current negotiating
body who so wish will be members of the Committee on
Disarmament.

519. Neither do I wish to repeat what the Chairman of
the Ad Hoc Committee said so appropriately when winding
up the work of that Committee in the early hours of yesterday morning. They were sentiments which I share concerning th~ praiseworthy efforts of the Rapporteur, the
other officers of the Committee, the Chairmen of the two
working groups, my four colleagues, who were given the
title of "co-ordinators", a job of recent invention but of
undeniable effectiveness. Neither do I believe it necessary,
since everyone is familiar with it, to repeat my appreciation for the valuable and inimitable co-operation of all
members of the Secretariat of the United Nations.

512. One of the significant results of this session has
been the stimulation it has given to public interest and participation in our common efforts. Thus, however important
our Final Document is, it may be that much of the significance of this session will in the long run lie in the public

520. But I do indeed want for the record here to speak of
the masterly way in which Mr. Ortiz de Rozas conducted
the work of the Preparatory Committee through its five
sessions, and thereafter the work of the Ad Hoc Committee
of ~he Tenth Special Session for something more than five
weeks of our labour. I am convinced that his impeccable

area.

51'

General Assembly - Tenth Special Session - Plenary Meetings

impartiality, what might be defined as his energetic suav·~
ity, his imperturbable calm and his inventive mind always
ready with conciliatory solutions were a decisive factor in
the success of this session.
521. As for the results of the session, my delegation
feels that any observer who, without being idealistic, has a
clear idea of the reality of the world in which we live and
the limitations imposed on our efforts, would say that we
had derived everything that could be derived from our efforts here, particularly if we take into account certain circumstances which are scarcely favourable in the current
international situation.
522. Among the main results of the session we should
mention the establishment of a deliberative body-a subsidiary organ of the General Assembly-the Disarmament
Commission, in which an Members of the United Nations
will take part. Thanks to another decision of the General
Assembly there will be a negotiating body as well, the
Committee on Disarmament, whose membership will be
slightly larger than that of the Conference of the Commi~­
tee on Disarmament, which has been functioning since
1962. The co-chairmanship system, which Mexico has
been criticizing for some 10 years, will disappear and there
will be a rotating chairmanship. Its meetings will be public, there will be participation by non-Member States in its
work, and there will be changes in other aspects of its procedure. All of this will provide conditions which we hope
wiIJ make it possible for the Committee, which has been
expressly made open to all the nuclear-weapon States,
soon to count on the active participation of France and
China.
Mr. Mojsov (Yugoslavia) resumed the Chair.

523. The Assembly has had a general debate in which
126 representatives appeared on the podium; more than 20
being Heads of State or Government and aoout 50 being
Ministers for Foreign Affairs. We have heard here a message from His Holiness Pope Paul VI. The Government of
Switzerland, high-ranking officials of the specialized agencies and other institutions and programmes within the
United Nations system, together with the spokesmen of 25
non-governmental organizations and six disarmament research institutions made a valuable contribution to the
work of the special session.
524. For the first time in a long while, France took an
active part, playing a major role in the discussions on disarmament, discussions in which China, also for the first
time since it took its right and proper place in the Organization in 1971, took part, although to a lesser extent perhaps.
525. A Final Document has been adopted by consensus.
It comprises four sections which define fundamental principles. objectives, priorities and methods for channelling
and furthering the efforts of all countries to eradicate the
threat of a nuclear war, put an end to the arms race and
draw up a comprehensive programme for disarmament
which will make use of all possibl~ means in order that the

objective of general and complete disarmament under effective international control may become a reality, in a
world in which peace and international security may prevail and in which the new international economic order
wiii be strengthened and consolidated.
526. At the request of the Preparatory Committee, the
United Nations Centre for Disarmament prepared more
than a dozen working papers which will be useful instruments for research workers. The official documents of the
special session of the General Assembly devoted to disarmament, which will include, in addition to those contained in the seven volumes of the report of the Preparatory Committee and their annexes, all the records and
proposals of the plenary Assembly and the Ad Hoc Committee of the Assembly will, without doubt, form a valuable source of documentation for Governments and for future studies in universities and research institutes in this
field.
527. I should like to avail myself of this opportunity to
express my gratitude to the very many representatives who
have been most generous in their comments on my modest
contribution to the work of this session of the Assembly.
As someone so rightly said here a few moments ago, the
results of the session, together with the comments I have
heard here, are for me my best reward.

53
Wl

ro
ca
011

ha
fa

52
in
liJ
Sll

52
d<
re

se
Fi

w
c(

cr
m

5:
er

c(
528. About 15 years ago, on 27 November 1963, when
the Assembly had just adopted resolution 1911 (XVIII) on
what was then called the' 'Denuclearization of Latin
America", it was my privilege to outline from this same
podium how Mexico envisaged undertaking the task that
was before us. I closed that statement with words that I
feel it opportune to recall now:

hi

"We do not intend to act rashly or hastily. We shall
follow the advice of the wise Latin adage and make
ha~te--slo.wJy, but we shall make haste.

h

aJ
W

al

ir
st
al

n

5

"Today, with the historic resolution adopted by this
Assembly, Latin America starts along the road to denuclearization. We are convinced that sooner or later we
shall achieve that goal, for we can count upon the unreserved and enthusiastic support of all our peoples. "5

tJ

529. Developments since then have fully justified our
optimism, and the Treaty for the Prohibition of Nuclear
Weapons in Latin America, the Treaty of Tlatelolco, has
been perhaps the most highly praised international treaty in
the debates at this session. Similarly, we wish to restate
here that the Final Document that we have adopted, whatever its short-comings and lacunae, is in our opinion a
solid basis on which to build a new strategy for disarmament, the precepts of which are well defined in the Introduction and the Declaration. We may feel justifiably optimistic that this will be so, particularly if we take into
account the fact that this session of the General Assembly
that we are closing today is only the beginning of a new
stage in United Nations efforts at disarmament, as is demonstrated by the fact that, as of now, we have endorsed the
convening of a second special session devoted to disarmament.

11

, Ibid.• Eight~~nth S~.fsion. P/~nary Meetings. 126Sth meeting, paras.
90 and 91.

d
tl
il
tl

(
~

(

j

,
I

i:::0,.·L:'2~::;"C':'-. .;·~=-~::a~·.:~<·~¥::~.O::;{t:L·C;:W:,;~i:;:;;·:;~-,:;;,:;cr:;Rx£:;Z:;;3L;;;'!.z:.~",'?;';kCi:"";!L~t;~jz"~~-Y~};"",~~'i'!i_·~!Ii!lil!illillifi!i'lllii!l_ _II!II!iJiII"_ _IlIIilI

. _ "I

27th meeting - 30 June 1978

530. We may be justifiably optimistic, I repeat, because"
we believe that the instinct of preservation is very deeply
rooted in mankind, and that disarmament is the most critical and urgent job of our time, since, as has been stated in
one of our conclusions, mankind is facing a dilemma: we
have to halt the arms race and proceed to disarmament, or
face annihilation.
531. Mr. ADENIJI (Nigeria): As we approach the closing minutes of this historic session, my delegation would
like to express its general satisfaction that the session has
succeeded in ending on a note of consensus.

I

532. A critical appraisal of the Final Document would no
doubt lead various observers-just as it would various representatives.-to various conclusions. However, all representatives who have participated in the elaboration of the
Final Document and all observers who have followed our
work with interest would agree on one thing, that is, that a
constructive spirit was at work among all delegations at the
crucial time in our deliberations which led to the achievement of the consensus.
533. It should not be surprising that the consensus emerged only after long and arduous negotiations. A subject
as complex and sensitive as disarmament cannot but cause
countries to take strong stands, particularly those which
have come to believe in a security achieved through being
armed to the teeth, as the expression goes. Yet those who
watch the great majority of the world's population eke out
an unedifying existence while such huge resources are being wasted on armaments cannot but take an equally strong
stand in favour of the promotion of security through disarmament and the diversion of the world's material and
human resources entirely to economic and social development.

r
r

s
rl

e
a

,.

534. Thus, if the spokesman of the non-aligned countries, the representative of Sri Lanka, expressed a certain
disappointment with the Final Docmnent, he truly reflected
the expectations of those countries, which had initiated the
idea of convening this speciai session. Let us remember
that in the opening sentences of the Declaration in the Final Document it is stated that:
"Mankind today is confronted with an unprecedented
threat of self-extinction arising from the massive and
competitive accumulation of the most destructive
weapons ever produced. Existing arsenals of nuclear
weapons alone are more than sufficient to destroy lllllife
('11 earth. "
535. Needless to say, the formulations in the Programme
of Action do not seem to reflect the urgency of nuclear disarmament, which the Declaration from which I have
quoted seems to imply. To say, as the Programme of
Action does in paragraph 45, that "Priorities in disarmament negotiations shall be: nuclear weapons; other
weapons of mass destruction . . . ; conventional weapons
. . . " is to put nuclear-weapons disarmament on the same
foe.ting as that of conventional weapons. This, in the view
of my delegation, does not reflect the urgency which most

511

pe~ple in the world attach to the question of nuclear disarmament.
536. In spite of this, however, it is the hope of my delegation that the process of nudear disarmament will, in
practice, be treated with the urgency and priority which it
deserves.
537. If the Programme of Action which we have adopted
in the Final Document falls short of what many Members
had expected, this should not in any way make us underestimate the importance of that Programme or the importance
of the consensus which was reached in its adoption.
538. We should bear in mind that the international community will ultimately judge the success or failure of this
first special session devoted to disarmament by the manner
in which even the modest Programme which we have
adopted is implemented. Fortunately, our decisions on machinery will provide us not only the wherewithal to pursue
the implementation of the Programme through' the negotiating body, the Committee on Disarmament, but also the
means to monitor and follow up through the new deliberative body, the Disarmament Commission.
539. The Nigerian delegation has for several years joined
others within the Conference of the Committee on Disarmament to press for changes to reflect present-day realities
and make that negotiating organ a more effective instrument on questions of disarmament. We are happy, therefore, that at this special session the Assembly has now
taken steps to ensure that the Committee on Disarmament
will not inherit the anachronistic structure of the Conference of the Committee on Disarmament, which for years
has been the subject of criticism, even within that organ itself.
540. We hope that as a result of the decision of the special session on machinery-particularly the negotiating
machinery-all the nUClear-weapon States will now be
able to take their rightful places in the Committee on Disarmament. moeeo, we oemano It 01 mcm.
- . .

•

..

....

£' ....- - ---

541. Whatever success this special session has achieved
has been due in no small measure to your wise guidance,
Mr. President, as well as to the skilful leadership of the
Chairman of the Ad Hoc Committee, Mr. Ortiz de Rozas,
ably assisted by Mr. Garda Robles, whose energy is a
source of inspiration tQ many of us.
542. May I also refer in this context to the valuable assistance which the Chairman of the Ad Hoc Committee received from the Chairmen of the working groups, as well
as from my colleagues in the group of co-ordinators.
543. In the preparation for this special session, the Nigerian delegation noticed the none too broad participation in
the Preparatory Committee from which many countries
were absent. We think that if the United Nations is to assume its central role in the area of disarmament, then its
members must be enabled to make informed contributions
to the necessary deliberations, something that is envisaged
through the creation of the new deliberative organ.

,I
I
:\

512

General Assembly - Tenth Special Session - Plenary Meetings

544. This conviction inspired the Nigerian proposal for a
programme of Uliited Nations fellowship~ on disarmament
[see A/S-JO/AC.l/ll). My delegation is most gratified that
our proposal received unanimous support and has been
adopted at this special session, as reflected in paragraph
108 of the Final Document.
545. As a result, the General Assembly has at this special session decided to establish a United Nations Programme of 20 annual fellowships on disarmament. We are
convinced that this programme will help in no small measure to promote an awareness of the issues oC-disarmament
in more countries. The constructive role which public
opinion in many countries can play is reflected in the participation of the non-governmental organizations in this
special session.
546. We hope that as a result of this programme the next
special session of the General Assembly will reflect a
wider representation of the developing countries in the
composition of delegations of non-governmental organizations.
547. My delegation wishes to convey its gratitude to all
delegations for supporting this initiative, which, we are
convinced, may well turn out to be one of the more immediately fruitful decisions of this special session.
548. Mr. MESHARRAFA (Egypt): Mr. President, I
should like to associate myself with those who have preceded me in congratulating you on your wise leadership
which has guided our deliberations to a successful conclusion.
549. My appreciation also goes to Mr. Ortiz de Roza!) of
Argentina and Mr. Garcfa Robles of Mexico, for their skilful and dedicated work, as well as to the two Chairmen of
the working groups and to the co-ordinators of the drafting
groups for their strenuous efforts.
550. Turning briefly to the document before us, the Final
Document of the tenth special session, I sho·,ild like to
point out that, while it is not perfect or complete, and
while many ess€~ntial points in the field of disarmameQt
have not, in OID, 0. heen adequately ,dealt with, the delegation of Egypt welcomes the consensus reached and
calls upon all countries to consider it a cogent point of departure-or, rather, of resumption of serious worktowards the achievement of substantial progress in the
field of disarmament.
551. We welcome the constructive awareness of the necessity of achieving disarmament; we welcome the dynamic developments generated by this session in this connexion. We agree with the solid framework in which the
whole concept of negotiation and measures in the field of
disarmament is being placed-namely, the reaffirmation
by all States of their full commitment to the purposes of
the Charter of the United Nations and to the obligation to
observe its principles and the principles of intr-rnational
law relating to international peace and security.
552. In this connexion, in the Final Document emphasis
was given to refraining from the threat of the use or the

557. This pi
Rica, first to
the proposals
tion in milita
tional fund tl
ondly, specif
the resources
expenditure )
their military
established,
products, wi
level and as
ment.

use of force against the sovereignty, territorial integrity or
politica! independence of States or agaillst the right of peopies struggling for their self-determination. We underline
the emphasis put on the primary role and responsibility of
the United Nations in disarmament and on the imperative
need to keep it informed of all steps in the field of disarmament, whether unilateral, bilateral, regional or multilateral. The delegation of Egypt further believes that the
United Nations has a decided responsibility to intervene
through its principal organ, the Security Council, when excessive armament by certain States condemned by their
disrespect for-and flouting of the principles of the Charter
becomes a threat to international peace and security-especially, for example, if this comes about through collaboration between certain racist regimes in ihe nuclear field. We
also underline the emphasis placed in the document on the
role of the Security Council in connexion with the establishment of nuclear-weapon-free zones in Africa and in the
Middle East. Egypt attaches the utmost importance to the
question of the establishment of zones of peace in various
other parts of the world, especially in South-East Asia and
the Indian Ocean.

558. Our p
tion in the A,
ing group, a
guage in a fr
avail. A curl
resentatives
others comp]
was rather
worded to al
ward. There
just on the \i
into English
nal text, wh
sponsibility,
standing tha
of the Unite
official lang

553. Egypt believes that halting the spread of nuclear
weapons is a principal goal of the international community
and a basic responsibility of the Organization. At the same
time we believe that the non-proliferation measures should
not jeopardize the right of all States to the peaceful use of
nuclear energy for economic and social development. On
the other hand, Jet us not forget that no practical results
have emerged and that perhaps there will be none because
of the ~i~e gaps that separate the different positions of
many countries. However, we sincerely h'ope that very
soon the world will witness the successful conclusion of
the long-awaited agreement resulting from the second series of strategic arms limitation talks and that the international efforts to achieve a comprehensive test-ban treaty
will bear fruit in the very near future.
554. Finally, as a member of the existing Conference of
the Committee on Disarmament., El!vot
exoresses its deeo
'-'"......
...
awareness of the continuing need for a single multilateral
disarmament negotiation forum of adequate size and,
therefore, welcomes the newly established body.
555. In conclusion I should like to state that the delegation of Egypt had had the intention of putting on record its
reservations regarding certain omissions or the dilution of
some paragraphs-for example, the paragraphs on safeguards. However, we refrained from making any reservations bearing in mind the circumstances in which our deliberations and negotiations were conducted.
556. Mr. PIZA-ESCALANTE (Costa Rica) (interpretationfrom Spanish): In the report of the Ad Hoc Committee
(AlS-1O/23, first part), mention of the note verbale of 28
June addressed to the Secretary-General by the representative of Costa Rica has been omitted. Its purpose was to introduce the proposal which figures in document A/S-IO/
AC. 1/37, paragraph 142, as part of subsection F,
"Disarmament and development" of the Programme of
Action.

559. In tI
Either our I
consequentl
please the 0
ments both
resolution v
I

560.

We

requested tt
it was even
the first dra
least that it
for future
bodies.
561. The
us that that
omission 0
simple ove'
that it can 1
session.
562. De~
with what
representat
my satisfal
it has beel1
General A
and also a1
thing, to 0

27th meeting - 30 June 1978

557. This proposal was made by the delegation of Costa
Rica, first to reaffirm the resolutions already adopted, and
the proposals submitted, calling for an immediate reduction in military budgets and the establishment of an additional fund to assist the developing countries, and, secondly, specifically to request that a substantial portion of
the resources saved as a result of the reduction in military
expenditure be set aside to compensate nations reducing
their military budgets to below a given percentage, to be
established, of their national budgets or their national
products, without taking into account their development
level and as a direct and effective incentive for disarmament.
558. Our proposal did not meet with a favourable reception in the Ad Hoc Committee or in the appropriate working group, and our efforts to change or modify the language in a fruitless effort to achieve consensus were of no
avail. A curious situation arose in which, while some representatives objected to our text as being too specific,
others complained that it was too general and that its form
was rather ineffective, as a result of its having been
worded to accommodate objections that had been put forward. There was even a tremendous semantic discussion
just on the way in which our proposal had been translated
into English, perhaps without its being noted that the original text, which is the only one for which I can accept responsibility, had been submitted in Spanish, on the understanding that Spanish is still one of the official languages
of the United Nations and has the same status as the other
official languages.
559. In th0se circumstances we were in a dilemma.
Either our proposal had to remain in square brackets and
consequently not appear in the final draft resolution or, to
please the opposition, it had to undergo a series of amendments both linguistic and substantive in nature and thus the
resolution would become useless and superficial.
,560. We opted for the first solution, and consequently
requested that our original text should be maintained, since
it was even then weaker and more general in nature than
the first draft we had wanted to introduce. This implied at
least that it would be included among the working papers
for future consideration by the appropriate negotiating
bodies.
561. The Chairman of the Ad Hoc Committee promised
us that that would be done. We therefore presume that the
omission of our document ~i:Jm the final text is due to a
simple oversight that will be remedied by the Secretariat so
that it can be induded in the official documentation of this
session.
562. Despite the foregoing, I wish to associate myself
with what has been said by the Secretary-General and the
representatives who have already spoken, and to express
my satisfaction and that of my Government. at the fact that
it has been possible to hold this tenth special fSession of the
General Assembly, devoted specifically to dis~rmament;
and also at the fact that it has been possible, despite everything, to obtain some positive results. Among those results

513

are, in our view, the following two. First, all the States
Members of the United Nations, through their heads of
State or Government, their ministers for foreign affairs or
their ambassadors, have concurred at least in expressing
the urgent and vital need rapidly to achieve general and
complete disarmament under effective international control. Secondly, the gre&t Powers, the nuclear Powers, the
countries producing and exporting arms have agreed that
this item on disarmament should be dealt wfth in this
world forum, and they have taken part in the discussions,
with respect for the equality of all the Member States.
563. The impatient-and at times I include myself
among them-will surely feel that much has been said and
very little has been done. That is true, pamcularly in terms
of immediately effective, specific achievements. But I believe that, despite these reservations, much that is important and positive has been said. Perhaps these have been
mere words, but I think, as I said during the general debate, that in the final analysis the ability to speak is essentially what sets the human being apart and, throughout the
centuries, it has been the driving force of h: IitOry.
564. Here I wish to digress a moment to say how proud I
am as a Latin American of the irnpormnt participation in
the debates of the community to which I belong-through
the Chairman of the Ad Hoc Committee, Mr. Ortiz de Rozas, and his colleague Mr. Garcia Robles.
565. As a Costa Rican I am very proud of Latin
America's role in the adoption and entry into force of the
first agreement to prohibit nuclear weapons in our region:
the Treaty of Tlatelolco. I am proud also of the fact that
the Final Document includes an essential reference to the
Declaration of Ayacucho. These are two pieces of evidence of our good faith and positive contribution to the
task of disarmament, with very specific reference to the
problem of the prohibition of conventional weapons,
which is one of the most immediate and dangerous features
involved in the insane arms race.
566. In conclusion, I repeat my appeai to an the nuciearweapon States to undertake, unreservedly and unconditionally, not to use nuclear weapons except in legitimate defence ag~inst a nuclear attack; to all States in general to
heed the voice of their peoples and of all the peoples of the
world, who are clamouring for peace, and, as an immediate guarantee of such peace, to achieve general and complete disarmament as soon as possible; to people everywhere to join with us in replacing distrust by good faith,
fear by hope, and hate by love.
567. I have the right to make that appeal because I represent one of the only two or three disarmed nations of the
earth. I have the right to do so, above all, because of 'uy
status as a human being, a member of the human race that
is threatened with annihilation because of the insane arms
race.
568. Mr. Andrew CONTEH (Sierra Leone): The Sierra
Leone delegation would like to associate itself with the
very warm words of felicitation expressed to you, Mr.

r

- -"--C-'.-'~-~--'--'---.----""--~-"~'''-

'~ ,.-~~_-:.,c",,::':,;_',:~,-,_;.:.;JLif-;.,;:C~_~.:?L:;.:,.:t;r~';-2'i:.:o..~.,-.:1_~

514

General Assembly - Tenth Special Session 'w Plenary Meetings

President, by our SecretarywGeneral and by other representatives who have preceded us to this rostrum.
569. We should like also to thank most warmly the abl~
Chairman of the Ad Hoc Committee and the co-ordinators
of the drafting groups on work well done.
570. We fully alJpreciate that in a forum such as this
one, in which an important and fundamental issue such as
disannament-an issue vital to the maintenance of international peace and security as a whole, and in particular to
the interests of nations-has been discussed, our negotiations were bound to have been tedious and complex. Be
that as it may, we have emerged with an historic document
on disarmament.
571. If the document appears weak in some areas and not
exhaustive in others, that is a clear indication of the state
of affairs existing in the world today-that is, the unwillingness or inability of States to disarm. However, we feel
sure that this should not deter us from our eff011s and our
determination to achieve the goal of universal and complete disarmament. We say this because we believe that
this is the beginning of a long and protracted march that
will eventually lead us to our desired goal of general and
complete disarmament under effective international control.
572. The fact that our negotiations have resulted in the
adoption by consensus of a declaration on disarmament
should in no way minimize their importance. We submit
that in the practice of the United Nations a declaration is
an official and solemn undertaking by Member States
which they cannot wantonly disregard. We therefore allow
ourselves to hope that this document will form the basis of
an obligation to disarm.
573. We feel constrained, however, to end these brief remarks on a somewhat sombre note. We are referring to the
lack of adequate provisions in the declaration on the question of the strengthening of international peace and confidence among States.
574. We are also of the view that sufficient attention has
not been devoted to the issue of disarmament and economic development in the light of the new international economic order, despite the acknowledgement by all the participants in the general debate of the interdependence
between disarmament and development.
575. Finally, we should like to place on record our sincere thanks and appreciation to the members of the Secretariat for the tremendous work that has been done during
this entire session.
576. Mr. MUSSA (Somalia): I should like to associate
my delegation with the well-deserved tribute to you, Mr.
President, by all speakers and to express our gratitude to
the Chairman of the Ad Hoc Committee and all the other
officers. I Wish also to express our appreciation to the Secretary-General.
577. My delegation wishes eo address itself to paragraph

26 of the Final Document and s'pecifically to the words
"inviolability of international frontiers". It is the understanding of the Somali delegation that those words pertain
only to international frontiers which have been legally established and/or e.ccepted by the parties concerned. I desire
that the record of this session reflect the stand of my delegation on these words.
578. The PRESIDENT: We have heard the last speaker
on the list.
579. I call on the representative of Cyprus, who has
asked to speak in exercise of his right of reply.
580. Mr. ROSSIDES (Cyprus): I am sorry that it should
be necessary, at the end of this positive session on disarmament, to reply to a most negative statement, but I propose
to speak in a positive sense in the hope that positiveness
may prevail over negativeness, conciliation over aggressiveness and peace in Cyprus over aggressive occupation
by a foreign country.
581. The question of Cyprus is not an internal problem;
it is an international problem. It is an international problem
resulting from Turkey's continued aggressive occupation
of Cyprus after it expelled the Greek-Cypriot majority population of the island in order to change the demography of
Cyprus, which is a violation of the Charter and of the repeated resolutions of the General Assembly and the Security Council.
582. Of course, we cannot expect the representative of
Turkey to come here and welcome the proposals for demilitarization of the island and peaceful development and conciliation. The policy of Thrkey all along has been-for tll~
purpose of changing the demography of and partitioning
the island-to sever the good relations between the Greeks
and the Turks of Cyprus. I quite understand what the representative of Turkey is doing, and I do not blame him; he
is following the policy of his country. But I want to correct
something that h~ said which is completely untrue.
583. He said that the submission of our letter to the Secretary-General is not in conformity with established procedure, that the content had not been communicated to the
Ad Hoc Committee before it concluded its work and that
up to this evening the document in question had not been
circulated-in fact, that he knew nothing about it and only
learned of it at 6 p.m. But the fact is that the very content
of the letter was contained in my statement in the 13th
meeting of the Ad Hoc Committee on 23 June when the
proposal was made verbatim. He ought to have been
present because the whole membership of the United Nations was represented in the Committee, and he certainly
ou~ht to have known about it. So it is not ignorance of the
matter that affects him, it is the substance -of it-that it is
positive for peace, conciliation, demilitarization. And of
course demilitarization would mean that Turkey, since it is
occupying Cyprus aggressively, would be involved.
584. First, however, I must correct another thing he said,
that the demilitarization of Cyprus would involve the British bases. I would say to that that in the statement, demili-

tarization is confine(
that part of what he
remarks he should tJ
what he says. That
look at the positive
Cyprus is treated b
called the District 0
are forbidden. to use
stead: Mersin, Turkl
treated as completel:
and of course the rf
to have that annexe<

585. As for all tJ
Denktash is merely 1
travesty but we do n
end in a positive sel
586. Therefore I sI
the constructiveness
step towards intern
promises much for tl
the excellent declara
which is consistent
gives a promise tha
ment will deal with
through the assuran(
587. The PRESID
of agenda items 9 t,
588. We are now
session of the Genl
the Assembly that t!
the representative (
pense with the trad
session. For this I I

Closing,
589. The PRESH
General Assembly
first such session (
history of the Unitl
versity of problen
back over the road
discussions and e:
mounted while init!
and when we look
formed durmg the
ourselves such que
Have all these effe
all the expectatiOn!
590. In retrospec
dence, give positb
us may be fully sa
of this special ses
more and may havl
this simply illustra
with one of the m

27th meeting - 30 June 1978

tarization is confined to the Republic of Cyprus, therefore
that part of what he said is not correct. Before he makes
remarks he should try to be at least elementarily correct in
what he says. That is the negative side. But we should
look at the positive side, in spite of the fact that part of
Cyprus is treated by Turkey as already annexed and is
called the District of Mersin, the residents in their letters
are forbidden. to use the name of Cyprus and must write instead: Mersin, Turkey, and must use Turkish stamps. It is
treated as completely annexed, to all intents and purposes,
and of course the representative of Turkey does not want
to have that annexed part connected with demilitarization.
585. As for all this abcut the consent of DenktashDenktash is merely the instrument of Ankara. It is really a
travesty but we do not want to end on this note; we want to
end in a positive sense.
586. Therefore I should like to conclude by emphasizing
the constructiveness of this special session as a first zlobal
step towards international security and disarmament. It
promises much for the future, particularly having regard to
the excellent declaration which came out of it, a document
which is consistent with the Charter in every respect and
gives a promise that the next special session on disarmament will deal with its implementation in an effective way
through the assurance of international security.

ternational relations. Those relations are otherwise so very
complicated and controversial that it is next to impossible
to make a break-through and bring mankind into a state of
full security and safety in a single special session of the
General Assembly.
591. We have, nevertheless, achieved much on the road
to creating a better and more secure world. This actually
has been, first of all, the most representative gathering
ever in the history of international relations devoted exclusively to questions of halting the arms race and opening
new avenues for more active and effective negotiations on
disarmament.
592. Furthermore, we have had "\ very important and
productive general debate, which was held at the highest
level ever of the international dialogue on disarmament.
We have heard the full range of arguments and many invaluable proposals and suggestions about how and why the
present untenable situation in the arms race should be
ended, about the growing military expenditures and about
keeping our footing on the dangerous brink of a global cataclysm, which, in terms of its frightening consequences,
would have no comparison at all in the history of human
civilization.

Closing statement by the President

593. Our work, our debates and our negotiations have
been followed with keen interest by people all over the
world, especially by the many non-governmental organizations and movements that have rendered a great contribution to having the spiralling arms race in the world portrayed in its true light to the peoples of all countries. Tens
of millions of persons have signed their names to appeals
addressed to the United Nations, demanding effective
action to ban this unpredictable and suicidal arms race.
These petitions, which are deposited in the archives of the
United Nations, illustrate in themselves the role which the
United Nations plays in our times and the confidence
which millions of ordinary people throughout the world
have in the Organization.

589. The PRESIDENT: The tenth special session of the
General Assembly is drawing to a close. This has been the
first such session devoted to disarmament in the eventful
history of the United Nations, a history replete with a diversity of problems and emergencies. When we glance
back over the road we have traversed, when we review the
discussions and examine the barriers that we have surmounted while initiating and preparing this special session,
and when we look b~ck on the highly complex work performed durmg these five weeks we are impelled to ask
ourselves such questions as: What have we accomplished?
Have all these efforts produced results? Have we fulfilled
all the expectations and hopes?

594. With this speciai session we have onCe again returned the disarmament issues to the United Nations. The
role of the United Nations in dealing with such a crucial
problem has become irreplaceable. It has been demonstrated that the United Nations is the only forum in which"
in spite of all difficulties of a political and negotiating nature, it is possible, on a footing of equality and with the
participation of all concerned, to examine problems of
great importance to some Powers with a special role and
responsibility. These problems cannot be successfully
solved only within the narrow circle of those Powers, a
circle which is more often than not a vicious circle of rivalry, of distrust and, consequently, of increased stockpiling of weaponry.

590. In retrospect, I think we can, with a sense of confidence, give positive replies to these questions. Not all of
us may be fully satisfied with the deliberations and results
of this spec.ial session. Although we may have expected
more and may have wished to see more substantive results,
this simply illustrates the fact that we have come to grips
with one of the most complex issues in contemporary in-

595. The past weeks, especially these last days, have
seen not only debate and discussion of new ideas and proposals but also intensive negotiations on all aspects of the
present situation within the context of the arms race and its
consequences. If to this we add the five sessions of the
Preparatory Committee, then the tenth special session of
the General Assembly represents the most intensive negoti-

587. The PRESIDENT: That concludes our consideration
of agenda items 9 to 12.
588. We are now coming to the end of the tenth special
session of the General Assembly. I should like to inform
the Assembly that the Chairmen of the regional groups and
the representative of the host country have agreed to dispense with the traditional statements at the closing of the
session. For this I am most grateful.

r

515

I
I

l'
I,

r

516

General Assembly - Tenth Special Session - Plenary Meetings

alions ever held on disarmament, even though at the session itself it was not intended to reach inteI'W\tionai treaties
or firm agreements. The whole process of preparing and
holding this session has led to the most detailed assessment
of the present situ&tion and of the major course of action
taken within the United Nations for the purpose of finding
solutions to problems that have accumulated within the
complex area of disarmament.
596. We have today adopted the Final Document, which
is the product of very patient and, at times, arduous negotiations. In the process we have seen the most varied approaches presented with mutual respect for the positions of
all the participants in this intensive process of accommodation. In the given situation, the document we have just
adopted represents the broadest possible platform for further work and for additional efforts by the United Nations
in the field of disarmament.
597. As is evident from the statements and the explanations given during today's and tonight's meeting of the
General Assembly, all are not-nor can they be-satisfied
with every section and paragraph of the Final Document. If
was not possible to adopt a text that presented a clearer or
more pertinent appraisal of the problems or more concrete
proposals and recommendations, because of various objections or the accepted method of our work here, which is
characterized by patient harmonization and decisions by
consensus. Necessary and important concessions, especially during last-minute negotiations, were made by many
participants in what I am impelled to describe as a truly
monumental task.
598. I shOUld like to thank from this rostrum all of those
who, although defending their positions and often their
own interests, made possible, in a spirit of mutual understanding, the adoption of this important document. It will,
I am confident, represent a new chapter in the history of
the work and activities of the world Organization.
599. I wish also to express my thanks to the sponsors of
draft resolutions, especially to the 33 Powers that have
submitted a draft resolution [AIS-JOIAC.lIL.lIRev.J] expressing the grave concern of this large group of countries
over the problem they have presented for consideration,
for not insisting on a vote. By acting thus, they have made
an important contribution towards having the tenth special
session end in an atmosphere of unanimity. This reflects
the serious preoccupation of the entire international community with the crucial phase of the arms race and the indispensability of undertaking effective negotiations with a
view to limiting and curbing it.
600. The assessments, measures and proposals contained
in the 129 paragraphs of the Final Document represent, especially in some aspects, important new positions that
have been harmonized in the United Nations. At the time
when the initiative for convening the tenth special session
was approved, and in the early phases of the preparations
for it, there were certain elements in the international situation, especially in the relations between the great Powers,
which offered great prospects for optimism and increased
our expectations as to the ultimate' outcome of the special

session. But neither the expected bilateral nor the multilateral agreements, which have been the subject of protracted negotiations, have been concluded. We had also
expected to see the resumption of certain unilateral measures on the part of some countries, great Powers in particular, with respect to freezing and reducing military
budgets, to halting the development and deployment of
specific types of arms or the further refinement of highly
destructive weapons, as well as certain action with respect
to confidence-building measures among individual countries in sensitive aspects of the arms race. The deterioration in the international atmosphere which emerged could
not but also affect adversely the tesults of this special session devoted exclusively to disarmament. This is especially so because the complex issue of disarmament is inseparable not only from the over-all situation in
international relations but also from each particular international problem. Therefore, we hope that the tenth special
session will also help in the surmounting of the pre~ent difficulties encountered in negotiations between individual
Powers and that it will inject new life into the negotiation
mechanism.
60 I. If it was not possible to conclude a second agreement on strategic arms limitation and the comprehensive
test-ban treaty prior to the convening of the tenth special
session, I am confident that these agreements will be concluded in the coming months, in the light of the major debate here and in the atmosphere of accommodation and negotiation which has characterized this session. These will
undoubtedly represent additional important results of the
great international dialogue in which we have all been participants here from 23 May to this early morning.
602. The strengthening of the machinery, and especially
of a negotiating body which will facilitate further deliberation, harmonization and the conclusion of a number of
measures aimed at disarmament, was the central focus of
this session. The focus was evident in statements made by
many distinguished world statesmen. It is obvious that
only thrQugh negotiations will it be possible in the coming
years to make a more significant and substantial breakthrough in all aspects of the complex problem of disarmament which appeared on our agenda. There is no doubt
that the decisions in the Final Document relating to this
matter represent very important and, I may say, historic
achievements of this session. The role of the United Nations and of the General Assembly in dealing with disarmament problems has been strengthenea. The Umted Nations Disarmament Commission, a deliberative body, will
make possible the continuation in the future of the dialogue initiated at this special session. In a few years from
now we shall have another special session of the General
Assembly devoted to disarmament, a session that will
bring new decisions and measures. A negotiating body has
been established which will work in the spirit of the proposals submitted during this session. The negotiating
process will thus continue. Negotiations will be conducted
on a number of measures in conformity with the decisions
of the current session, and this negotiating body will become even more closely linked with the United Nations
and its procedures. With respect to the agreement reached
on the future of the negotiating body, I should like to state

for the record that:
the members of tht
of the Committee (
603. Many propc
which it was not p
be the subject of fl
within the framew(
established for this
604. All that we
of the international
the most optimis
achieved even mo
taken as a reason
We did not, obvi(
wards halting the i
new and meanin~
have not accompl
What we have dOl
open new channell
605. All that we
merit of all delegal
wards the final sue
pecially indebted 1
Hoc Committee, ~
the Committee al
working group A
Chairman of worl
as well as to the (
Garcia Robles of
contributions to tli
Document and the
special session.
606. I should ai
Vice-Presidents of
me the responsibil
difficult session 0
U\~

vv, •

Th..
rnl..
& • •"
. " .__ ,

!J

..

27th meet1n& - 30 June 1978

for the record that it was reached on the understanding that
the members of the existing negotiating body are members
of the Committee on Disarmament.
603. Many proposals submitted to this special session on
which it was not possible to agree for various reasons will
be the subject of further deliberations and decision-making
within the framework of the United Nations and the bodies
established for this purpose at this special session.
604. All that we have achieved merits the full attention
of the international community. If we have not lived up to
the most optimistic expectations, and if we have not
achieved even more important results, this should not be
taken as a reason for disillusionment or disappointment.
We did not, obviously, make a major break-through towards halting the arms race. We were not able to agree on
new and meaningful disarmament measures. What we
have not accomplished now, we shall accomplish later.
What we have done is finally to chart a new course and
open new channels for further negotiations.
605. All that we have done and achieved is due to the
merit of all delegations that have worked with diligence towards the final success of this special session. We are especially indebted to the indefatigable Chairman of the Ad
Hoc Committee, Mr. Ortiz de Rozas, to all the officers of
the Committee and, in particular, to the Chairman of
working group A, Mr. Templeton of New Zealand, the
Chairman of working group B, Mr. Jaroszek of Poland,
as well as to the co-ordinator of the working groups, Mr.
Garcfa Robles of Mexico. They have all made invaluable
contributions to the successful harmonization of the Final
Document and thereby to the successful conclusion of the
special session.

!l17

tary-General, Mr. Waldheim, during this session is well '
known and appreciated by MU ~ofus. "He has once'again
demonstrated his dynamism and dedication to the objectives of the world Organization. My thanks go to the Und~r-Secretary-General, Mr. 'Buffum, and to all the other
staff members of the Secretariat for their exemplary services during this ses§ion. I &Ill especially indebted to the interpreters and other staff members who have facilitated the
smooth runtling of the session, a session during which so
many meetings of the working groups and other consultative bodies were held.
608. In a short time we shall part and assume new duties
and engage in new activities. I hope that the experience
that we have shared during the tenth special session will
serve as an incentive to greater efforts and successes during the future sessions and activities of the United Nations.
. I wish you all bon voyage and a well-deserved vacation.

AGENDA ITEM 2
Minute 01 sDeat prayer er meditation
609. The PRESIDENT: I now invite repr~sentatives to
stand and observe one minute of silent prayer or meditation.

The representatives stood in silence.

Closure of the tenth s/Heml session

606. I should also like to extend my thanks to all the
Vice-Presidents of the General Assembly who shared with
me the responsibilities in guiding this highly important but
difficult session of the General Assembly.

610. The PRESIDENT: I declare closed the tenth special session of the General Assembly.

607. The role, activity a.'!d de.dicate.d work of th~ S~cre-

The meeting rose on Saturday. 1 July, at 2.30 a.m.
