S/2012/298

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
4 May 2012
Original: English

Letter dated 4 May 2012 from the Secretary-General addressed to
the President of the Security Council
I have the honour to transmit the attached communication, dated 25 April
2012, which I received from Mr. Jean Ping, Chairperson of the African Union
Commission, forwarding a report and communiqués on the situation in GuineaBissau and Mali and, on relations between the Sudan and South Sudan, adopted by
the African Union Peace and Security Council at its 319th meeting, held in Addis
Ababa on 24 April 2012 (see annex).
I should be grateful if you would bring the present letter and its annex to the
attention of the members of the Security Council.
(Signed) BAN Ki-moon

12-33200 (E) 310512

*1233200*

S/2012/298

Annex
Letter dated 25 April 2012 from the Chairperson of the African
Union Commission addressed to the Secretary-General
I am forwarding herewith the communiqués on the situation in Guinea-Bissau
and Mali, as well as on relations between the Sudan and South Sudan, which were
adopted by the Peace and Security Council at its ministerial meeting held on 24 April
2012. I am also attaching herewith the report I submitted to the meeting of the
Council.
The above-mentioned situations are of utmost concern to the African Union,
the United Nations and the international community as a whole. Each situation
poses a serious threat to regional and international peace and security. It is therefore
critical that we pool our efforts to address them as effectively as possible. Allow me,
in this respect, to express the appreciation of the African Union to the Security
Council and to yourself for the support extended to its efforts to find the required
solutions to these issues and to overcome the challenges involved. In particular, the
statements issued by the Security Council contributed greatly to sending a unified
and consistent message to the parties concerned.
Regarding, in particular, the situation between the Sudan and South Sudan,
coordinated and urgent action is needed to defuse the current tension and to ensure
the implementation of existing agreements and the resumption of negotiations on
outstanding issues pertaining to post-secession relations. The attached communiqués
of the Peace and Security Council articulate a road map to that end. Security
Council support to, and endorsement of, the steps envisaged will go a long way in
enhancing ongoing efforts to address the crisis. I have no doubt that we can count on
the continued support of the United Nations.
I would be most grateful if you could share the present letter and its
attachments with the members of the Security Council for their information and
action, as appropriate.
(Signed) Jean Ping

2

12-33200

S/2012/298

Enclosure 1
Communiqué on the situation in Guinea-Bissau
[Original: English]
The Peace and Security Council of the African Union, at its 319th meeting
held at the ministerial level, on 24 April 2012, adopted the following decision on the
situation in Guinea-Bissau:
Council,
1.
Takes note of the paragraphs on Guinea-Bissau contained in the report of
the Chairperson of the Commission on the situation in Guinea-Bissau, Mali and the
situation between the Sudan and South Sudan [PSC/MIN/3 (CCCXIV)]. Council
also takes note of the statements made by Côte d’Ivoire, in its capacity as the Chair
of the Economic Community of West African States (ECOWAS), the ECOWAS
Commission and Angola, in its capacity as the Chair of the Community of
Portuguese-speaking Countries (CPLP), as well as by other AU bilateral and
multilateral partners;
2.
Reaffirms the provisions on unconstitutional changes of Government
contained in the AU Constitutive Act, the Protocol Relating to the Establishment of
the Peace and Security Council and Chapter VIII of the African Charter on
Democracy, Elections and Governance, as well as the ECOWAS Protocol on
Democracy and Good Governance Supplementary to the Protocol relating to the
Mechanism for Conflict Prevention, Management, Resolution, Peacekeeping and
Security;
3.
Endorses the press statements issued by the Chairperson of the
Commission on the situation in Guinea-Bissau on 13, 14 and 19 April 2012, and
commends him for his efforts. Council recalls and reaffirms the terms of
communiqué PSC/PR/COMM (CCCXVIII) adopted on the occasion of its 318th
meeting held on 17 April 2012;
4.
Reaffirms the principles of subsidiarity and, in this respect, endorses the
decisions of ECOWAS, in particular the deployment of a stabilization mission,
welcomes the commitment and dynamism of ECOWAS in dealing with the crisis in
Guinea-Bissau, and expresses its support to the mediation conducted by the
Republic of Guinea. Council expresses appreciation to the CPLP, for its principled
position on the situation, to the United Nations Secretary-General and the Security
Council, welcoming the latter’s statement to the press and presidential statement of
13 and 21 April 2012, respectively, as well as to the European Union (EU). Council
further welcomes the position adopted by the International Organization of la
Francophonie (OIF) and its decision to suspend the participation of Guinea-Bissau
in its activities until the restoration of constitutional order;
5.
Reiterates its strong condemnation of the coup d’état perpetrated on
12 April 2012, with the specific intent to stop the electoral process under way, with
the non-organization of the second round of the presidential election on 29 April
2012, and totally rejects “the Protocol on the establishment and management of the
constitutional and democratic order”, which created the so-called “Transitional
National Council”, signed on 18 April 2012, between the “Military command” and

12-33200

3

S/2012/298

political parties of the minority parliamentary opposition. Council notes that this
“Protocol” is a vain and unacceptable attempt to legitimize the coup d’état;
6.
Reiterates the concern of the AU about the recurrence of illegal and
unacceptable interference of the army in the political life of Guinea-Bissau, which
hinders all efforts to stabilize the country, the fight against impunity and drug
trafficking, and the promotion of socioeconomic development. Council stresses the
duty of Africa, through the AU and ECOWAS, with the support of the United
Nations, the CPLP and other members of the international community, to ensure that
the coup d’état of 12 April 2012 fails and to put an end to the destabilizing actions
of the army in Guinea-Bissau;
7.
Reiterates the demand for the restoration, without further delay, of
constitutional order, and completion of the electoral process that began with the first
round of the presidential election held on 18 March 2012, which was deemed to be
credible, free and fair by all international observer missions, including those of the
AU and ECOWAS. Council also reiterates its demand for the immediate and
unconditional release of the Acting President of the Republic, Raimundo Pereira,
Prime Minister Carlos Gomes Junior, and other political personalities sequestrated
by the military, including respect for their dignity and physical integrity;
8.
Requests the Commission, in view of the refusal of the coup perpetrators
to respond positively to the calls from the AU, ECOWAS, CPLP and the United
Nations Security Council and other members of the international community for the
restoration of constitutional order, to compile and disseminate to all Member States,
after appropriate consultations, the list of the members of the military junta and their
military and civilian supporters for application of the individual measures
mentioned in paragraph 6 of communiqué PSC/PR/COMM (CCCXVIII). Council
calls on all Member States to fully implement these sanctions. Council further
requests the Commission to expedite, in consultation with ECOWAS, the
finalization of its proposals on additional sanctions to be imposed on members of
the junta and their military and civilian supporters;
9.
Requests the United Nations Security Council, pursuant to the relevant
paragraph of its presidential statement of 21 April 2012, to support these sanctions.
Council also urges the European Union, CPLP, OIF and the Organization of the
Islamic Cooperation (OIC) and other bilateral and multilateral partners to support
the measures taken by ECOWAS and the AU;
10. Requests the Chairperson of the Commission to urgently convene, in the
context of a Multilateral Consultation and Coordination Framework on the
Stabilization of Guinea-Bissau, a meeting that will bring together all stakeholders,
in particular ECOWAS, CPLP, the United Nations and the EU, to develop a
comprehensive strategy, with a view to facilitating a speedy and lasting solution.
Council stresses that this strategy should have, as its priority objective, the
restoration of constitutional order in Guinea-Bissau, as soon as possible, by using all
appropriate means, and would notably cover the defence and security sector reform,
the deployment of a stabilization mission to continue the work undertaken as part of
the ECOWAS-CPLP road map, the fight against drug trafficking and impunity and
other related aspects, including the development of the country. Council expresses
its intention to consider this strategy as quickly as possible for endorsement, before
submission to the United Nations Security Council and to other multilateral partners

4

12-33200

S/2012/298

concerned so as to mobilize the necessary support and facilitate its effective
implementation;
11. Requests the Chairperson of the Commission to transmit this decision to
the United Nations Security Council and other AU partners and to keep it regularly
informed of the progress made in its implementation;
12.

12-33200

Decides to remain actively seized of the matter.

5

S/2012/298

Enclosure 2
Communiqué on the situation in Mali
The Peace and Security Council of the African Union (AU), at its 319th
meeting held at ministerial level, on 24 April 2012, adopted the following decision
on the situation in the Republic of Mali:
Council,
1.
Takes note of the paragraphs on the situation in Mali contained in the
report of the Chairperson of the Commission on the situation in Guinea-Bissau, Mali
and the situation between the Sudan and South Sudan [PSC/MIN/3 (CCCXIX)], and
the statements made by representatives of the Economic Community of West
African States (ECOWAS) and the core countries, as well as by the United Nations
and other bilateral and multilateral partners;
2.
Recalls its previous communiqués on the situation in Mali, particularly
communiqués PSC/MIN/COMM (CCCXIV), PSC/PR/COMM (CCCXV) and
PSC/PR/COMM (CCCXVI) adopted on the occasion of its 314th, 315th and 316th
meetings held on 20 and 23 March, and 3 April 2012, respectively. Council
reaffirms the contents of these communiqués;
3.
Welcomes the encouraging developments in Mali regarding the
restoration of constitutional order, including the signing, on 6 April 2012, of the
Framework Agreement for the Implementation of the Solemn Commitment of
1 April 2012, the appointment of the interim President, Mr. Dioncounda Traore, and
that of the Prime Minister of the Transition, Cheick Modibo Diarra. Council stresses
the need for all parties in Mali to work in good faith towards the implementation of
the commitments made. Council, concerned about the recent arrests of political and
military personalities, recalls the imperative for the scrupulous respect for civil
liberties and strongly condemns all attempts to intimidate and harass political and
other personalities;
4.
Commends ECOWAS for its tireless efforts to find a solution to the crisis
in Mali. In particular, Council expresses its appreciation to President Alassane
Ouattara of Côte d’Ivoire, current Chairman of ECOWAS, and President Blaise
Compaoré of Burkina Faso, Mediator in the crisis in Mali, for their efforts, and
welcomes the action of the representative of the Mediator, Djibrill Yipènè Bassolé,
Minister of Foreign Affairs and Regional Cooperation of Burkina Faso, and the
representative of the current Chairman of ECOWAS, Mr. Bictogo Adama, Minister
for African Integration of the Republic of Côte d’Ivoire;
5.
Encourages the Mediator, in close consultation with the AU, to continue
and intensify his efforts to ensure the completion of the restoration of constitutional
order, in accordance with the relevant AU and ECOWAS instruments. In this
context, Council demands that the “National Council for the Recovery of
Democracy and the Restoration of the State” (CNRDRE) to refrain from any
interference and any role in the political life of the country, given the need for strict
compliance with the prerogatives of civil institutions inherent in the constitutional
order. The Council underscores the urgent need for the Malian stakeholders,
working with ECOWAS and the Mediator, to resolve the outstanding issues,
especially the management of the transition, its duration and the prerogatives of the
various organs of the transition, after the expiry of the 40 days deadline provided for

6

12-33200

S/2012/298

in article 36 of the Constitution of February 1992, to avoid a constitutional vacuum
in Mali, it being understood that the civilian institutions should have full
responsibility for managing the transition, with all the necessary prerogatives in this
regard. In this context, Council stresses the opportunity to extend the mandate of the
parliamentarians so that the National Assembly could continue to assume its powers
during the transitional period;
6.
Reiterates its deep concern about the developments in northern Mali and
the strong condemnation by the AU of the attacks perpetrated by the armed and
terrorist groups against the Malian State, including exactions against the Malian
military and their families in Aguelhok, in the north of Mali;
7.
Rejects the “declaration of independence made by the National
Movement for the Liberation of Azawad”, which is null and void. Council stresses
that the occupation of any part of the Malian territory by armed criminal and
terrorist groups is a threat to international peace and security. Council strongly
condemns the taking of hostages by terrorist groups, in particular the abduction of
diplomats of the Consulate of Algeria in Gao, Mali;
8.
Recalls the provisions of paragraph 7 of the communiqué PSC/MIN/
COMM (CCCXIV) by which Council affirmed its determination to actively support
the efforts of the neighbouring countries of Mali, particularly the core countries, and
ECOWAS mediation, in scrupulous respect of the national unity and territorial
integrity of the Republic of Mali;
9.
Welcomes the efforts being made by the Chairperson of the Commission
to follow up on the relevant decisions of Council. Council requested him to speed
up his consultations with all the stakeholders, with the view to finalizing the
modalities for the implementation of the process referred to in paragraph 7 above,
and facilitating the preparation and implementation of an overall political and
security strategy, to address the situation, including modalities for applying the
sanctions already imposed against terrorists and armed groups active in northern
Mali, in accordance with paragraphs 10 and 12 of communiqué PSC/PR/COMM
(CCCXVI), as well as the measures envisaged by ECOWAS on the basis of the
relevant provisions of the communiqués issued at the end of its Extraordinary
Summits of 27 and 29 March 2012, and the outcomes of the meeting of the
Mediation and Security Council of ECOWAS, held in Abidjan on 12 April 2012;
10. Looks forward to the decisions of the Extraordinary Summit of
ECOWAS, scheduled in Abidjan on 26 April 2012, and the outcomes of the
inaugural meeting of the Support and Follow-up Group, which will take place in
Abidjan on 4 May 2012, whose establishment was decided at its 314th meeting, held
on 20 March 2012 in Bamako, and whose mandate was extended to the issue of the
restoration of constitutional order by the communiqué of its 315th meeting, held on
23 March 2012;
11. Requests the Chairperson of the Commission to submit, within a period
of one month, a report on the evolution of the situation and the implementation of
this decision, in particular its paragraphs 5 and 8, to enable it to take necessary
measures, as appropriate;
12.

12-33200

Decides to remain actively seized of the situation.

7

S/2012/298

Enclosure 3
Communiqué on the situation between the Republic of the Sudan
and the Republic of South Sudan
The Peace and Security Council of the African Union (AU), at its 319th
meeting held, at ministerial level, on 24 April 2012, adopted the following decision
on the situation between the Republic of the Sudan and the Republic of South
Sudan:
Council,
1.
Takes note of the paragraphs on the situation between the Sudan and
South Sudan, as contained in the report of the Chairperson of the Commission on
the situation in Guinea-Bissau, Mali and between the Sudan and South Sudan, and
the briefing given by former President Pierre Buyoya on behalf of the AU HighLevel Implementation Panel (AUHIP). Council also takes note of the statements
made by the representatives of the Republic of the Sudan and the Republic of South
Sudan, as well as by the Intergovernmental Authority on Development (IGAD), the
United Nations and other bilateral and multilateral partners;
2.
Recalls the communiqués adopted at its 310th and 317th meetings, held
on 14 February and 12 April 2012, respectively, as well as the press statements
issued by the Chairperson of the Commission on 11, 17 and 22 April 2012. Council
also recalls the communiqué issued by the 3rd meeting of the Sudan-South Sudan
Consultative Forum, held in Addis Ababa on 29 March 2012, under the auspices of
the AU and the United Nations;
3.
Expresses grave concern at the prevailing situation along the border
between the Sudan and South Sudan, which poses a serious threat to peace and
security in both countries and in the region as a whole, undermines the economic
viability of the two countries, as well as the rights and welfare of their citizens;
4.
Further expresses deep concern at the humanitarian situation created by
the fighting between the Sudan and South Sudan, the aerial bombardments, the
continued fighting in the states of Southern Kordofan and Blue Nile, in the Sudan,
as well as the fate of the nationals of both countries resident in each other’s
territory, following the end of the transition period on 8 April 2012;
5.
Welcomes the withdrawal from Heglig of the army of South Sudan and
calls for the immediate cessation of aerial bombardments by the Sudan Armed
Forces against South Sudan.
6.
Strongly condemns the violations of human rights of non-combatants in
the affected area, the damage to economic infrastructure, in particular oil
installations, and the inflammatory statements from both sides in the media resulting
in mutual demonization and the threat of hostile action by extremist elements,
including xenophobic attacks;
7.
Reaffirms its strong commitment to the respect for the unity and
territorial integrity of the Sudan and South Sudan and the inviolability of the border
between the two countries, defined as that existing at the time of the Sudan’s
independence on 1 January 1956, taking into account the disputed areas as agreed in
the deliberations of the Technical ad hoc Boundary Committee. Council reiterates

8

12-33200

S/2012/298

that the territorial boundaries of States shall not be altered by force, and that any
territorial disputes shall be settled exclusively by peaceful means;
8.
Recalls the provisions of the Constitutive Act of the African Union, as
well as the Charter of the United Nations, which prohibit the use of force or the
threat of force among Member States and call for non-interference in the internal
affairs of Member States and for peaceful settlement of all disputes;
9.
Welcomes the continuing efforts of Africa and the rest of the
international community to support the Parties in addressing the legacy of conflict
and bitterness in the Sudan, notably through the conclusion of the January 2005
Comprehensive Peace Agreement (CPA), its implementation, in particular the
holding of the referendum on self-determination of South Sudan, and the
negotiations on post-secession relations. The Council commends the efforts of the
African Union High-Level Implementation Panel (AUHIP), headed by former
President Thabo Mbeki and including former Presidents Abdulsalami Abubakar and
Pierre Buyoya, the Chairperson of IGAD, Prime Minister Meles Zenawi, the United
Nations Special Envoy for the Sudan and South Sudan, Haile Menkerios and the
United Nations Interim Security Force for Abyei (UNISFA), under the leadership of
Lieutenant General Tesfay Tadesse, as well as the support provided by AU’s
partners, including the Troika on the Sudan (Norway, the United Kingdom and the
United States of America), the members of the Security Council, the European
Union (EU) and the League of Arab States;
10. Expresses Africa’s dismay and deep disappointment at the failure of the
leadership in both countries to build on the goodwill of Africa and the rest of the
international community, as well as on the achievements they have already made, to
address their post-secession relations, live up to their stated commitment to the
principle of two viable States, in peace with one another, and to create the necessary
conditions of peace, security and stability to meet the most basic needs of their
peoples;
11. Expresses deep concern at the failure of the Parties to implement
agreements that they themselves have freely entered into, in particular the
Agreement on the Temporary Arrangements for the Administration and Security of
the Abyei Area of 20 June 2011, the Agreement on Border Security and the Joint
Political and Security Mechanism (JPSM) of 29 June 2011, the Agreement on the
Border Monitoring Support Mission of 30 July 2011, the decisions of the JPSM of
18 September 2011, the Memorandum of Understanding on Non-Aggression and
Cooperation of 10 February 2012;
12. Decides, in light of the above, to adopt the road map outlined below, for
implementation by both the Sudan and South Sudan, in order to ease the current
tension, facilitate the resumption of negotiations on post-secession relations and the
normalization of their relations:
(i) immediate cessation of all hostilities, including aerial bombardments,
with the Parties formally conveying their commitment in this respect to the
Chairperson of the Commission, within 48 hours;
(ii) unconditional withdrawal of all of their armed forces to their side of the
border, in accordance with previously adopted Agreements, including the
Agreement on the Border Monitoring Support Mission of 30 July 2011;

12-33200

9

S/2012/298

(iii) activation, within a week of the adoption of this decision, of the
necessary border security mechanisms, namely the Joint Border Verification
and Monitoring Mission (JBVMM) and the Secure Demilitarized Border Zone
(SDBZ), in accordance with the administrative and security map presented to
the Parties by the AUHIP in November 2011, it being understood that the map
in no way prejudices ongoing negotiations on the disputed areas and
demarcation of the border. In this respect, Council calls on UNISFA to take the
necessary steps to provide force protection and logistical support, in
accordance with relevant provisions of United Nations Security Council
resolution 2024 (2012);
(iv) cessation of harbouring of, or support to, rebel groups against the other
State;
(v) activation of the ad hoc Committee, under the JPSM, to receive and
investigate complaints and allegations made by one party against the other. In
this regard, Council requests the AUHIP to convene a meeting of the JPSM,
within ten (10) days of the adoption of the present decision;
(vi) immediate cessation of hostile propaganda and inflammatory statements in
the media, as well as of any attacks against the property, religious and cultural
symbols belonging to the nationals of the other State. To this end, the two
Governments must take full responsibility for the protection of each other’s
nationals in line with international principles, as agreed in the Framework
Agreement initialled in March 2012. In this regard, Council requests the
Commission, in close collaboration with the United Nations and relevant
agencies, to design a monitoring mechanism to verify compliance by both Parties;
(vii) implementation of pending aspects of the 20 June 2011 Agreement on
Temporary Security and Administrative Arrangements for the Abyei Area, in
particular the redeployment, within two weeks, of all Sudanese and South
Sudanese forces out of Abyei. Council requests UNISFA to report on
compliance with this decision, for further action by Council as necessary;
13. Urges the Parties to resume negotiations unconditionally, under the
auspices of the AUHIP and with the support of the Chairman of IGAD, within two
weeks, at a time to be set by the Panel in consultation with relevant international
partners, to reach agreement on the following critical issues:
(i)

arrangements concerning oil and associated payments;

(ii) the status of nationals of one country resident in the other, in accordance
with the Framework Agreement initialled in March 2012;
(iii) resolution of the status of the disputed and claimed border areas and the
demarcation of the border; and
(iv) the final status of Abyei.
14. Decides that these negotiations must be concluded within three months of
the adoption of this decision. Should these negotiations fail to result in an agreement
on any or all of the issues identified above within the allotted time frame of three
months, Council requests the AUHIP to submit to it a comprehensive report on the
status of the negotiations, including detailed proposals on all outstanding issues, to
be endorsed as final and binding solutions to the post-secession relations. Council

10

12-33200

S/2012/298

undertakes to seek the endorsement of, and support by, the United Nations Security
Council of the same;
15. Further decides that failure by either Party to implement the provisions
of the road map outlined in paragraph 12 above, or to cooperate in good faith with
the Panel towards the conclusion of the negotiations on the outstanding issues as
enumerated in paragraph 13 above, will result in Council taking appropriate
measures, as provided for in the Peace and Security Council Protocol and the
Constitutive Act of the AU, and to seek the support of the United Nations Security
Council and all AU partners to measures it may take;
16. Reiterates AU’s conviction that there can be no military solution to the
conflict in Southern Kordofan and Blue Nile, and stresses therefore the urgent need
for a political and negotiated solution, based on respect for diversity in unity.
Council requests the Government of the Sudan and the SPLM-North to extend full
cooperation to the AUHIP and the Chair of IGAD, to reach a negotiated settlement
on the basis of the Framework Agreement on Political Partnership between NCP and
SPLM-N and Political and Security Arrangements in Blue Nile and the Southern
Kordofan States. Pending the convening of talks by the AUHIP, Council calls on the
Government to accept the tripartite proposal submitted by the African Union, the
United Nations and the League of Arab States to permit humanitarian access to the
affected population in the two areas;
17. Requests all AU Member States to support and abide by this decision,
bearing in mind the provisions of article 7 (2 and 3) of the Protocol Relating to the
Establishment of the Peace and Security Council, under which Member States
agreed that, in carrying out its duties, Council acts on their behalf, and undertook to
accept and implement the decisions of Council, in accordance with the AU
Constitutive Act;
18. Requests the Chairperson of the Commission to transmit this decision to
the United Nations Security Council, as well as to all other AU partners. Council
seeks the support of the Security Council and its endorsement, under Chapter VII of
the Charter of the United Nations, of the road map in paragraphs 12 and 13 above.
Council also requests the Chairperson of the Commission, in consultation with the
Secretary-General of the United Nations, to urgently convene a meeting of the
Sudan and South Sudan Consultative Forum to mobilize its full support for the
present decision and agree on practical ways and means for the implementation of
its relevant provisions;
19. Further requests the Chairperson of the Commission to follow up on the
implementation of this decision and to take all steps deemed necessary to this end,
including interaction at the highest level with the Sudanese parties, involving as
appropriate relevant AU organs, including a visit to both countries by a delegation
of Council;
20. Looks forward to the submission by the Chairperson of the Commission
of monthly factual reports on the evolution over the situation on the ground and
compliance by the Sudan and South Sudan with the relevant provisions of this
decision, the status of the negotiations on all pending issues and efforts to mobilize
increased support from the international community in order to enable it take
appropriate decisions as may be called for by the evolution of the situation;
21.

12-33200

Decides to remain actively seized of the matter.

11

S/2012/298

Enclosure 4
[Original: English]

Report of the Chairperson of the Commission on the situations in
Guinea-Bissau, Mali and between the Sudan and South Sudan
I.

Introduction
1.
Over the past weeks, different regions of the continent have faced serious
crises. Since mid-January 2012, Mali has faced an armed rebellion in the north of
the country. This comes in addition to the actions of the terrorist and criminal
groups which have been operating in that region for several years now. The situation
was compounded by the coup d’état of 22 March, which overthrew the democratically
elected President, Amadou Toumani Toure, a little more than a month before the
presidential election which was scheduled to take place on 29 April 2012. In
Guinea-Bissau, a country which finally appeared to have emerged from the chronic
instability that had marked its history since independence, the army overthrew the
civilian authority on 12 April 2012. This new coup d’état took place while
preparations were under way for the second round of the presidential election, then
scheduled for 29 April, following the death of President Malam Bacai Sanha.
Finally, the Sudan and South Sudan, in spite of the sustained efforts made by the
AU, with the support of the international community, have not been able to rise to
the level of the hope generated by the successful holding of the referendum for selfdetermination and subsequent independence of South Sudan. The two countries are
today trapped in a logic of war, which is destabilizing them, the region and the rest
of Africa.
2.
In Mali and Guinea-Bissau, the coups d’état that have taken place there call
into question the principle of the rejection of unconstitutional change of
government. Those developments constitute a serious setback for the democratic
process initiated since the 1990s, while also highlighting the need to further enhance
the deterrence potential of the instruments adopted by the AU on unconstitutional
changes of government. As pointed out above, the situation in Mali is coupled with
a serious violation of what is undoubtedly one of the most fundamental principles of
our Union, that is, the principle of respect for the borders existing at the time of
independence and the unity and territorial integrity of Member States. In the
Declaration adopted by the 16th Ordinary Session of the Assembly of the Union,
held in Addis Ababa, on 30 and 31 January 2011, following the referendum for selfdetermination in South Sudan, the Heads of State and Government clearly pointed
out that the situation of the Sudan was an exceptional case and did not, in any way,
call into question the sacrosanct principle of respect for the borders inherited at the
accession to independence by African countries. Regarding the relations between the
Sudan and South Sudan, we are facing the challenge of non-respect of the principle
of good neighbourliness and a test for the universally accepted objective of two
viable States living side by side in peace.
3.
Africa has reacted firmly to all these crises, affirming clearly the principles to
be applied and endeavouring to find solutions within the limits they prescribed. I
would like to express the deep appreciation of the AU to the Economic Community
of West African States (ECOWAS) and to the Intergovernmental Authority for
Development (IGAD) for the sustained efforts they deploy, in conformity with the

12

12-33200

S/2012/298

provisions of the Protocol of the Peace and Security Council which articulate the
division of labour and complementarity of efforts between the continental and
regional levels in the promotion of peace, security and stability. The AU, pursuant to
its responsibilities, continues to support these efforts and take all necessary
initiatives to hasten their successful conclusion.
4.
It is imperative, considering the principles in question and what is at stake for
peace and security on the continent, to enhance the effectiveness and the credibility
of the efforts made and mobilize greater support from the international community.
Africa cannot simply accept that the principles underlying the Constitutive Act be
violated in such a flagrant manner and cannot reconcile itself with the persistence of
the crises faced by Guinea-Bissau and Mali, as well as with the logic of war which
characterizes the relations between the Sudan and South Sudan. An enhanced and
more coordinated collective action is more necessary than ever. This is why, basing
myself on article 10 (2a) of the Protocol relating to the Establishment of the Peace
and Security Council, which allows the Chairperson to draw the attention of Council
to any matter which in his or her view could jeopardize peace, security and stability
on the continent, I have taken the initiative to convene this meeting.
5.
The present report comprises three major sections focusing on Guinea-Bissau,
Mali and the situation between the Sudan and South Sudan. Each section sums up
the most significant developments that have taken place over the past weeks and the
efforts made to find solutions to the different crises under consideration. The report
concludes with recommendations on the way forward, with the view to enhancing
the effectiveness of the collective African action and strengthening the ownership,
by the continent, of the process to resolve the crises affecting it and its leadership in
the efforts made to this end.
II.

Situation in Guinea-Bissau
6.
Over the past years, the situation in Guinea-Bissau appeared to be evolving in
an encouraging direction, ending the cycle of chronic instability, including several
political assassinations, which marked the political history of the country since
independence. At the same time, the country was in the throes of heightened social
tension due to the increase in the price of commodities, the reactions to the inquiries
into the political assassinations of June 2009 and the acts of military indiscipline of
26 December 2011. However, following the death, on 9 January 2012, of President
Malam Bacai Sanha, the Speaker of the National Assembly, Raimundo Pereira, was
sworn in as acting President, in accordance with the relevant provisions of the
Constitution of Guinea-Bissau, pending the organization of the early presidential
election.
7.
The first round of the presidential election was organized on 18 March 2012. It
was considered to be free and fair and credible by all the international observers,
including those of the AU. Carlos Gomes Junior came first. However, five of the
eight other candidates rejected the provisional results and demanded the complete
annulment of the vote, as well as the urgent organization of a reliable national
census for the holding of free, fair and credible elections. Both the National
Electoral Commission (CNE) and the Supreme Court rejected their claims. The
second round of the election was fixed for 29 April 2012. With Carlos Gomes
Junior, on the one side, determined to go to the second round, and the coalition of

12-33200

13

S/2012/298

the five candidates, equally determined to obtain the annulment of the vote, the
electoral process reached an impasse.
8.
In the meantime, the issue of cooperation between Angola and Guinea-Bissau,
in general, and that of the military and security cooperation, in particular, emerged
in the political debate between the two rounds, thus bringing the presence of the
Angolan Technical Military and Security Mission in Guinea-Bissau (MISSANGGB) to the forefront. The presence of MISSANG, which was deployed within the
framework of the ECOWAS-CPLP (Community of Portuguese-speaking Countries)
Road map on the Defense and Security Sector Reform, highlighted the difficult
relations between the constitutional authorities and the army. There was a showdown
between the Government and the African Party for the Independence of GuineaBissau and Cape Verde (PAIGC), which continued to reaffirm their determination to
maintain MISSANG, and the military hierarchy, which also was adamant to obtain
its withdrawal and to oppose the deployment of any international interposition force.
In order to defuse the electoral crisis, and on the basis of the decision taken by the
Extraordinary Session of the ECOWAS Summit held in Abidjan on 27 March 2012,
President Alassane Dramane Ouattara, Current Chairman of ECOWAS, dispatched,
on 31 March 2012, a joint high-level ECOWAS-AU-UN fact-finding mission to
Guinea-Bissau. Angolan officials also visited Guinea-Bissau. Following those visits,
the principle of the withdrawal of MISSANG was accepted. In a letter dated
4 March 2012, the Permanent Mission of Angola to the AU confirmed the decision
on the withdrawal of MISSANG, while reiterating the commitment of the Angolan
Government to pursue its contribution to the efforts of stabilizing the situation in
Guinea-Bissau.
9.
On 12 April 2012, the military seized power, arresting Acting President
Raimundo Pereira, and Carlos Gomes Junior, the Prime Minister, who led in the first
round of the presidential election. Presenting themselves as the “Military Command”,
the perpetrators of the coup d’état, in their first communiqué of 12 April, stated that
they were not interested in power, justifying their action as a reaction to the decision
of the Government to call on a foreign force, a position reaffirmed in the
communiqués that followed. It was only on 13 April, after a meeting held at its
initiative with the opposition political parties on the same day, that the said
“Military Command” revealed its true face and disclosed its real intentions. It
affirmed that it was detaining the Acting President of the Republic, the Prime
Minister, the Chief of Defense Staff, the Ministers of Interior and of Trade, and
requested the political parties to make proposals for a “new political architecture”.
10. The coup d’état was strongly condemned by the AU, ECOWAS, the United
Nations, the European Union (EU), the International Organization of La Francophonie
(OIF), the CPLP, and other bilateral and multilateral partners. The 318th meeting of
Council, held on 17 April 2012, decided to suspend the participation of GuineaBissau in all the activities of the AU until the restoration of constitutional order, and
demanded the continuation of the electoral process with the organization of the second
round of the presidential election. Council demanded the immediate and unconditional
release of sequestrated political personalities, as well as the preservation of their
dignity and physical integrity. Council requested the Commission, in consultation
with ECOWAS, to submit to it, for decision, proposals on additional sanctions
against the perpetrators of the coup d’état and their military and civilian supporters,
including a travel ban, asset freeze and other measures. Council also requested me
to undertake consultations with ECOWAS, the CPLP, the United Nations and other

14

12-33200

S/2012/298

partners for the establishment of a mission that would continue the work started
within the framework of the implementation of the ECOWAS-CPLP Road map,
particularly those aspects relating to defence and security sector reform, including
the possibility of deploying a new international stabilization operation.
11. On 16 April, the Chairman of ECOWAS sent a second mission to GuineaBissau. The mission met with the representatives of the “Military Command” and
those of the political parties and some personalities of civil society. To all its
interlocutors, it recalled, in strong terms, the ECOWAS “zero tolerance” policy for
military coups d’état, the demand for the restoration of constitutional legality and
the release of detained personalities. The mission also pointed out that ECOWAS
was ready to set up a military force for peace. The “Military Command” said it
“accepted” the principle of speedy restoration of constitutional legality on condition
that Carlos Gomes Junior did not resume his post of Prime Minister and would not
stand as candidate for the presidential election. It also pledged to release the
political prisoners, “as soon as the security conditions were met”.
12. Subsequently, the “Military Command” organized a meeting of a “Forum of
political parties on the coup d’état of 12 April 2012” and established two committees:
a Social Committee in charge of economic matters and the management of the dayto-day affairs, and a Diplomatic Committee in charge of explaining the reason of the
coup d’état. The negotiations, held on 14 April between the “Military Command”
and the political parties of the minority parliamentary opposition led to the signing,
on 18 April, between the two parties, of the “Protocol on the establishment and
management of constitutional and democratic order”. This Protocol establishes a
“National Transitional Council” for a period of two years, implying the de facto
removal of the Acting President and the dissolution of Parliament. Manuel Serifo
Nhamadjo, First Deputy Speaker of the People’s National Assembly and one of the
candidates opposed to the second round of election, was appointed the Chairman of
the Transition, and Sori Djalo, First Vice-President of the “Parti de la Renovation
sociale” (Social Renovation Party — PRS) and Second Deputy Speaker of the
National Assembly, was appointed the Chairman of the National Transitional
Council. PAIGC and eight other political parties, on their part, formed a front
rejecting the coup d’état. Manuel Serifo Nhamadjo publicly refused the role of
“Chairman of the Transition” for which he had been designated.
13. The AU and ECOWAS rejected the Protocol, considering it a futile attempt to
legitimize the coup d’état. It should also be added that, in a presidential statement
dated 21 April 2012, the United Nations Security Council, recalling its statement to
the press of 13 April 2012 and its strong condemnation of the coup d’état, rejected
the unconstitutional establishment of the “National Transitional Council” by the
military leaders and their supporters. The Security Council demanded the immediate
restoration of constitutional order and the reinstatement of the legitimate
government, as well as the immediate and unconditional release of the high-level
personalities detained. In this regard, the Security Council welcomed the decision of
the AU to suspend Guinea-Bissau until the restoration of constitutional order. The
Security Council encouraged the AU, ECOWAS and the CPLP to coordinate their
efforts and urgently called on the partners of Guinea-Bissau and the United Nations
Secretary-General to support their efforts. The Security Council stated its readiness
to consider other possible measures, including the imposition of targeted sanctions
against the authors of the military coup d’état and their supporters if the crisis was
not resolved. The Security Council took note of the decision of the AU to hold

12-33200

15

S/2012/298

consultations with ECOWAS, the CPLP, the United Nations and other partners on
the new means that may be required to stabilize the country, in consultation with the
legitimate Government of Guinea-Bissau.
14. Through the coup d’état of 12 April, the army of Guinea-Bissau aims to
impede the electoral process and prevent the assumption of power by Carlos Gomes
Junior, who, considering the results of the first round, is likely to win the polls.
Thus, Guinea-Bissau is, once again, caught up in instability, making it even more
difficult to pursue the efforts to establish the rule of law and consolidate democracy,
promote development and fight against drug trafficking and organized crime. The
illegal and repeated interference of the army of Guinea-Bissau in the political life of
the country is unacceptable. Coming in addition to drug trafficking, for which
Guinea-Bissau has become a hub, it is a serious threat to regional security and
stability. No effort should be spared to put a definitive end to this situation,
particularly through the resolute implementation of the defence and security sector
reform and the actual subordination of the army to the democratically elected
civilian authorities.
III.

Situation in Mali
15. There are two dimensions to the Malian crisis. The first relates to the attacks
carried out since mid-January 2012 by the “National Movement for the Liberation of
AZAWAD” (MNLA) against the army and the State of Mali. Composed essentially
of former combatants of the Libyan army, who returned from Libya following the
overthrow of the regime of Colonel Qaddafi, the MNLA took full advantage of the
proliferation of the arms coming from the Libyan arsenals to equip itself. The initial
attacks of the MNLA enabled it to take control different areas in the north of the
country, particularly Meneka and Aguelhok, where serious exactions were carried
out against Malian soldiers and their families, as well as the strategic area of
Tessalit, which has an airport that can accommodate large aircraft. Since the end of
March, taking advantage of the confusion created by the coup d’état, the MNLA and
other terrorist and armed groups, including Harakat Ansar ed-Din al-Salafiya (Ansar
Eddine), Al-Qaida in the Islamic Maghreb (AQIM) and the Movement for Unity and
Jihad in West Africa (MUJAO), increased their attacks, finally taking control of
almost two thirds of the Malian territory. On 6 April 2012, the MNLA “proclaimed
the independence of Azawad”.
16. To justify their action, the perpetrators of the coup d’état of 22 March 2012
blamed the deplorable conditions of the army, which made it impossible to
effectively face the rebellion in the north of the country. Following the overthrow of
the constitutional authorities, they established a National Council for the Recovery
of Democracy and the Restoration of the State (CNRDRE). The aim of the latter was
to reorganize the Armed and Security Forces in order to take back the northern part
of the country and to organize democratic, free and fair elections. Almost the entire
political class of Mali condemned the coup d’état, deemed unjustified, more
especially since the presidential election, in which the outgoing President could not
participate, was due to be held on 29 April 2012. The coup d’état took place the day
after the ministerial meeting of Council in Bamako, dedicated to the situation in the
Sahel, during which important decisions were taken concerning the situation in the
northern part of Mali and the ways and means to resolve it quickly.

16

12-33200

S/2012/298

17. The AU and ECOWAS reacted strongly to this situation and took a number of
measures regarding the developments on the ground, as evidenced by the different
decisions adopted by their relevant organs: decision Assembly/AU/Dec. 408 (XVIII),
adopted by the 18th Ordinary Session of the Assembly of the Union, held in Addis
Ababa, on 29 and 30 January 2012; final communiqué of the 40th Ordinary Session
of the Authority of the Heads of State and Government of ECOWAS, held in Abuja,
on 16 and 17 February 2012; communiqués (PSC/MIN/COMM(CCCXIV),
PSC/PR/COMM(CCCXV), PSC/PR/COMM(CCCXVI) and PSC/PR/COMM
(CCCXVII)) of the 314th, 315th, 316th and 317th meetings of Council held on
20 and 23 March 2012 and 3 and 12 April 2012; and the communiqués of the
Extraordinary Summits of ECOWAS of 27 and 29 March and 2 April 2012. I issued
several statements articulating the position of the AU and took, in consultation with
the Chairman of the Union and ECOWAS, initiatives to contribute to the search for
appropriate solutions and ensure the effective follow-up of the decisions of Council.
18. With regard to the developments in the north of Mali, the AU and ECOWAS
strongly condemned the attacks of the armed and terrorist groups, reaffirmed their
unwavering commitment to the respect for national unity, territorial integrity and
sovereignty of Mali. At its 314th meeting, Council stressed the determination of the
AU and of its Member States not to accept any violation of its principles and its
rejection of recourse to armed rebellion in Mali, a country whose democratic
institutions offered a framework for the expression of all legitimate claims, making
it possible to find, through dialogue, solutions to the concerns of the different
components of the Malian nation. Council reaffirmed its conviction that resorting to
armed rebellion was a serious threat to the democratization processes on the continent,
as well as to the stability and development of Africa and should, as such, be fought
vigorously.
19. Consequently, Council demanded an immediate end to hostilities and requested
the different rebel groups to engage, without delay, in the search for a peaceful
solution to the crisis within the strict framework of the principles of the AU. Council
expressed its commitment to actively support a “mediation process conducted by the
neighbouring countries of Mali, particularly the core countries and especially Algeria,
considering the crucial role that the country has always played in the search for
solutions to this situation, as well as by ECOWAS”, and requested me to determine,
with the concerned actors, the modalities for the immediate implementation of such
a process. Furthermore, Council requested me to take all necessary measures to
mobilize the support of the continent and the international community as a whole
for this process, including through the speedy establishment, under the aegis of the
AU and the United Nations, of a Support and Follow-up Group comprising all the
neighbouring countries, the relevant regional economic communities and the
international partners concerned.
20. At its Extraordinary Summit of 27 March, ECOWAS decided to activate the
planning process for a possible deployment of elements of its Stand-by Brigade, in
order to contribute to the protection of the unity and territorial integrity of Mali,
should its offer for dialogue with the MNLA, to find a solution to the rebellion in
the north, go unheeded. ECOWAS also designated President Blaise Compaoré of
Burkina Faso as its Mediator. At its 316th meeting, the Council endorsed that
decision and requested the Commission to lend the necessary support to the efforts
of ECOWAS, including by making available planning officers. The Council
appealed to all the AU Member States and partners to give financial, logistic and

12-33200

17

S/2012/298

other support to ECOWAS. Since then, the Chiefs of Staff of ECOWAS have met on
several occasions to complete the required planning exercise, and have undertaken
visits to Mali. Their recommendations were adopted by the Extraordinary Session of
the ECOWAS Mediation and Security Council, held in Abidjan on 12 April 2012.
21. More specifically, Council requested the countries of the region, particularly
those of ECOWAS and the core countries, as well as all other States, to do everything
possible to prevent any flow of arms and combatants to the armed and terrorist groups
operating in the north of Mali. In this regard, Council requested the Commission, in
cooperation with the Commission of ECOWAS and the neighbouring countries, to
work out mechanisms likely to ensure the effectiveness of this measure. Furthermore,
Council decided to apply individual sanctions against the leaders and elements of
the armed groups involved in the attacks in the north of Mali and abuses against the
civilian population. Council requested the Commission, in cooperation with the
Commission of ECOWAS, the core countries and the African Centre for the Study
and Research on Terrorism (ACSRT), within a period of one month, to draw up a list
of all the terrorist and other armed groups operating in conjunction with them on the
territory of the Republic of Mali, in order to include them in the list of terrorist
groups drawn up by the AU. Pursuant to these decisions, the Commission sent the
necessary letters to the countries and institutions concerned to facilitate the
establishment of the list of the armed and terrorist groups active in the northern part
of Mali, as well as that of their leaders. I also wrote to the United Nations SecretaryGeneral to bring to his attention and that of the Security Council the decisions thus
adopted. The Commissioner for Peace and Security addressed a similar letter to the
High Representative of the EU for Foreign Affairs and Security Policy.
22. On the ground, the frontline has stabilized south of Timbuktu, after the
leadership of the rebellion stated, on 5 April 2012, that it had attained its territorial
objectives and proclaimed, the following day, the “independence of Azawad”. In a
communiqué issued on 6 April 2012, I expressed the total rejection of the statement
made by the MNLA by the AU, considering it as null and void. At its 316th meeting,
Council endorsed my communiqué. The core countries, meeting in Nouakchott on
8 April 2012, also rejected this so-called declaration of independence. Several
international actors also marked their disapproval and condemnation.
23. In the areas outside the control of the Malian State, clashes between the
different armed groups have been reported. Beyond their fight against the Malian
army, their objectives are divergent. The MNLA favours the so-called independence
of Azawad, while Ansar Eddine aims at enforcing sharia law over the entire Malian
territory and affirms that it has no secessionist agenda. MUJAO is a dissident branch
of AQIM, bringing together armed elements of different terrorist and criminal groups
from the region, including Boko Haram. AQIM, which has been present in the north
of Mali for several years, now has greater latitude to pursue its terrorist activities,
including the kidnapping of hostages for the purpose of collecting ransom. On 6 April
2012, staff of the Algerian Consulate in Gao were abducted by armed elements and
taken to an unknown destination. In a communiqué issued on the same day, I strongly
condemned those reprehensible acts against internationally protected diplomatic
staff and premises, demanding the immediate release of all abducted persons.
24. The humanitarian situation is particularly alarming, more especially as Mali,
like the other countries of the Sahel, is currently affected by a severe drought and a
serious nutritional crisis. More than 160,000 persons have sought refuge in Mali’s

18

12-33200

S/2012/298

neighbouring States: Algeria, Burkina Faso, Mauritania and Niger. There are also
more than 107,000 internally displaced persons. The numerous acts of looting and
violations of human rights in the north of Mali contribute to worsening forced
displacement. At its 314th meeting, Council paid tribute to the neighbouring
countries which host Malian refugees on their territories and contribute to the
humanitarian efforts.
25. Both the ECOWAS and the AU strongly condemned the coup d’état of
22 March 2012, suspended the participation of Mali in their activities and adopted a
number of sanctions, including economic and financial sanctions, individual measures
such as a travel ban and assets freeze, to compel the perpetrators of the coup to
restore constitutional order. In his capacity as Mediator, President Blaise Compaoré
of Burkina Faso was requested to follow up on the efforts towards the restoration of
constitutional order.
26. On 6 April 2012, the efforts of the Mediator led to the signing, in Bamako, of
the Framework Agreement for the Implementation of the Solemn Commitment of
1 April 2012 between his representative, the Minister of Foreign Affairs and Regional
Cooperation, Djibrill Yipènè Bassolé, and the leader of the CNRDRE, for the
restoration of constitutional order in Mali on the basis of article 36 of the 1992
Constitution. In conformity with the provisions of that article, the Speaker of the
National Assembly, following the resignation of the President of the Republic, was
inaugurated as the Acting President with the task of organizing a presidential
election within the constitutional timeline of 40 days. The Agreement stresses that,
due to the exceptional situation obtaining in the country, particularly the constitutional
crisis and the armed rebellion in the north, which seriously affect the normal
functioning of the institutions, and the impossibility of organizing the election
within the set deadline, it is necessary to arrange for a political transition leading to
free, fair and democratic elections in the entire national territory. The parties agreed
to set up transitional organs tasked to manage the country until the organization of a
presidential election, comprising a Prime Minister, Head of Government, with full
powers, and a Transitional Government of National Unity. They also agreed to
prepare a road map for the transition, comprising a schedule, the operational tasks to
be carried out, the modalities for organizing the elections, the revision of the electoral
list, as well as the role and place of the members of the CNRDRE in the transition.
27. In conformity with the Framework Agreement, the ECOWAS Current Chairman,
after consulting his colleagues, lifted the sanctions imposed on Mali at the Summit
of 29 March 2012. On my part, in a communiqué dated 7 April 2012, I welcomed
the signing of the Framework Agreement, paying tribute to Presidents Alassane
Dramane Ouattara and Blaise Compaoré and the action of Minister Djibrill Bassolé.
I urged all the Malian actors concerned to implement, in good faith, the Agreement
concluded. At its 317th meeting, held on 13 April 2012, Council expressed
satisfaction with the encouraging developments in Mali concerning the restoration
of constitutional order and called upon all the actors concerned to scrupulously
implement the other provisions of the Framework Agreement.
28. In accordance with the Framework Agreement, President Amadou Toumani
Toure submitted his resignation on 8 April 2012. After the Constitutional Court noted
the power vacuum, the Speaker of the National Assembly, Dioncounda Traore, was
inaugurated as the Acting President on 12 April 2012. Subsequently, the different
Malian stakeholders met in a Conference of the “Forces Vives”, in Ouagadougou,

12-33200

19

S/2012/298

on 14 and 15 April 2012, under the aegis of the ECOWAS Mediator. The Conference
expressed support for the implementation of the Framework Agreement. On 16 April
2012, after consultations between the CNRDRE, the Acting President and the
ECOWAS Mediator, Cheick Modibo Diarra was appointed as Prime Minister.
29. The situation obtaining at present in Mali is fraught with dangers for the
stability and the unity of the country, but also for regional security. A coordinated
and sustained action, involving both ECOWAS and the core countries, is urgently
needed to complete the process of restoration of constitutional order and to address
the situation in the northern part of the country. Regarding this latter point, the task
is to reinstate, without delay, the authority of the Malian State over its entire territory,
to put an end to the activities of the terrorist and criminal groups which are active on
the ground and to respond, within the strict framework of the principles of the AU,
to the structural causes of the recurrent rebellions in northern Mali. In general, the
task is also to implement the conclusions of the meeting of experts of the countries
of the Sahel region, held in Addis Ababa on 14 and 15 March 2012, as endorsed by
Council at its ministerial meeting in Bamako. Those conclusions provide for a
global strategy aimed at addressing, in the long term, the multidimensional
challenges faced by the Sahel region.
IV.

Situation between the Sudan and South Sudan
30. Relations between the Sudan and South Sudan have sharply deteriorated over
the past weeks. In particular, there has been intense fighting between the armies of
the two countries, mostly in and around Heglig. That conflict has poisoned relations
between the two countries, generating a humanitarian crisis, undermining the
viability of both States and jeopardizing the security of the entire region.
31. At its 317th meeting held on 12 April 2012, Council deliberated on the
situation and adopted a communiqué outlining the steps that need to be taken to
address the immediate crisis and create conditions for the resumption, under the
auspices of the AU High-level Implementation Panel (AUHIP), of the negotiations
on the outstanding issues in the post-secession relations between the Sudan and
South Sudan. Other members of the international community, notably the United
Nations Security Council, the EU, the League of Arab States and bilateral partners,
such as China, France, the United Kingdom and the United States, have also
pronounced themselves on the situation. The position of the members of the
international community could be summarized as follows: South Sudan should
withdraw its forces from Heglig; the Sudan should cease aerial bombardment of
South Sudan; both Parties should cease support to rebel forces fighting against the
other State. It is also necessary for the Parties to implement their existing agreements
on security matters and to resume negotiations on all outstanding issues. In light of
the most recent developments in Heglig and the statements by the Parties, I reiterate
the AU’s request for the Sudan and South Sudan to immediately implement the
security agreements that they have reached under the facilitation of the AUHIP.
32. Since June 2010, the AUHIP has been facilitating negotiations between the
Sudan and South Sudan on post-referendum and post-secession issues. These
negotiations have addressed all the major issues of contention between the two
States, and also the question of the armed conflict in the two areas of Southern
Kordofan and Blue Nile, in the Sudan. Agreements have been signed on most of these
issues, although implementation has fallen short of expectations. Fair and practical

20

12-33200

S/2012/298

proposals are on the table, or are ready to be put on the table, when the Parties are
ready, for all the issues under discussion. The implementation of existing
Agreements will significantly facilitate negotiations on the outstanding issues.
33. In March 2012, the two sides embarked on negotiations in an atmosphere
characterized by a “new spirit” of cooperation, in pursuit of the shared objective of
“two viable States”. A delegation from South Sudan visited Khartoum, and
preparations were made for a Summit meeting between President Omar Hassan
Al-Bashir and President Salva Kiir Mayardit. Unfortunately, that spirit unravelled
rapidly due to military actions in contravention of the 10 February 2012 Memorandum
of Understanding on Non-Aggression and Cooperation, including supporting rebels
in each other’s territory and territorial transgressions by both sides. The military
occupation of, and confrontation in, Heglig and neighbouring areas of Southern
Kordofan, and the aerial bombardment of locations in South Sudan by the Sudan air
force, have considerably damaged the prospects of resuming negotiations in a
constructive spirit. The level of bitterness, anger and distrust on both sides has never
been so high.
34. During the last round of the AUHIP-facilitated negotiations on security issues,
earlier in April 2012, which was intended to establish the implementation mechanisms
for the Memorandum of Understanding of 10 February, the Parties reached agreement
on almost all issues. They agreed to withdraw any forces from the territory of the
other State, to end support for each other’s rebel groups and to activate the Joint
Border Verification and Monitoring Mission (JBVMM), which is to be provided
with logistical support and protection by the United Nations Interim Security Force
for Abyei (UNISFA). Most importantly, the two sides agreed to immediately
convene meetings of the Ad Hoc Committee which was set up to receive and
investigate complaints by each side against the other. South Sudan agreed to the
proposals, while the Sudanese delegation sought more time to consult in Khartoum.
35. The JBVMM and UNISFA are in a position to deploy immediately along the
entire border. The Agreement on the Border Monitoring Support Mission, signed by
the two Parties on 30 July 2011, required the establishment of a Safe Demilitarized
Border Zone, 10 km on either side of the borderline, which shall constitute the area
of operations for the JBVMM. In terms of the Agreement, the border that defines the
JBVMM shall be the borderline of 1 January 1956. In case of the disputed areas of
the border, deployment shall be defined by the administrative common borderline,
and the two Parties shall prepare a map to this effect, it being understood that this
line shall not prejudice the process of the resolution of the disputed areas along the
border. However, the Parties have not been able to agree on the borderline, which
has prevented the deployment of the JBVMM and the protection force of UNISFA.
The activation of the JBVMM is crucial to fostering trust between the two Parties,
reducing the incidence of security incidents along the border, and creating the
conditions to return to negotiations on all outstanding issues.
36. The 2005 Comprehensive Peace Agreement (CPA) established the Technical Ad
Hoc Boundary Committee (TABC), with the tasks of delineating and demarcating
the border, including identifying any disputed areas and presenting the arguments of
each Party to the Presidency for political resolution. The Boundary Committee agreed
on five disputed areas. On 13 March 2012, the two Parties initialled an Agreement
in Addis Ababa to begin demarcating the agreed areas of the border according to the
recommendations of the TABC, and also agree on a process for resolving the

12-33200

21

S/2012/298

disputed areas. The issue of the border clearly is closely related to the issue of
security, and it is thus imperative that the two sides address it as soon as possible.
The AU, through the AU Border Programme (AUBP), has been working with the
Parties and with the AUHIP to assist them to address the matter in accordance with
African best practice.
37. Negotiations concerning oil have proceeded on the basis that South Sudan will
utilize the oil infrastructure in the Sudan to transport its oil to market, and for this it
will pay a transit fee. Additionally, South Sudan will make a financial contribution
to help fill the budget deficit in the Sudan emanating from the loss of revenue from
the oilfields in the south at the time of South Sudan’s independence. The Parties
agreed to the principle that South Sudan’s financial contribution would be transitional
and would be one of three mechanisms to fill this gap, the other two of which would
be the Sudan’s own austerity measures and financial contributions from the
international community. Negotiations on the oil issue were complicated by the
question of arrears owed by each Party to the other, and by the unauthorized seizure
and diversion of South Sudan’s oil by the Republic of Sudan during December 2011
and January 2012, and South Sudan’s subsequent decision to shut down its oil
production.
38. The shutdown of oil production has created a new situation in which South
Sudan does not have the finances with which it could make a contribution to the
budget of the Sudan. The shutdown of production in Heglig, which until earlier this
month provided nearly half of the Sudan’s oil production, further complicates the
issue. The Parties should be put on notice to avoid any further damage to the oil
infrastructure of either country, which would constitute an assault on the prospects
for economic development of the peoples of the Sudan and South Sudan, and would
be wholly contrary to their repeated commitment to the principle of two viable
States. At its 317th meeting, Council addressed this matter.
39. The immediate priority for Abyei is the implementation of the 20 June 2011
Agreement on Temporary Administrative and Security Arrangements. The outstanding
matters are relatively minor and yet critically important for the normalization of life
in Abyei, thereby laying the basis for a final settlement. The implementation of the
Temporary Agreement is necessary for the return of internally displaced persons,
who were displaced almost a year ago, and the normalization of the situation and
livelihoods in the area for both residents and pastoralists. The international
community has fulfilled its part of the Agreement, notably with the full deployment
of UNISFA. The Parties should fulfil their commitments. In order for tension to be
lessened, the most important steps now required are the redeployment of the
remaining contingent of the Sudan Armed Forces from Abyei, numbering about 300,
and the corresponding redeployment of armed South Sudan Police Force units.
Additionally, neither Party should deploy additional forces in violation of the
Agreement. It is also necessary to establish the Abyei Area Administration, which
requires agreement on the head of the Abyei Legislative Assembly. I am pleased to
report, however, that the Abyei Joint Oversight Committee (AJOC) is functioning.
40. A matter of considerable concern is the status of nationals of South Sudan who
are present in the Sudan, and those of the Sudan who are in South Sudan. The
“citizenship transitional period” expired on 9 April 2012, nine months after the
independence of South Sudan. The main concern relates to the situation of the
estimated 700,000 southerners in the Republic of Sudan. During the last nine months,

22

12-33200

S/2012/298

the Government of South Sudan was to have issued identity documents to its
nationals in the Sudan, on the basis of which they could obtain residency documents
and work permits. However, the necessary steps to regularize their status have not
been taken, and, as a result, the southern citizens in the north have become not only
de facto stateless, but are extremely vulnerable, given the tensions between the Sudan
and South Sudan. I urge the Government of South Sudan to expedite the process of
issuing the necessary documentation to its citizens in the Sudan, and the Sudan to
extend the citizenship transitional period to enable this process to be completed.
41. In March 2012, the two Parties initialled a Framework Agreement covering the
“four freedoms” of residence, work, travel and property ownership. This Agreement
requires the two Parties to meet at ministerial level and to agree on an
implementation mechanism. The Panel has received the assurance of President
Al-Bashir that nothing untoward would happen to southern citizens in Sudan that
would adversely affect their everyday life.
42. Another area requiring action is the conflict in the two areas of Southern
Kordofan and Blue Nile. This is an internal matter to the Sudan, but given the
history of the conflict in the two areas and their links to South Sudan, it is fair to
assume that there can be no peace between the Sudan and South Sudan until this
conflict is resolved. It is equally evident that there can be no military solution. In
June 2011, the AUHIP convened talks between the Government of the Sudan and the
SPLM-North on security issues and political partnership, resulting in a Framework
Agreement signed by the Parties on 28 June 2011. Unfortunately, the Parties have
not followed up on the Framework Agreement. The current situation demands that
political talks resume immediately on the two areas without precondition, using the
Framework Agreement of 28 June 2011 as a reference point. It also calls for a
ceasefire and for the delivery of humanitarian assistance, in accordance with the
tripartite initiative of the United Nations, the AU and the League of Arab States,
especially in view of the fact that the rainy season will begin shortly.
43. The present state of the relations between the Sudan and South Sudan cannot
be allowed to continue, for it would destroy any prospect of the emergence of two
viable States, living side by side in peace, and would seriously undermine regional
peace and security. I would like to emphasize, once again, that recourse to force will
never bring about a lasting solution to the issues at hand. The peoples of the Sudan
and South Sudan need to live in peace with one another and to cooperate, as their
destinies are intertwined. Both Parties need to exercise the much-needed
statesmanship and to be driven by a vision that takes into account the long-term
interests of their countries and peoples, as well as by their responsibility towards the
region, the rest of Africa and the larger international community. It is imperative
that the present meeting of Council send a clear message to both the Sudan and
South Sudan and articulate a clear road map that would facilitate the peaceful
resolution of the current security issues and the resumption of negotiations on the
outstanding issues in the post-secession relations between the Sudan and South
Sudan. In this respect, continued unity of purpose and action among all members of
the international community is necessary.
V.

Observations
44. The present meeting of Council provides an opportunity to enhance continental
efforts on the different situations under consideration. The coups d’état in Mali and

12-33200

23

S/2012/298

in Guinea-Bissau constitute real setbacks for these two countries and for Africa.
They run counter to the evolution of Africa towards democracy. Everything must be
done to restore constitutional order on the basis of the relevant instruments of the
AU and ECOWAS, lest these bad examples be repeated elsewhere, with negative
consequences on the stability of the continent and the viability of the democratic
institutions of our different Member States. Similarly, Africa must show the
necessary determination to preserve the unity and territorial integrity of Mali. Any
failure in this regard will open the door for all sorts of adventure, encourage
secessionist movements elsewhere and will further encourage armed violence. The
armed clashes between the Sudan and South Sudan are also full of risk for both
countries, the region and the continent as a whole.
45. With regard to Guinea-Bissau, it is important that Council reaffirm with force
the demand for the restoration of constitutional order, the release of the political
personalities detained by the army and the resumption of the electoral process. In
this spirit, it is important to reiterate the total rejection by the AU of the delaying
tactics of the perpetrators of the coup d’état, particularly the agreement concluded
with some political parties on 18 April 2012, as a futile attempt to legitimize the
seizure of power by force. In brief, Council must send an unequivocal message to
the perpetrators of the coup d’état that their action is unacceptable and that Africa is
determined to reverse it.
46. Council must renew its support to ECOWAS, which is actively seized of the
matter, and commend the contribution of Angola to the efforts towards the defence
and security sector reform, as well as the action of international partners,
particularly the CPLP and the United Nations. The speedy resolution of the crisis in
Guinea-Bissau requires close coordination between the different international actors
concerned. I shall leave no stone unturned to facilitate this coordination both at the
level of the Commission and the AU Liaison Office in Guinea-Bissau. In
implementation of the decision of the 318th meeting of Council, I intend to intensify
consultations with ECOWAS, the United Nations and the CPLP to facilitate the
deployment of an international stabilization mission in Guinea-Bissau to carry out
successfully the defence and security sector reform. Without such a reform, there
can be no lasting stability in Guinea-Bissau, nor consolidation of the democratic
process in that country. In the meantime, Council may wish to approve the
immediate imposition of the sanctions decided at its 318th meeting, against the
perpetrators of the coup and their military and civilian supporters.
47. Regarding Mali, Council may wish to welcome the efforts made by the
Mediator, which led to the signing of the Framework Agreement, the inauguration of
the Acting President and the appointment of the Prime Minister. It is understood that
ECOWAS and the AU must remain vigilant to ensure the effectiveness of the
restoration of constitutional order, in conformity with the provisions of the relevant
instruments of the AU and ECOWAS. The recent arbitrary arrest, followed by their
release, a few days after, of several Malian political and military personalities
constitute, particularly in the present context, a source of deep concern. It is
particularly important that a speedy solution, in line with the AU and ECOWAS
instruments, be found to the issue of the status of the Acting President after the
40 days provided for by article 36 of the February 1992 Constitution, the duration of
the transitional period and the full powers devolved upon the transitional Prime
Minister.

24

12-33200

S/2012/298

48. Regarding the situation in the north of Mali, the Council should reaffirm the
commitment of the AU to the unity and territorial integrity of Mali and its
determination to spare no effort to ensure its protection and fight against the armed
and terrorist groups active on the ground. It is particularly important to reaffirm the
total rejection of the so-called “declaration of independence of Azawad” and stress
with force the rejection by the AU of the use of violence, while the institutions of
Mali offer the framework that make it possible to put forth, through dialogue, all
legitimate claims. Council should, within this framework, support the efforts of
ECOWAS and the decisions it adopted on the matter, as well as the action of the
core countries in the fight against terrorism in the Sahelo-Saharan region.
49. In pursuit of the objectives that Africa has laid down concerning the situation
in north Mali, particularly the immediate restoration of the authority of the Malian
State over its entire territory, it is important for the core countries and ECOWAS to
work closely together. Equally crucial is the mobilization of the full support of the
international community for the principled position of Africa on this matter. From
this point of view, the activation of the Support and Follow-up Group, which will
hold its inaugural meeting in Abidjan on 4 May 2012, will enhance African
collective action and mobilize increased international support. At the same time, the
Commission will endeavour to finalize, as soon as possible, the modalities for the
application of sanctions already decided upon against the armed and terrorist groups
active in northern Mali. In general, it is important to follow up more effectively on
the conclusions of the meeting of experts on the situation in the Sahel, held in Addis
Ababa on 14 and 15 March 2012, as endorsed by the meeting of Council held in
Bamako.
50. Finally, regarding the Sudan and South Sudan, it is critical that the two
countries immediately implement the security agreements that they have reached
under the facilitation of the AUHIP, with the support of IGAD and the United
Nations, particularly the decision of the JPSM of 18 September 2011, which, inter
alia, established the JBVMM. Equally important is the need for the Parties to refrain
from inflammatory statements, which not only complicate the current and delicate
situation, but also undermine the prospects for neighbourly relations between the
two States and their peoples. The two Parties should also immediately and
unconditionally resume negotiations, under the auspices of the AUHIP, to reach
agreements on all outstanding issues, as they relate to security, border demarcation,
nationality and citizenship, Transitional Financial Arrangements (TFA), oil and
Abyei, in accordance with the overriding principle of establishing two viable States
in the Sudan and South Sudan.
51. In parallel, the Sudan and South Sudan each has urgent domestic business to
which it must attend. These matters are essential for the viability of each State. Of
particular importance is the need to resolve the conflict in Southern Kordofan and
Blue Nile. The AUHIP and the Chair of IGAD, Prime Minister Meles Zenawi, who
has consistently supported the Panel’s efforts, are ready to facilitate the necessary
negotiations. Without waiting for this process to be launched, I urge the Government
of the Sudan to agree to the joint AU-Arab League-United Nations initiative for
humanitarian access. South Sudan also faces challenges of nation-building,
including intercommunal violence in Jonglei State and elsewhere, that require
political attention, including promoting reconciliation.

12-33200

25

S/2012/298

52. Over the past few years, the AU, through the AUHIP, has engaged extensively
with the Sudan and South Sudan. I have no hesitation in saying that the people of
both nations need peace and good neighbourliness. The principle of “two viable
States” is fundamentally an issue of the welfare of the people. The leaders of the
two countries will be failing their peoples if they do not act in accordance with this
principle. I am convinced that the Sudanese Parties, both in the north and in the
south, are fully aware of this simple truth. For the future of their two countries and
peoples, it is essential that they act on this basis without delay.

26

12-33200
