S/PV.8263

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-third year

8263rd meeting

Monday, 21 May 2018, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Ms. Wronecka . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Poland)

Members:

Bolivia (Plurinational State of). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Côte d’Ivoire . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Equatorial Guinea. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ethiopia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kazakhstan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kuwait. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Netherlands. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Peru. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Sweden . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Inchauste Jordán
Mr. Shen Bo
Mr. Djédjé
Mr. Esono Mbengono
Mr. Alemu
Mr. Delattre
Mr. Umarov
Mr. Alotaibi
Mrs. Gregoire Van Haaren
Mr. Meza-Cuadra
Mr. Safronkov
Mr. Skoog
Mr. Allen
Mrs. Haley

Agenda
The situation in Libya
Report of the Secretary-General on the United Nations Support Mission in
Libya (S/2018/429)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

18-15418 (E)
*1815418*

S/PV.8263

The situation in Libya

The meeting was called to order at 10.05 a.m.

the electoral process. However, despite the tragic loss
of many staff and the need to move to a new premises
after the suicide explosion damaged the building, its
Chair has stressed the continued readiness of the High
National Elections Commission to conduct elections.
The perseverance of the Commission in the face of such
adversity deserves our admiration.

Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in Libya
Report of the Secretary-General on the
United Nations Support Mission in Libya
(S/2018/429)
The President: In accordance with rule 37 of the
Council’s provisional rules of procedure, I invite the
representative of Libya to participate in this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite Mr. Ghassan
Salamé, Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral and Head of the United Nations Support
Mission in Libya, to participate in this meeting.
Mr. Salamé is joining via video tele-conference
from Paris.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I wish to draw the attention of Council members
to document S/2018/429, which contains the report of
the Secretary-General on the United Nations Support
Mission in Libya.
At this meeting, the Security Council will hear
briefings by Mr. Salamé and Ambassador Olof Skoog,
Permanent Representative of Sweden, in his capacity as
Chair of the Security Council Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1970 (2011), concerning Libya.
I give the floor to Mr. Salamé.
Mr. Salamé: Allow me to congratulate Poland
upon its assumption of the presidency of the Security
Council this month. I am grateful for this opportunity
to brief the Council on our work in Libya.
There are various ways to look at Libya, a country
of some 1.5 million square kilometres. From one city
to another, one finds cause for concern as well as
reasons for hope. Although many cities and towns
merit mention, I shall cite just a few, beginning with
the capital. This month Tripoli was struck by tragedy.
On 2 May, a murderous attack on the headquarters of
the High Commission for National Elections claimed
13 lives. The attack was claimed by the Islamic State
in Iraq and the Levant and was an attempt to derail
2/22

21/05/2018

However, there have also been positive developments
in the city. The elections for the presidency of the High
State Council were conducted on time, peacefully and
democratically, bringing an entirely new leadership
to the institution, while reminding all that official
positions are only temporary. More important for
Libyan citizens, the Government of National Accord
has agreed the 2018 budget.
To the east, the city of Derna has been subject
to escalating ground, air and artillery assault since
7 May, when Mr. Haftar announced an offensive by the
Libyan National Army. Numerous civilians have been
killed, while aid and medical access have been severely
limited. Hundreds of families have been displaced. So
far, most of the fighting has taken place on the outskirts
of the city. We are concerned that, if it proceeds to the
urban areas, civilians will be in even greater danger.
I urgently call on all parties to exercise restraint
and to take all feasible precautions to protect civilians,
and I strongly advise that the Council do likewise.
The United Nations is working hard to address the
humanitarian situation and is preparing in case the
conflict worsens, and requests all actors to permit
unfettered humanitarian access and safe passage for
civilians out of the area. We have formally offered — and
do so once more now — the Mission’s good offices to
de-escalate the conflict.
To the south, the city of Sabha has also suffered
an alarming escalation in armed clashes. Fighting for
control of strategic locations has led to rising fatalities,
including many civilian casualties. The city’s main
hospital has been the subject of direct attacks, putting
the infirm at risk. In that regard, as in every instance
where civilians are at risk, we stress to all parties their
obligations under international human rights law and
international humanitarian law.
Besides being the main city in Libya’s southern
region, Sabha is a source of specific concern because,
first, many agreements to stop the fighting among the
groups there have been signed and then subsequently
and repeatedly violated; secondly, there is a serious
18-15418

21/05/2018

The situation in Libya

risk that those clashes will deteriorate into an ethnic
conflict; and, thirdly, because that conflict has the
potential to become regional, given that armed groups
originating from many neighbouring countries have too
easily transformed that part of Libya as their alternative
battle ground.
We therefore support rapid negotiations between
Libya and its southern neighbours, and we are
wholeheartedly prepared to facilitate them if need be.
The Sabha case demonstrates the need for Libya to
work with southern neighbouring States to secure its
borders and resolve the matters of human trafficking,
the flows of fighters and the smuggling of goods.
On a more positive note, 40 kilometres to the west
of Tripoli, on 12 May, the city of Zawiya, the fourthlargest in Libya, conducted the first municipal council
election since 2015. In an open and competitive race,
the local community, supported by the Municipal
Election Committee, worked to ensure a peaceful and
organized process, with national observers in every
polling centre. That successful election marks the
start of a series of municipal polls that will take place
across the entire country. Libyans have come to rely
upon their mayors and municipalities for essential basic
services, who in turn struggle to obtain the necessary
resources to meet their needs. Hence the importance
of the renewal of local leadership. The United Nations
supported that election, both politically and materially,
and shall do so for the forthcoming elections.
Another city I will mention is Tawergha. That is a
city that lost its inhabitants after a very serious conflict
with the neighbouring city of Misrata. The inhabitants
should have come back on 1 February, according to
the plan of the Government of National Accord. They
were forcibly prevented from doing so. Many have had
to stay without cover, under rain and now under heavy
sun. United Nations agencies have done much to make
their conditions bearable. I have submitted a plan to
implement the 2016 Misrata-Tawergha agreement. We
are still pushing for its implementation.
Beyond the Tawergha case, I would point to the more
than 300,000 internally displaced persons of different
political persuasions who long to go back to homes, in
Benghazi or other cities. They were compelled to flee
because of fighting or hostility from neighbours with
whom they have lived for centuries.
The last city I shall note is the oasis of Ghadames,
where citizens came together to paint the old town

S/PV. 8263

square in preparation for their national conference
event. Citizens shared their aspirations for their State
and the principles that should guide it, their vision for a
way out of the current crisis.
Forty-two similar events have taken place in twentyseven locations across the country since the process
was launched in April. Opening with simultaneous
events in the eastern city of Benghazi and the western
city of Zwara, the national conference has spanned
the country. Meetings have been held from Tripoli to
Shahat, the western Nafusa mountains to the eastern
Green mountains, the south-west border town of Ghat to
the town of Qatrun in the extreme south — all without
a single security incident recorded. Libyans from all
political stripes and segments of society gathered to
enter the political conversation, many for the first time,
with an enthusiasm that could not have been predicted.
They have made it their own.
After holding its national conference, Benghazi
established 30 committees to follow-up. Cities have
reached out to demand their own events. Local
communities and officials have volunteered to organize
their events. Even in the warring city of Sabha, the
parties to the conflict called a temporary truce so that
the city could hold its National conference. Special
events are being held to focus on the concerns of
women, youth and internally displaced persons. By the
end of the process, events will have been held in over
40 locations for communities in Libya and residing
abroad. I commend the thousands of people who chose
to join the meetings, as well as the municipalities and
institutions that hosted them. I also thank the Centre for
Humanitarian Dialogue, which organized the process.
This series of events is the national conference: not
a forum for select elites, but for all people. Once the
meetings conclude, at the end of June, the findings will
be collected and shared at a special event in Libya, as
well as with the Council.
Some points of consensus from this large inclusive
consultative process held in the various cities and
towns have begun to crystallize. There is a yearning
for a united and sovereign nation and a common belief
that, to achieve that, the State must be decentralized.
There is an urgent need for a fairer, more transparent
and effective distribution of public resources for the
benefit of all citizens. There is a strong desire for
unified State institutions, working transparently with
leaders selected based on their competency, not their
identity, as well as for a unified, professional military

18-154183/22

S/PV.8263

The situation in Libya

and a coherent security apparatus, free from political
interference and operating under clearly defined rules.
The people also want elections that can unite the
country. Finally, there is a very clear longing to emerge
from transition.
That is why the advancement of the political
process is so vital. At the core of the public mood is
a strong desire for a renewal of the political scene, the
assertion of local power and a return to a more normal
life with more regular institutions. That has fuelled
the people’s call for elections, which has been heard
increasingly loudly and clearly, through the voter
registration update, within opinion polling and, now,
during the national conference meetings.
While elections must be held as soon as possible,
the proper conditions must be place. A new round of
voter registration, prior commitment to accepting
the results and appropriate funds and strong security
arrangements are needed.
No less important, the House of Representatives must
deliver on its promise to produce electoral legislation
for all forms of electoral events, in consultation with
the High State Council. Those laws must be produced
in a manner that makes them acceptable to the majority
of the population. We are ready to provide immediate
advice in line with international practice.
The Constitutional Drafting Assembly was
democratically chosen in free and fair elections. Its
proposal enjoys the legal majority required under
the constitutional declaration, and a majority of the
Assembly’s votes from each of Libya’s three historical
regions. We have assisted the Assembly in its outreach
efforts to the Libyan people and the international
community. However, with respect to the current
draft of the Constitution, Libyan views dramatically
diverge. While many are keen to proceed directly to a
referendum, others are dissatisfied with the text and call
for its amendment, a return to a previous constitution,
or specific guarantees, insisting that otherwise
they will strongly oppose the very organization of
the referendum.
The adoption of a constitution is a crucial moment
in the life of a nation. It should not be a reason for more
division, feuds or tension. The Mission will conclude its
consultations with the widest array of Libyans possible
in order to set an appropriate timetable for the people to
democratically express their will, in either a referendum
4/22

21/05/2018

or national elections. I look forward to conveying the
proposal at my next briefing to the Council.
At the conception of the action plan, the amendment
of the Libyan Political Agreement was requested by
various Libyan interlocutors. We have tried over and
over to explore different formulas, reconcile various
opinions and find means to accommodate ambitions.
However, the parties are unwilling to make the
necessary concessions. In my previous briefing to the
Council (see S/PV.8211), I stated that we would allow
a last chance for the amendments to come to pass, and
they have not. Instead they have become a distraction.
It is now time to turn the page. By focusing on
elections this year, amending the Political Agreement
rapidly shrinks in importance. However, we must
demand far more from the current Presidency Council in
its remaining final months, in terms of both concretely
preparing for elections and providing services to
the people.
We never lose sight of human rights. In our two recent
human rights reports, the first on detention centres and
the second, due to be released tomorrow, on medical
services, we have documented countless violations
by armed actors against civilians. Furthermore, the
continued influence of armed groups upon politics
and the economy is perilous and, unless resisted, is in
danger of expanding, as recently shown in a disputed
decision by the Government of National Accord to give
to an armed group powers that can belong only to the
sovereign State.
To that end, we have developed a new strategy to
help Libya deal with the armed groups. We have engaged
the armed groups directly, in close consultation with the
Government. We are in the final stages of consultation
with the Libyan authorities to finalize the strategy and
form the plan for its implementation. It will not unravel
armed groups tomorrow but will help the long process
begin in earnest.
Helping Libya tackle armed groups addresses one
of the many challenges Libya faces in the security
sector. There also needs to be a renewed push to
build professional armed and police forces, including
redoubling our own work. Those efforts need to proceed
in lockstep.
With the passage of the budget, Libya’s wealth
should flow to the people, and it must do so unimpeded
and free of corruption. But with this year almost half
18-15418

21/05/2018

The situation in Libya

gone, Libya must also look to its future. Subsidies
remain unaddressed, as does the severe mismatch
between the official and black-market exchange rate.
Trafficked people and illicitly traded goods continue
to flow through its borders. Those apects provide
opportunities for those few who sit at the heart of
Libya’s political stalemate, plundering the nation’s
coffers and resisting any actions that might challenge
their sway over a predatory economy. It is this perverse
economic model that must be shattered if the political
process is to make meaningful progress.
We are working to tackle these challenges and,
accordingly, in April, a special event was held at the
margins of the spring meetings of the Bretton Woods
Institutions in Washington, D.C. The efforts of
Member States are vital, both in supporting the Libyan
authorities to manage their fiscal and monetary policy
and in pursuing perpetrators of criminal financial
behaviour. But there are limits to what can be done
unless there are unified institutions that have the
strength to challenge vested interests and the credibility
to introduce meaningful reforms.
The social and political fluidity observed during
the previous briefing has continued to grow. It is a
great pleasure to see Libyans from opposing factions
meet and have discussions themselves, such as those
between former regime groups in Benghazi or among
representatives from Misrata, Tarhouna and Zintan.
However, those meetings must be in pursuit of peace.
We have also seen the welcome interest of Member
States in support of Libyans meeting with each other. In
Cairo, when officers from all parts of the country came
together to try to unify their institutions; in Rabat, when
the Speakers of the two Houses met for the first time;
or in Dakar, where various groups of Libyans gathered
to discuss their place in the political process — such
meetings have the capacity to be useful, but only when
they are congruent with the action plan for Libya.
The solidarity of regional organizations was high,
as expressed in the last Libya quartet meeting held
Cairo, as was the solidarity shown during the regular
tripartite meeting of neighbouring States, including
Algeria, Egypt and Tunisia. I must thank the African
Union, the League of Arab States and the European
Union for inviting me to their respective forums to
brief their member States. I also want to express my
appreciation to the African Union and the European
Union in the light of our joint task-force efforts aimed
at supporting the voluntary return of migrants to their

S/PV. 8263

homes and improving, while still insufficiently, the
conditions of the detention centres they are being held
in. Along with Member States, we must continue our
work with the Libyan authorities to improve the lives of
migrants living in centres or in communities.
The aspirations of millions cannot be halted by
those few who wish to maintain the status quo for their
own personal benefit. Parallel bodies that continue to
exist beyond their mandate must be dissolved. Elections
must be held. The country must move forward. But that
can be achieved only with the support of the Security
Council. When Libya hears conflicting messages, we
only add to division and give opportunity to those
seeking to derail the process. But when the Council
speaks with a clear and single voice, Libyans, believe
me, listen.
The President: I thank Mr. Salamé for his briefing.
I now give the floor to Ambassador Skoog.
Mr. Skoog (Sweden): In accordance with paragraph
24 (e) of resolution 1970 (2011), of 26 February 2011, I
have the honour to report to the Security Council on
the work of the Committee established by the same
resolution. The report covers the period from 22 March
to 21 May, during which time the Committee met once
in informal consultations and conducted additional
work via the written silence procedure.
During the informal consultations held on 3 April,
the Committee discussed a letter dated 7 March from the
Coordinator of the Panel of Experts on Libya, addressed
to me, expressing the Panel’s extreme concern, which
was shared by Committee members, regarding the
leak to the media of the Panel’s unpublished interim
report of 16 January. The Committee heard briefings
by the Secretariat and the Coordinator of the Panel. The
Committee also discussed, under “Other matters”, the
issue of the Libyan assets frozen pursuant to Security
Council resolutions following reports of alleged
devaluation and losses.
With respect to the arms embargo, the Committee
sent a letter to Libya seeking any update to the written
briefings that were provided in May 2017, pursuant
to paragraph 6 of resolution 2278 (2016), concerning
the Libyan coast guard, explosive-ordnance disposal
units and the presidential guard. As of 1 May, the
Committee is considering proposals for the designation
of six individuals under the assets-freeze and travel-

18-154185/22

S/PV.8263

The situation in Libya

ban measures in the context of migrant exploitation
and abuse.
During the reporting period, the Committee also
received a request for de-listing from the travel ban,
through the focal point for de-listing established
pursuant to resolution 1730 (2006), from a listed
individual, Aisha Al-Qadhafi, whose name is currently
inscribed on the Committee’s sanctions list as subject to
the assets-freeze and travel-ban measures. In accordance
with the provisional guidelines of the Committee, given
that Ms. Al-Qadhafi was listed by a resolution of the
Security Council, the Committee assumes the role
of designating State and will take further steps after
having received any possible comments from the States
of citizenship and residence.
Finally, the Committee received updates from the
Panel of Experts in relation to the vessels Nadine and
Lynn S, which had previously been subject to some of
the measures in connection with its attempts to illicitly
export petroleum, including crude oil and refined
petroleum products, from Libya. The listing of the two
vessels expired on 18 and 29 April, respectively.
The President: I thank Ambassador Skoog for
his briefing.
I shall now give the floor to those Council members
who wish to make statements.
Mr. Allen (United Kingdom): I thank Ambassador
Skoog for his briefing. Let me also very much welcome
the briefing of the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, Mr. Ghassan Salamé, and the
report of the Secretary-General (S/2018/429). We fully
support his work and efforts as Special Representative
to deliver the United Nations road map.
The United Kingdom welcomes the progress
towards national reconciliation through the national
conference process. It is important to do all that we can
to support all Libyans to have a stake in the political
process. As we have said for some months now, the
status quo is not sustainable. We therefore welcome
the efforts to prepare for elections. It is extremely
positive that 2.4 million Libyans have now registered
to vote, reflecting the popular demand for an end to
the transition period and an eagerness to engage in the
democratic political process. Libyans want to break the
political impasse and to move their country forward.
However, the Libyan people are suffering because
of the divisions and disagreements among their
6/22

21/05/2018

leaders. As the United Nations has set out, there are
three elements that need to form part of the political
sequence: the Constitution, parliamentary elections
and presidential elections. It is important to manage
that sequencing so that credible elections are delivered
and stability is promoted. Before elections can take
place, Libya’s leaders must therefore agree to an
inclusive political package on the technical, security
and political measures needed to ensure that the
elections are inclusive and peaceful and that the results
are accepted. As the international community and the
Security Council, we need to deliver a single unified
message. All national efforts must be in support of and
coordinated with the United Nations.
Turning to the economy, we welcome the 2018 budget,
agreed on 9 May, which will allow the Government to
support vital public services. Libya’s leaders now need
to work together to address the suffering of the Libyan
people while the preparations for the elections continue.
They urgently need to agree economic reforms, to unify
Libya’s economic institutions and to resolve the dispute
over the governorship of the Central Bank of Libya.
Finally, turning to security, the lower casualty rates
since the start of 2018 are most welcome. However, the
tragedy continues to strike, including the attack of
2 May on the High Commission for National Elections
claimed by the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant. It
is a stark reminder that such groups are still working
to undermine the democratic process. We in the
international community must make a concerted effort
to help to bolster electoral security arrangements so that
the Libyan people can exercise their democratic right
without the threat of violence. We recognize that the
fighting, particularly in Sabha and Derna, demonstrates
deep divisions in Libya. That fighting increases the
suffering of the Libyan people and is being exploited
by extremists.
In talking of exploitation, we still recall the
shocking reports of what appeared to be slave auctions
run by migrant traffickers. We must take action to
signal that traffickers cannot act with impunity. The
United Kingdom fully supports such efforts, including
through the Security Council sanctions regime.
The year 2018 is crucial for Libya. It presents a
great opportunity to finally deliver what the people of
Libya have long demanded — a peaceful, secure and
prosperous country and an opportunity to have a say
in how that is achieved through credible elections. The
18-15418

21/05/2018

The situation in Libya

international community must work together with the
United Nations to support Libya’s leaders to deliver.
To fail now is to invite more suffering, more wasted
opportunities and greater threat to the peace and
security of us all.
Mrs. Haley (United States of America): I would
like to thank Special Representative Salamé and the
Ambassador of Sweden for their briefings. The United
States stands fully behind the efforts to help to bring
peace to Libya.
The Libyan people have waited more than seven
years for a better future. After rising up against one
of the world’s most brutal tyrants, the promise of
Libya’s revolution remains unfulfilled. The stakes
for international peace and security are high. Libya’s
insecurity does not affect only Libyans. Groups such
as the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant have taken
advantage of the conflict to put down roots. Loose arms
from Libya are fuelling violence from the Sahel to the
Sinai. Brutal militias conspire with criminal gangs to
smuggle migrants to Europe. The lawlessness in Libya
is an issue that concerns us all.
Last year, a horrific video emerged that captured
the world’s attention. It showed migrants being sold
into slavery in Libya. It was sick and inhumane. There
is no place in our world for slavery. We must never
tolerate the conditions that could allow such a barbaric
practice to occur.
Sadly, human rights abuses against migrants occur
all too frequently in Libya. One desperate survivor of a
Libyan detention facility told Doctors Without Borders
recently: “I have endured two months, three weeks, one
day and 12 hours of hell.” We can only imagine how
many thousands of migrants are enduring their own
hell in detention facilities right now. The crisis calls
for the immediate action of the Security Council. The
groups that are responsible for those abuses are the same
ones that are destabilizing Libya. Those who torture
migrants and refugees profit from smuggling. They use
such profits to undermine the authority of Government
institutions. Those ruthless smugglers threaten Libya’s
peace and security.
This time, the Security Council is in a position
to respond and to live up to its responsibilities. The
Council is considering sanctions against six individuals
involved in migrant smuggling and human trafficking in
Libya. Those designations would be an important step
towards holding the perpetrators of abuses accountable.

S/PV. 8263

We regret that the Security Council has not yet reached
consensus on such designations. Failing to move
forward with the designations would be a travesty in
the face of so much global outrage over such abuses.
There is strong regional support for the designations,
and the evidence showing the involvement of the six
people is clear. The United States therefore hopes
that the Security Council can move forward with the
sanctions designations as soon as possible in order to
deter further abuses.
In the meantime, we continue to encourage the
Government of National Accord to work closely with
international agencies so as to assist vulnerable migrants
and refugees. The International Organization for
Migration (IOM) and the Office of the United Nations
High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR) have done
good work. They are helping to repatriate migrants in
a safe and voluntary manner from detention facilities
and to assist those with claims to protection. The IOM
and UNHCR must be able to continue those important
efforts. In the long run, of course, addressing Libya’s
instability requires a political solution. That is where
Special Representative Salamé’s work is involved.
The United States is a firm supporter of the United
Nations dialogue. That should be the only mediation
process. Separate international initiatives will distract
from the efforts of the United Nations and will
undermine prospects for national reconciliation. While
the United Nations works on talks, all parties must
exercise restraint. There should be no unilateral action
outside the United Nations process. Political spoilers
must stop undermining the dialogue and engage with
the United Nations in good faith.
As Special Representative Salamé has said, the
Libyan people are eager for elections to bring an end
to interim Governments and political transitions. We
therefore appreciate the progress that the United Nations
has made to prepare for elections. These elections
must be well prepared so that we do not end up with
any further instability. There is a strong international
consensus that for the elections to happen, there needs
to be a constitutional basis. The United States stands
behind this consensus. Libyan leaders need to commit
to both the election process and to respecting the will
of the Libyan people. Special Representative Salamé
must have the space to consult with Libya’s leaders on
how to move forward with the democratic and inclusive
constitutional process. We look forward to hearing
more from him on the next steps.

18-154187/22

S/PV.8263

The situation in Libya

Since 2012, the United States has given more
than $32 million to support election preparations and
the drafting of a new constitution in Libya. We urge
other donors to step up to meet the needs of Libya’s
High Commission for National Elections, so that the
Government can finish its preparations. On 2 May,
terrorists attacked the headquarters of the National
Election Commission in Tripoli. We condemn this
cowardly attack, which only deepens our commitment
to supporting free and fair elections. We recognize
the immense courage of the election officials, who
continue to report to work despite these threats. They
are working to help build a democratic Libya, and they
deserve our full backing. It is people like these whom
we need to remember in the Security Council. We
need support the Libyans who are pushing for peace
rather than those who are fighting for their own selfish
interests. Those Libyans who are holding out from the
United Nations process need to understand that they
must come to the table.
Despite all the insecurity, there is hope. One
24-year-old student named Salim, who participated
in the 2011 revolution, recently attended a workshop
on reconciliation. Reflecting on his experiences,
Salim said:
“I refuse to take part in an act of vengeance. That
is not what 2011 was all about. And if we can be
reminded that our aspiration was freedom and a
better life, we might start thinking differently”.
Salim is right. It is long past time for Libya’s
leaders to put aside their narrow agendas and instead
think about the aspirations of the Libyan people. It is
long past time for Libyans to come together around the
cause of a stable, unified and democratic Government.
The United States will not hesitate to use all of the tools
we have to help Libyans achieve this goal.
Mr. Delattre (France) (spoke in French): I thank
the Special Representative, Mr. Ghassan Salamé, for
his briefing and once again pay tribute to his tireless
efforts to move forward the political transition in Libya.
I would like here, on behalf of France, to reiterate to
him once again our full and unwavering support. My
thanks go also to the representative of Sweden for his
briefing on the work of the sanctions Committee.
The first point I wish to make pertains to political
stability and reconciliation in Libya. As the Special
Representative told us this morning, he is continuing
his consultations throughout the country as part of
8/22

21/05/2018

the national conference process, which is aimed at
encouraging reconciliation and fulfilling the conditions
necessary for elections to take place.
We have kept a very close eye on the popular
consultations that have taken place in more than 20
Libyan cities as well as the different channels of political
and military dialogue that the Special Representative
is working to harmonize. We welcome this complex
and demanding undertaking, which is being carried
out throughout the country and makes it possible to
consult the Libyan people as to aspirations concerning
the future of the country. These efforts are vital for
reducing tensions and achieving an inclusive political
solution on the basis of the Skhirat Agreement.
Consensus has emerged in Libya on the need to
revive the process of democratic transition through
elections. Elections are the best way of creating
positive momentum in Libya. The popular enthusiasm
reflected in the registration of almost 2.5 million voters
is a positive sign. The holding of general, free, credible,
transparent and democratic elections in 2018 will
require the creation of an adequate political and security
environment and a commitment by all segments of
society to respecting the outcome. The holding of early
municipal elections in Zawiya on 12 May with a good
turnout rate of 62 per cent is very encouraging.
The status quo is unacceptable. It is now the
responsibility of all Libyan political stakeholders to
respect popular opinion, which is in favour of elections
being held.
The second point I wish to make concerns
developments in the security situation as well as the
terrorist situation, which remains a genuine threat
to Libya. As we are all aware, the security obstacles
in Libya are myriad and the situation on the ground
remains volatile, as demonstrated by the attack
carried out on 2 May against the High Commission for
National Elections in Tripoli, which we unequivocally
condemned. The situation remains tense in Sabha,
with clashes between the Tebu and Awlad Sulayman
communities. In Derna, it is of vital importance that
the civilian population be protected.
France condemns all terrorist acts perpetrated in
Libya, which are intended to destabilize the country.
We call on the Libyan people to join together to fight
that scourge. We must foster dialogue among the armed
forces in order to unify them under a single civilian
authority. Here I pay tribute to the Cairo efforts made
18-15418

21/05/2018

The situation in Libya

to that end, in support of the mediation efforts of the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General.
Only an inclusive political solution will allow
us to vanquish terrorism and ensure lasting security.
Such a solution must include national reconciliation,
institutional unity and the strengthening of the State,
which must be capable of exerting control over the
entirety of its territory.
My third point concerns the predatory economy,
a cancer afflicting that country that is eating it from
the inside. The many actors profiting from the situation
are promoting instability, and the various forms of
trafficking that abound in Libya fuel this predatory
economy, which entrenches the status quo and weakens
the State. We must collectively reflect on ways to break
this vicious circle once and for all. For the time being,
our efforts are focused on the European Union military
operation in the Southern Central Mediterranean,
Operation Sophia, which is aimed at combating
trafficking in migrants and violations of the arms
embargo. We are also taking action at the level of the
Security Council to combat the illicit export of crude
and refined oil, as well as arms trafficking. It is vital
also that the Libyan economic and financial institutions,
in particular the Central Bank and the National Oil
Corporation, be safeguarded, and the issue of the
Central Bank’s governance clarified. We will remain
active within the Security Council to consider all of the
tools available to us to curb these illegal activities and
the resulting misappropriation of the country’s wealth.
This brings me to my final point: the plight of
migrants who are transiting Libya. France’s position is
clear: we believe that those responsible for trafficking
in human beings and the smuggling of migrants must be
subject to sanctions within the existing United Nations
sanctions regime. In that respect, France has worked
together with its European and American partners,
with the support of the Libyan Government, on the
adoption by the Security Council of sanctions targeting
migrant smugglers. We hope to soon be able to reach
a consensus and to ensure that a list in that respect is
adopted by the sanctions Committee.
We must join forces in the face of acts that are not
only repugnant but also deeply destabilizing for the
country and the region. I therefore appeal to all members
of the Security Council to shoulder their responsibility
on this key issue, which is a priority for France.

S/PV. 8263

I should like also to commend the headway made
by the United Nations, European Union and African
Union task force, which meets regularly and is making
tangible progress on the implementation of the Abidjan
road map. We are continuing our dialogue with the
Libyan authorities to facilitate assisted voluntary
returns, overseen by the International Organization for
Migration, and to enhance cooperation with the Office
of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees.
Mr. Esono Mbengono (Equatorial Guinea) (spoke
in Spanish): Allow me to begin my statement by
expressing my delegation’s gratitude to Special
Representative of the Secretary-General Ghassan
Salamé for the information provided on the report on
the activities of the United Nations Support Mission
in Libya (UNSMIL) (S/2018/429) and the report on the
implementation of resolution 2357 (2017) (S/2018/451).
We also thank Ambassador Olof Skoog, in his capacity
as Chair of the Security Council Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1970 (2011), concerning Libya,
for keeping us informed of the Committee’s activities.
We extend our gratitude to the African Union for
its efforts to mediate and seek solutions, as well as to
the European Union military operation in the Southern
Central Mediterranean — Operation Sophia — for its
extensive work in controlling the smuggling of arms
and related materials on the high seas to and from
Libya, thereby preventing possible violations of the
arms embargo and their proliferation. Measures such
as these and those set out in resolutions 2362 (2017)
and 2380 (2017), related to the prevention of illegal oil
exports from Libya and the fight against smuggling of
migrants and trafficking in persons, respectively, will
have our full support provided that they comply with
all the guarantees of international law. We believe that
they must be extended until the conflict is brought to
an end and the Libyan Government can take full control
of the situation.
In addition, we urge the Libyan Government to
continue to work with the United Nations to put an
end to these aberrations and to redouble its efforts to
ensure that those responsible for systematic violations
of human rights and international humanitarian law, on
both sides, are held accountable and brought to justice.
Despite these small steps forward, the Security
Council and the international community must urgently
focus on the negative impact of this political and
military conflict on the economic and humanitarian

18-154189/22

S/PV.8263

The situation in Libya

situation in the country. The ongoing clashes between
armed groups and militias and the presence of terrorist
groups from other countries affect more than 1 million
people, resulting in large internal displacements and a
great need for humanitarian assistance in much of the
country. This situation requires an immediate, or at
least relatively expeditious, solution, as we have said
on other occasions, to bring some hope to war victims.
My delegation considers it essential to eliminate
the presence of armed groups, militias and terrorist
organizations,
which
currently
operate
with
considerable impunity, as they are a major factor in
the political instability in Libyan territory, beyond the
clashes between the various communities. The regional
consequences of the situation in Libya are inescapable,
with many countries in Africa affected by the situation.
Libya’s security problems and instability can gradually
affect the countries of the region, becoming genuine
threats to international peace and security.
In connection with the electoral process, my
Government fully subscribes to the African Union
Commission’s 4 May communiqué strongly condemning
the 2 May terrorist attack in Tripoli on the High
Commission for National Elections, which claimed the
lives of 14 people and left several injured, including
Commission staff and police officers. The attack,
which is an outrage against the Libyan people and the
Government, must not undermine efforts to prepare the
country for national reconciliation and the organization
of national elections. We also appeal to Libyan political
actors and reiterate the need to create an environment
conducive to the holding of the elections, which would
constitute a significant step towards the resolution of
the political crisis. We also reiterate that the solution to
the political and military conflict in Libya depends on
Libyans themselves making use of their independence
and sovereignty. In that regard, we welcome the peace
agreement signed on 11 May in Dakar among more
than 20 Libyan political leaders, including the most
influential and representative figures of all political
and social movements in the country. We hope that
these three days of intra-Libyan reflection will lead to
reconciliation, peace and sustainable development.
We once again insist on the search for a peaceful
solution and more effective measures to protect the
most vulnerable civilians, particularly migrants, who
continue to suffer human rights violations, including
illegal deprivation of liberty, arbitrary detention and
forced labour. To tolerate that kind of activity means
10/22

21/05/2018

regressing and reliving the pain and outrage that many
would like to forget.
In conclusion, we applaud the work of UNSMIL for
its efforts in establishing a constitutional framework,
thereby ending the political transition period in Libya
through dialogue and reconciliation among the parties
to the internal conflict, which, in our view, is the only
way to put an end to this prolonged and painful conflict
that is a source for great concern.
Mr. Meza-Cuadra (Peru) (spoke in Spanish): We
are grateful for the holding of this meeting and would
like to thank Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral Ghassan Salamé and Swedish Ambassador Olof
Skoog, in his capacity as Chair of the Security Council
Committee established pursuant to resolution 1970
(2011), concerning Libya, for their important briefings.
Peru supports the efforts of Special Representative
Salamé to promote an inclusive process in Libya that will
gradually lead to a constitutional referendum followed
by free, fair and secure parliamentary and presidential
elections, with broad participation of all political forces
and citizens. We believe that the new constitution, to
the extent that it reflects national consensus, should
serve to establish the institutional and governance
frameworks required to build sustainable peace in
Libya. It will also be necessary to adopt adequate
electoral legislation to supplement the new voter
registration. The international community, especially
the Council, must stand united in its support for the
good offices deployed by the United Nations Mission
to ensure that the High State Council and the House
of Representatives agree on the executive authority
required to conduct the electoral processes and to face
serious challenges and threats.
In that regard, we welcome the progress made in
the implementation of the United Nations action plan,
in particular the launch of the national conference
to build trust and reconciliation between political
actors and civil society, and we encourage greater
participation by women and young people. We also
consider it important to move towards the reintegration
of armed actors into civilian life and to strengthen the
institutions responsible for security, all the more so
when we note with concern that episodes of violence
continue to occur.
We must condemn the continuation of terrorist
attacks, such as the one against the High Commission
for National Elections facilities in Tripoli, and we
18-15418

21/05/2018

The situation in Libya

stress the urgent need to address the trafficking in
small arms and light weapons. We are concerned about
the impunity with which human rights continue to be
violated in Libya, including arbitrary detention, as
well as the vulnerability of migrants and refugees. We
hope that the joint task force of the United Nations,
the African Union and the European Union can put an
end to the trafficking networks. It is also important to
consider imposing sanctions on those responsible for
those reprehensible acts.
At the same time, we view an urgent need for
fiscal capacity-building to approve a public budget
and fight against corruption. That is essential to face
the challenging humanitarian situation that continues
in various parts of the country to enable the country
to move towards sustainable peace while promoting
its development.
I would like to conclude, Madam President, by
highlighting the important work carried out by the
United Nations Mission in Libya, in a context of
heightened polarization, insecurity and sacrifice, and
by expressing Peru’s support for the tireless efforts of
the Envoy Special.
Mr. Skoog (Sweden): I would like to begin by
thanking Special Representative Salamé for his briefing
to the Security Council. As the Secretary-General’s
report (S/2018/429) reminds us, the situation in Libya
remains very difficult, and we commend his tireless
efforts to implement the United Nations action plan and
to work towards a peaceful and stable Libya. I would
like to highlight three areas today.
First, the security situation in Libya remains
fragile. The terrorist attack on the High Commission
for National Elections Commiss, which we condemn,
was a stark reminder of that fact. Nonetheless, we
note the gradual improvement of security situation in
Tripoli. Every effort should be made to consolidate and
build upon such improvements. It is imperative that all
parties refrain from destabilizing threats or actions that
risk reversing that trend.
We share the concern expressed by the Special
Representative and echoed by other speakers about
the escalation of violence in Derna. While we note
that commitments to spare civilians have been made,
the potential for further significant civilian casualties
cannot be ignored. We echo the call on all parties to
respect human rights and international humanitarian
law. That includes protecting civilians and allowing

S/PV. 8263

their free and safe passage. We are also concerned
about the escalation of violence in the south, not least
in Sabha, where we encourage continued regional
cooperation to defuse the conflict as outlined by the
Special Representative this morning.
We welcome the focus in the Secretary-General’s
report on human rights and the rule of law. We welcome
in particular the visits to Libya’s prisons and detention
facilities and the documentation of widespread abuses
such as torture, sexual and gender-based violence
and arbitrary detention — in the east as well as the
west. It is clear that thousands of individuals now
languish in detention, many without knowing the
charge against them or what their future holds. That
is entirely unacceptable. Accountability is needed for
crimes committed against those in detention. We call
on all parties to ensure access for the United Nations,
and other humanitarian organizations, to detention
centres under their control, including to the Mitiga
detention facility.
We applaud the cooperation between the United
Nations Support Mission in Libya (UNSMIL) and the
Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for
Human Rights on those issues. We encourage continued
collaboration and support, not least for the International
Criminal Court’s important work in Libya.
Secondly, we reiterate our firm support for the
United Nations-facilitated political process in Libya.
We urge all Libyan leaders to engage constructively
and to create the legal, political and security conditions
necessary to hold free and fair elections to end Libya’s
protracted transition.
We are impressed by the ambitious bottom-up
approach being taken in the ongoing national conference
consultations across the country, including the valuable
online activity to engage more Libyans in the political
process. Such initiatives help build trust in the political
process and contribute to increasing the legitimacy of
the elections.
Moving forward, every effort must be made to
promote women’s equal representation and participation
in the political and election process. That includes
ensuring that women from all parts of the country will
have access to information on election procedures and
an opportunity to run for election. Concrete efforts to
prevent stigma and address all types of security threats
facing female candidates are essential. As co-Chair
of the Council’s Informal Working Group on Women

18-1541811/22

S/PV.8263

The situation in Libya

and Peace and Security, we are pleased that Libya has
been added as a country of focus for 2018. We aim
to continue to provide the Council with up-to-date
information and analysis on the women and peace and
security agenda in Libya, which we hope can better
inform our deliberations.
Finally, I should like to turn to the situation of
refugees and migrants, as many others have done
this morning. We remain deeply concerned about
the situation of the more than 5,000 refugees and
the estimated 700,000 migrants currently in Libya.
Refugees and migrants are often vulnerable and risk
being exploited or arbitrarily detained. We would like
to highlight the work of the Office of the United Nations
High Commissioner for Refugees and the International
Organization for Migration to assist refugees and
migrants under difficult circumstances, and underline
the importance of full access for humanitarian actors.
Serious efforts are needed to safeguard against human
rights abuses and violations, create accountability and
promote changes in behaviour in order to end impunity.
We believe that the Council must come together and
send a strong signal in that regard. That includes the use
of sanctions to target those responsible for smuggling
and trafficking in persons.
The political, security and humanitarian situation
in Libya is one of the most complex on the Council’s
agenda. We have given UNSMIL, under the leadership
of Special Representative Salamé, a huge task to support
the Libyan people to move their country forward.
We must continue to stand united and give them our
full support.
Mr. Djédjé (Côte d’Ivoire) (spoke in French):
My delegation thanks the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General in Libya, Mr. Salamé, for his
informative briefing. I reiterate Côte d’Ivoire’s support
to efforts towards peace and stability in Libya. I also
commend Ambassador Olof Skoog for the quality of
his briefing.
My country would like to take the opportunity
of this meeting on Libya to strongly condemn the
attack perpetrated at the headquarters of the Libyan
High Commission for National Elections on 2 May.
That attack, claimed by the Islamic State in Iraq and
the Levant, underscored the fragility of the security
situation and called on us to engage in joint efforts to
response appropriately to terrorism and the issue of
12/22

21/05/2018

armed groups, which pose a real threat to the Libyan
peace process.
While the security situation remains cause for
concern, we must not lose sight of the progress made
in the ongoing political process. In that regard, my
delegation would like to welcome the meetings between
members of the House of Representatives and the High
State Council with a view to reaching compromises on
important provisions of the Libyan Political Agreement
that are subject to controversy. The Agreement,
endorsed by the United Nations, remains the only valid
reference framework to lead Libya towards a credible
and inclusive democratic transition.
We welcome the fact that the Libyan Supreme
Court has been able to remove judicial obstacles to
pave the way for the forthcoming referendum on the
new constitution, which will be the cornerstone of the
rule of law to which all Libyans aspire.
We also commend Libyans’ support for the ongoing
political process and their clear desire definitively
to bring to an end the situation of instability and
insecurity in their country. That desire is reflected in
the high rate of voter registration among Libyans; the
reconciliation between the armed groups in the cities
of Misrata and Zintan; and the measures taken by
mayors and local elected representatives to hold timely
municipal elections. Libyans’ desire for peace also led
to the high participation in 42 meetings in 27 localities
of the country, the first phase of an inclusive political
process leading to a national donference.
The significant progress we are seeing on the ground
augurs well for a successful outcome of the efforts of
Mr. Salamé to restore peace and stability in Libya. My
delegation would like to reiterate its congratulations
on the progress he has made in what is a particularly
difficult situation.
I also take this opportunity to recall that resolving
the Libyan crisis is of great importance for all of Africa,
including for its effects on the Sahelo-Saharan region,
which led to the 17 April meeting of the High Committee
of the African Union on Libya in Addis Ababa.
My country takes note of the arrest warrants issued
by the International Criminal Court with a view to
ending a long period of impunity in Libya.
Côte d’Ivoire commends the efforts made by the
Libyan Government to put an end to the trafficking of
migrants in that country. In that regard, we welcome the
18-15418

21/05/2018

The situation in Libya

decision by the Prosecutor of the International Criminal
Court (ICC) to consider the possibility of extending
the ICC’s jurisdiction to cover crimes committed
against migrants. We continue to support the inclusion
of persons or entities engaged in the trafficking or
smuggling of migrants on the list of sanctions of the
Security Council Committee established pursuant to
resolution 1970 (2011), concerning Libya.
My delegation is also extremely concerned about the
siege of the city of Derna by the Libyan National Army.
We call on the warring parties to move to a ceasefire
and to pursue dialogue to overcome their differences.
On the humanitarian front, my country urgently
calls for the effective implementation of the 2018
Libyan humanitarian response plan to meet the urgent
needs for this year of 940,000 Libyans throughout
the country.
In conclusion, Côte d’Ivoire reiterates its support
for the action plan of the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General. We urge the international
community to lend him its full support in order to
advance the national reconciliation process and lay
the foundations for lasting peace and stability in Libya
through an inclusive democratic process. My delegation
would also like to commend the work being carried out
by the staff of the United Nations Support Mission in
Libya, who have just begun their deployment in Tripoli.
Mr. Umarov (Kazakhstan): We thank Special
Representative Salamé and Ambassador Skoog for their
comprehensive updates on the situation in Libya and
on the activities of the Security Council Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1970 (2011),
concerning Libya.
Almost eight years have passed since the beginning
of the conflict in Libya, and the situation in the country
is still far from being stable. Libya still faces many
challenges, including on the political track. A volatile
security environment and terrorist activities, as well as
mass movements of refugees and migrants, continue to
be a matter of great concern.
Despite some positive steps undertaken by the
Libyans, the United Nations Support Mission in Libya
(UNSMIL) and the international community, violence
and confrontations among rival armed groups are
increasing. Those actions not only threaten the lives of
hundreds of civilians, but also undermine the progress
achieved so far in the implementation of the Libyan

S/PV. 8263

Political Agreement. Kazakhstan believes that the
Libyan Political Agreement remains the only viable
framework for putting an end to the protracted crisis
during the transitional period.
However, we need to move towards permanent
stability in Libya. In that regard, we call on all
Libyan parties and stakeholders to maintain a strong
commitment to the common goal of seeking a
political settlement to the crisis and a comprehensive
implementation of the Libyan Political Agreement.
It is vital that the authorities of Tripoli and Tobruk
should continue their engagements in order to resolve
differences on the basis of an inclusive dialogue through
political means.
It remains essential to maintain the unity of the
Security Council and support the work of UNSMIL and
Special Representative of the Secretary-General Salamé.
My delegation welcomes the efforts of Mr. Salamé to
engage constructively and supports an active, inclusive
dialogue among all Libyan stakeholders. We encourage
him to continue such efforts in order to broaden their
support and commitments to the political process.
Drafting a constitution, holding credible elections,
implementing economic reforms and putting an end to
the lawlessness in the country are the main avenues for
progress in Libya, which we must all work on.
The international community must create
favourable conditions to advance the political dialogue.
With that, the primacy of the United Nations as the main
mediator should be maintained. We fully support the
observation of the Secretary-General in his most recent
report (S/2018/429) that international and regional
engagement continue to play a vital role in support of
the United Nations efforts to address the crisis in Libya.
Lastly, concerning the sanctions regime, it is vital
that Libya’s oil resources be used for the benefit of all
Libyans. Strict compliance with the embargo on the
supply of arms to Libya must be enforced.
Mr. Inchauste Jordán (Plurinational State of
Bolivia) (spoke in Spanish): We would like to thank the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General and
Head of the United Nations Support Mission in Libya
(UNSMIL), Mr. Ghassan Salamé, for his briefing,
and we take this opportunity to convey to him again
our unstinting support for the outstanding work he
continues to carry out. Similarly, we appreciate the
briefing by Ambassador Olof Skoog on the activities
carried out in his capacity as Chair of the Security

18-1541813/22

S/PV.8263

The situation in Libya

Council Committee established pursuant to resolution
1970 (2011), concerning Libya.
Taking note of the reports of the Secretary-General
on the implementation of resolutions 2376 (2017)
and 2357 (2017), there is a clear and pressing need to
reaffirm the importance of the full implementation of
the Libyan Political Agreement to bring the transition
period to a definitive end. That task should also be
reinforced through compliance with the provisions of
the action plan promoted by the Special Representative,
which methodically and clearly lays out a road map to
that end.
With regard to the progress achieved, we would
like to highlight the fact that, in February, the Libyan
Supreme Court finally resolved the cases against
the Constitution Drafting assembly brought before
administrative courts, thereby removing the legal
obstacles that prevented the national referendum
on the new constitution from taking place. We look
forward to the tasks being undertaken by the House of
Representatives to develop the necessary legislation and
regulatory structure to clearly establish the elements
and requirements for conducting both the referendum
and the subsequent electoral processes. That normative
development is also essential for the establishment of
reliable and capable institutions, which are the bedrock
of the State.
In the same vein, we highlight the progress made in
voter registration by the High Commission for National
Elections. At the time the report was issued, nearly
2.5 million people had been registered, almost half
of whom were women. That demonstrates once again
the importance of the role of women in the future of
Libya. It is therefore essential to guarantee the full
participation of women in electoral processes, as well
as that of young people and all segments of society.
We also highlight the efforts and initiatives for
tribal and community reconciliation and rapprochement
carried out by different actors in the localities of
Kufra, Misrata and Zintan. We are convinced that
the strengthening of that dialogue and the constant
exchange of perspectives on the freedom of movement,
equal access to services, and accountability and justice
will establish a common understanding that will
contribute to preventing future conflicts and tensions.
We also appreciate and highlight the ongoing efforts
that have continued to be made by various regional
organizations and actors, such as the African Union and
14/22

21/05/2018

the League of Arab States, and countries such as Egypt,
Algeria, Tunisia and Chad, among other countries, to
strengthen, support and advance the Libyan political
process and plan of action.
Despite those positive developments, the worrying
increase in violence and fighting among the parties
continues to wreak havoc. The steady stream of
reports of abductions, torture, arbitrary detentions
and summary executions, in particular in the cities
of Sabha, Derna, Tripoli and Benghazi, are alarming,
especially when it is clear that, according to the report
of the Secretary-General, at least 16 people lost their
lives and approximately 30 people were injured in the
crossfire during sporadic clashes and as a result of the
use of explosives in public and civilian spaces in blatant
violation of international humanitarian law.
In that context, my delegation reiterates once again
its appeal to the parties and local actors to lay down
their arms and refrain from any rhetoric that seeks to
justify violence as a means of achieving any objective,
as those attitudes are an attack on the lives of innocent
people and undermine the progress achieved so far in
implementing the Libyan Political Agreement.
The continued presence on Libyan territory of
irregular combatants and foreign armed groups who are
engaged in armed clashes in the south of the country is
also a serious threat to the political process and to the
stability of that part of the country. That threat is further
exacerbated by the presence and ability of the Islamic
State in Iraq and the Sham to traffic weapons, despite
the embargo in force, and to coordinate and perpetrate
deadly attacks, such as the one against the Libyan High
Commission on National Elections, in Tripoli on 2 May,
in which more than 15 people died. We condemn that
attack in the strongest possible terms. The presence
of foreign armed groups and the existence of sleeper
cells of the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant pose an
imminent risk that endangers not only the security of
Libya, but also the entire region.
We are concerned about the reports of widespread
human rights violations in detention centres. It should
be noted that despite the commitment of the Presidency
Council and the Libyan National Army to initiating
and conducting investigations into such abuses, so far
not one person has been brought to justice for these
violations. The death of a detainee in Ain Zara prison,
presumably from torture, makes the situation even more
alarming and urgent. The repeated reports of violations
18-15418

21/05/2018

The situation in Libya

of the rights of migrants, who are being indefinitely
held in detention centres under inadequate conditions
and subjected to degrading treatment, torture, forced
labour, sexual violence and denial of medical help,
highlight the importance of addressing this situation
in a cross-cutting manner. We call on the parties to
prevent abuses and violations of these people’s rights
and urge them to comply with their obligations under
international law. In that regard, we reiterate our
call to the Libyan authorities to initiate appropriate
investigations for identifying those responsible for these
violations so that their acts do not go unpunished, as
well as to support and cooperate with the investigations
by the Office of the Prosecutor of the International
Criminal Court identifying those responsible for these
acts, which will come under the Court’s jurisdiction
should they constitute crimes against humanity.
We reiterate that there can be no military solution to
this conflict, and we therefore call on all parties to join
the ongoing efforts to maintain a dialogue that can lead
to a peaceful, orderly and inclusive political transition
that responds to the interests of the Libyan people and
will enable them to freely and consensually define
their future within the framework of their country’s
sovereignty, independence and territorial integrity.
To that end, compliance with the Libyan Political
Agreement, recognized by resolution 2259 (2015)
and reaffirmed through the presidential statement of
14 December 2017 (S/PRST/2017/26), is imperative.
Finally, it is important to bear in mind that
the impact that the Libyan conflict has had on the
security situation in the region is a direct consequence
of interventionist practices and policies of regime
change that have had a collateral effect in the Sahel,
bringing about the emergence of chaos, terrorism and
militarization, with regrettable results that continue to
be have repercussions to this day.
Mr. Alotaibi (Kuwait) (spoke in Arabic): I thank
you, Madam President, for holding today’s meeting.
We appreciate the untiring efforts of Mr. Ghassan
Salamé, Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral and Head of the United Nations Support Mission
in Libya (UNSMIL), to achieve peace and stability in
Libya, and we very much appreciate UNSMIL’s vital
and important role. We also thank Ambassador Olof
Skoog for the valuable information he has provided on
the activities of the Committee established pursuant to
resolution 1970 (2011) concerning Libya.

S/PV. 8263

I will focus on three key elements: political
developments, security challenges and economic
reform. First, with regard to political developments,
we reiterate our full support for the action plan,
which has helped to fulfil many aspirations related
to moving Libya from a situation of chaos to stability
and prosperity, including the launch of the preparatory
process for a general national congress, to be held
by the end of 2018, the promotion of national unity
through a dialogue facilitated by national reconciliation
initiatives, and the important agreement between the
House of Representatives and the High Council of State
on a mechanism to form a new executive authority.
We believe in this important plan and its provisions
for establishing security in Libya. We therefore renew
our commitment to the United Nations efforts aimed
at ending the protracted transitional period in the
country, the most important of which, at the current
time, is providing adequate support for the preparation
of elections and ensuring that they are accepted by all.
We hope that the voter registration update, which added
more than 2.4 million voters to the rolls, will help to
ensure the participation of the largest possible number
of Libyans in the voting process.
We welcome the positive experience observed
in the municipal elections in Zawiya, which went
smoothly and transparently and showed great integrity.
We commend all those who participated in exercising
their constitutional right to elect their representatives
in the municipal council, in a rate of participation that
exceeded 60 per cent. We hope that the Libyan people
will follow suit with great voter participation in the
other Libyan cities that elect municipal councils this
year. We agree with the Secretary-General on the
need for positive indicators such as these in order to
ensure that the House of Representatives shoulders its
responsibilities without further delay. It must establish
a constitutional framework with a view to holding
elections following the adoption of the necessary
constitutional legislation. We reiterate the message
in the resolution adopted by the League of Arab
States, one of the actors in the Quartet, calling for a
comprehensive political solution to the crisis and for
adherence to the Libyan Political Agreement as the sole
political framework for addressing it.
Secondly, with respect to the security challenges, it
is perhaps paradoxical that the most prominent security
incident during the reporting period was a terrorist
attack earlier this month targeting the headquarters of

18-1541815/22

S/PV.8263

The situation in Libya

the High Commission for National Elections in Tripoli.
We strongly condemn that cowardly act and express
our condolences to the families of the victims. This
incident, and other events that have led to a continued
escalation of tensions and violence, remind us of the
ongoing state of insecurity in Libya, which remains the
most notable feature of its security situation, especially
in the light of the escalation of confrontations in the
cities of Derna and Sabha and elsewhere.
This adds to the deteriorating humanitarian
situation in general and the ongoing violations of human
rights and human trafficking in particular. We reiterate
our rejection of these practices, which are contrary to
international law, and we call for an end to such acts,
which contribute to the killing and displacement of
civilians. In the Security Council, we must continue
to support Libyan efforts to establish the rule of law,
extend the authority of the State and move towards the
unification of the Libyan military and security forces
under a civilian leadership. We welcome the meetings
hosted by Egypt to discuss that unification.
Thirdly, with regard to economic reform, we
welcome the continuing production of more than
a million barrels of oil a day, which has increased
optimism about Libyan economic expectations. We
also welcome the adoption of a general budget for
2018. However, we remain concerned about the notable
increase in public spending, which will lead to a
financial deficit estimated at $7.5 billion. We would
like to recall here the resolution of the League of Arab
States, which calls on the Presidency Council, the
House of Representatives, the High Council of State,
the Central Bank of Libya and the national economic
institutions to work together to agree on solutions to
Libya’s economic problems.
Mr. Safronkov (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We thank Special Representative Ghassan
Salamé for his objective briefing. We also thank
Mr. Olof Skoog, Permanent Representative of Sweden,
for his report on the work of the Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1970 (2011) concerning Libya
and, more generally, for his responsible leadership of
the Committee.
Russia supports the steps undertaken under the
auspices of the United Nations to assist in stabilizing
Libya. We note Mr. Salamé’s courage and personal
efforts and appreciate his commitment to getting
results in the work of unifying Libya and stabilizing
16/22

21/05/2018

the internal situation, which is crucial to improving
the situation in the region as a whole. We do have to
conclude, however, that in spite of all the efforts to
establish an intra-Libyan dialogue, the prospects for
settling the crisis any time soon are bleak. This is no
accident. The situation is very complex, and one of
the reasons for that is the continuing distrust among
the key players in the Libyan political landscape. They
continue to be suspicious of one another, which presents
an obstacle to reaching compromise solutions to
their disagreements. The meeting on 23 April between
Mr. Khalid Al-Mishri, the newly chosen leader of the
High Council of State, and Mr. Aqilah Saleh, Speaker
of the House of Representatives, gives us a certain
degree of optimism. It is very important that the parties
agreed to continue their consultations. We hope that the
negotiation process will overcome the current impasse,
for which Mr. Salamé will personally deserve credit.
The forthcoming elections clearly represent an
important step in resolving the crisis. However, there are
still many issues related to holding them. For example,
there is so far no understanding on the electoral law. In
other words, we urge continued vigilance and holding
to the principle of “first do no harm”. Any decisions
and steps taken should be subordinated to the task
of uniting the country, its State institutions, political
forces and security structures. We want to emphasize
Mr. Salamé’s view that the right conditions must be
established for the elections. In that regard, one of the
main challenges continues to be the establishment of
the legal basis for the work of the national authorities’
institutions following the elections. If the parties
cannot agree on their modalities in advance, the newly
established Government system in Libya may not
be viable.
The situation is complicated not only by a lack of
compromise among the parties but also by security
problems. The terrorist attack of 2 May on the High
Commission for National Elections in Tripoli was a sad
affirmation of that fact. We also have to understand that
a great deal will depend on resolving the issue of the
forces that ended up being sidelined in the country’s
post-revolutionary transformation.
There can be no alternative to a negotiated
solution to the crisis. The Libyans themselves must
decide their country’s future, through a dialogue and
in a spirit of openness and compromise, based on the
Skhirat agreement reached in Morocco as the only
viable foundation for achieving a long-term settlement.
18-15418

21/05/2018

The situation in Libya

The future development of the situation will depend
on the success of efforts to restore security, without
which it will continue to be a fertile breeding ground
for terrorists and armed groups using the institutional
vacuum for their criminal activity. The issue of unity
on many levels is also crucially important to the joint
efforts to combat terrorism.
The situation of migrants and refugees in detention
centres remains difficult, and they continue to
encounter various forms of ill-treatment. There has to
be full commitment to tackling that issue. The problem
cannot be solved with half measures. Above all, the
root causes that resulted in people’s migration have
to be dealt with, at which point they will voluntarily
return to their homes.
We note that the crisis is a long way from being
settled, and significant efforts will be needed to reach
a durable agreement on the parameters for national
reconciliation. We support the initiatives undertaken
by the international and regional sponsors of the
settlement in Libya, particularly its neighbours Egypt,
Tunisia and Algeria. We note the work being done by
the African Union in the context of its Ad Hoc HighLevel Committee on Libya and by the League of Arab
States. The efforts of foreign mediators and external
actors should be consolidated and as coordinated as
possible, but it is Libyans themselves who must decide
their future. The United Nations should continue to play
a leading role in the political process. For our part, we
will continue to support the Special Representative’s
efforts to reach out to all Libyans and to cooperate with
all involved partners. In working to resolve the situation
in Libya, we must remember that the current problems
are the result of the violent overthrow of the Libyan
regime, which destroyed its sovereignty and ignored
the African Union’s vital initiatives. Those mistakes
should teach some serious political lessons about the
stability of Libya, its neighbours and other countries
that have been subjected to foreign intervention.
With regard to the work of the Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1970 (2011) concerning Libya,
while we greatly value the efforts of the Ambassador
of Sweden and his team, we would like to point out
that on 3 April, at our initiative, the Committee held
a meeting specifically to discuss a leak to the press of
the interim report of the Panel of Experts. In general,
the issue of leaks about the work of the Council and its
subsidiary bodies is extremely relevant and can hardly
be explained only by computer network glitches. We

S/PV. 8263

were also extremely disappointed that the Committee
could not agree on the Chair’s proposed compromise
variations of a decision on investigating what occurred.
The demands for greater transparency in the work
of the Council’s Sanctions Committees should be
accompanied by a high degree of responsibility.
Russia and Libya are linked by a historically rich
and friendly relationship. We will do everything we
can, in our national capacity and in cooperation with
Libya’s political forces and regional and international
partners, to restore Libya and its unity and return it to a
future of steady development.
Mrs. Gregoire Van Haaren (Netherlands): The
Kingdom of the Netherlands would like to express its
sincere thanks to Special Representative Salamé and
Ambassador Olof Skoog for their clear briefings at the
beginning of this meeting.
I would like to focus on three important aspects
with regard to the situation in Libya: first, ending the
political crisis: secondly, the human rights situation of
migrants; and lastly, the economy of predation.
First, with regard to the political process, the Libyan
people have been waiting for an end to their country’s
political transition for a long time, and we commend
Mr. Salamé for his tireless efforts to revitalize the
political process. He continues to have our full support.
Our main challenge continues to be the lack of political
will among the Libyan parties to make the necessary
compromises. It is important that they work for credible
and tangible results in order to be able to appeal to
all Libyans to join the march to peace and stability.
We understand the call for elections, but they must
be well prepared and can take place only in a secure
environment. We strongly condemn the cowardly
attack of 2 May on the High Commission for National
Elections. In the coming months we will have to pay
specific attention to improving the security situation
through dialogue with and between the armed groups.
My second point concerns the human rights
situation of migrants. The Kingdom of the Netherlands
remains deeply concerned about the serious human
rights violations and abuses against migrants that
continue throughout Libya. Trafficking networks
exploit migrants and are closely linked to the militia
and terrorist groups that have been destabilizing the
country. The Security Council has stated its resolve
on numerous occasions to address the destabilizing
practices of those trafficking networks. It is time to

18-1541817/22

S/PV.8263

The situation in Libya

turn our words into action. As part of a comprehensive
effort to dismantle those networks and improve the
human rights situation of migrants, in cooperation
with our partners and with the support of many States,
including Libya and countries in the region, the
Kingdom of the Netherlands has proposed targeted
sanctions against six prominent traffickers. We expect
the Committee established pursuant to resolution 1970
(2011) concerning Libya to come to a swift agreement
on that important issue, which affects the wider region
as well as Libya itself.
Thirdly, with regard to the economy of predation,
the business of human trafficking is only one example
of the criminalization of Libya’s economy. We need to
work urgently on the economic, political and security
fronts simultaneously in order to facilitate a political
solution and stability for Libya. The Libyan people
continue to lose millions of dollars in revenue thanks
to fuel smuggling, and the fact that armed militias are
sabotaging the increase of oil production is particularly
worrying. Such issues can be addressed only by
engaging with the armed groups, and we commend the
steps taken by the United Nations Support Mission in
Libya in that regard.
In conclusion, the Libyan parties must realize
that they are at a crossroads. They can either redouble
their efforts to finally bring peace to Libya or bear the
responsibility for leaving their country in a prolonged
state of instability and disarray. It is up to them to
show the courage and leadership necessary to make the
necessary compromises. At the same time, they cannot
do this alone. The international community, including
the Council, should continue to stand ready to help
address the Libyan crisis using every tool at its disposal.
Mr. Alemu (Ethiopia): We thank Special
Representative Ghassan Salamé for his comprehensive
briefing. We appreciate the very good work that he
is doing and the close working relationship he has
established with the African Union. We want to see this
continue. Looking back, one can see how useful it is to
take into account the African perspective. We reiterate
our support for his continued diplomatic endeavours to
facilitate a Libyan-led comprehensive political solution
to end the crisis. We also thank Ambassador Olof
Skoog for his report as Chair of the Security Council
Committee established pursuant to resolution 1970
(2011) concerning Libya.
18/22

21/05/2018

We welcome the progress registered in the
implementation of the United Nations action plan.
Indeed, with the support of the United Nations Support
Mission in Libya (UNSMIL), encouraging actions have
been taken by the Libyans to end the protracted transition.
The completion of voter registration demonstrates
the strong popular desire of Libyans to participate
in electoral processes. The continued consultation
among the major Libyan actors aimed at forming
a new executive authority and reaching a common
understanding on how to make limited amendments to
the Libyan Political Agreement, which remains the only
viable framework, is also encouraging. The ongoing
local consultations are also creating opportunities to
listen to the voices of all Libyans, which, as the report
of the Secretary-General (S/2018/429) indicates, could
lead to a successful national conference.
We also commend the ongoing local reconciliation
processes, which not only support the political process
but also address community grievances peacefully
and strengthen national cohesion. To fully implement
the United Nations plan of action and conclude the
prolonged transition, it is imperative to maintain
and build on the positive momentum. This requires
the continued engagement of all Libyan actors with
the United Nations-facilitated peace process, with a
genuine and constructive spirit that is vital to ending
parallel State institutions.
It is also indispensable to create an environment
conducive to holding credible elections by finalizing
the necessary legal architecture, including the
constitutional framework. These are positive
developments, but there is obviously no room for
complacency, as Libya continues to face multiple
challenges. The fragile security situation remains a
source of concern. It is deeply troubling that, owing to
the continued tension and violence, civilian casualties
and displacement continue without letup. Terrorist
groups, including elements of the Islamic State in Iraq
and the Sham, continue their attacks. We condemn
any violence against civilians or civilian facilities,
including the 2 May terrorist attack on the headquarters
of the High National Election Commission.
The continued climate of insecurity is another
reminder of why it is vital to unify Libya’s military and
security forces under civilian control and establish the
rule of law. With the continued climate of insecurity, it
is not only Libyans but also migrants and refugees who
18-15418

21/05/2018

The situation in Libya

continue to suffer. As the Secretary-General stated in
paragraph 94 of his report dated 7 May on UNSMIL,
“The plight of migrants and the abuses they suffer
in Libya … continue to call for joint, concerted and
urgent action.”
In that regard, while the efforts of the African
Union, European Union and United Nations task
force are commendable, we hope that the Security
Council will also come together to take appropriate
measures against illegal human traffickers to send a
strong political message that the inhumane treatment
of migrants is totally unacceptable. On this and
other vital challenges, it is critical, as the Special
Representative has stated, to ensure that the Council
sends a unified message. We appreciate the important
role of neighbouring States and regional organizations,
for that will contribute to encouraging all major Libyan
actors to sustain their engagement with the United
Nations-led inclusive political process.
In this regard, we note the series of important
meetings held recently, including the fifth Meeting of
the African Union High-level Committee on Libya, in
Addis Ababa, and the meeting in Cairo last month of the
Quartet on Libya, which underscored the full support
for the United Nations action plan. Representatives of
the countries neighbouring Libya are also meeting in
Algiers today. We believe that neighbours and regional
organizations should continue to work together in a
coordinated and complementary manner to achieve
an inclusive and comprehensive political solution
that would respond to the legitimate aspirations of
all Libyans.
As I noted earlier, the unity of the Council also
remains important to end the protracted transition in
Libya. The Council should continue to send a strong
message to the effect that the only way to address
the multifaceted challenges, insecurity, economic
difficulties and humanitarian concerns is through a
sustained and meaningful engagement on the part of
the Libyan actors in the inclusive political process set
out in United Nations action plan. This is not only in the
interests of the Libyans, who have suffered for so long,
but of the broader region as well, most particularly the
Sahel, for which, as Côte d’Ivoire said a while ago, the
crisis in Libya has had a major destabilizing impact.
Mr. Shen Bo (China) (spoke in Chinese): China
thanks Special Representative of the Secretary-General
Ghassan Salamé and the Chair of the Security Council

S/PV. 8263

Committee established pursuant to resolution 1970
(2011) concerning Libya, Ambassador Olof Skoog,
for their briefings. China will continue to support
their work.
Although the security situation in Libya remains
concerning, with localized clashes and terrorist acts
occurring sporadically, Libya has worked arduously
and achieved steady progress in its political transition
thanks to the support of the United Nations, regional
organizations and neighbouring countries. That support
from the international community should be intensified
so as to help Libya get back on its feet swiftly, with
restored stability and effective governance, on the
basis of respect for Libya’s sovereignty, unity and
territorial integrity.
I should like to touch on three points.
First, we should resolutely advance the Libyan-led
and Libyan-owned political process. The Libyan parties
should press on with inclusive dialogue at various
levels, from the national to the local, to build a broader
consensus, narrow their differences and find a solution
that is acceptable to all stakeholders so as to achieve
national reconciliation. Restoring State governance
by amending the Libyan Political Agreement is an
important step that deserves to be taken seriously by all
stakeholders in Libya.
Secondly, a better security environment is needed
for the political process. Countries and regional
organizations that are in a position to influence
the parties should leverage such influence and
encourage the Libyan actors to refrain from resorting
to force on reflex, to achieve reconciliation through
confidence-building measures and to create a unified
State security institution as soon as possible, so as
to put conditions in place that are more conducive to
the implementation of the United Nations action plan.
Libyan actors, for their part, should work closely
together and suppress terrorist activities and organized
crime, among other problems.
Thirdly, the role and capacity of United Nations
good offices should be strengthened through joint
efforts. The international community should welcome
the efforts of the United Nations Support Mission
in Libya, led by Special Representative of the
Secretary-General Salamé, aimed at galvanizing the
implementation of the action plan and supporting Libya
in constitution-making, revising the Political Agreement
and holding the presidential and parliamentary elections

18-1541819/22

S/PV.8263

The situation in Libya

successfully. We would like to see Libya’s neighbours,
the African Union, the League of Arab States and the
European Union step up their efforts to mediate and
encourage peace talks and lend their support to the
United Nations action plan.
China is of the view that the Security Council
sanctions should be aimed at the political settlement
of hotspot issues. Council sanctions with regard to
Libya should not harm its overall national interests, nor
should they prevent it from satisfying its humanitarian
and livelihood needs. It will be important to address the
continued impairment of the frozen assets. We encourage
the Sanctions Committee to expedite its study and
respond to Libya’s legitimate concerns appropriately.
China supports any and all efforts that contribute
to the stabilization of the situation in Libya, its political
settlement and the fight against terrorism by all Libyan
actors working together. What we want is for security
and stability in Libya to be restored as soon as possible
so that it can develop and prosper.
The President: I shall now make a statement in my
capacity as the representative of Poland.
To start with, I would like thank Special
Representative of the Secretary-General Mr. Ghassan
Salamé for his very informative briefing on recent
developments in Libya. I also thank Ambassador Olof
Skoog for his helpful briefing on the ongoing work of
the Committee established pursuant to resolution 1970
(2011) concerning Libya.
Poland welcomes the high turnout in the recently
completed voter registration update. It is a testament
to Libya’s eagerness to participate in free and fair
elections that will mark the end of the transitional
period. In that regard, we urge Libyan authorities to
finalize the necessary electoral legislation effectively.
Despite the significant decrease in civilian
casualties in recent months, we remain concerned
about the insecurity in various areas throughout Libya,
as well as the ongoing human rights violations and
abuses in detention centres and the cases of prolonged
arbitrary detention without due process. Poland also
supports the Security Council’s undertaking of all
necessary measures against those responsible for human
trafficking, in accordance with Council resolution 1970
(2011). Echoing a recent statement (see S/PV.8250) by
the Prosecutor of the International Criminal Court,
Ms. Fatou Bensouda, we call on the Libyan authorities
20/22

21/05/2018

to fully cooperate with the Court in order to help bring
justice and accountability in Libya for crimes under
international law.
Finally, I would like to express my gratitude to
Special Representative Salamé and the United Nations
personnel working in Libya for their dedication and
support for a peaceful end to the transitional period
in Libya.
I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.
I give the floor to the representative of Libya.
Mr. Elmajerbi (Libya) (spoke in Arabic): First
and foremost, Madam President, I would like to thank
you for convening this meeting of the Security Council
today, and the Secretary-General for his report to the
Council on the activities of the United Nations Support
Mission in Libya (UNSMIL) in Libya (S/2018/429). I am
also grateful to Mr. Ghassan Salamé for his briefing,
in which he outlined UNSMIL’s activities aimed at
bringing an end to the political crisis in my country
that sadly seems so deeply entrenched. Lastly, I thank
Ambassador Olof Skoog for his briefing in his capacity
as Chair of the Committee established pursuant to
resolution 1970 (2011) concerning Libya.
In the light of the efforts spearheaded by the Council
to come to the aid of my country and help us emerge
from our current crisis, the international community
also has a responsibility to support and engage more
effectively and efficiently with Libyans in order to help
us to set aside our domestic differences and establish the
foundations and institutions for a modern, responsible,
democratic State, free from unjustified meddling by
some parties, which so far has only hampered our
efforts to transition to a more inclusive political process
and has further exacerbated the suffering of the Libyan
people. It must end.
We therefore welcome the United Nations action
plan, announced here in New York when it was unveiled
on 20 September 2017. Among other things, it is aimed
at ensuring that elections are held by the end of 2018,
within a year of its adoption. We would like to reiterate
the position of the Government of National Accord,
which is firmly behind the action plan and fully
supports the importance of organizing and holding
presidential and legislative elections within the given
time frame, thereby leading to the establishment of the
18-15418

21/05/2018

The situation in Libya

executive bodies and branches needed to enable an end
to be brought to the crisis in Libya.
Nevertheless, all of this can be achieved only with
effective, efficient and ongoing international support,
which will enable all the parties in Libya to engage in
the democratic process so as to ensure that the votes of
the Libyan people themselves will be used to set aside
differences and produce an acceptable outcome. In the
past few years we have witnessed a great deal of pain in
which Libyans have suffered on every front — political,
economic and social. It has been a harrowing time.
We would therefore like to once again underscore the
importance of ensuring that everyone moves together
in lockstep in their efforts to help end the crisis in
Libya. We cannot have a fragmented approach. We
must all act as one in order to ensure that we end up
with a democratic and responsible State that safeguards,
protects and upholds the rights of its citizens, that can
fight terrorism and prevail and that believes in political
pluralism and the peaceful transition of power — in
other words, a State that is working to move ahead on
the basis of progress and prosperity. That goal reflects
the aspirations of all Libyans, who have reached the
end of their rope. They are no longer prepared to
suffer under the successive crises they have endured
in recent years, particularly through the issues of the
proliferation of weapons, the wave of organized crime
and major economic problems. Irresponsible parties
have been wreaking havoc on our economy, which is
being damaged by people who, to put it mildly, should
be properly labelled as criminals. They have turned
Libya into a fertile breeding ground for their criminal
activities through their predatory acts and their effects
on our economy.
The Government of National Accord will spare no
effort to bring Libyans together to ensure that it can
meet the aspirations of all parties and hear all of their
concerns. Despite the difficulty of that task, we are
determined to do all we can to satisfy all aspirations and
needs. I want to underscore that national and patriotic
Libyans have lent their support to the Government
of National Accord and to our efforts to bring about
national reconciliation on a comprehensive, countrywide basis. All national efforts within Libya enjoy our
support, particularly local mediation and initiatives,
because we have repeatedly seen that they help to reduce
tension, end crises and bring about rapprochement and
reconciliation between tribes. Such local reconciliation
activities have meant that many cities and towns in

S/PV. 8263

Libya that were previously theatres of war between
clashing armies, often pitting brotherly neighbouring
tribes against one another, are now enjoying security
and safety.
We also welcome all positive efforts by neighbouring
States and the international community to help Libya
recover from the crisis. We commend the 30 April
communiqué from the quadripartite negotiations in
Cairo, which underscored support for the United Nations
action plan for Libya and the need to work quickly to
implement it. The emergence of terrorism and the acts
of armed groups in Libya have resulted from ideas and
ideologies that are completely foreign to the nature and
desires of the Libyan people, who are, on the contrary,
well known for their moderation and tolerance. Such
foreign, erroneous ideologies fuel notions imported
from abroad and have nothing to do with the actual
precepts of our religion of Islam, seeking rather to sow
anarchy, terror and destruction in our country. By way
of response, therefore, we have taken action.
In that regard, we welcome the support for our
response from many of the countries that have stood
with Libya as we seek to tackle that phenomenon,
which unfortunately has killed or seduced many of our
young people. The most recent attack by these armed
terrorist groups in Libya, which targeted the High
Commission for National Elections on 2 May, resulted
in large numbers of deaths and injuries and was broadly
condemned by the international community and
Libyans alike. This cowardly attack showed once again
that these groups must be brought to justice and their
universally reviled acts ended.
We call on the international community to step
up its efforts to exterminate this global scourge by
cutting off the sources of financing for armed terrorist
groups. We in Libya will spare no effort in upholding
our responsibility to eradicate terrorism, including
by cooperating with the international community.
In that regard, we would like to cite the Presidential
Council statement issued on 16 May, which affirmed
the Government of National Accord’s opposition to
terrorism in every form and urged the Libyan people
to overcome their differences. With regard to the
ongoing operations in Derna, the Government of
National Accord also urged all people of sense in the
region to help to intervene, lift the siege on the city
and protect the lives of innocent civilians. We want to
emphasize once again how urgent it is to ensure that
while combating terrorism we also protect the lives of

18-1541821/22

S/PV.8263

The situation in Libya

innocent civilians. We call on all parties throughout
Libya to overcome their differences through peaceful
dialogue and to refrain from the use of force, which can
only further divide the Libyan people and destroy more
of our infrastructure.
The recent reduction in the number of migrants
arriving in Libya via trafficking and smuggling has
provided some respite, as some countries of destination
have recognized. The drop is thanks largely to efforts
to cut off migrant flows at the source, including on
the part of the Security Council and, in Libya, by the
Presidential Council and the Government of National
Accord, as they work to reverse the adverse impact of
migrant trafficking and smuggling. For example, we
have launched broad campaigns, which have had some
effect, targeting those who smuggle and traffic migrants
in or through Libyan territory. The Government has
also established reception centres for migrants through
joint efforts with UNSMIL and with the support of
the International Organization for Migration. We have
also been able to repatriate many migrants, but further
efforts in that regard will require the continued support
of the international community, in cooperation with the
countries of origin. The countries of origin, in turn,
must get the support they need to pursue development at
the domestic level, in accordance with the 2030 Agenda
for Sustainable Development, thereby giving migrants
an incentive to stay home rather than put their lives on
the line by migrating, especially through clandestine
trafficking or smuggling.
Turning to the area of humanitarian action, some
non-governmental organizations (NGOs) are being
used as cover by human traffickers or smugglers. On
19 March, for example, two members of the crew of

22/22

21/05/2018

a rescue boat operated by an NGO were arrested
by a European Government because, despite their
NGO disguise, they were covertly supporting human
trafficking and smuggling. The phenomenon must be
recognized and addressed. We must also address the
elephant in the room, which is the fact that the smuggling
and trafficking of migrants is very closely coordinated
by criminal gangs on both sides of the Mediterranean,
in Europe and Africa alike. We want to stress the
importance of tackling trafficking and smuggling
groups on both continents as the one sure way to put
an end to their abhorrent enterprise. In that regard, we
must end the suspicious activities of certain NGOs that
threaten Libya’s democracy and national security.
In conclusion, I would like to once again
reiterate that the Libyan people have had enough of
the deteriorating conditions in their everyday lives,
especially on the economic front, as a result of the
country’s ongoing political divisions. We sincerely
hope that through the Security Council the international
community will redouble its efforts to support the
implementation of the United Nations action plan for
Libya, adopted on 20 September 2017, and to put an
end to foreign interference in Libyan affairs while
continuing to address our security problems, which
are just as important as political issues. As we have
repeatedly stressed, no initiative in Libya can succeed
without resolving the security situation.
The President: There are no more names inscribed
on the list of speakers.
I now invite Council members to informal
consultations to continue our discussion on the subject.
The meeting rose at 12.05 p.m.

18-15418
