United Nations

S/PV.5863

Security Council

Provisional

Sixty-third year

5863rd meeting
Tuesday, 8 April 2008, 3 p.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Kumalo . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(South Africa)

Members:

Belgium . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Burkina Faso . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Costa Rica . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Croatia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Indonesia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Italy . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Libyan Arab Jamahiriya . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Panama . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . .
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Viet Nam . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Mr. Verbeke
Mr. Kafando
Mr. Liu Zhenmin
Ms. Villalobos
Mr. Skračić
Mr. Ripert
Mr. Natalegawa
Mr. Mantovani
Mr. Mubarak
Mr. Suescum
Mr. Rogachev
Mr. McKenzie Smith
Mr. Khalilzad
Mr. Bui The Giang

Agenda
The situation in the Middle East
Letter dated 28 March 2008 from the Secretary-General addressed to the
President of the Security Council (S/2008/210)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the
delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room C-154A.

08-29745 (E)

*0829745*

S/PV.5863

The meeting was called to order at 3.05 p.m.

United Nations International Independent Investigation
Commission. I now give the floor to Mr. Bellemare.

Adoption of the agenda

Mr. Bellemare: “Terrorism is never justifiable on
any ground.… It hurts all nations — large and small,
rich and poor. It takes a toll on human beings of every
age and income, culture and religion.” Those are the
words of Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon. Those
words act as a constant reminder for the members of
the Commission over which I have the honour and the
privilege to preside.

The agenda was adopted.
The situation in the Middle East
Letter dated 28 March 2008 from the SecretaryGeneral addressed to the President of the
Security Council (S/2008/210)
The President: I should like to inform the
Council that I have received a letter from the
representative of Lebanon in which he requests to be
invited to participate in the consideration of the item
on the Council’s agenda. In accordance with the usual
practice, I propose, with the consent of the Council, to
invite that representative to participate in the
consideration without the right to vote, in accordance
with the relevant provisions of the Charter and rule 37
of the Council’s provisional rules of procedure.
There being no objection, it is so decided.
At the invitation of the President, Mr. Salam
(Lebanon) took a seat at the Council table.
The President: In accordance with the
understanding reached in the Council’s prior
consultations, I shall take it that the Security Council
agrees to extend an invitation under rule 39 of its
provisional rules of procedure to Mr. Daniel Bellemare,
Commissioner of the United Nations International
Independent Investigation Commission.
It is so decided.
I invite Mr. Bellemare to take a seat at the
Council table.
The Security Council will now begin its
consideration of the item on its agenda. The Council is
meeting in accordance with the understanding reached
in its prior consultations.
Members of the Council have before them
document S/2008/210, which contains a letter dated
28 March 2008 from the Secretary-General addressed
to the President of the Security Council, transmitting
the tenth report of the International Independent
Investigation Commission.
At this meeting, the Security Council will hear a
briefing by Mr. Daniel Bellemare, Commissioner of the

2

This is my first appearance before the Security
Council since I took office last January. I would like to
thank members for the opportunity to brief the Council
on the progress made by the International Independent
Investigation Commission.
It is my honour to present today the tenth report
of the Commission. As requested, it outlines progress
made since 28 November 2007 in the investigation of
the assassination of former Prime Minister Rafiq Hariri
and the 22 others who were killed during the attack,
and of other attacks that fall within the mandate of the
Commission. Since this is the first time I am
addressing the Council both as Commissioner and as
Prosecutor Designate, I would like to take this
opportunity to share a few thoughts on how I approach
my role.
The mandate that the Council gave the
Commission in 2005 is particularly challenging. Not
only is the investigation objectively very complex, it is
also being conducted in a politically charged climate
and in an extremely volatile environment.
Unfortunately, the establishment of the Commission
has not had an immediate deterrent effect on terrorists.
Bombings have continued, with two more deadly
attacks that have been added to the Commission’s
mandate since the last report.
Our investigation involves a series of terrorist
attacks which have killed 55 people and injured over
420. The magnitude of the attacks, their continuing
nature and the fact that investigations are conducted in
an environment dominated by ongoing security
concerns add to the challenges facing the Commission.
Members may rest assured, however, that the
Commission will not be deterred by the prevailing
violence. On the contrary, each attack increases the
resolve of the men and women of the more than 60
countries that have answered the call for help and are

08-29745

S/PV.5863

fully committed to bringing an end to impunity in
Lebanon.
My mission’s overarching principle is to ensure
that justice is done. With that in mind, the Commission
will yield to no pressure, political or otherwise, and the
identification of suspects will be based on sound legal
standards supported by concrete evidence.
Acting under the flag of the United Nations, it is
against that uniquely challenging backdrop that the
Commission advances its mandate in a neutral and
objective manner. In doing so, the Commission must
continue to keep an open mind and not presuppose the
outcome. As Carla del Ponte once said, “facts are
pieces of truth on the way to justice”. In its search for
truth and justice, applying basic principles of fairness,
neutrality and impartiality, the Commission must be
guided by facts and evidence. Everything else is
irrelevant. To act otherwise would be to fail the
international community and, in particular, the people
of Lebanon.
The Commission is an independent body. It was
created to help put an end to impunity in Lebanon by
making sure that the perpetrators of the attacks falling
within the mandate of the Commission have no safe
haven and that they are eventually brought to justice.
Independence, however, does not mean isolation;
nor does it mean that the Commission operates in a
vacuum. Quite the contrary, because the Commission is
acting under the flag of the United Nations, it is also
acting on behalf of Member States. Member States
have provided assistance to the Commission when their
assistance was sought. I thank them for their support.
Indeed, Member States should continue to ask
themselves whether and how they can assist the
Commission. In doing so, they can be forthcoming and
proactive; their assistance does not have to be
predicated on the existence of specific requests made
by the Commission.
Members of the Security Council are familiar
with the constraints faced by the Commission
regarding the disclosure of its findings. The
Commission has to constantly find a delicate balance
between its reporting obligations and the need to
preserve the confidentiality of the investigation. The
need for confidentiality is obvious; it is necessary to
maintain the integrity of the process. Indeed, the
Commission cannot ignore the fact that the perpetrators
are watching every move it makes.

08-29745

However, we have every intention of being
transparent, to the extent possible, without jeopardizing
the security or the safety of those who want to
cooperate with us — and who may eventually be called
upon to appear before the Tribunal — and the security
and safety of our staff. Transparency is essential to
maintain the confidence of the public in the
Commission as an institution and the trust in its
operations.
Public expectations are high. That is
understandable. The many steps taken towards the
creation of the Special Tribunal for Lebanon may have
created an impression that the conclusion of the
investigation was imminent. In addition, public
speculation on the timing of possible indictments may
also have fuelled the rising expectations.
Regrettably, we cannot prevent speculation, but
public expectations must be addressed. That is why it
is both useful and important to send the clear message
that the search for justice cannot be rushed — it must
follow its course. Any illusion of immediacy must be
dispelled. Our progress is neither slow nor immediate —
it is deliberate. With that in mind, let me now update the
Council on the progress made in the past four months,
including new developments in the Commission’s work
and challenges ahead.
First, in relation to the investigation of the Hariri
case and the 22 others who were killed during the
attack, the Commission can now confirm, on the basis
of evidence, that a network of individuals acted in
concert to carry out the assassination of Rafiq Hariri
and that this network — which has been referred to as
the “Hariri network” — or parts of the network are
linked to some of the other cases within the
Commission’s mandate.
It is probably useful for me to pause at this time
and to clarify two points. First, let me say a few words
about the use in the report of the words “criminal
network”. Those words should be read in the context of
the whole report, which clearly refers to a terrorist
investigation. The direction of the investigation has not
changed, and the Commission is still investigating
crimes that are politically motivated. Secondly, while
previous reports have referred to the hypothesis of a
network, what is new this time is that we now have the
evidence of the existence of such a network and of its
links.

3

S/PV.5863

The Commission has also gathered evidence that
the Hariri network existed before the Hariri
assassination; that it conducted surveillance of
Mr. Hariri before his assassination; that it operated on
the day of Mr. Hariri’s assassination; and that at least
part of the network continued to exist and operate after
Mr. Hariri’s assassination.
Our priority is now to gather more evidence about
the Hariri network, its scope, the identity of all of its
participants, their links with others outside the network
and their role in the attacks. In relation to the other
attacks that fall within its mandate, the Commission
has continued to assist the Lebanese authorities in
providing a number of measures of technical
assistance, ranging from forensic analysis to reviewing
imagery materials. The Commission has continued to
investigate possible links between those cases and the
Hariri case.
The technical assistance provided to our
Lebanese hosts is not only meant to support the cases
at hand; it is also designed to allow the Lebanese
authorities to build capacity for the future. In that
regard, the Commission would like to note, however,
that the sooner its assistance is requested, the more
likely that technical assistance can be meaningful.
The mandate and the work of the Commission are
ground-breaking. Methods of investigations used in a
traditional domestic setting have to be adapted to the
existing environment. Operational imperatives or
administrative challenges like staff recruitment and
retention must be addressed with creativity. The
Commission’s needs and requirements may often
stretch the limits of existing United Nations policies.
Off-the-shelf solutions are not necessarily suited to the
pursuit of a precedent-setting mission like ours. Every
day we must adjust, invent and create new ways to
advance our operations.
Much is said and written about the Tribunal. As
Prosecutor Designate of the Tribunal, I will only state
that the filing of eventual indictments will not be
immediate after the establishment of the Tribunal. The
admissible evidence will have to be carefully and
objectively considered in light of the applicable
prosecution threshold. No one can predict or dictate
how long this process will take.
As Louise Arbour said when she was Prosecutor
at the ICTY:

4

“An independent Prosecutor must be able to stand
apart from national politics, the interests of
individual States and the goals of any particular
foreign policy. Indeed, not only must the
Prosecutor stand apart from such considerations,
he or she must stand above them, and be fully
prepared without fear or favour to contradict
them or to challenge political pressures which
may seek to influence the course of justice.”
That being said, however, ideally the time
between the establishment of the operations of the
Tribunal and the eventual filing of indictments should
be as short as possible. That is the reason why the
progress of the investigation becomes such a crucial
element in determining when the Tribunal will
commence its operation.
As a result, while the preparatory steps for the
establishment of the Special Tribunal for Lebanon are
continuing, I would request this Council to consider
extending the Commission’s mandate beyond the date
of 15 June 2008. That would give the Commission the
needed time to continue its investigation. It would also
provide a desirable measure of stability and
predictability for our staff.
In conclusion, let me say that any unnecessary
delay in finding the truth and bringing the perpetrators
to justice must be avoided. But, as I have mentioned
before, the search for justice must be allowed to follow
its course. In saying so, I understand and share the
frustration of the surviving victims, the families of the
deceased and the people of Lebanon who expect quick
results. Though legitimate and understandable, that
frustration must not be allowed to undermine the trust
and the confidence that members of the international
community and the people of Lebanon have placed in
the Commission and in its process.
With the continued assistance of Member States
and the ongoing support of the Lebanese authorities, I
can assure the Council that no effort will be spared to
expedite the process as much as humanly possible.
Mr. Rogachev (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): I would like to thank Mr. Bellemare for his
briefing.
I would like to receive, for the first time,
information on a number of elements of the big picture
of the investigation of the killing of the former Prime
Minister of Lebanon, Rafiq Hariri, and the fate of the

08-29745

S/PV.5863

former Director General of General Security in
Lebanon, General Jamil Al Sayed, and the three other
former heads of the Lebanese Special Services
suspected of being part of the assassination of Prime
Minister Hariri.
Do we correctly understand that these four people
have been in prison for almost three years now, with no
indictment and that they have been detained on the
recommendation of the first head of the Commission?
And that this recommendation in considered to still be
in force?
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Lebanon.
Mr. Salam (Lebanon) (spoke in Arabic): Allow
me at the outset, on behalf of Lebanon, to congratulate
you, Mr. President, and your friendly country on
assuming the presidency of the Security Council this
month. Let me also express our sincerest appreciation
to the delegation of the Russian Federation for its
presidency of the Council last month.
We meet today to discuss the tenth report of the
International Independent Investigation Commission on
the crime of the assassination of former Prime Minister
Rafiq Hariri and his companions. Since the last report
of the Commission, two new crimes have been
perpetrated, the first targeting General François al-Hajj
and the second, Major Wissam Eid. They were both
martyred, along with a new number of civilian victims.
Thus the number of crimes for which the
International Commission is providing technical
assistance to the Lebanese authorities in their
investigation has reached 20. They are all acts of
terrorism aimed at destabilizing Lebanon through the
targeting of free thinkers and politicians, as well as
leaders of both the military and security
establishments. On top of this, many innocent people
in the safe havens of their homes and places of work
have been targeted.
That series of cowardly, terrorist attacks has
resulted in the deaths of 61 people and the wounding of
no less than 494 others. We must also recall here that
the cowardly hand of terrorism has also reached out
targeted elements of the United Nations Interim Force
in Lebanon in southern Lebanon, as well as members
of the diplomatic corps accredited to Lebanon.
Lebanon is making many sacrifices for its
freedom. They are only matched by our determination

08-29745

and by the Council’s determination, through the
International Commission, to find out the truth, to find
out who plotted, participated in and perpetrated such
crimes. There are many sacrifices that Lebanon is
making for its freedom. They are only matched by our
insistence, and the Council’s, on setting up the Special
Tribunal for Lebanon with an international character to
ensure that there will be no impunity for the
perpetrators.
Our search for truth has never been for the sake
of revenge. We have sought the truth in order to help
our people heal the wounds caused by this series of
terrorist attacks. We are on a path that you,
Mr. President, know more than any other, as your great
country, South Africa, has had a leading experience,
together with Bishop Desmond Tutu, in stressing the
importance of truth in overcoming the pains that your
people have suffered. As truth, as former President
Nelson Mandela said, helped your country to find
common understanding of its path, we also hope that
truth will help us reach a common understanding of
this chapter in the history of our country.
Our seeking to set up the Special Tribunal for
Lebanon, a tribunal with an international character, has
always sought justice in order to deter terrorists from
perpetrating their crimes in order to restore stability
and security to our country and to restore a sense of
civility and safety to our people.
I have listened very carefully to the statement
made by Commissioner Daniel Bellemare. On behalf of
the Government of Lebanon, I should like to reiterate
our congratulations to him on his assumption of office.
Allow me also to express our sincere appreciation of
his sense of leadership and the great professionalism he
has demonstrated since taking over the Commission at
the beginning of this year. I should also like to convey
our most heartfelt thanks to all of those working in the
Commission for their excellent work. With regard to
the substance of Mr. Bellemare’s statement and the
Commission’s tenth report, which has now been
transmitted to the Council, I should like to make the
following observations on behalf of my delegation.
First, we pay tribute to the Commission, in the
person of its Commissioner and members, for carrying
out their work in difficult security conditions and for
the success they have achieved in more than
doubling — from 123 to 256 — the number of the
Commission’s requests for assistance to Lebanon and

5

S/PV.5863

other States. We also welcome the Commission’s
flexibility with regard to those requests for assistance,
as well as for seeking assistance from the largest
number of international forensic laboratories in order
to achieve results as soon as possible.
Secondly, we welcome the concrete results
achieved by the Commission on the basis of the
evidence it continues to collect, in particular as that has
enabled the Commission to ascertain that the
assassination of former Prime Minister Hariri was
carried out by a criminal network, that some parts of
that network are linked to a number of other crimes
covered by the Commission’s mandate, that that
network was in place prior to Prime Minister Hariri’s
assassination and that elements of the network are still
in place and continue to operate.
Thirdly, we would like to draw the Council’s
attention to the fact that the Commission is continuing
to cooperate with Lebanese judicial authorities —
whether with regard to exchanges of information, the
holding of meetings, evaluating evidence or preparing
for future stages of the current investigation. We would
also like to reiterate the commitment of the
Government of Lebanon to ensuring full protection for
the headquarters and members of the Commission.
Fourthly, having read last year’s report of the
Secretary-General
to
the
Security
Council
(S/2007/525) on the important progress made in the
steps to establish the Special Tribunal for Lebanon —
including the signing of the headquarters agreement,
the selection of judges, the appointment of the
Registrar, the establishment of the administration and
the collection of a large number of necessary financial
contributions — we would like to welcome the
reference in Mr. Bellemare’s report regarding the
completion of the necessary steps for the transitional
period prior to the establishment of the Tribunal and
for the transfer of evidence and other judicial matters.

6

The delegation of Lebanon takes note of
Mr. Bellemare’s request that the Commission’s mandate
be renewed. Let me assure the Council that my
Government will look most favourably on the matter.
The President: I now give the floor to
Mr. Bellemare to respond to the comments and
questions raised.
Mr. Bellemare: I thank the representative of the
Russian Federation for his question. The first thing that
I would like to say is that the situation of the
individuals he referred to results from a decision that
was made by the Lebanese judicial authorities
according to Lebanese criminal law. It is not for me to
second-guess their decision. I have continued to
provide the Lebanese judicial authorities with all the
information we have, so that they can make their own
assessment on the continued detention.
I have discussed the matter with the Prosecutor
General of Lebanon; but the Council will understand
that I will not comment publicly on my discussion with
him. The Prosecutor General is the highest judicial
investigative authority in Lebanon, and he is my main
interlocutor. My relationship with him is based on
trust, and that trust is based on the confidentiality of
our discussions. I also understand, from recent media
reports, that the matter may soon be litigated before an
international tribunal, which is yet another reason for
me not to comment further.
The President: I thank Mr. Bellemare for his
further comments.
There are no further speakers inscribed on my
list. In accordance with understanding reached in the
Council’s prior consultations, I now invite Council
members to informal consultations to continue our
discussion on the subject.
The meeting rose at 3.35 p.m.

08-29745
