S/PV.8451

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-fourth year

8451st meeting

Friday, 25 January 2019, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Vargas Maldonado/Mr. Cortorreal . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Dominican Republic)

Members:

Belgium. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Côte d’Ivoire . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Equatorial Guinea. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Germany . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Indonesia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kuwait. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Peru. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Poland . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
South Africa . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Reynders
Mr. Ma Zhaoxu
Mr. Ipo
Mr. Ndong Mba
Mrs. Gueguen
Mr. Maas
Mrs. Marsudi
Sheikh Al Sabah
Mr. Meza-Cuadra
Mr. Kurtyka
Mr. Nebenzia
Mr. Matjila
Lord Ahmad
Mr. Cohen

Agenda
Maintenance of international peace and security
Addressing the impacts of climate-related disasters on international peace
and security
Letter dated 2 January 2019 from the Permanent Representative of the Dominican
Republic to the United Nations addressed to the Secretary-General (S/2019/1)

.

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

19-02010 (E)
*1902010*

S/PV.8451

Maintenance of international peace and security

The meeting was called to order at 10.10 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Maintenance of international peace and security
Addressing the impacts of climate-related
disasters on international peace and security
Letter dated 2 January 2019 from the
Permanent Representative of the Dominican
Republic to the United Nations addressed to the
Secretary-General (S/2019/1)
The President (spoke in Spanish): In accordance
with rule 37 of the Council’s provisional rules of
procedure, I invite the representatives of Algeria,
Armenia, Australia, Bangladesh, Barbados, Belize,
Brazil, Canada, Chile, Colombia, Costa Rica, Ecuador,
Estonia, Fiji, Finland, Greece, Guatemala, Haiti,
Hungary, India, Iraq, Ireland, the Islamic Republic
of Iran, Italy, Japan, Kazakhstan, Kenya, Latvia,
Liechtenstein, Maldives, Mexico, the Federated States
of Micronesia, Morocco, Nauru, the Netherlands,
New Zealand, Nicaragua, Norway, Pakistan, Papua
New Guinea, Portugal, Qatar, the Philippines, the
Republic of Korea, Romania, Saint Vincent and the
Grenadines, Somalia, Slovakia, Spain, Sri Lanka, the
Sudan, Sweden, Switzerland, Trinidad and Tobago,
Turkey, Tuvalu, the United Arab Emirates, Uruguay,
Uzbekistan and Viet Nam to participate in this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite the following
briefers to participate in this meeting: Ms. Rosemary
DiCarlo, Under-Secretary-General for Political
and Peacebuilding Affairs; Mr. Achim Steiner,
Administrator of the United Nations Development
Programme; Mr. Pavel Kabat, Chief Scientist of the
World Meteorological Organization; and Ms. Lindsay
Getschel, Research Assistant at the Environmental
Security Program of the Stimson Center.
Mr. Steiner is joining today’s meeting via video
tele-conference from Davos, Switzerland.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I also invite Mr. Antonio
Parenti, Minister Counsellor of the Delegation of the
European Union to the United Nations; Her Excellency
Ms. Fatima Kyari Mohammed, Permanent Observer of
the African Union to the United Nations; and Mr. Robert
2/83

25/01/2019

Mardini, Permanent Observer of the International
Committee of the Red Cross to the United Nations, to
participate in this meeting.
I propose that the Council invite the Permanent
Observer of the Observer State of the Holy See to
the United Nations to participate in this meeting, in
accordance with the provisional rules of procedure and
the previous practice in this regard.
It is so decided.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I wish to draw the attention of the members of the
Council to document S/2019/1, which contains a letter
dated 2 January 2019 from the Permanent Representative
of the Dominican Republic to the United Nations
addressed to the Secretary-General, transmitting a
concept note on the item under consideration.
I now give the floor to Ms. DiCarlo.
Ms. DiCarlo: I thank the Government of the
Dominican Republic for convening this timely
open debate.
The risks associated with climate-related disasters
do not represent a scenario of some distant future. They
are already a reality for millions of people around the
globe, and they are not going away. A report released
by the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change
last October predicted more heat waves, heavier rain
events, higher sea levels and more severe damage to
agriculture. These trends represent a security risk for
the entire world. However, their consequences are felt
most strongly in regions that are already vulnerable,
where climate change and extreme weather compound
existing grievances and threats.
The relationship between climate-related risks and
conflict is complex and often intersects with political,
social, economic and demographic factors. Sea-level
rise is an obvious primary impact of climate change,
and one that ultimately threatens the very existence of
coastal communities and small island States. Extreme
weather is another such consequence. In the space of a
month, hurricanes Irma, Harvey and Maria displaced
around 3 million people along the Atlantic Coast of the
Americas and the Caribbean. The worst impact was felt
by small island developing States of the region. In Haiti,
for example, a series of climate-related disasters has
struck the country since the devastating earthquake in
19-02010

25/01/2019

Maintenance of international peace and security

2010 and has contributed to instability and a prolonged
humanitarian crisis.

S/PV. 8451

Climate change also affects peace and security in
indirect but no less serious ways. In the Sahel and the
Sudan, for instance, climate change has heightened
competition for diminishing land, forage and water
resources, fuelling tensions between herders and
farmers. In the Lake Chad basin, climate change
contributes to unpredictable rainfall patterns that
impede traditional livelihood options, compound
socioeconomic exclusion and reduce the opportunity
costs of joining armed groups.

First, we are strengthening our analytical capacity.
The Department of Political and Peacebuilding
Affairs, the United Nations Development Programme
and the United Nations Environment Programme, in
collaboration with practitioners from across and beyond
the United Nations, are developing an integrated risk
assessment framework to analyse climate-related
security risks. Furthermore, in response to Security
Council presidential statement S/PRST/2011/15, which
requested more contextual information on the security
implications of climate change, the United Nations is
working to ensure that such analysis is better reflected
in our mandated reports.

Climate-related displacement has also become
an acute problem. Frequent and longer droughts in
Somalia have been a major factor in the displacement
of more than 2.6 million people, which in turn has
increased local tensions, as well as human trafficking,
child exploitation and recruitment by armed groups.

Secondly, the United Nations is seeking to
strengthen the evidence base to support the development
of climate risk prevention and management strategies
at the field level. We invite Member States and other
interested actors to jointly undertake a review of good
practices that will inform this work.

For the Security Council, this is not news. In recent
months, the Council has recognized the adverse effects
of climate change, among other factors, on the stability
of Mali, Somalia, West Africa and the Sahel, Central
Africa and the Sudan. The Secretary-General, for his
part, has articulated a broad vision for prevention and
made it a priority to improve our ability to address
wider stresses and shocks that can exacerbate crises
and lead to violent conflict. Across the United Nations
system, efforts are intensifying to leverage capacities
and sharpen responses. For example, the United
Nations Office for West Africa and the Sahel has been
working closely with the Economic Community of
West African States to analyse climate-related security
risks in the region and to jointly develop regional
prevention strategies.

Thirdly, we are strengthening partnerships to
leverage existing capacities with Member States,
regional organizations, civil society and the growing
research community on this issue. Addressing the
security implications of climate change is a collective
problem that requires a collective response.

These regional approaches are also being applied
in Central Asia, where regional cooperation is fostering
progress in the area of transboundary water management
through ongoing consultations among Central Asian
States, supported by the United Nations Regional
Centre for Preventive Diplomacy. In country-specific
contexts, our missions are also building responses to
the consequences of climate change. In Somalia, the
United Nations is working to establish an effective
drought response programme.
Looking ahead, the United Nations will invest in a
number of actions.

Most important for all of us is the recognition
that deeds must follow words. Major armies and
businesses have long recognized the need to prepare
for climate-related risks, rightfully perceiving climate
change as a threat multiplier. We cannot lag behind. We
must act now, with a sense of urgency and a commitment
to placing people, especially those most marginalized
and vulnerable, at the centre of our efforts. Given the
critical role and responsibility of the Security Council,
I am encouraged by today’s debate. It signals our
willingness to establish a shared understanding of the
impact of climate-related security risks on international
peace and security. In this regard, I would like to again
thank the Dominican Republic for convening us on
this subject.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I thank
Ms. DiCarlo for her briefing.
I now give the floor to Mr. Steiner.
Mr. Steiner: I begin by offering my apologies for
the fact that, due to technology issues, it has not been
possible to establish a video connection. I shall therefore
restrict my statement to a brief overview of the main

19-020103/83

S/PV.8451

Maintenance of international peace and security

25/01/2019

points that I wanted to share with the Security Council
and will submit the full statement in due course.

not keeping up with the challenge. Let me very briefly
set out three major themes that have emerged.

If I may, I would like to begin by thanking the
Dominican Republic and you, Mr. President, in your
capacity as its Foreign Minister, for calling the Council’s
attention once again to the impact of climate-related
disasters on international peace and security in this
debate. I also want to join my colleague Rosemary
DiCarlo and our other briefers in expressing the hope
that what we share with the Council today will not only
demonstrate the linkages that the Council is exploring
but also bring to its attention once again the sense of
urgency with which the world now needs to address
this issue.

First, the science that my colleague Rosemary
DiCarlo just referred to is becoming ever more clear,
both in terms of the nature and scale of the impact and
to the linkages between climate change and the effect
that it is having not just in the atmosphere, but actually
in the biosphere. The report of the Intergovernmental
Panel on Climate Change points to more extreme
weather events, drought, floods, rising sea levels and
so on, and those clearly are a threat to communities
across the globe, in particular and perhaps on the front
line of action to the poorest of the poor and coastal
communities in small island developing States.

Taken alone, climate-related disasters, conflict
and insecurity each threaten human security and
development. Examples will be forthcoming today.
But their convergence can lead to catastrophic impacts
on people and societies. It is telling that this week
the World Economic Forum published its Global
Risks Report 2018, in which it identifies the impact
of extreme weather events and failure to implement
climate-change mitigation and adaptation measures
as the top two global risks that the world now faces,
well ahead of cybersecurity, data theft and other such
phenomenons that pose risks to the global economy and
international security.

But what is also important is the fact that the
empirical evidence of how we can respond to those
threats is becoming ever more clear. The nationally
determined contributions that all countries agreed to
in Paris are not only action plans but also risk maps
of where countries have identified the priorities for
addressing threats to the future of their security,
economic well-being and development. The case of Iraq
is an interesting one. The action plan that Iraq brought
to the Paris agreement focuses on the nexus between
climate and security, which includes mainstreaming
climate risks, ecosystem restoration and solar solutions
for recovery in newly liberated areas.

As Council members all know, climate change is a
risk multiplier. It aggravates an already fragile situation,
including in countries in conflict, where communities
have limited capacities to cope with additional shocks.
In a recent report, our colleagues in the World Bank
have also pointed to the fact that without urgent climate
action, more than 140 million people in sub-Saharan
Africa, South Asia and Latin America will migrate
within their countries’ borders by the year 2050, adding
significantly to the challenges that are already being
faced by vulnerable communities in cities.

The second major point I wish to make is that our
capacity to respond to these threats and address their
challenges to human security demands an effective and
integrated agenda on climate disaster-risk reduction,
peacebuilding and many development measures,
including the resetting of our economies and therefore
emissions reduction. Integrating efforts to tackle
climate change and to prepare for and respond to
natural disasters is the right approach. The Sustainable
Development Goals and the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development provide us with an approach that can
actually leverage various measures that can add up to
significant change. Included in that are the optimization
of nature-based solutions to scale. Sustainable land
use and forest management offer powerful and costeffective means to reduce greenhouse gas emissions,
reduce risks to livelihoods and provide rural economies
in particular with opportunities to manage this.

In our work on the ground as the United Nations
Development Programme (UNDP), we are witness
to the ways that climate change is driving insecurity
and, increasingly, conflict as well. For instance, in
extreme weather events such as drought, we are already
witnessing a higher number of victims arising from
conflict between pastoralists and sedentary populations
in West Africa than from some of the extreme violence
related to political developments. These are very
troubling developments and point to the fact that we are
4/83

The third point that I would like to make here is
that while we are addressing the first two issues, it is
critical that we recognize that people are already at risk
19-02010

25/01/2019

Maintenance of international peace and security

today from the impact of climate change. Therefore,
investing in adaptation and resilience is now an urgent
need if we wish to scale up. Even if we curb emissions
for 1.5 degree world, many millions of people are
already exposed to the challenges and risks of climate
change. A strong focus on adaptation and disaster risk
management is therefore essential. I would cite two
or three examples from our work across the world
that demonstrate how we are currently trying to assist
countries in addressing this. I would also mention that
at the UNDP today, we literally have a portfolio of
hundreds of projects in 140 countries, assisting nations
to address these mitigation and adaptation priorities.
In Maldives, rising sea levels threaten freshwater
supplies. The Government of Maldives and UNDP have
piloted an innovative integrated water management
system across three islands. I am pleased report that,
based on the success of the pilot, the United Nations
Green Climate Fund is now providing financing to
scale up such an integrated water management system
across 45 islands, securing a combination of rainwater
and groundwater for a quarter of the population
in Maldives.
My second example is in the Caribbean. For
obvious reasons, in partnership with four of the largest
insurance companies in the region, UNDP has supported
Governments in designing initiatives to facilitate
financial risk transfers from climate-vulnerable
households to the private sector. This initiative will
expand insurance coverage in the Caribbean, building
on the reconstruction work in the region.
As a final example, in the Dominican Republic,
the Government, in partnership with UNDP, has
developed a vulnerability index to climate shock — the
first of its kind worldwide — to measure household
vulnerability to hurricanes, storms and other climate
phenomena. It has been used not only in the context
of social protection policy systems, but also as a tool
for disaster risk planning and disaster response. It is
a very appropriate example at this time, given that
the Dominican Republic, as President of the Security
Council, has brought us together on this critical
question today.
I end this brief presentation by appealing to all
participants to consider how the world now views
climate risk and how the world is assessing the threat
that it poses to the future not only of our economies but
also of our human and national security. Ultimately, it

S/PV. 8451

also becomes a transboundary challenge to the way that
we can look to the future.
I express my thanks for this opportunity to address
the Council by means of this telephone call, and, again,
my apologies for not having been able to participate
in person.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I thank
Mr. Steiner for his briefing.
I now give the floor to Mr. Kabat.
Mr. Kabat: I have the honour to brief the Council
today on behalf of the Secretary-General of the World
Meteorological Organization (WMO), the United
Nations system’s authoritative voice on weather,
climate and water. The WMO has 192 member States
and territories, with representatives of national
meteorological and hydrological services around
the world.
As already pointed out by my colleague Achim
Steiner, the World Economic Forum, which is taking
place in Davos this week, has just published its annual
Global Risks Report 2019. The report indicates once
again that extreme weather, natural disasters, climate
change and water crises are the top four issues on the
list of existential threats of the global risk landscape.
These show significant interconnections with the
other shocks and impacts to peace and security and
sustainable development.
This survey highlights yet again the critical
importance of the WMO’s core business, and early
warnings are at the heart of that business: early warnings
to prevent natural hazards from becoming disasters, and
early warnings about our changing climate, which were
issued a full 40 years ago, at the First World Climate
Conference, organized by the WMO in 1979.
Global average greenhouse-gas concentrations of
carbon dioxide reached 405 parts per million in 2017
and are continuing to rise to record levels in 20182019. The last time our Earth experienced a comparable
concentration of carbon dioxide was 3 to 5 million years
ago, when the temperature was about 2 to 3 degrees
warmer and the sea level was 10 to 20 metres higher
than it is now. The WMO’s provisional statement on
the state of the climate in 2018 showed that the past
four years have been the warmest on record, with many
high-impact weather events that bear the hallmarks
of climate change. The 20 warmest years on record
have occurred in the past 22 years. The global average

19-020105/83

S/PV.8451

Maintenance of international peace and security

25/01/2019

temperature is nearly 1 degree higher than it was in the
pre-industrial era.

with far-reaching, lasting consequences for marine life,
coral reefs and food security.

On extreme weather threats, 2017 was the most
impactful and costliest Atlantic hurricane season in
observable history, with losses exceeding $282 billion
and significant social economic and gross domestic
product (GDP) impacts on small island developing
States in the Caribbean from major hurricanes such as
Maria, Irma and Harvey. The World Bank estimates
the total damage and losses to Dominica island from
Hurricane Maria at $1.3 billion, or 224 per cent of its
GDP. Approximately 99.7 per cent of the damage done
during the season was due to three of the season’s
major hurricanes — Harvey, Irma, and Maria. Another
notable hurricane, Nate, was the worst natural disaster
in Costa Rican history. That season was also one of
only six years on record to feature multiple Category
5 hurricanes.

Climate change has a multitude of security impacts:
rolling back the gains made in nutrition and access to
food; heightening the risk of wildfires and exacerbating
air-quality challenges; and increasing the potential for
water conflict, leading to more internal displacement
and migration. It is therefore increasingly regarded as a
national security threat.

In August 2018, the south-western Indian state of
Kerala suffered the worst flooding since the 1920s,
displacing more than 1.4 million people from their
homes and affecting more than 5.4 million. Large
parts of western Japan experienced destructive
flooding in late June and early July, killing at least
230 people and destroying thousands of homes.
Flooding affected many parts of East Africa in March
and April, including Kenya and Somalia, which had
previously been suffering from severe drought, as well
as Ethiopia and northern and central Tanzania. Of
the 17.7 million internally displaced persons tracked
by the International Organization for Migration,
2.3 million had been displaced due to disasters linked
to weather and climate events as of September 2018.
In Somalia, some 642,000 new internal displacements
were recorded between January and July 2018 by the
Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for
Refugees (UNHCR), with flooding the primary reason
for displacement, followed by drought and conflict.
Research by the WMO and its partners and network
of scientists shows that sea-level rise is accelerating, as
is the melting of polar ice sheets, posing an increasing
existential threat to small island developing States.
The shrinking of Arctic sea ice not only affects the
local environment and indigenous peoples, but also
influences weather patterns in the world’s populated
regions. Glacier melt continues unchecked, with shortterm impacts that include increased flooding and a
long-term threat to water supplies for many millions
of people. Ocean heat content is also at record levels,
6/83

Today is the first time in history that the WMO,
as a United Nations agency, has officially briefed
the Security Council in the Chamber on climate and
extreme weather issues. We hope that this will foster
closer collaboration and establish mechanisms for
future briefings between Security Council members
and the United Nations system agencies, including
the WMO, which will make it possible to provide
authoritative information for decision-making and
support the diplomatic business of the Council in areas
appropriate to the understanding and analysis of peace
and security threats.
The WMO is stepping up its support for the
United Nations Operations and Crisis Centre through
a dedicated coordination officer at United Nations
Headquarters to provide expert information and to
assist United Nations leadership in making informed
strategic decisions. This is vital given that extreme
weather and climate events such as floods, drought and
tropical cyclones are undercutting progress towards the
Sustainable Development Goals, as we are repeatedly
seeing, with tragic consequences.
The WMO is committed to providing cutting-edge
science to the United Nations Secretary-General’s
Climate Summit in September and to supporting
Member States in evidence-based climate action.
In order to meet the challenges and promote the
international agenda, there is a need for a new political
and investment paradigm to build a new generation
of hydroclimate forecasting and early-warning
services. This should become a component of the
basic infrastructure of a country, comparable to roads
and bridges. We must see this is a must-have, not just
something nice to have.
The WMO is honoured to support Member States
and the Security Council in the provision of topquality information on weather-, climate-, water- and
environment-related threats to peace and security. We
thank once again the Dominican Republic presidency
19-02010

25/01/2019

Maintenance of international peace and security

of the Security Council for its vision in organizing this
debate and for the opportunity to address the Council in
the Chamber this morning.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I thank Mr. Kabat
for his briefing.
I now give the floor to Ms. Getschel.
Ms. Getschel: It is an honour to address the
Security Council, and I thank the Dominican Republic
for having convened this debate.
I am here as a young person to demand action
because it is my generation and those that come after
me who will bear the consequences of climate change.
We are dedicated to finding solutions to this issue so
that we can live in a world that is more secure, more
peaceful and more prosperous.
I will lay out three concrete steps that the Security
Council can take to reduce the security impacts of
climate change.
First, the Security Council should adopt a draft
resolution that formally recognizes climate change as a
threat to international peace and security.
Secondly, deployed United Nations missions should
assess how climate change will impact local youth
and how youth can be involved in building resilience
and sustainability.
And, thirdly, deployed United Nations missions
need to transition to using clean energy in the field,
which will help mitigate climate change as well as build
more sustainable communities.
The adoption by the Security Council of a draft
resolution formally recognizing the threat that climate
change poses to security is long overdue. While I
applaud the Council for discussing climate change’s
security impacts, it has been 10 years since its first
debate on this issue, and no resolution has been adopted
that affirms that climate change constitutes a threat to
international peace and security.
There is no question that climate change is a
security issue. At the Stimson Center, an international
security policy research institute in Washington, D.C.,
where I work, we are doing innovative research on how
social and economic vulnerabilities, poor governance,
migration and a decline in fisheries will impact the
stability of coastal cities. By overlaying these factors,
we are identifying the most at-risk places for instability

S/PV. 8451

as a result of climate change in order to better target
policies, investment and aid.
It is clear to everyone in this room that climate
change is a security threat. Today, we know that
18 million people were displaced in 2017 alone as a
result of storms, drought, flooding and heat waves. As
we have seen in just the past few Atlantic hurricane
seasons, which have ravaged the Caribbean and Gulf
of Mexico, local Governments simply cannot handle
the increasingly severe weather that is becoming more
common. When local Governments cannot provide
basic services to their people, the result is displacement,
poverty, political instability and violence. Climate
change is also harming the food and economic security
of millions of people. There is an increasing consensus
that more extreme and longer droughts in Africa and
the Middle East are connected to conflict there. As
oceans warm and marine ecosystems shift, coastal
communities, particularly in island nations, will lose
the sources of food and livelihood they have relied on
for generations.
Simply put, climate change makes people less
safe, forcing them to leave their homes and abandon
their livelihoods as they lose access to their income,
food and ways of life. This clearly impacts political
and social stability. Importantly, young people are
particularly vulnerable, be it through human trafficking,
unemployment, poverty or simply not knowing where
their next meal is coining from.
While the United Nations has incorporated climate
change into the mandates of missions, such as in
Somalia, Darfur, Mali, the Central African Republic
and the Lake Chad region, a Security Council resolution
that recognizes the security impacts of climate change
must also require climate sensitivity to be part of the
mandates of all peacekeeping missions and special
political missions.
The next step the Security Council must take will be
to recognize both the disproportionate impact climate
change has on young people and young people’s unique
role as innovators, bringing new ideas to the table to
solve this global problem. The Security Council should
require the special representatives of the SecretaryGeneral at each deployed mission to assess the impact
of climate change on local youth, particularly in terms
of displacement, unemployment, food security, and
recruitment into armed groups, because these are
insecurities that we know drive continued conflict.

19-020107/83

S/PV.8451

Maintenance of international peace and security

The special representatives should brief the Security
Council on their findings. Such assessments would
function as an early-warning mechanism to alert the
Council to areas where climate change will hamper the
ability of United Nations missions to carry out their
conflict prevention and peacebuilding activities.
Deployed missions must also engage young
people in finding solutions to build climate resilience
in their communities. As just one example, in Saint
Lucia, a local young person, Mr. Johanan Dujon saw
how climate-induced blooms of harmful seaweed
damaged the local fishing industry and he created a
fertilizer using the seaweed that had washed ashore.
This improved the resilience of local fishers to climate
change and improved local gardening and agriculture.
In the three years since Mr. Dujon started his business,
he has removed almost 300 tons of seaweed from the
shores of Saint Lucia. More of these innovate solutions
are needed to address climate change around the world.
The United Nations and its newly launched Youth 2030
Strategy can act as a platform where young people can
share their ideas and find support for their initiatives.
Finally, the United Nations must live up to this
organ’s long-stated goal to reduce reliance on fossil
fuels in field missions. By reducing the energy footprint
of its deployed missions, the United Nations can reduce
its greenhouse gas pollution while also building
sustainable infrastructure in the communities that it
serves. By using sustainable energy, the United Nations
can prevent its reliance on the fossil fuels market and
build a more self-sufficient community. According
to an environmental study conducted by the United
Nations Department of Field Support, as of April 2017,
renewable energy accounted for less than 1 per cent of
electricity generation in deployed missions, meaning
that missions rely almost entirely on fossil fuels,
particularly diesel. The Security Council should adopt
a resolution to commit to 50 per cent of energy from
renewables by 2025 and use regular reports from the
Secretary-General to track progress.
There is no question that climate change is a
security threat both in its direct impacts and as a threat
multiplier. The United Nations and the Security Council
must live up to their words and act now to mitigate
and adapt to climate change. While I am heartened by
multilateral frameworks like the Paris Agreement on
Climate Change, there is much more to be done. Those
commitments are important, but they are not nearly
good enough if we are to prevent warming above 1.5˚C.
8/83

25/01/2019

Young people must be central to finding and
sustaining these solutions. Almost 2 billion young
people around the world do not have the luxury of
choosing not to care about this issue. And with the help
of the United Nations and its member countries, we will
find solutions. Otherwise it is us, our communities and
our future that will face the consequences.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I thank
Ms. Getschel for her briefing.
I shall now give the floor to the members of
the Council.
I call on the Deputy Prime Minister and Minister
for Foreign Affairs of Kuwait.
Sheikh Al Sabah (Kuwait) (spoke in Arabic):
At the outset, I would like to thank Your Excellency
Mr. Vargas Maldonado, Minister for Foreign Affairs
of the friendly Dominican Republic, for presiding over
this meeting to address the impacts of climate-related
disasters on international peace and security. I would
like also to remind the international community of the
need to support the countries that are most affected.
I thank Ms. Rosemary DiCarlo, Under-SecretaryGeneral for Political and Peacebuilding Affairs;
Mr. Achim Steiner, Administrator of the United Nations
Development Programme; Mr. Pavel Kabat, Chief
Scientist of the World Meteorological Organization
(WMO); and Ms. Lindsay Getschel, Research Assistant
at the Environmental Security Program of the Stimson
Center, for their valuable briefings.
Climate change has been a major international
concern in recent years. Many important international
conferences have been held to discuss the best ways to
address that phenomenon. Those endeavours and tireless
efforts of the international community resulted in the
adoption of the Paris Agreement on Climate Change
in 2015 — a historic achievement to the upholding
and implementation of which we must be committed
in order to spare Earth further deterioration. Recent
scientific studies underscore that the deterioration is
moving at a pace faster than the steps we are taking to
protect and preserve the environment.
The adverse impacts of climate change are
evident. Millions of people are suffering across the
world owing to food insecurity, water scarcity and
other health hazards that affect people and living
organisms as a result of floods, storms, desertification
and rising temperatures and sea and ocean levels that
19-02010

25/01/2019

Maintenance of international peace and security

will threaten the very existence of a number of island
States in the Pacific Ocean in the coming years. Those
facts underline the fact that climate change is a crossborder phenomenon and that no country will be spared
its impact.
In order to address that phenomenon, all of us have
a common but differentiated responsibility. However,
that would require political will, cooperation and
solidarity at the international and regional levels in
order for tangible measures to be taken in accordance
with the agreed frameworks aimed at addressing the
impact of the phenomenon. That includes measures
that would implement the principles and purposes of
the Sendai Framework for Disaster Risk Reduction
2015-2030, as well as the Paris Agreement on Climate
Change, in order to limit the global temperature rise to
less than 2°C or to 1.5°C, if possible, by 2020.
We are concerned about the assertion of WMO
that in 2015, 2016 and 2017 global temperatures saw
record increases. We hope that the climate summit
that the Secretary-General has called for convening in
September will make progress, mobilize the required
international support and complement the achievements
made in the twenty-fourth Conference of the Parties to
the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate
Change, which was held at the end of last year in the
city of Katowice in Poland. Important agreements were
made at the Conference to promote transparency and
information-sharing on plans and programmes aimed at
reducing emissions and increasing financial support to
developing countries and those that are most affected by
climate change, so as to help them adapt, work towards
natural-disaster reduction and continue to implement
the guidelines related to the historic Paris Agreement,
which will enter into force in 2020.
United Nations estimates show that natural
disasters related to climate change are on the rise. They
account for 77 per cent of the natural disasters that have
occurred over the past two decades. The international
community is facing considerable challenges in
addressing the emergencies caused by such disasters.
They result in the deaths of 3 million people a year
and leave many injured and in distress, a number that
reached 1.4 billion people over the past two decades.
Climate change is one of the root causes of the
challenges and difficulties in the African continent,
particularly in the region of Lake Chad basin and the
Sahel. It has exacerbated socioeconomic difficulties in

S/PV. 8451

a way that has fuelled conflicts and competition over
scarce resources, which has had an impact on security
and stability in the region.
International attention to climate change has been
accompanied by similar attention from the State of
Kuwait. The reality is that, like other countries, we
are affected by climate change. Therefore, my country,
Kuwait, has shared in the efforts of the international
community to address the impact of climate change.
We have spared no effort at the local, regional and
international levels, in particular since the start of
negotiations on the historic Paris Agreement, which we
have ratified. The State of Kuwait has paid particular
attention to renewable energies and to diversifying
energy resources through the use of wind and solar
power. That will help meet 15 per cent of the State’s
energy needs by 2020. The oil sector has also developed
strategies to manage greenhouse-gas emissions, with a
view to reducing them in order to improve the efficiency
of environmentally friendly energy.
Kuwait has also promoted international cooperation
and collective work as part of the collective emergency
response at the governmental and public levels in the
area of humanitarian assistance and rehabilitation. We
have also extended a helping hand to peoples of countries
facing natural disasters and countries emerging from
conflict. That includes emergency relief as well as
development and reconstruction programmes. We have
assumed our international responsibility in addressing
and mitigating natural disaster-related crises. In fact,
climate change affects food security, biodiversity,
sustainable development, peace and security, the air
and water. More than ever, we need to take additional
steps and technological measures, adopt new patterns
of behaviour and be more ambition in implementing
Sustainable Development Goal 13.
In conclusion, we stress that we will continue to
support the efforts of various United Nations organs
in the areas of crises and disasters management,
peacebuilding and addressing climate change and its
impact on security, given the multifaceted nature of
the phenomenon. That requires broad discussion in
the context of sustainable development, because we
believe in addressing the phenomenon with common
but differentiated responsibilities in the area of
climate-change mitigation and adaptation, in line with
national priorities and capacities in order to meet the
aspirations of all our peoples.

19-020109/83

S/PV.8451

Maintenance of international peace and security

The President (spoke in Spanish): I now call on the
Minister for Foreign Affairs of Belgium.
Mr. Reynders (Belgium) (spoke in French): First
of all, I would like to thank the Dominican Republic
for convening today’s meeting. Belgium welcomes the
role of the Security Council in addressing the impacts
of climate change on international peace and security.
I also thank those who spoke at the beginning of the
meeting for setting the stage for today’s debate.
Today we are seeing mounting evidence of how
climate change increases instability and insecurity
in places as diverse as the Sahel, the Middle East,
Central Asia and the Caribbean and Pacific island
States. More frequent and intense extreme weather
events, such as hurricanes and droughts, as well as sealevel rise, exacerbate sociopolitical tensions around
the world. Given the growing scientific evidence of
the disastrous consequences of climate change, there
should no longer be any doubt as to the relevance of
the issue to the Security Council. The international
community must come together to urgently find an
ambitious common response. As policymakers, we
have a tremendous responsibility. We must heed the
call of future generations.
I would like to address the following three issues:
the importance of a preventive approach, ways for the
Council to better take into account the link between
climate change and security, and the response of the
United Nations system as a whole.
First, in order to effectively discharge the mandate
set out in the Charter of the United Nations, the Council
must pay attention to early warning signs and develop
greater sensitivity to situations that could lead to
conflict, including climate-related situations. Conflict
prevention is not only a virtuous policy; it is also a
profitable strategy on many levels. In particular, it
makes it possible to invest resources in positive and
forward-looking actions, rather than having to intervene
later through peacekeeping operations, which are more
costly and less effective.
Secondly, as to how the Council should approach
the problem, it is high time for climate-related risks
to be reflected in its regular work. Belgium attaches
great importance to the integration of climate risks into
country or regional discussions, including with regard
to the renewal of peacekeeping mandates. I welcome the
recent resolutions that have already taken that factor into
account. I am thinking in particular of the Sahel, where
10/83

25/01/2019

conflicts between herders and farmers have broken out
because of the lack of water, and Afghanistan, where
drought is causing destabilizing migration flows. It is
clear that taking climate risks into account is no longer
an option but a necessity, if the Council is to assume
its full responsibility and strengthen its capacity to
prevent conflicts.
Thirdly, for Belgium, the time has come to further
organize around that issue within the United Nations
system by bringing together expertise from the various
United Nations agencies and departments in order
to cross-reference existing knowledge and make it
operational. An institutional focal point — a clearing
house — would respond to the urgent need to provide the
Council with adequate risk analysis and management
strategies for countries and regions where that is
relevant. That could be done within the Secretariat or
through a format that also involves Member States, as
is the case with subsidiary bodies.
An annual thematic briefing would be a good point
of departure. Detailed analyses and regular reporting
by the Special Representatives of the SecretaryGeneral and peace operations in the regions concerned
would also be useful, and Belgium welcomes cases
where that is already being implemented. But let us be
clear — it is a question not of unnecessarily burdening
the institutional machinery, but of finding ways to
bring together the available know-how, in accordance
with a unique and integrated United Nations approach.
In the run-up to the Secretary-General’s summit
on climate change in September 2019 will again be
a pivotal year for our response to climate change. Its
consequences will be all the more catastrophic if our
actions lack ambition. We must do more to mitigate
catastrophic climate change and fully implement the
Paris Agreement on Climate Change, but we must also
adapt to a warming world.
The results of the twenty-fourth Conference of the
Parties in Katowice, Poland, are an important step in
building adaptive capacity, increasing resilience to
climate change and reducing vulnerability to climate
change. Our Council must also contribute to that effort
by taking a greater interest in the link between climate
and security and more closely involving the United
Nations system as a whole. That is why today’s debate
is crucial. I am convinced that it will continue here
and elsewhere.
19-02010

25/01/2019

Maintenance of international peace and security

The President (spoke in Spanish): I now call on the
Minister for Foreign Affairs of Indonesia.
Mrs. Marsudi (Indonesia): I wish to applaud you,
Mr. President, for convening this important meeting. I
also thank the briefers for their insightful presentations.
Climate change is real, and it is happening now. I
was born in Semarang — a peaceful coastal city of the
island of Java, Indonesia. It is located in a low-lying
delta. Since the city’s establishment in the seventeenth
century, its coastal area has always been prone to seawater flooding, which we call “rob flooding”, during the
rainy season. Climate change has further exacerbated
that vulnerability. The prevalence of rob flooding has
increased. According to research done by the United
Nations Population Fund, Semarang, my hometown,
will experience climate-related sea-level rise by 40 to
80 centimetres in the next 100 years, thereby expanding
the potential inundation area inland by 1.7 to 3 square
kilometres. My hometown shows clearly that the
security threats of climate change are indisputable.
However, as an economically dynamic city, Semarang
has the capacity to adapt.
But that is certainly not the case for many other
places around the globe. When there is no capacity to
adapt, potential security threats become real security
threats — from the loss of livelihoods to irregular
migration; from food scarcity to the loss of territory;
and perhaps even the survival of a nation is jeopardized.
Indonesia therefore truly shares the concerns of small
islands developing States about the survival of our
nations. The question then is: How should the Security
Council respond to that threat? Allow me to highlight
some pertinent points.
First, the Security Council must consolidate efforts
to better respond to the security impacts of climate
change — I repeat, the security impacts of climate
change, not climate change itself. In past discussions,
the Security Council has acknowledged the negative
security implications of climate change in the Sahel
and the Horn of Africa. We can build upon past
accomplishments. One concrete step that we can take
is to better equip our peacekeepers with the capacity
to undertake military operations other than war — to
carry out not only peacekeeping operations but also
climate peace missions. In that context, Indonesian
peacekeepers stand ready to share their experience with
military operations other than war.

S/PV. 8451

Secondly, our approach to peacekeeping and
peacebuilding must — and I repeat must — ensure
synergy between security and development. One cannot
exist without the other. Therefore, efforts towards peace
must take into account the often-overlooked aspect of
sustainable development.
Thirdly, I wish to reiterate that the responsibility
to respond to the security impact of climate change lies
with the countries concerned. Instead of interfering,
what we must do is assist based on actual needs and
priorities. Indonesia stands ready to contribute. We
have extended technical assistance to the Pacific and
Africa to enhance their adaptive capacity. We are
committed to doing more.
The role of regional organizations should not be
overlooked, as the impacts often spill into neighbouring
countries. In our own region, we are proud that the
Association of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN)
has strengthened the capacity of its Humanitarian
Assistance Centre in providing a coordinated
response — one ASEAN, one response.
Finally, our homework in the Council is to better
define what falls under the ambit of climate change
itself and what constitutes the security dimension of
climate-related impacts. The United Nations system
must work in synergy, according to the respective
competencies and mandates of its bodies.
For Indonesia, while the Security Council can
deal with the security dimension of climate change,
the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate
Change remains the leading forum to address climate
change. Upholding the Paris Agreement on Climate
Change is absolutely vital. The Security Council may
rest assured that Indonesia stands ready to contribute
to global efforts to combat climate change.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now call on the
Federal Minister for Foreign Affairs of Germany.
Mr. Maas (Germany): Conflicts are part and parcel
of the Security Council’s day-to-day business, but we
do not often have the opportunity to take a step back
and consider the causes of those conflicts. I would
therefore like to thank you, Mr. President, for inviting
us to do that today.
I would like to tell members of the Council about
someone who did not just take one step back, but around
570,000 steps. It was from up high at the International
Space Station that the German astronaut Alexander

19-0201011/83

S/PV.8451

Maintenance of international peace and security

Gerst gazed down on our planet for six months last year.
The images that he beamed back to Earth shocked many
people in Europe. The driest summer since records
began had clearly left its mark. It was even visible from
space. What is usually a green continent at that time of
year resembled a yellow-brown steppe. I have brought
some of those pictures with me. The consequences of
that drought are crop losses running into the billions;
catastrophic forest fires, even in northern Europe; and
in some regions of Germany, fuel started to become
scarce as the water level in rivers was too low for
tanker ships.
I know that all that sounds harmless compared with
the disasters caused by climate-related extreme weather
in other parts of the world. In the Sahel, there is an
increasing number of conflicts because of the lack of
water and land for farming. As Lake Chad shrinks, the
livelihoods of entire populations are disappearing — the
perfect breeding ground for extremism and terrorism.
In Iraq, water scarcity is undermining the prospects for
lasting peace. In Afghanistan and Yemen, water tables
have fallen dramatically. We still remember the forest
fires that raged in California, and rising sea levels and
hurricanes threaten the very existence of a number of
island States, including in your region, Mr. President.
Climate change is real. It is having a global impact,
and it is increasingly becoming a threat to international
peace and security. That is why the debate about the
policy consequences of climate change belongs here
in the Security Council. It must become routine for
us to take the link between climate and security into
account in all conflict situations. We should focus on
three aspects.
First, all United Nations Member States need
access to reliable and comprehensive information. That
is why systematic reporting by the Secretary-General
on the security-related impacts of climate change is
so important.

25/01/2019

on the ground must be strengthened. Our partners,
especially regional organizations, need early warning
capacities, and we must support those regions that
are most affected by climate change through quickimpact projects.
Those are key priorities for Germany as a member
of the Security Council. I am glad that we are not alone
here. Last year, we established the Group of Friends on
Climate and Security, together with Nauru and partners
from around the world. The Group is supported by a
broad international network of experts. Together, we
will submit proposals to the Security Council on how
we can improve our response. We want to deepen our
discussion about the issue at a high-level conference on
climate and security to be held in Berlin on 4 June. Allow
me to invite all present to join us at that conference.
One hundred and twenty-five years after Fridtjof
Nansen’s polar expedition, a new mission to the Arctic is
to be launched in September. For one year, the German
research vessel RV Polarstern will travel through the
frozen polar sea ice — some 150 days in the polar night.
Approximately 600 scientists from 17 countries will be
on board, including women and men from Belgium,
China, France, Poland, Russia, the United States and
the United Kingdom. They will all be united by a
common goal, namely, to warn humankind about the
worst consequences of climate change. Climate change
is real. It is having a global impact, and that is why it
should bring together not only scientists on board a ship,
but also us here in the Security Council. The Arctic is an
early-warning system for climate change. The Security
Council must become an early-warning system for
international policy. That is our shared responsibility.

Secondly, the Security Council needs sound risk
analyses and forecasts with clear recommendations
for action. Our Swedish friends have strengthened the
capacities of the United Nations system to that end, and
we want to continue along that path.

Mr. Kurtyka (Poland): Let me first sincerely thank
the Dominican Republic for inviting me here today
to share Poland’s perspective on the issue of climate
change and security. Let me also take this opportunity,
Mr. President, to congratulate you on assuming the
presidency of the Security Council. Before starting,
I would also like to thank the briefers for their
contribution to our discussion, namely, Ms. Rosemary
DiCarlo, Mr. Achim Steiner, Mr. Pavel Kabat and
Ms. Lindsay Getschel.

Thirdly, we must work even harder to translate our
knowledge about climate change into tangible policy
within the mandates of United Nations missions and,
above all, in the work of the United Nations in the field.
The United Nations ability to analyse the situation

Today’s discussion focusing on the existential threat
posed by natural disasters for small island developing
States encourages us in the Council to look at that
threat from the preventive and security perspective in
order to address them in an effective and innovative

12/83

19-02010

25/01/2019

Maintenance of international peace and security

way. I am speaking to the Council not only as Secretary
of State in the Ministry of Environment of Poland.
This year, I also have the privilege to preside over the
twenty-fourth Conference of the Parties to the United
Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change
(COP24) in Katowice. I would like to thank our briefers
who mentioned Katowice as an important milestone on
our way forward.
I will address three points. First, let me share with
the Council why we think the issue of climate change
and security is pertinent; secondly, what tools could be
used in order to address the corresponding nexus in an
adequate manner; and, thirdly, some information on
the newly adopted global tool to address global climate
change, known as the Katowice rulebook.
First, concerning the issue of “why”, climate change
is happening all over the world. I am sure that I do not
have to convince anyone here about the urgency and
seriousness of the problem. It is an existential threat.
Usually, climate-related events are very local in nature,
but such local events have a butterfly effect. They impact
people’s livelihoods, security and ability to provide,
produce and function, and, through all that, they create
an inflammatory ground on which a potential conflict
can ignite. We do not have to look far to find examples of
climate-induced conflicts destabilizing — sometimes
quite unexpectedly — entire regions, for instance, as
has been repeatedly mentioned, the Lake Chad basin
and the Sahel region. Therefore, addressing that issue is
not just our responsibility, but also in our own interest.
Let me turn to the tools. One might ask: What
can the Security Council do about it? Let me turn the
Council’s attention to two aspects.
First, creating a safe and secure world for all is
not just about reaction. It is also about anticipation
and prevention. As my colleagues from Belgium and
Germany mentioned earlier, all countries potentially
affected by such threats should be equipped with an
accurate early-warning information-gathering system
that would alert us to potential climate-induced
flare-ups and conflict. That goal can be successfully
reached by implementing activities under the 2030
Agenda for Sustainable Development aimed at
enhancing the resilience of risk-exposed States. All
States and organizations should use the full potential
of their field offices and missions in order to gather and
share such information.

S/PV. 8451

Secondly, the issue of climate change and security
should gain prominence in the Security Council through
regular discussions and debates as a preventive tool,
focusing on solutions and monitoring. The Security
Council should be regularly briefed on the threats and
the progress in addressing and mitigating the global
security implications of climate change.
Thirdly, let me turn to the global response and direct
the attention of representatives to the achievements of
the United Nations climate summit that took place in
Katowice in December. I again thank the representative
of Kuwait and many other speakers who have mentioned
that important event. I had the privilege to preside over
that global climate conference, known as COP24.
The tangible impacts of climate change may be
local, but the solution that must be found is clearly a
global one. That is why the only way to address the
problem at its source must be implemented through a
concerted global effort. After long negotiations, we
adopted a document called the Katowice rulebook,
which makes the Paris Agreement operational. It is
important for the following reasons. First, it provides
clarity on how, when and according to which formula
all countries of the world must act. Secondly, it shifts
the world onto a path towards a concrete and single
transparency system. Thirdly, it creates a very specific
framework around the provision of climate finance and
other support to those countries that need it.
Holding the presidency of the global climate process
for the fourth time, Poland contributed to strengthening
the global response to climate change. We have a great
deal of experience and understanding of the issues
with which countries are grappling and the scale of the
problem before us. The climate-related threats oblige us
to be responsive and responsible.
Today, as President of the United Nations Framework
Convention on Climate Change and a member of the
Security Council, Poland would like to once again
underscore that climate change is a destabilizing force
in our world and deserves attention and action on the
part of the Security Council in order to achieve durable
and sustainable peace on our planet Earth.
Lord Ahmad (United Kingdom): May I first join
others in thanking you, Mr. President, for scheduling
this debate today and for giving the Security Council
the opportunity to further consider the threat posed to
international peace and security by climate change. The
Dominican Republic’s own experience has encouraged

19-0201013/83

S/PV.8451

Maintenance of international peace and security

you to be a powerful advocate for this issue and a leader
in this field. I am sure that I speak for all in saying that
we look forward to your remarks later in the debate. I
also wish to thank all the briefers, but I was particularly
struck by the contribution of Ms. Lindsay Getschel. By
drawing attention to the challenge of climate change
and the importance of the consideration of the youth,
all countries should acknowledge that we should not
only engage the youth but also involve them in finding
the solutions. From the perspective of my Government,
and I am sure that I speak for many in the Chamber
and beyond, I certainly make that commitment because
it is important that we work together to find common
solutions, and the youth have an important role to play.
This is also an extremely important issue for the
United Kingdom. Indeed, we were the first country to
raise the issue in the Security Council, in 2007 (see
S/PV.5663). We are particularly concerned about small
island developing States and least developed countries,
including almost 60 per cent of our fellow Commonwealth
members, which face an existential threat from climate
change and associated natural disasters.
Under-Secretary-General
Rosemary
DiCarlo
mentioned the devastation of Hurricane Irma in 2017.
I, too, visited the Caribbean in the wake of Hurricane
Irma, where the devastation but, more importantly,
the determination of the people left a deep and lasting
impression on me. Our Prime Minister, Mrs. May, has
said that there is a clear moral imperative for developed
economies to help those that stand to lose most from the
consequences of man-made climate change. Through
our International Climate Fund, we support cleaner
economic growth and have helped more than 21 million
people to prepare for the risk of increased droughts and
floods. Between 2016 and 2020, we pledged to provide
at least $7 billion in support to the Fund, and we aim for
a balance in our spending on adaptation and mitigation.
We have also sought to strengthen our work within
the Caribbean region to build resilience by bringing
together resources, capabilities, assets and expertise to
show a collaborative and strengthened response to the
challenge posed by extreme weather events.
We all acknowledge that climate change is not an
abstract, theoretical risk. It is real and is happening now.
Severe weather events that used to happen, as was often
said, once in a century now occur two or three times in
a decade, sometimes more often. They impact essential
resources and drive people from their homes. They
threaten sustainable development, including our ability
14/83

25/01/2019

to meet the Sustainable Development Goals and to
trade, and they exacerbate conflict and instability. The
situation is in fact much graver than previously thought.
Research by the United Kingdom’s independent Climate
Change Committee, in collaboration with the China
Expert Panel on Climate Change, recently concluded
that we have significantly underestimated the social
and, indeed, the economic risk of climate change.
That risk, of course, threatens us all. It is therefore
important that we all contribute to the solution,
including through discussions such as the important one
we are having now. In Paris in 2015, the international
community rallied together to find a shared solution
to this shared and common problem. As the British
Prime Minister has said, the Paris Agreement is a vital
pillar of the rules-based international system. We must
now accelerate global action to meet the commitments
that we have made, and we must heed the call of the
Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change to increase
our ambition. That includes through our existing
partnerships. For example, last April in London,
the Commonwealth Heads of Government Meeting
reaffirmed its commitment to the Paris Agreement
and to pursuing efforts to limit the increase in global
average temperatures to 1.5 degrees Celsius above
pre-industrial levels. I, too, pay tribute to Poland’s
leadership at the twenty-fourth Conference of the
Parties to the United Nations Framework Convention
on Climate Change.
In that vein, we strongly commend the SecretaryGeneral’s efforts to refocus the United Nations on the
urgent need to address climate change. In our view,
the United Nations needs to enhance its approach to
climate security in three important ways.
First, with respect to information-sharing, we must
make better use of the climate risk data available in
the private sector and, importantly, in civil society. We
must integrate that data into decision-making across
the entire United Nations system.
Secondly, we need to consider all risks, including
climate-related risks, in a holistic way and when
planning and implementing solutions to peace and,
indeed, security issues. As mentioned by Mr. Heiko
Maas, Minister for Foreign Affairs of Germany,
the Security Council has started to reflect that in
recent resolutions, in particular — I agree with
him — on the issues of Lake Chad, Somalia, the Sahel,
Mali and Darfur. The task now is to ensure effective
19-02010

25/01/2019

Maintenance of international peace and security

implementation and, importantly, integration into our
development, peacebuilding and humanitarian work.
The United Kingdom welcomes the piloting of a minimechanism to ensure that information is available to
United Nations reporting, but it should explore ways to
go further, for example, by improving the coordination
and integration of United Nations agencies and
missions that manage climate-related security risks on
the ground.
Finally, we must invest in resilience. The United
Kingdom will lead efforts aimed at increasing resilience,
ahead of the Secretary-General’s climate summit this
year, while collaborating with a range of actors to launch
what we hope to be genuinely transformational actions.
Again, to Ms. Getschel, I would say that I am sure her
suggestions have caused us all to reflect, and that, from
a Commonwealth perspective, I have the opportunity
to host youth ambassadors from the Commonwealth in
London next week. I will certainly be reflecting very
strongly on her suggestions and recommendations in
the coming days.
In economic terms alone, this makes sense. Investing
and preparedness to respond will on average cut in
half — yes, half — the cost of deploying humanitarian
aid in the wake of a disaster, and it can also speed up
crisis response by up to two weeks. Resilience also
presents a huge opportunity for supporting employment
and spreading prosperity, which of course accelerates
development and ultimately enhances security. Through
the United Kingdom-led Centre for Global Disaster
Protection, we are working with developing countries
to increase their preparedness, and indeed resilience to
climate change and natural disasters.
In conclusion, there is no doubt that climate-related
security challenges are real; they are here and they
are now. We must work together to ensure the United
Nations system is able to holistically consider climate
risks in decision-making and, most important,
integrate them into mission planning and ultimately
into implementation.
Mr. Ma Zhaoxu (China) (spoke in Chinese): China
welcomes you to New York, Sir, to preside over today’s
meeting. China highly appreciates the initiative of the
Dominican Republic to convene this open debate. I also
thank Under-Secretary-General DiCarlo, Administrator
Steiner, Mr. Kabat and Ms. Getschel for their briefings.
Climate change is a major challenge that affects
the future and destiny of humankind. Climate change

S/PV. 8451

induces natural disasters, wreaks havoc in many parts
of the world and poses grave threats to food security,
water resources, the ecological environment, energy,
human life and property. These issues have even become
disruptive factors in certain regions, undermining
peace and stability.
Easing the impact of climate-change-related
disasters obviously serves global stability. In facing
this global challenge, the international community
needs to step up cooperation and respond together.
In this regard, from the perspective of maintaining
international peace and security, I would like today to
share with participants the following three points.
First, it is necessary to uphold multilateralism
and foster a sense of community and shared future for
humankind. In the face of climate change, no country
can stay aloft by itself. Countries should strengthen
exchanges and cooperation on climate change, adhere
to multilateral mechanisms and earnestly fulfil their
international obligations. It is important to increase
funding and technical support to developing countries
to assist them in coping with climate change and
improving their ability to adapt to it. The relevant
United Nations agencies should properly address and
respond to climate-change-related issues in line with a
division of labour and their respective functions.
Secondly, we need to explore green and low-carbon
transitional and sustainable development pathways
tailored to national specificities. Peace and development
are interconnected and mutually reinforcing. The
international community needs to embrace a vision of
global governance hinged on consultation, contribution
and benefits-sharing and advance the implementation
of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development across
the board, give priority to poverty reduction, and tackle
development imbalances and inadequate development.
We need to pursue sustainable development and its
drive to address through common development such
climate-change-related issues as food insecurity,
humanitarian crises and mass migration.
Thirdly, we should acknowledge and respect
countries’ differences, especially in developing
countries, and take seriously the daunting challenges
facing small island developing States and least
developed countries. The international community
should implement in earnest the Paris Agreement on
Climate Change under the United Nations Framework
Convention on Climate Change (UNFCCC) and uphold

19-0201015/83

S/PV.8451

Maintenance of international peace and security

the principles of equity and common but differentiated
responsibilities and respective capabilities. Developed
countries should continue to spearhead emission
reductions and help developing countries, in particular
small island developing States, to upgrade their capacity
in adaptation, mitigation, management and financing.
China has been actively engaged in the global
response to climate change. We have been a contributor
to this cause. We have been earnestly fulfilling
our international obligations under, inter alia, the
UNFCCC and the Paris Agreement, while making
active contributions to the global fight against climate
change to the best of our ability and on the basis of our
national conditions. China will continue to implement
our South-South cooperation commitments on climate
change and support developing countries in addressing
related challenges. China stands ready to work with
the international community to build a word of lasting
peace, universal security, common prosperity, openness
and inclusiveness — a world that is clean and beautiful.
Mr. Nebenzia (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We would like to thank all the briefers at
today’s meeting.
The position of the Russian Federation with regard
to the security impacts of climate change is well known.
We deem it excessive, and even counterproductive, to
consider climate change in the Security Council, whose
aim under the Charter of the United Nations is to swiftly
respond to serious challenges to international peace
and security. We consider that this practice undercuts
the current system of division of labour within the
United Nations. Yes, the climate is changing. However,
climate change is not a universal challenge in the
context of international security. Accordingly, it should
be considered specific to each specific situation, which
was confirmed by briefer Under-Secretary-General
Rosemary DiCarlo.
In some situations, as Achim Steiner pointed out,
climate change can be an additional risk factor in some
countries and regions. However, a generalized linking
of the topic of climate change with peace can lead to the
false assumption that the problems of the environment
are unavoidable and always lead to conflict.
Furthermore, if, for example, we take the Sahel region,
which was mentioned in the concept note (S/2019/1,
annex), then we should not shift focus onto climate and
droughts while pushing to the backburner the real main
reasons for the conflict, which include the proactive
16/83

25/01/2019

actions of a number of countries that led to regime
change in Libya and the terrible impact of the NATO
air strikes, including on the country’s oil and oil-field
infrastructure. Today, in another region now, we once
again see a demonstration of how external provocations
to exacerbate domestic crises with specific ambitious
goals, as well as abuses of international law, and this
is precisely what the Security Council should work on.
Coming back to climate, I would like to point out
that nobody denies that the challenges in this area
require a comprehensive approach. Every opportunity
to fully develop such approaches is provided by the
existing specialized bodies within the United Nations,
where rather than mere cosmetic efforts, concrete,
expert-level work is conducted to that end.
The Russian Federation has unfailingly advocated
the expansion of international cooperation to reduce the
risk of disasters and to strengthen resilience to them. We
support the Organization’s central role in that regard.
We consider that in order to ensure effectiveness we
must engage in professional dialogue based on in-depth
expertise and relevant knowledge, first and foremost as
part of the Global Platform for Disaster Risk Reduction.
We believe that the Sendai Framework for Disaster
Risk Reduction 2015-2030 in Africa, which was adopted
at the third World Conference on Disaster Reduction
and endorsed by General Assembly resolution 69/283,
is the main mechanism for exchanging experiences
and best practices in order to strengthen the global
architecture of international cooperation in the area of
disaster risk reduction.
It is important to foster cooperation at the regional
level by tapping into the potential of the regional
economic commissions. As a result of the decision
taken by the United Nations Economic and Social
Commission for Asia and the Pacific concerning the
use of space technology for sustainable development,
the Asia-Pacific region became the first to benefit
from practical high-tech development in the field of
disaster risk reduction within Organization’s regional
commission, and there has been a great deal of interest
in further exploring such development.
We urge the Council to focus on the provision
of technical assistance and on strengthening the
potential of developing countries, which are the most
vulnerable to natural disasters due to challenges in
the socioeconomic sphere. The Russian Federation
provides assistance to small island developing States
19-02010

25/01/2019

Maintenance of international peace and security

in the southern Pacific Ocean in order to promote
sustainability in the face of disasters. We do so through
the United Nations Development Programme, various
other specialized programmes, funds and agencies, as
well as the International Civil Defence Organization.
Technical assistance projects are being undertaken
to strengthen prevention and response to natural
disasters for the Commonwealth of Independent
States countries and to deal with the aftermath of
natural disasters in countries of Latin America and the
Caribbean, Asia and the Middle East. It is important for
all States that are able to do so to provide comprehensive
assistance to countries in need in order to strengthen
the overall potential of disaster risk reduction.
As for problems associated with climate change,
we deem the most pertinent challenge facing the
international community to be ensuring total
compliance with the rules for implementing, in the
framework of the Paris Agreement on Climate Change,
the comprehensive document approved at the twentyfourth session of the Conference of the Parties to the
United Nations Framework Convention on Climate
Change in December.
We need to focus on specific measures taken at
the global and national levels that are greatly contribut
to preventing the rise in temperature, lower the risk
of the increasing frequency and destructiveness of
natural disasters, and mitigate their effects and their
adverse socioeconomic impact for the most vulnerable
countries and regions. Climate risks must also be taken
into consideration, not in a generic way but in the
context of discussing specific and real situations on the
Council’s agenda — if they exist and if they are real.
Mr. Ipo (Côte d’Ivoire) (spoke in French): Côte
d’Ivoire thanks the presidency of the Dominican
Republic for organizing this public debate on the
impact of climate disasters on international peace and
security, which is critical. My delegation commends
Under-Secretary-General Rosemary DiCarlo and the
other briefers for their excellent presentations.
My country aligns itself with the statement to be
made by Ms. Fatima Mohammed, Permanent Observer
of the African Union to the United Nations.
The issue of the impact of climate disasters on
international peace and security has a prominent place
in the world’s current security concerns. My country
notes that the frequency and growing intensity of

S/PV. 8451

natural disasters and their direct or indirect impact on
peace and security in the affected regions are without
precedent in modern history. That development is
linked, among other things, to the combination of
world population growth and climate change. While
in the early 1990s there were fewer than 300 disasters
per year worldwide, experts have registered more
than 500 annually since the early 2000s. In addition,
they estimate that more than half of the population
in developing countries is expected to be at risk from
floods and/or storms by 2025.
Just as the increase in natural disasters is partly due
to the worsening of climatic phenomena, the material
and human damage they cause is linked to urban growth
and the concentration of populations in at-risk areas,
particularly in coastal regions. In sub-Saharan Africa,
for example, 700,000 people lived in flood-prone
coastal areas in 2000; that figure will reach 5 million
in 2030 and up to 25 million in 2060, according to the
most pessimistic forecasts.
In an environment of soaring population growth,
coupled with the scarcity of arable land and water
resources, natural disasters could trigger or aggravate
social tensions that could degenerate into open
conflicts. Similarly, in a context where early-warning
and health-response mechanisms cannot contain the
scope of disasters, these can spread water-borne or
vector-borne diseases.
Africa is now one of the regions most exposed to
the effects of climate change on peace and security. The
case of Côte d’Ivoire is a perfect illustration. Ranked
147 out of the 178 countries most vulnerable to climate
change, my country, like many others, is experiencing
the negative impact of such disasters, with adverse
effects for forests, agriculture and food security, in
addition to sparking community conflicts, particularly
between farmers and nomadic herders.
In response, my country has adopted a national
climate change programme that aims, among other
things, to reduce its greenhouse gas emissions by
28 per cent and increase the share of renewable energies
in its energy mix by 16 per cent by 2030. In response
to natural disasters, my country established the
National Civil Protection Office to facilitate the rapid
provision of assistance to affected populations. My
delegation stresses the need for the United Nations and
international partners to work to strengthen national

19-0201017/83

S/PV.8451

Maintenance of international peace and security

capacities in the fight against climate change and the
management of natural disasters.
Côte d’Ivoire believes that addressing the impact
on peace and security of natural disasters related to
climate change cannot take place exclusively within
the framework of national strategies. To be effective,
they must be consistent with existing continent-wide
and international frameworks. My country therefore
endorses the relevant recommendations of the
174th meeting of the African Union Peace and Security
Council, held on 21 May in Addis Ababa, on the link
between climate change and conflict in Africa and
the security implications. They include developing a
continental framework to proactively respond to real
and potential security threats posed by climate change;
actively seeking comprehensive approaches to enhance
resilience to climate change; improving communication
on climate change in order to effectively ensure
disaster preparedness and risk reduction from the
local to the continental level; and finally, accelerating
the implementation of all existing international and
regional commitments on mitigating the adverse effects
of climate change, including the Paris Agreement on
Climate Change, the Montreal Protocol on Substances
that Deplete the Ozone Layer and the Sendai Framework
for Disaster Risk Reduction 2015-2030.
For Côte d’Ivoire, the fight against climate
change must remain an essential component of our
shared commitment to promoting international peace
and security. It therefore urges the United Nations,
including the Security Council, to play its part in this
shared endeavour.
Mr. Meza-Cuadra (Peru) (spoke in Spanish): We
are grateful for the convening of this meeting. We
once again welcome the presence of Minister Parenti
and the other high officials participating in this open
debate on a such a topical and relevant theme. We also
thank this morning’s briefers — Mr. Achim Steiner,
Ms. Rosemary DiCarlo, Mr. Pavel Kabat and Ms. Lindsay
Getschel — for their valuable presentations.
This debate enables us to discuss the tasks
and competencies of the Security Council in the
maintenance of international peace and security
through a broad multidimensional approach to security.
In this context, it is important to address climate-related
risks to human security, which, according to scientific
evidence, will increase as a result of global warming
and climate change. These risks have the potential to
18/83

25/01/2019

lead to humanitarian crises, conflicts and disasters
that, because of their scope, could pose threats to
international peace and security. The consequences
certainly transcend the mandate of the United Nations
Framework Convention on Climate Change and could
require a response from the Security Council in
the context of its responsibilities related to conflict
prevention and resolution.
We welcome the fact that in recent months the
Security Council has recognized the adverse effects
of climate change on conflict situations in different
regions, particularly in Africa, including the Lake Chad
region, Somalia, West Africa and the Sahel, Mali and
Darfur. Similarly, we recall that the Council has been
able to react in a timely manner to natural disasters,
such as the earthquake that struck Haiti in 2010, by
reinforcing the United Nations Stabilization Mission in
Haiti personnel to deal with that emergency.
We also underscore that the International Law
Commission decided to include in its agenda the issue
of sea-level rise in relation to international law. We
stress the particular importance of that issue, given its
serious consequences and legal implications for small
island developing States, such as is the case of your
nation, Mr. President. We hope that those steps in the
right direction will lead to specific responses on the
part of the international community, and especially the
Council, based on an appropriate assessment of the risks
and strategies to address them, in line with the reforms
promoted by the Secretary-General and the increasing
focus on the prevention of conflict and the promotion
of sustaining peace. We believe that these functions
should be undertaken, bearing in mind the mandates
and purviews of different bodies of the system. That
is why it is important to develop synergies among the
Council, the General Assembly and the Economic and
Social Council, as well as with those competent bodies
and agencies of the United Nations system with a view
to having early warning systems for climate-related
risks and other multidimensional threats.
Peru is highly vulnerable to climate change and
natural disasters. The retreat of the Andean tropical
glaciers and the increasingly frequent droughts and
floods lead to food insecurity, which undermines
our development agenda and, at the same time, raises
challenges to maintaining peace. Climate change and
related disasters also lead to massive human movement
with the potential of generating instability, new
demands and challenges.
19-02010

25/01/2019

Maintenance of international peace and security

We conclude by stressing the importance of
working on these issues with regional and subregional
organizations, financial institutions, the private sector,
academia and civil society, around holistic, coherent
and efficient strategies, including the implementation
of the Sendai Framework for Disaster Risk Reduction.
Mrs. Gueguen (France) (spoke in French): I
commend the Dominican presidency for organizing
this open debate. Your country, Mr. President, is on
the front lines of tackling climate change and you have
rightly made that issue a priority of your presidency. I
also thank our briefers for the excellent quality of their
statements. The mobilization of young people presented
by Ms. Getschel is an important glimmer of hope, and
we must not let that hope be lost.
The level of participation in this open debate
demonstrates, if there were ever a need, a broad
awareness among Member States that the impacts of
climate change on international peace and security must
be better understood by the United Nations and more
specifically by the Security Council. The consequences
of climate change on security is considerable. The
impacts of climate disasters on humanitarian aspects,
on food and health security, and more generally on
the economic, demographic and social balances of a
human community can be such that they contribute to
domestic crises, which in turn may lead to regional and
international crises or exacerbate existing conflicts.
Risks know no borders. We therefore share the
responsibility of managing them collectively. The Paris
Agreement on Climate Change shows us the way by
limiting global warming to 2°C, if possible 1.5°C, and
calls on us to increase our adaptability and resilience
to climate change, especially in the most vulnerable
countries, and make financial flows compatible with
limiting the global increase in temperature. The Paris
Agreement now has implementing guidelines, and I
commend the role played by the Polish presidency of the
twenty-fourth Conference of the Parties to the United
Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change.
We must endeavour to achieve our goals
collectively. The climate summit scheduled for
23 September comes at the right time to create the
conditions for achieving our heightened aspirations.
France will play an important role in that regard, since,
together with Jamaica, it has been entrusted with the
task of working on climate finance and funding. I am
sure that the summit will send a strong message to the

S/PV. 8451

Council, which must address the risks that the effects
of climate change represent for our common peace and
security. We must take action to anticipate, prevent and
limit those effects. In this context, I would like to share
three of France’s firm beliefs.
The first is that the risks to international security
posed by the impacts of climate change must become a
central element of the conflict prevention agenda. We
must develop preventive diplomacy that integrates all
destabilizing factors, including those related to climate
change and the collapse of biodiversity. The second is
that a rigorous and regular analysis of these risks is
necessary and in the international public interest. The
United Nations, and within it the Security Council
and the Secretary-General, must play a pivotal role in
this regard. The third belief is that this risk analysis
must be accompanied by preventive measures that will
be implemented by national Governments, regional
organizations, development partners and United
Nations agencies. Bolstered by those beliefs, France
would like to work with all Member States on several
proposals it has shared, including two main ones.
The first proposal aims to provide us with a tool
for collective analysis and early warning of the impacts
of climate change on global peace and security. Data
and analysis tools exist, but they are scattered in
think tanks, among States and even within the United
Nations among its various agencies. We must bring
them together in a central place and give them a voice.
What is missing is a guardian — a guarantor of the
scientific message that can build consensus on the links
between climate and security. France would like to see
the Secretary-General play this role by submitting an
annual report to the General Assembly and the Security
Council that assesses the risks to peace and security
posed by the impacts of climate change in all regions of
the world and within different timeframes.
It is also important to fully implement the request
put forward by the Council in its presidential statement
S/PRST/2011/15, of July 2011, adopted upon Germany’s
initiative, that the reports of the Secretary-General on
the conflicts on the Council’s agenda include contextual
information with regard to the impact of climate change
on those conflicts. In this way, we could anticipate and
implement appropriate responses to the threats to peace
and security that already exist in some regions, such as
the Sahel or island States, but also, in southern Africa,
Central America or South-East Asia, which may be
less immediate but could in due course have an equally

19-0201019/83

S/PV.8451

Maintenance of international peace and security

disastrous impact on security. At the national level,
France has initiated research programmes to develop
a typology of crises for the most vulnerable regions, in
particular in the Mediterranean and Pacific areas. This
work could feed into the Secretary-General’s report.
The second proposal by France concerns the role
of the United Nations in developing recommendations
for concrete actions to prevent conflicts. Faced with
these risks for security, we must mobilize a wide range
of tools, from emergency aid to development policies.
In some cases, such as after an extreme weather event,
humanitarian measures will be urgently needed. In
other cases, it will be necessary to help communities
adapt to the inescapable rise in sea levels, drought
and soil degradation. Sometimes, it will be necessary
to give small farmers insurance mechanisms that will
enable them to restart economic activity quickly after
a climate disaster rather than having to migrate to
other areas. The United Nations can and should play
an important role in developing these recommendations
and in coordinating the efforts that will need to
be implemented.
At the national level, donor countries such as
France must adapt their development policies. In
this regard, France has initiated several projects,
including the Climate Risk and Early Warning
Systems initiative — with the World Meteorological
Organization, the Global Facility for Disaster Risk
Reduction and the United Nations Office for Disaster
Risk Reduction — that seeks to strengthen the capacity
of early warning systems in least developed countries
and small island developing States to deal with extreme
climate events. At this stage, nearly €40 million out of
€100 have already been disbursed, making it possible
to finance five national projects, three regional
multi-country projects in the Caribbean, West Africa
and the Pacific, as well as a post-disaster study in
the Caribbean.
Faced with these certain risks, we cannot take
refuge in denial or misinformation. We can anticipate
and respond to these risks and prevent conflicts. That
is the role of the United Nations and the role of the
Council. France is committed to working tirelessly
with all at this table to make this goal a reality in the
coming months.
Mr. Cohen (United States of America): I thank
you, Mr. President, for calling this important meeting.
I welcome the many ministers joining us today.
20/83

25/01/2019

I would also like to thank Administrator Steiner,
Under-Secretary-General DiCarlo, Mr. Kabat and
Ms. Getschel for their contributions and helpful framing
of today’s discussion.
Many of our nations have experienced devastating
natural disasters in recent years, from hurricanes to
floods to droughts, affecting 2 billion people worldwide
in the past decade alone. These events inflict loss of
life, the destruction of property and the displacement of
citizens. They increase the risk of food insecurity and
disease outbreak.
This past year, the United States experienced the
deadliest wildfire in the history of my home state of
California and one of the strongest hurricanes on record
to hit the United States mainland. We saw devastating
flash floods in Maryland and destructive mudslides on
our west coast. In Puerto Rico, the National Oceanic
and Atmospheric Administration assesses Hurricane
Maria to have been the most destructive hurricane to hit
the island in modern times. That catastrophic hurricane
led to loss of life and more than $90 billion in damage.
We have seen how natural disasters can
exacerbate existing vulnerabilities, threatening critical
infrastructure that citizens rely on to reliably deliver
food, water and shelter in the wake of such events. This
makes things harder for everyone — from relief workers
to police forces to national militaries — as they try to
access remote areas, supply their teams and deliver
needed services. Natural disasters also frequently lead
to breakdowns in social order and spikes in crime,
violence and instability.
Over time, incomplete recovery from repeated
severe natural disasters erodes and impedes
development, including of critical infrastructure and
institutions. Particularly in communities with a history
of conflict or civil violence, this can create conditions
that allow illicit activities to flourish.
It is the policy of the United States to provide
humanitarian and relief assistance to help countries
deal with extreme weather events and natural disasters.
The East Coast of the United States and our
Caribbean neighbours to the south have always been
subject to devastating hurricanes, and for generations
the United States has experienced and dealt with
earthquakes, hurricanes, tornadoes, droughts, floods
and other environmental disasters. We are constantly
learning new and better ways to mitigate their effects
19-02010

25/01/2019

Maintenance of international peace and security

and to protect lives and property. When possible to
enact, good zoning laws in fire zones, flood plains
or areas vulnerable to coastal storm surges can
significantly reduce losses, as can good building codes.
Early warning has saved countless lives. The United
States has and will continue to share best practices
with its neighbours and friends who face extreme
environmental challenges.
Central America and the Caribbean have suffered
greatly from the follow-on effects of natural disasters.
Hurricanes have impacted national economies and
created huge recovery needs. Recent droughts have
exacerbated food and water insecurity and contributed
to new migration flows in the region. In response to
Hurricane Matthew in Haiti, the United States supported
recovery needs with $100 million of assistance,
including critical governance, health, shelter support
and food assistance for the more than 1.8 million people,
as well as cash to revive destroyed farms and restore
livelihoods. In response to drought in Central America,
the United States is working with partners to provide
support for new agriculture technology and to improve
the business environment for small scale farmers as a
means to boost productivity, incomes and resilience.
Beyond the Caribbean and Central America, the
United States is partnering with Governments and
regional organizations to bring relief and disaster
preparedness to those who need it most. It is the right
thing to do, and it also helps preserve order, maintain
basic services to populations suddenly in need, and
mitigate the threat of instability after a natural disaster.
Each nation must do its part, but we believe that the
Security Council and its member States can and should
play an especially important role in this common effort
to assist with disaster preparedness and response.
As other speakers have done, we encourage the
Security Council member States and United Nations
agencies to increase information-sharing and identify
best practices for post-disaster recovery. We each focus
on a small piece of this challenge, and aggregating data
will improve our overall understanding.
As Lindsay Getschel and other speakers have
suggested, we would also like to see Security Council
members explore ways in which the United Nations
special political missions can place a greater focus
on post-disaster resilience. The United States will be
assessing how best to incorporate this work into relevant

S/PV. 8451

mandates, and we encourage our friends around this
table to do the same.
Mr. Ndong Mba (Equatorial Guinea) (spoke
in Spanish): My statement is in line with that to be
delivered by the Permanent Observer of the African
Union to the United Nations.
The participation of a large number of high-level
speakers in this debate is ample testimony to the critical
and major importance of the item under discussion.
We therefore thank His Excellency Mr. Miguel Vargas
Maldonado, Minister for Foreign Affairs of the
Dominican Republic, and his delegation for convening
this debate to address the worrisome topic of the impact
of climate-related natural disasters on the maintenance
of international peace and security.
Likewise, we thank Ms. Rosemary DiCarlo,
Mr. Achim Steiner, Mr. Pavel Kabat and Ms. Lindsay
Getschel for their participation and excellent briefings,
which provided the Chamber with all the information
necessary to address this issue.
The Republic of Equatorial Guinea is aware that
climate change is a phenomenon of global dimension
whose effects pose a direct and obvious threat to the
existence of humankind. In that context, it is one of the
biggest challenges we face in the coming decades. In
that regard, our delegation considers this phenomenon
to be not only an environmental issue, but also a crosscutting matter that affects many areas, including
the economy and international peace and security,
among others. It not a direct cause in and of itself, but
its environmental aspect is a multiplier of the threat
posed by its cross-cutting nature, as we can understand
from the report of the Intergovernmental Panel on
Climate Change.
It can be deduced from the same report that
the effects of climate change are more evident and
pronounced in the most vulnerable places, such as
island States, countries in conflict or those that do
not have adequate resources to address the problem.
Therefore, we believe that one measure to address
this phenomenon is the promotion of policies designed
to promote development and eradicate poverty; to
establish a system of assistance and global cooperation
on environmental issues so as to ensure the efficient and
sustainable management of natural resources linked to
a sustainable political, economic and social system that
also and above all benefits the most vulnerable areas
and with less resources; and to create strategies for

19-0201021/83

S/PV.8451

Maintenance of international peace and security

the fight against climate change that can be applied
nationally and globally.
In this regard, we believe that the United Nations
should play a relevant role in the early and effective
creation and implementation of such measures by,
inter alia, providing the technical, legal and political
assistance necessary to prevent, combat or resolve
crises caused by the adverse effects of climate change.
We are interested in the Council’s views on the
expansion of conflicts, which requires it to play a role
in raising awareness of the issue and to be the driver of
related measures.
Africa is probably the continent most vulnerable
to climate change, as the effects of climate change are
having an impact on peace and security. Despite the
fact that it is one of the regions that produces the least
greenhouse gases, Africa continues to strengthen its
efforts to work towards the implementation of measures
aimed at sustainable development, translating them into
long-term climate actions based on national processes
and that are in keeping with the Paris Agreement on
Climate Change, the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development and the African Union’s Agenda 2063.
At the national level, the Republic of Equatorial
Guinea has no doubt whatsoever about the reliability
of the data clearly showing an alarming rise in global
temperature, which will have sweeping negative
consequences, including in terms of access to potable
water, reduced agricultural productivity, loss of
livelihoods and migration. That is why our Government
has adopted a series of measures aimed at mitigating
the threat of climate change and integrated them into
policies and planning processes at the national, regional
and local levels. It is also implementing risk-reduction
strategies and adaptation measures and strengthening
technical capacity in order to tackle climate change
risks and manage the areas most affected.
All of this clearly shows the iron-clad commitment
of the African continent to the struggle against climate
change, a threat that, generally speaking, affects the
entire planet and requires joint, multilateral and early
action to be taken by all without exception involving
a series of globally agreed, transparent and effective
measures that guarantee a future for coming generations.
We must take into account the fact that no State can
grapple with this phenomenon without the necessary
tools and resources. That is why it is important to stress
the aspect of cooperation and unity in this regard. Joint
22/83

25/01/2019

action is necessary, especially in the most polluting
countries, or the response to climate change will not
be effective.
I wish to say in conclusion that the world already
has the necessary tools to face this threat. Now all it
needs is unwavering political determination to begin
the fight and address this phenomenon.
Mr. Matjila (South Africa): Mr. President, we
are honoured to see you preside over today’s open
debate. We thank the Dominican Republic for having
arranged this important meeting addressing the impact
of climate-related disasters on international peace and
security. We are also honoured by and acknowledge
the presence in the Council Chamber today of
many Ministers.
We would like also to thank the many briefers
for the information they provided to the Council. We
took note of the remarks made by Ms. Getschel and
amplified by Lord Ahmad of Wimbledon regarding the
role of youth in this debate.
We associate ourselves with the statement to be
delivered by Ms. Fatima Kyari Mohammed on behalf of
the African Union.
South Africa fully shares the views expressed by
the Secretary-General at the 24th Conference of the
Parties to the United Nations Framework Convention
on Climate Change (UNFCCC), held in Katowice,
Poland, in December 2018, where he stated that
“climate change is the single most important
issue we face. It affects all our plans for
sustainable development and a safe, secure and
prosperous world”.
The Secretary-General has issued a warning
that time is running out to address climate change.
That warning is premised on the clear findings of
the international scientific community, as well as by
the new reality of increasingly frequent and extreme
climate-related disasters. The special report of the
Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC) on
the impact of a 1.5°C temperature rise confirms that we
are already seeing the consequences of climate change
for nature and for people and their livelihoods and that
the worst is yet to come.
We note with great concern the erratic nature and
ferocity of the natural calamities that have struck the
Caribbean and many islands, including those in the
19-02010

25/01/2019

Maintenance of international peace and security

Pacific, such as hurricanes; in Indonesia and Japan,
repeated tsunamis; in Australia and the United States of
America, devastating wildfires; in Europe, floods and
heavy snows; and in Africa, drought, among others.
These natural catastrophes caused untold human
suffering, destroyed the livelihoods of millions of
people and displaced hundreds of millions more.
Africa is particularly vulnerable to climate change
as the single greatest threat to its development and
prosperity. We in South Africa have experienced
devastating weather events in recent years, with several
regions of our country suffering their worst drought in
decades. Africa therefore stands in full solidarity with
other regions similarly affected by natural disasters,
such as those highlighted in the concept note prepared
by the Dominican Republic (S/2019/1, annex). We
remain firmly committed to addressing climate change
and responding to natural disasters at the national,
regional and international levels.
It is clear to us that climate change is a global
sustainable development challenge that can realistically
be addressed only if we do so collectively, through
a rules-based multilateral regime that is based on
science, equity and a differentiation in terms of action
and support between countries with very different
national circumstances. Climate action needs to be
dramatically scaled up while protecting and furthering
the development gains of developing countries and
eradicating poverty.
We have strong foundations for this multilateral
solution already in the form of the 2030 Agenda for
Sustainable Development, reinforced by regional
development programmes such as the African Union’s
Agenda 2063. We look to the UNFCCC, its Kyoto
Protocol and the Paris Agreement for policy direction
and leadership on climate change and also refer to the
Sendai Framework for Disaster Risk Reduction.
In those security situations that are within the
purview of the Security Council where climate change
is thought to be a significant factor contributing to
insecurity, such as the Sahel and Somalia, it is important
that the Council highlight climate change as a factor
that must be addressed by the international community.
By adding its voice to the conversation, the Security
Council will increase awareness of the problem,
which will, hopefully, in turn help to mobilize global
action and the provision of means of implementation
and support to developing countries. The Council

S/PV. 8451

may also help with the preparation of context-specific
risk-mitigation strategies that address all factors
leading to insecurity. However, as the IPCC and other
evidence-based studies have shown, it is often difficult
to determine a direct causal nexus between climate
change and natural disasters, on the one hand, and
threats to international peace and security, on the other.
In specific circumstances, they may be an exacerbating
factor, or threat multiplier, to more direct and specific
root causes of conflict. That reality has been recognized
in Africa, where the African Union Master Roadmap of
Practical Steps to Silence the Guns by 2020 identifies
a number of key areas as constituting serious threats
to the African peace and security agenda, including,
potentially, climate change.
The true nature of the threat posed by climate change
is existential and global in nature. We therefore need a
multilateral response that gives a voice to the widest
possible representation of States, and with a strong role
for all other stakeholders. As the Secretary-General has
often said, the solution lies in a transformation of the
global economy. And that “requires inclusivity, because
everyone is affected by climate change”. In that regard,
we should be aware that the Security Council’s limited
membership and specific peace and security focus
means that it may not be the appropriate forum for
addressing the issue of climate change. Consequently,
we should be cautious about duplicating the efforts of
other bodies in the United Nations system that are better
placed to address the matter. However, we remain open
to further discussions on the issue.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I shall now make
a statement in my capacity as Minister for Foreign
Affairs of the Dominican Republic.
It is an honour to preside over today’s open debate
on natural disasters and environmental degradation and
their effects on development and international peace
and security. I would like to thank all participants in
today’s debate for their considerable interest in the
topic. I would like to warmly welcome and commend
my colleagues — Ministers for Foreign Affairs — who
are here today. I would also like to thank all of the
briefers — Ms. Rosemary DiCarlo, Mr. Achim Steiner,
Mr. Pavel Kabat and Ms. Lindsay Getschel, for their
various presentations today
Considering the link between the effects of climate
change and security is a very high priority for the
Dominican Republic. The increase in recent years in

19-0201023/83

S/PV.8451

Maintenance of international peace and security

the frequency and intensity of extreme natural disasters
in the Caribbean raised the alarm in our country and
our region. A failure to recognize and address that
vulnerability in a timely manner will have serious
consequences for our nations, as well as for those of
other regions also affected.
At the outset, I would like to emphasize that the
attention we give to the link between the environment
and security is, from our point of view, consistent with
efforts that we make, together with other members of
the international community, to build an institutional
architecture that responds to the multiple challenges
posed by environmental degradation. The United
Nations and its subsidiary bodies have made significant
progress in considering the issue from the perspective
of its impact on development. The agreements reached
during twenty-fourth Conference of the Parties to the
United Nations Framework Convention on Climate
Change, held in Katowice, on the guidelines for
implementing the Paris Agreement on Climate Change
are a key step in that direction.
Meanwhile, for more than a decade now, the
nexus between climate change and security has been
addressed sporadically in the Security Council. It is
no coincidence that there is renewed interest in the
issue, sparked by the debate organized by Sweden in
2018 (see S/PV.8307), the debate we are presiding over
today and the plans announced by other members,
such as Germany and Belgium, during their time as
non-permanent members of the Security Council. Such
focus goes hand in hand with an increasing awareness
of the urgent challenges posed by environmental
degradation and its negative consequences.
We all know that climate change is the greatest
global challenge facing humankind and that it requires
collective action in order to address all its dimensions.
With regard to the link between the environment
and security, the Security Council has already set
precedents by accepting that environmental change and
degradation are risk factors in several conflict-prone
areas and that the negative effects of climate change can
contribute to destabilization. In the specific instances
of Lake Chad and the Sahel, the Council has made it
clear that certain effects of climate change are linked to
other factors that exacerbate the situation.
All evidence available suggests that the effects
of climate change will be felt more strongly at the
global level in the coming years. The report of the
24/83

25/01/2019

Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change states
that, if the current trend continues, by 2030 global
warming will lead to greater risks to health, human
life, food security, water supply and economic growth.
That trend therefore implies the need to prevent such
negative effects from becoming root causes of conflict.
We therefore believe that it is vital to pay attention to the
link between environmental degradation and security
and to create mechanisms to address that nexus within
the framework of the body responsible for ensuring
international peace and security.
We must equip the Security Council with the tools
necessary to systematically assess the relationship
between the effects of the climate change and
conventional risks, in particular in vulnerable areas.
In that regard, there are already several ideas on the
table to which we must pay attention in order to make
the most appropriate decisions. The time has come for
us to take those steps, and we hope that today’s debate
will be a positive contribution in that direction. The
nexus between the adverse effects of change climate
change and security is perhaps more obvious from the
perspective of developing countries, in particular small
island developing States and countries suffering from
extreme vulnerability, including those of the Central
American isthmus.
Our countries are already experiencing a new
reality, which includes increasingly severe natural
disasters and risks that emerge more gradually, such
as human displacement, food insecurity and recurring
and unpredictable failures in critical infrastructure. We
thank Mr. Steiner for his illustration of the enormous
impact of natural disasters and the importance of
improving institutional arrangements in order to better
coordinate our prevention and response capability.
The Dominican Republic brings to the table the voice
of the countries that suffer more intensely the effects
of natural disasters as a result of climate change, due
to both their geographic location and their institutional
and/or economic vulnerabilities. For that reason,
we feel that it is particularly urgent for the Security
Council to reach consensus on the best way to include
climate-related effects in its work on security. We are
facing an unconventional threat, which demands that
the Council reflect further on its role in the prevention
of conflicts. That is a reality that is already present on
the ground, which we cannot ignore. Our work must be
to adapt to that and update the Council’s approach on
security with a view to increasing its analytical skills
19-02010

25/01/2019

Maintenance of international peace and security

in order to identify, and eventually prevent, causes
of conflict.
In that regard, Ms. DiCarlo was very eloquent in
explaining how the consideration of instability and
conflicts, which arise at the intersection between
climate change and social, economic, demographic
and political factors, fall within the purview of work
of the Council. Mr. Kabat also showed us the effects
on highly-populated areas and particularly vulnerable
areas as a result of extreme climatic events, such as
floods and droughts.
As other members have already said, it is not
appropriate, and it should not be our aim, to duplicate
the work of other United Nations organs, but rather
to explore ways by which they can complement each
other, working within their own mandates. By creating
an institutional space for reflection on the link between
climate change we would be contributing to the Council’s
knowledge and equipping it with the mechanisms it
needs to ensure the relevance of its analyses of risks
and causes, and therefore the effectiveness of its action
to promote peace.
It is of the utmost importance for the Council
to have the necessary information for it to make
strategic decisions, taking into account the impact of
unusually fierce natural phenomena on the Sustainable
Development Goals, and so that, ultimately, it can carry
out that role and respond to the aspirations of millions
of people, mostly youth, to live in a better world, in
a sustainable, resilient and peaceful environment. The
Dominican Republic proposes that all of the proposals
discussed here be compiled into a report that is then
given to the Secretary-General.
We urge members to lend their support to concrete
steps that will allow us to move towards consensus that
would include that new dimension in our work, both
to improve our understanding of today’s conflicts and
prevent those of the future.
I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.
May I remind all speakers to limit their statements
to no more than four minutes in order to enable the
Council to carry out its work expeditiously. Delegations
with lengthy statements are kindly requested to circulate
their text in writing and to deliver a condensed version
when speaking in the Chamber.

S/PV. 8451

I also wish to inform all concerned that we will be
carrying on this open debate through the lunch hour, as
we have a long list of speakers.
I now call on the Minister for Foreign Affairs
of Guatemala.
Ms. Jovel Polanco (Guatemala) (spoke in Spanish):
Guatemala congratulates the Dominican Republic on
its election to the Security Council, which is a historic
event of great consequence when we recall that, as a
founding member of our Organization, this is the first
time it forms part of the Security Council, and it is
doing so as the President. The region’s leadership is
therefore strengthened by the Dominican Republic
creating space for critical dialogue on climate change
and its implications for international security and the
vulnerability of developing nations to the negative
effects of that phenomenon.
I thank the briefers, who provided us with a broader
view of the scope of climate change and its impact on
issues such as migration, conflicts and international
security overall.
Indeed, this Organization was created to maintain
international peace and security, which is why
Guatemala believes that the United Nations owes it
to its Member States to respond in their best interest,
without selectivity or vested interests and in respect of
their sovereignty.
Over the past 20 years, Guatemala has been one of
the countries that has been most affected by greenhouse
gases, and we are therefore aware of the serious reality
of climate change. That is why we must not ignore the
impacts of natural phenomena, especially if they are
caused by climate change, with a view to making more
effective and efficient decisions to prevent them.
It must also be taken into account that countries
like my own are more vulnerable, where people’s
living conditions have worsened, especially those
living poverty and extreme poverty, not only because
of the lack of institutional resources to have a rapid
response system to mitigate damage and adapt to new
conditions, but because of human displacement and
the sad vicissitudes that afflict the victims of those
anthropogenic events.
We suffered the ravages caused by Hurricane Mitch
in 1998, Hurricane Stan in 2005, Tropical Storm Agatha
in 2010 and droughts in 2008 and 2009, 2014 and 2015,
among other events. Those all showed the unequivocal

19-0201025/83

S/PV.8451

Maintenance of international peace and security

level of exposure and vulnerability to which my country,
as well as the region, was subjected, which resulted in
the irreparable loss of lives and the consequent negative
impact on the economy and development opportunities.
As a result, my country has identified and defined
strategic actions for the recovery, conservation and
sustainable management of natural resources, as well
as adaptation and mitigation of climate change. Those
include strengthening our institutions and national
legislation. To that end, we have a law, a policy and
an action plan on climate change. Moreover, territorial
planning is linked to development planning and gives
special attention to rural areas, risk reduction and
orderly urban growth.
Similarly, we have strengthened the office of the
national coordinator for disaster reduction, which is the
institution in charge of carrying out inter-institutional
coordination immediately and efficiently. We have
established a national round table for dialogue on national
climate change and its environmental impact, whose
work focuses on reversing environmental degradation
indicators. We are also increasing investment in
reforestation and the restoration of forests, given that
33 per cent of our territory is protected, 70 per cent of
our energy matrix comes from renewable energy and
the country’s agricultural profile is in forestry.
However, due to its location and geographic
circumstances, Guatemala is highly vulnerable to
the negative effects of climate change, despite being
one of the countries that emits the least amount of
greenhouse gases. Those conditions endanger and
limit development owing to the loss of infrastructure,
the increase in food insecurity, the reduction in the
availability and quality of water, the transmission of
disease and soil degradation.
Climate change also leads to forced migration
whereby the populations of our countries are forced to
seek better living conditions, which makes the issue all
the more relevant. As such, it requires comprehensive
solutions that take into account the migration cycle.
We are at a critical juncture where it is the
responsibility of every world leader to conserve
ecosystems, as we are not only talking about sustainable
development but also maintaining international peace
and security for future generations. We are therefore all
called upon not only to support the decisions adopted
in important forums, such as the Security Council and
the Conference of the Parties to the United Nations
26/83

25/01/2019

Framework Convention on Climate Change, but also to
implement their basic agreements.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now call on
the Minister for Foreign Affairs and Trade of Hungary.
Mr. Szijjártó (Hungary): We appreciate the
Dominican Republic’s invitation to speak at today’s
open debate and that the members of the Security
Council want to listen to non-Council members speak
on this matter as well, considering that there is no
doubt that climate change is among the most important
challenges facing the international community and
should be addressed properly. Climate change will
definitely generate fights for resources as access to
them becomes increasingly difficult. That is why we
consider climate change as a security challenge, as the
President very succinctly said in his statement.
Water
scarcity,
increasing
ocean
levels,
desertification, the decreasing productivity of arable
lands and the demographic boom in certain regions
will definitely result in additional massive migration
flows, even at the inter-continental level, as the Foreign
Minister of Guatemala stated earlier. According to
estimations and predictions, by 2050 approximately
200 million migrants will have taken to the road owing
to environmental causes. We have our experience from
Europe. During the three-year period from 2015 to
2017, 3.3 million people submitted requests for asylum,
of whom 90 per cent came from 34 countries. In those
34 countries the populations will grow by 26 per cent in
the next 10 years, which means an additional 640 million
people. That foreshadows further migratory flows.
Unfortunately, it has been demonstrated over the past
years that migration poses an enormous security threat
to the countries of origin, transit and destination. In
Europe we have been faced with the security challenges
associated with migration over the past couple of years.
That is why, based on our experience, we believe that
the United Nations and all international organizations
should not adopt decisions or documents that encourage
further migratory waves or portray migration as a
human right or as having only a positive impact.
Instead of encouraging new migratory flows
and putting pressure on countries that do not accept
accommodating that phenomenon, the international
community should do everything possible to tackle
the root causes of migration, whether they are
political, security-related, economic or environmental.
Therefore, we do not agree with the Global Compact for
19-02010

25/01/2019

Maintenance of international peace and security

Safe, Orderly and Regular Migration and the premise
that it should serve as a blueprint according to which
all countries should and will serve as origin, transit or
destination countries for migration. We do not accept
that, and we believe that all countries should have the
right to decide whether they want to be one of the latter
three, with whom they would like to live and whom they
would like to allow to enter their countries. That is why
border protection will be the most important factor for
ensuring security in the future. If those national rights
are not respected, then that can be another root cause
leading to further conflicts and security risks. We will
also face enormous future security risks caused by
the environment and climate change, as the President
stated earlier, and we would better off avoiding as many
conflicts as possible in the future.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now call on the
Minister for Foreign Affairs of the Philippines.
Mr. Locsin (Philippines): Humankind is facing
the ultimate challenge to the life of the planet and
the penultimate challenge to its own survival — the
imminent prospect of ecological collapse. That will
not be another ice age in the course of nature, but a
deadly certainty generated entirely by human activity
and inaction. Science proves it. Experience shows it.
The increasing ferocity of storms demonstrates its
certain advent. Only mumbo jumbo disputes it. The
devastating effects of climate change are suffered the
most severely in especially vulnerable countries like
mine. Sea levels have risen 60 centimetres, more than
three times the global average of 19 centimetres. We
have 7,107 beautiful islands. We will have much fewer.
Not all those losses will be regretted. We have
so many islands and maritime features that they defy
effective patrolling. They are havens for massive drug
trafficking — the scourge of humankind and the death
of nations — as evidenced by the desperate flight of
populations from narcoStates. Should global warming
not be arrested, 98 per cent of our coral reefs — rich
fields for fisheries — will die out by mid-century and
becoming extinct by century’s end. To be sure, we
would welcome the evaporation of territorial disputes
when the reefs they concern vanish completely beneath
the rising sea, along with the structures built on them.
Every cloud has a silver lining. As Typhoon Haiyan
powerfully showed, storm surges wipe out coastal
communities in a matter of minutes, erasing decades
of economic progress and social improvement and
leaving perdurable misery in their wake. The 2018

S/PV. 8451

Global Climate Risk Index shows that our country lost
an annual average of 1 per cent of our gross domestic
product over the past two decades. Climate change
has generated civil strife and foreign wars. It will get
worse, and there will be more. A new Dark Age will
descend on most of the planet never before seen in
breadth. Unlike in the past, the darkness will never be
lifted. No age of enlightenment will follow. Human life
will not be worth living except for brutes, and there
are quite a few of those already in countries denying
climate change and refusing its challenges.
For less developed countries that trace their
privations to the depredations of developed ones, it will
be self-destructive retribution. If all humankind cannot
have this planet on the same terms, no part of humankind
should. Misery quite rightly craves company. It is a
kind of justice. We must develop better risk assessment
and mitigation strategies for climate-related disasters.
Although we emit less than half of 1 per cent of global
emissions, the Philippines has put itself firmly on the
path to low-carbon development. Far better-off societies
will not do so out of greed and self-serving ignorance,
but Filipinos are different. Whatever is the right thing
for everyone to do, Filipinos will do it, even if no one
else does. We have adopted, continued to improve and
are actually implementing a comprehensive national
disaster risk-reduction and management plan, but
climate change knows no boundaries. And every one
of us is at the mercy of actions and inaction beyond
our borders.
Therefore, stronger synergies among States and
deeper international cooperation are imperative. The
Humanitarian Assistance Centre of Association of
Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN) has strengthened
its cooperation in line with the approach of the One
ASEAN, One Response. Globally, we are committed to
the Sendai Framework for Disaster Risk Reduction and,
above all, to the Paris Agreement on Climate Change.
We will never see a reason to abandon the latter. In
that regard, we share the intelligence of everyone who
continues to adhere to it.
The climate-driven conflicts and desperate mass
population movements that we see today are what
we will see more of tomorrow. No country will be
safe. Some can retreat behind walls, but they will
not be subsequently able to venture beyond them.
Sooner or later, chaos will scale any wall. Countries
of wealth and power may have a brief respite from
the final catastrophe, but their lives will be extremely

19-0201027/83

S/PV.8451

Maintenance of international peace and security

25/01/2019

diminished. But those with the intelligence and caring
to do something about climate change should not beg
for cooperation from those who lack both. In the end,
we shall have the sad but real satisfaction of a common
fate. We might suggest, however, that the Security
Council chisel the climate-change challenge on granite
as its first, foremost and last security concern. When
the end finally comes and all social bonds are severed,
all the conflicts of the past will seem like sports
competitions by comparison, and that includes the farmore horrendous first two decades of the twenty-first
century, which cannot plead ignorance as an excuse,
with the horrors of the twentieth still fresh in mind.

fish stock. But, most importantly, climate change is
going to take our home away from us.

The President (spoke in Spanish): I now call on
Minister for Foreign Affairs of Maldives.

Yet today, 12 years later, I am still repeating the
same message in the Council. The prospects for our
future are far worse than we ever imagined. While we
are still trying to decide which forum of the United
Nations must address which aspect of climate change,
in our countries across the world lakes are drying up,
depriving tens of millions of people of fresh water.
Unseasonal droughts are leaving millions of people
homeless. Hunger and displacement are leading to
conflicts, and entire nations are sinking under water.
What is a greater security threat than that?

Mr. Shahid (Maldives): I wish to thank the
Dominican Republic, which holds the presidency of the
Security Council for the month of January, for convening
this important debate. I would also like to thank the
eminent experts for providing us with valuable insights
in their briefings this morning. Let me also take this
opportunity to congratulate the newly elected members
of the Council — Belgium, the Dominican Republic,
Germany, Indonesia and South Africa, which took up
their membership on the Council this month.
As I left the Maldives to travel here, I met a 5-yearold little girl, Aisha, at Malé International Airport. She
asked me where I was going and I told her that I was
travelling to New York to speak about climate change
in the Security Council. We had a little chat and she
hugged me and waved me goodbye as I walked away to
board my flight.
On my very long flight to New York, I could not
stop thinking about the little girl who had embraced
me, the bright sparkle in her eyes and the joyous
innocence in her smile, unaware of the kind of future
that she may have ahead of her. I asked myself: can
I really do something meaningful for that little girl?
Can we all collectively help her to realize the hopes
and dreams that she carries in her young self? Can we
deliver her the future to which she aspires and that she
deserves — a future that is safe, secure and healthy?
Looking at the current state of affairs in the world, I
must answer no.
Climate change has been destroying our tiny island
country for years. It is eroding our beaches, killing the
coral reefs that protect our islands and contaminating
our fresh water with sea water, and we are losing our
28/83

On 17 April 2007, when the Security Council held
its first-ever debate on the impact of climate change on
peace and security, I spoke in this very Chamber on this
very same matter (see S/PV.5663). That day, I reminded
the Council that climate change is not only an everyday
fact of life for the Maldivians, but also an existential
threat. I reminded the Council that a mean sea-level rise
of two metres would suffice to virtually submerge the
entire Maldives under water. That would indeed be the
death of a nation.

We are encouraged by the Paris Agreement with
its aim to combat climate change and to accelerate and
intensify the actions and investments needed to that
end. We also hope that the Katowice rulebook will
help to improve our collective ambition to deliver on
our pledges and keep global warming to well below
2°C, or if possible 1.5°C, above pre-industrial levels.
However, for the Maldives, waiting and hoping are not
enough. We must drastically reverse the current trends
in climate change to ensure that a future exists for little
girls like Aisha and her friends.
We need solutions that are based on the principles of
justice and common but differentiated responsibilities,
within respective capabilities, and that are achieved
through consensus and national ownership. The
solutions we seek should narrow the gap between
adaptation and mitigation. A large share of funds
must be reserved for adaptation. That will enable
countries to build infrastructure to reduce the risks of
climate-induced disasters, as envisaged in the Sendai
Framework for Disaster Risk Reduction 2015-2030
and the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development.
The solutions we seek should also aim to strengthen
the capacity of the United Nations system to identify
potential climate-related risks in conflicts and to
19-02010

25/01/2019

Maintenance of international peace and security

take mitigating measures early on. The Secretariat’s
briefings to the Council should, in our opinion, include
expert analyses of climate-related risks and how such
risks are driving conflicts.
The countries that are on the front line of impact,
such as the Maldives, cannot afford to wait. We cannot
wait until we can all agree with the facts on the ground:
that climate change is a threat to international peace
and security. We cannot wait until the impacts of
climate-induced disasters destroy our economies and
our livelihoods. We cannot wait for climate change to
force us to abandon our identity and lose our homes. We
need actions that are consistent with the commitments
that we have already made. If we do not act, we will
extinguish the sparkle in the eyes of Aisha and millions
of children like her.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to His Excellency Mr. Bocchit Edmond, Minister
for Foreign Affairs of Haiti.
Mr. Edmond (Haiti) (spoke in French): At the outset,
on behalf of the President of the Republic of Haiti, His
Excellency Mr. Jovenel Moïse, and on my own behalf,
I would like to wish every success to South Africa,
Germany, Belgium, Indonesia and the Dominican
Republic, which are serving as non-permanent
members of the Security Council for the period 20192020. I would also like to congratulate the Dominican
Republic, which holds the rotating presidency of the
Council, for organizing this open debate on the theme
“Addressing the impacts of climate-related disasters
on international peace and security” in order to focus
everyone’s attention on the urgent need to address
climate-fragility risks in a sustained manner.
The Government of the Republic of Haiti believes
it essential that the international community recognize
the significance of climate-related disasters for
international peace and security and the importance
of implementing a common action plan to counter the
threats that they pose.
This open debate is timely because the year 2019
will be marked by important processes to promote the
three pillars and the core values of the United Nations
through an integrated follow-up to the commitments
made at major conferences and meetings in recent
years. At the heart of those processes are efforts to
ensure the proper and universal implementation of the
2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development. The debate
on climate-related risks is in line with the priorities

S/PV. 8451

recently announced by both the President of the
General Assembly at its seventy-third session and the
Secretary-General.
The Republic of Haiti will continue to make its best
contribution to all such processes because, ultimately,
it is a question of improving living conditions and
respecting the dignity of all human beings, bearing in
mind the motto “no one should be left behind”.
Recurrent climate-related disasters are a major
obstacle to sustainable development efforts and a
genuine threat to the survival of many countries, in
particular small island developing States; hence the
increased interest of all such States in the ongoing and
future discussions on climate issues. I fully endorse
the statement to be delivered by the representative of
Belize in its capacity as Chair of the Alliance of Small
Island States.
In recent years, severe cyclones have caused untold
human suffering and considerable material damage in
many parts of the world, particularly in Central America
and the small island States of the Caribbean. In general,
recovery and reconstruction needs have often exceeded
the national capacities of most affected countries.
My country has been hit many times by severe
natural disasters, such as Hurricane Matthew in October
2016, which destroyed the livelihoods of virtually all
rural populations and undermined the efforts of the
Government. We must recognize the share of climate
disasters that have hit Haiti’s economy hard, destroying
a significant part of its infrastructure, exacerbating the
country’s structural vulnerabilities, placing a heavy
burden on economic recovery efforts, aggravating
cumulative delays and delaying year after year the
prospects for achieving the country’s sustainable
development goals.
With the support of all stakeholders, the
Government today is seeking to invest more in
preventing those risks. In search of rapid and
sustainable solutions to this phenomenon, President
Moïse launched several innovative initiatives as soon
as he came to power, including the Caravan of Change.
Unfortunately, those initiatives have not yet received
sustained financial support from the international
community. The President’s priority objective is
to consolidate democratic institutions, strengthen
essential infrastructure, attract job-creating investment
and, in general, improve the living conditions of all
segments of the population. Unfortunately, we cannot

19-0201029/83

S/PV.8451

Maintenance of international peace and security

endorse certain assertions relating to the situation in
Haiti in the concept note, in particular the questionable
reference to an
“upward trend in malaria cases since 2009 that can
be traced back to Haiti” (S/2019/1, annex, para. 11).
I strongly encourage all States, together with all
the relevant United Nations bodies and specialized
agencies, to work constructively to ensure that the
adverse effects of climate change are taken into
account in an even more responsible manner. The
Republic of Haiti is committed to playing its full part
in this collective climate action. We reiterate our full
support for all efforts leading to the implementation of
the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate
Change, as well as the follow-up of commitments made
under the Paris Agreement and the Sendai Framework
for Disaster Risk Reduction.
In conclusion, two elements remain crucial for a
responsible and sustainable response to the destructive
effects of climate change: the political will of all
States and the collaboration of all stakeholders, on the
one hand, and the mobilization of adequate financial
resources, on the other.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now call on the
Minister of Environment and Climate of Canada.
Ms. McKenna (Canada) (spoke in French): First of
all, I want to thank you, Mr. President, for the invitation
to discuss the impact of climate change on the security
of our planet. This is an urgent and essential discussion.
I thank the Dominican Republic for taking up this
important leadership.
(spoke in English)
Climate change is the defining issue of our time.
It is an environmental issue, an economic issue and
quite clearly one of the greatest security challenges
of the twenty-first century, threatening lives and
livelihoods of citizens around the world. Like many
here today, Canada is working hard to both mitigate the
risks of climate change and adapt to its impacts. For
Canadians, climate-related natural disasters, wildfires,
extreme heat, droughts, rising sea levels, melting ice
and thawing permafrost in Canada’s north represent not
just inconveniences but existential threats, in particular
to some of our most vulnerable, including indigenous
peoples living in the Arctic and in rural and remote
communities. Canada’s top military commander
recently said that one of the greatest security threats to
30/83

25/01/2019

Canada is not military, but that of natural disasters, in
Canada and around the world.
Countries around the world, especially least
developed countries and small island developing
States, are feeling great impacts that threaten their very
survival. Whether the issue is desertification in parts of
Africa, forced migration of vulnerable people creating
climate refugees, conflict over water scarcity, or rising
sea levels and tropical storms for small island States,
the security aspects of climate change are a near and
present danger.
As Deputy Secretary-General Amina Mohammed
emphasized, climate change should be viewed as one
issue in a web of factors that can lead to conflict. As
many have emphasized, for the third year in a row, the
World Economic Forum, in its Global Risks Report,
found that world leaders rank climate change and
climate-change-related risks as the top risks in the
world, higher than large-scale cyberattacks or terrorism.
It is important to emphasize that viewing climate
change through a peace-and-security lens does not
undermine the Paris Agreement on Climate Change
and the commitment of countries around the world
to take ambitious action domestically to reduce their
greenhouse-gas emissions. It complements it by
expanding the frame to recognize that climate change
is not simply an environmental problem.
For those reasons, Canada is of the firm view that
the issue of climate and security must have a clear
place in the Council’s deliberations. We recognize the
Council’s leadership through resolutions passed in
recent years recognizing the adverse effects of climate
change on the stability and security of regions, such as
the Lake Chad basin and the Sahel.
To ensure that the Security Council is equipped
to continue to play this leadership role, and as
recommended by the youth representative this
morning, Canada supports the establishment of a new
special representative of the Secretary-General on
climate and security, as well as the establishment of a
hub for the topic within the United Nations system. It
is critical that the Security Council better understand
climate-related security risks and report on climate
risks when analysing a conflict or region.
Complex problems require collective solutions.
In climate change we have perhaps one of our most
complex problems. We must act together. I want to take
19-02010

25/01/2019

Maintenance of international peace and security

this opportunity to emphasize that Canada, as a country
seeking a non-permanent seat on the Security Council
for the 2021-2022 term, will continue to advocate for
results-based solutions in the nexus between climate
and peace and security, and as a voice for those
countries most affected by climate change, including
our hemispheric partners in the Caribbean, and all
small island developing States.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now call on
the Attorney General and Minister for Economy, Civil
Service, Communications and Climate Change of Fiji.
Mr. Sayed-Khaiyum (Fiji): I am delighted to be
here today to deliver this statement on behalf of the
Fijian Prime Minister, Mr. Josaia Voreqe Bainimarama,
who could not be here due to pressing engagements
at home.
We thank the Dominican Republic for convening
this open debate at the Security Council on the defining
challenge of our times — preparing the international
community to confront the growing security
consequences arising from climate-change-induced
natural disasters.
Climate change has transformed our natural world.
Extreme weather catastrophes — such as major floods,
prolonged droughts, record-shattering heat waves and
super-cyclones — and the frequency at which they
occur tell us that the natural world has fundamentally
changed. Once-in-a-100-years extreme-weather events
are being experienced once every 10 years. The gap
between extreme weather events is growing smaller.
And a single extreme weather event like Tropical
Cyclone Winston, which Fiji experienced in 2016 and
from which we are still recovering, as it wiped off one
third of the value of our gross domestic product in one
single event, can also take away the steady progress that
we have made in achieving the globally agreed goals.
The severe consequences of extreme weather patterns
in Fiji and across the world were highlighted repeatedly
by our Prime Minister during Fiji’s presidency of
the twenty-third annual Conference of the Parties
to the United Nations Framework Convention on
Climate Change.
Relentless sea-level rise is a threat multiplier to our
economies and societies. In 2014, the Fijian Government
relocated its first coastal community to safer ground,
and subsequently moved another two. Tragically, we
are only at the start of the relocation process. Another
43 coastal communities will follow. We will manage

S/PV. 8451

those relocations the best we can, but I want to take
this opportunity to stress to the Security Council that
such relocations will not happen only domestically but
across borders.
I have highlighted this to the Security Council not
to make any moral point but to stress that we are too
uncomfortably close to a tipping point. We are still in
a phase where domestic and cross-border relocations
can be managed voluntarily, as Fiji has offered
support to host some of our neighbours. However,
very soon, they will become forced migrations on a
scale that will place severe stress on our societies and
international arrangements.
Climate change is leading to loss of arable land and
the relocation of people, which will increase and lead
to desertification, food and health insecurity and the
depletion of our fish stocks and marine resources. It
will lead to conflicts. Of course, the effects of climate
change, which at the moment is more pronounced in
some places than others, will nonetheless be a problem
that will ultimately affect us all. We are all vulnerable.
The effects of climate change are a threat to
everyone, everywhere — from the disappearing coast
lines of Bangladesh to the scorching heat drying out land
across sub-Saharan Africa to the worsening flooding in
low-lying cities in the United States. It is not just an
issue for the Pacific. All of these effects will place far
greater stress on individuals, communities and nation
States competing for increasingly scarce resources.
Extreme weather patterns make our economies and
societies more fragile. We have seen time and again
that, when economic and social fragility increase,
our institutions suffer — they become more open to
manipulation by extremists, corruption, international
criminal syndicates and geopolitical opportunists. It
makes our borders more porous.
We ask the Security Council and the wider United
Nations family to accept that climate-change-induced
disasters will continue to fundamentally challenge
institutions of national, regional and global governance.
And we call on the United Nations to lead and support
national and regional efforts to tackle growing security
challenges related to climate change.
Fiji has a long and proud tradition of United Nations
peacekeeping, which has given Fiji great exposure and
training. We thank all the permanent members of the
Security Council — the United States of America,

19-0201031/83

S/PV.8451

Maintenance of international peace and security

Russia, China, France and the United Kingdom — for
helping us to develop our peacekeeping skills. Our Prime
Minister has given his go-ahead to use that expertise to
develop what is perhaps the world’s first response unit
that is fully capable of responding with speed, agility
and knowledge to climate-induced disasters, in addition
to peacekeeping. We acknowledge the assistance of the
Australian Government in that regard.
I am grateful for this opportunity to present Fiji’s
perspective. We look forward to continuing to engage
with the Security Council to begin to tackle the growing
regional and international security consequences of
climate change.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Nicaragua.
Mr. Oquist Kelley (Nicaragua) (spoke in Spanish):
At the outset, I would like to congratulate you,
Mr. President, on your assumption of the presidency
of the Security Council. We are pleased to see a
sister republic of the Central American Integration
System lead the debate. We also congratulate Belgium,
Germany, Indonesia and South African on their election
to serve as non-permanent members on the Council.
Climate-change disasters have already led to failed
States, and even failed societies. That has been the case
in the past and is beginning to occur now. Forecasts
are catastrophic if we do not take urgent action. Four
thousand two hundred years ago, the great civilizations
of the Bronze Age all toppled at almost the same due
to droughts lasting more than 100 years. In some cases
droughts have lasted up to 300 years, such as in the
Akkadian empire in Mesopotamia, in the Old Kingdom
of Egypt, and the early Minoan civilization in Crete.
I wonder if our civilization could survive a 300-year
drought, or even a 100-year drought.
Currently, the Sahara Desert is destroying the
livelihoods of herders and farmers in conflict, while an
Islamist war rages nearby, leaving 15.6 million people
in the Sahel affected by a food crisis and generating a
dangerous mass migration to the north. Lake Chad has
dried by 95 per cent, affecting the population of four
countries that face a double crisis of climate change and
Boko Haram operations. At the same time, Al-Shabaab
operates among the tens of thousands of refugees and
internally displaced persons in Somalia.
As for the future, if subsistence farming economies
continue to collapse, an estimated 20 million refugees
32/83

25/01/2019

from the Sahel alone are expected by 2050. If Europe
does not know what to do with 1 million refugees, it
should ponder what it would do with 20 million.
Central America and the Caribbean are among
the most vulnerable regions to climate change
worldwide. In Mesoamerica, southern Mexico and
Central America, there is an increasingly arid dry zone
inhabited by 3.6 million subsistence farming families.
If there is a climate-related collapse, that economy of
approximately 18 million people would swell the slums
of the cities of the region or march north to climb over,
dig under or pass through any wall they find along
the way.
The biggest obstacle to overcome is political will.
One indicator is the lack of climate financing. For
mitigation and adaptation, the real test will be the
replenishment of the Green Climate Fund in 2019.
For losses and damages, the only scientific, fair and
ethical way is for the countries that have caused the
phenomenon to compensate the countries that are
suffering the consequences to the extent of their
historical and current responsibility, as Nicaraguan
President Commander Daniel Ortega Saavedra
proposed in the message delivered on his behalf to the
General Assembly in 2015 (see A/70/PV.23). For those
who find that approach very radical, we must remind
them that the concept of compensation for damages
has been part of all the legal and ethical systems of the
world since antiquity. Of course, there are those who
find it old-fashioned because they think that survival is
too expensive. If small island States that are losing their
future are not compensated, there will be no climate
justice in world.
To safeguard international peace and security
from the impact of climate change we have to decide
on what to base our policies — science or greed, the
common good of humankind and the planet in the longterm or national economic advantages in the shortterm, defending the most vulnerable populations or
promoting the selfish economy of endless, limitless and
meaningless growth of production, consumption and
capital accumulation on a planet with limited resources?
We are 11 years from 2030 and have some decisions
to make. There has been some progress. We congratulate
Poland on the twenty-fourth Conference of the Parties
to the United Nations Framework Convention on
Climate Change, held in Katowice, but we must
implement the Paris Agreement by following through
19-02010

25/01/2019

Maintenance of international peace and security

on the commitments to reduce emissions and provide
financing that will enable us to limit global average
temperature rise to 1.5°C. The future of our civilization
and the ecosystems that are vital to life on Mother
Earth depend upon the 1.5°C target. With the climate
summit to be convened by the Secretary-General in
September, we have an opportunity to launch a genuine
and effective movement for survival.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Norway.
Mr. Holte (Norway): Urgent and unprecedented
changes are needed to stop global temperatures from
rising over 1.5°C. That was stated in the report of the
Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change issued
in October 2018. In Secretary-General Guterres’ own
words, “Climate change is moving faster than we are.”
Let me acknowledge the leadership provided by the
Dominican Republic, a country from one of the regions
most affected by climate-related disasters.
Norway was present at the ministerial level at
the Foreign Ministers Meeting of the Caribbean
Community, as well as the Summit of the Pacific Island
Forum in Nauru. The messages from those meetings
were clear: we are being ravaged by climate change.
The important Boe Declaration on climate is a key
document on the security threats arising from climate
change. The evidence of global warming is also obvious
in my own region — the Arctic. The magnitude of
change in the Arctic is twice the global increase. It will
have profound local, regional and global implications.
The relationship between climate change, peace and
security is complex. Climate change is seldom a direct
cause of conflict, but it works as a threat multiplier.
Annually, 26 million people are displaced by natural
disasters. Global economic losses from extreme weather
events are up 250 per cent over the past 20 years. By
2030, more than 100 million people could be driven
into extreme poverty by climate change.
The consequences are often different for women
than for men. Therefore, our response must be
gender responsive.
Climate change not only aggravates existing
tensions and provides fertile grounds for conflict.
It can seriously destabilize economies, nurture
political extremism and — in some cases — threaten
the very existence of a country, in particular small
island developing States. It also seriously undermines

S/PV. 8451

our joint global efforts to reach the Sustainable
Development Goals.
The Security Council has the primary responsibility
for maintaining international peace and security. The
climate-security nexus merits, in our view, being firmly
placed on the Council’s agenda. It is also a priority for
Norway, as a candidate country for a non-permanent
seat in the Council. Norway also supports the initiative
to appoint a United Nations special representative for
climate and security.
With regard to combating climate change, I see
three major lines of defence. The Paris Agreement must
remain our first line of defence. The Secretary-General’s
climate summit in September this year should focus on
enhancing ambitions. Secondly, assisting vulnerable
countries in building their resilience to natural disasters
and adapting to the impacts of climate change should
be our second line of defence, and something that we
need to focus much more on. Our third line of defence
should be integrating the climate-security nexus into
development and security policies.
Climate action is perhaps the indisputable case to
be made for multilateralism. You cannot go it alone. It
is simply not an option. We therefore warmly welcome
the joint initiative of Germany and Nauru to establish
the Group of Friends on Climate and Security.
Amidst difficulty lies opportunity. Estimates show
that bold action against climate change could yield a
direct economic gain of $26 trillion through 2030, as
compared with doing business as usual. Furthermore,
the ongoing renewable energy transition, or should I
say revolution, is likely to reduce the number of energyrelated conflicts.
The next 10 to 15 years are a “unique use it or
lose it” moment in history. There is great urgency.
In a crisis time is always the enemy. As a consistent
partner, Norway is committed to doing its share for our
common future.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Estonia.
Mr. Teesalu (Estonia): Allow me to express my
sincere gratitude to the Dominican Republic, this
month’s President of the Security Council, for convening
an open debate on such a highly relevant topic.
Estonia aligns itself with the statement to be
delivered by the observer of the European Union.

19-0201033/83

S/PV.8451

Maintenance of international peace and security

Climate change has severe security implications.
We are clearly seeing the existential threat it poses
to the very survival of many small island developing
States. Knowledge surrounding the threat of climate
change to small island developing States and other lowlying coastal areas dates as far back as 1990, but we
have yet to take concrete steps to change the course of
these developments. The accumulation of the effects of
climate-related disasters will inevitably have a direct
impact on people’s livelihoods, which will be especially
devastating in already fragile areas.
The slow onset sea-level rise may seem like
something in the distant future, when in fact the
devastating impacts of climate change are already felt
today. For instance, in the Lake Chad basin and the Sahel
region, the effects of climate change are multipliers of
poverty, instability, hunger and violence.
Recent scientific data show that the effects of
climate change are taking place much faster than
previously thought. The world’s leading climate
scientists have warned that only a dozen years remain
for global warming to be kept to a maximum of 1.5°C. In
order to effectively respond to security threats, we need
to strengthen climate resilience, disaster preparedness
and disaster response. That can be achieved only
through coordinated action, both on a domestic as well
as on an international level.
My country, Estonia, has traditionally not been at
the forefront of major climate disasters, but shifting
climate patterns have lately had a considerable effect
on our agriculture and forestry sectors. As a response
to that, we are developing expertise on how to combat
forest fires, and we are supporting similar projects
in the region. Even though such cooperation projects
might provide only a small-scale example, they still
illustrate very well how the experience we are gaining
by increasing resilience to climate change impacts can
benefit our partners in enhancing their own resilience.
Climate change and its effects are without a doubt
extremely complex, which in turn means that we need
to strive for a holistic approach and comprehensive
strategic planning to ensure our preparedness for such
effects. It is essential to make continuous efforts to
integrate climate change across sectors in national and
regional planning. To ensure ownership and the full
implementation of such plans, all interest groups of
society need to be included in the process, including
especially women and youth.
34/83

25/01/2019

Furthermore, the linkages between climate change
and poverty, food, water and energy security, migration
and conflict need to be made more explicit in order to
influence national policy agendas. In this regard, the
Security Council can and should take a more systematic
approach to considering the climate-change factor
as a cause of and multiplier in conflict situations.
Estonia fully supports the Secretary-General’s focus
on prevention. In this regard, taking into account and
including a focus on the negative effects of climate
change in Security Council-mandated missions
can make a difference in the outcome of conflictresolution processes.
Finally, we in Estonia, being at the forefront of
innovation and digitalization of the society, believe
that climate resilience is an area in which the tools of
modern technology can be used, as proved by earlywarning systems. Our long-term strategy foresees
promoting the development of innovative technologies,
products and services that reduce emissions. We aim to
invest more in new solutions that support a low-carbon
and more energy-efficient and climate-resilient world.
Our cooperation efforts focus especially on the situation
of the most endangered countries: the least developed
ones. We are proud also to be contributors to and
collaborators in projects that enhance responsiveness
and adaptation to climate change in the Pacific small
island developing States.
In conclusion, allow me to assure the Council that
Estonia is fully committed to the fight against global
climate change. This will also be one of Estonia’s
priorities should we be elected to the Security Council
for the period 2020-2021. We firmly believe that it is
our responsibility to take effective action to combat
climate change, including its direct implications for
peace and security.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Liechtenstein.
Mr. Wenaweser (Liechtenstein): This open debate
brings necessary attention to the key issue of our time.
Since the first discussion of this issue in this Chamber,
in 2007 (see S/PV.5663), Member States have become
increasingly aware of the fact that climate change is a
driver of insecurity and a threat multiplier for conflict,
as well as a threat to our collective security.
Although there are other United Nations organs with
the competence to address climate change, including
the Economic and Social Council and the General
19-02010

25/01/2019

Maintenance of international peace and security

Assembly, it is essential that the Council engage to
address the international and transnational threat that
climate change poses to peace and security. One cannot
fully address the root causes of conflict or take on the
mantle of prevention emphasized by the SecretaryGeneral without acknowledging our changing climate.
We are pleased that the Administrator of the
United Nations Development Programme (UNDP) has
been invited to brief the Council today and encourage
strengthened coordination with other United Nations
bodies with responsibility for addressing climate
change. We also hope that the Council will continue
to advocate for enhanced analysis and information on
climate issues.
We are pleased to see that the Security Council has
begun to integrate climate issues into its country and
region-specific work, building on the precedent set in
resolution 2349 (2017), on West Africa and the Sahel. In
areas such as the Lake Chad basin, where 90 per cent of
the economy relies on agriculture and pastoralism, it is
self-evident that a deteriorating climate will negatively
affect peace and security, exacerbating vulnerability
than can be exploited by malicious actors and driving
mass displacement.
We also welcome the Council’s inclusion of similar
language addressing climate in its resolutions covering
the United Nations Regional Office for Central Africa,
Mali, Somalia and Darfur. But more can be done on these
issues: in addition to mandating Governments and the
United Nations to address the effects of climate change,
the Council should also encourage measures to prevent
and mitigate its effects as a root cause of conflict itself.
The Security Council should also specifically address
marginalized groups such as women and young people,
who will be particularly vulnerable to the detrimental
effects of climate change, for example due to a lack of
educational and employment opportunities.
In situations such as those in Libya, South Sudan,
Yemen and Syria, climate change has exacerbated the
severity of man-made conflict by increasing extreme
weather patterns. We hope that the Council will be
able to mainstream its consideration of climate in its
resolutions while at the same time maintaining a focus
on those responsible for causing and perpetrating
these conflicts.
Looking forward, we are also aware that our
changing climate may create conditions for conflict
in areas that so far have been peaceful. The melting

S/PV. 8451

of Arctic summer ice creates incentives for increased
contestation over resources, the extraction of which
will further exacerbate climate change and spur further
degradation of the Arctic environment. The increased
attention to the region poses challenges for regional
institutions, including the Arctic Council. We should
also mention the impact of competition for resources
on the indigenous peoples of the Arctic region, whose
relationship with their historic lands, territories and
resources should be respected.
For many States Members of the United Nations,
in particular small island developing States, climate
change is an existential threat. Its effects — mass
displacement and loss of homes and livelihoods — echo
the outcomes of those armed conflicts that the Security
Council addresses in its daily work. Given this reality,
the Council should treat climate change as a direct
threat to our global collective security.
Finally, all action on climate change must
be underpinned by our resolute commitment to
multilateralism, epitomized by the Paris Agreement
on Climate Change. We must take the spirit of that
Agreement forward and work together ambitiously to
create effective and sustainable solutions.
The President (spoke in Spanish): As there remain
51 speakers on the list, I take this opportunity to remind
representatives to limit their statements to three or, at a
maximum, four minutes.
I now give the floor to the representative of Japan.
Mr. Bessho (Japan): I thank you, Mr. President, for
having convened this debate. I also wish to thank the
briefers for their valuable input.
Japan, during its presidency of the Security Council
in December 2017, hosted a discussion (see S/PV.8144)
addressing the complex contemporary challenges,
including climate change and natural hazards, to
international peace and security.
As we stated during that discussion, in order for
the Security Council to more effectively address
complex challenges, the Council needs to increase its
focus on the whole conflict cycle, namely, preventing
the outbreak, escalation, continuation and recurrence
of conflict.
At the same time, attention should be paid to the fact
that peace and security, development, human rights and
humanitarian elements are closely interlinked. Climate

19-0201035/83

S/PV.8451

Maintenance of international peace and security

risks, including disasters, which can act as a threat
multiplier, are increasing in small island developing
States and least developed countries, inter alia. Japan
itself experienced record torrential rain last July, as
Mr. Kabat mentioned in his briefing.
Accordingly, the importance of adaptation
measures is also increasing. From that perspective,
Japan is leading the discussion on climate-change
adaptation within the framework of the Group of 20. We
have also contributed directly to building societies that
are resilient to climate-related risks through continued
assistance to developing countries, including through
climate-change impact assessments and climate-risk
information development.
Japan, itself a disaster-prone country, has been
committed to mainstreaming disaster risk reduction
into the international arena, including guiding the
adoption of the Sendai Framework for Disaster Risk
Reduction as well as through various forms of tangible
and intangible assistance made under the Sendai
Cooperation Initiative for Disaster Risk Reduction.
What is most important in this context is for
each Government to make disaster risk reduction a
policy priority, introduce the disaster risk reduction
perspective into all development policies and expand
investment in this area. Collective efforts under such
policies, including continued discussion, resource
mobilization and planning and implementing measures
to address emerging risks, can lead to the realization of
a resilient society.
We believe that such efforts, as supported by global
awareness on disaster-risk reduction, can eventually
contribute to international peace and security. In that
regard, we welcome today’s debate. Let me express our
continued commitment to contributing to the discussion
on these related issues, including at the United Nations,
in a positive and constructive manner.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Greece.
Mrs. Theofili (Greece): At the outset, I would
like to thank you, Mr. President, for convening today’s
highly relevant and timely debate.
My delegation aligns itself with the statement to be
delivered by the observer of the European Union and
would like to add the following remarks.
36/83

25/01/2019

The latest scientific data suggest that climate
change poses rapidly increasing risks to natural
ecosystems, human health, food security and economic
development. Indeed, its effects are no longer a distant
eventuality, but a present reality. In my own country,
Greece, and throughout the Mediterranean region,
catastrophic forest fires, diminishing water resources
and increasingly prolonged seasonal floods pose a
serious threat to the vital agriculture, fisheries and
tourism industries. The increasing magnitude and
frequency of extreme weather events not only create new
threats, but also further aggravate existing social and
cross-border tensions. Clearly, no country is immune
to the direct and indirect consequences of climate
change, and therefore their mitigation necessitates
enhanced multilateral cooperation. In that vein, Greece
has signed and ratified all the important conventions
on climate change and the environment. At the same
time, we actively participate in ongoing negotiations
and supports ambitious efforts by the European Union
to address the long-term security implications of
climate change.
We believe that the recently reformed, nimble
architecture of the United Nations, with its emphasis on
long-term analysis, cross-cutting effects and a novel,
holistic approach to international security, is uniquely
equipped to address those challenges. Our first priority
should be to improve shared knowledge and situational
awareness on climate-related security risks, before
consistently factoring them into our early-warning and
conflict-prevention mechanisms. Strengthening and
aligning the implementation of the Paris Agreement on
Climate Change and the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development can be a crucial first step in that direction.
In the future, our ability to anticipate and adapt
to security threats created by climate change may be
equally important to our long-term efforts to reverse it.
In that context, we look forward to this year’s climate
summit to be hosted by the Secretary-General. Inaction
is not an option.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Latvia.
Mr. Pildegovičs (Latvia): I thank the Dominican
Republic, as President of the Security Council, for
organizing today’s debate. The perspective of your
country, Sir, as it is directly affected by climate change,
gives us a particular sense of urgency. I also thank all
of the briefers for their useful updates in that regard.
19-02010

25/01/2019

Maintenance of international peace and security

S/PV. 8451

Latvia fully aligns itself with the statement to be
delivered by the observer of the European Union.

and social progress will reduce the incidence of conflict,
instability and despair.

Climate change is one of the greatest challenges of
our time, faced by all countries. Undoubtedly, it also
affects geopolitical stability and security, while acting
as a threat multiplier, especially for the most vulnerable
regions — in some cases reinforcing the conflicts.
Climate-related disasters threaten populations and the
stability of whole regions, particularly countries in
Central America and the Caribbean, as well as South,
Central and South-East Asia. We are well aware of the
particular vulnerability of many small island developing
States to climate change and sea-level rise.

The Paris Agreement on Climate Change provides
clear guidance on what we must do before it is too late.
Latvia is fully committed to the long-term goals of the
Agreement. Latvia’s obligations will be to implement
the commitment made by the European Union’s
nationally determined contribution to collectively
reduce greenhouse-gas emissions by at least 40 per cent
by 2030 as compared to 1990. Latvia is now working
on its National Long-term Low-carbon Development
Strategy 2050 and its National Plan for Adaptation to
Climate Change 2030. Moreover, Latvia is developing a
detailed national energy and climate plan for the period
2021-2030. At the regional level, Latvia, currently holds
the presidency of the Council of the Baltic Sea States
and prioritizes dialogue and cooperation in the field
of climate adaptation and low-emission development.
We will promote the effective implementation of the
Paris Agreement in that framework. We will also focus
on the pollution problems of the Baltic Sea. Chemical
pollution and plastic waste have emerged as one of the
growing threats to the Baltic Sea basin ecosystem over
the past decade, which calls for an immediate solution.

Latvia fully welcomes the fact that the Security
Council is discussing the issue. We believe that
climate-related security risks should be mainstreamed
in the Council’s conflict-prevention and peacebuilding
efforts. Deepening our understanding of the
implications of climate change on international security
will help countries and individuals to step up climate
action. We also applaud the Secretary-General for his
strong commitment to putting climate change high
on the United Nations agenda, in particular this year
in preparation for the United Nations climate summit
in September.
The effects of climate change are becoming
increasingly evident and more severe. Last summer,
we again witnessed record-breaking heat all around
the world. Like other countries, Latvia is experiencing
the effects of climate change. Records of average
air temperature in Latvia show a long-term trend
of warming. Every storm causes flooding and great
distress to the people living in coastal regions. And
the threat of coastal erosion along the Baltic Sea could
intensify in the future. Only with joint multilateral
efforts and cooperation is it possible to combat climate
change by reducing greenhouse-gas emissions and
building resilience and through better preparedness for
the negative impacts of climate change, including more
frequent climate-related disasters.
Climate action has a clear interlinkage with the
implementation of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development. Latvia is strongly convinced that
reaching the Sustainable Development Goals is the
ultimate prevention agenda, as they address the drivers
and root causes of instability and conflict. Therefore,
investing in human dignity, eradicating poverty,
fostering climate resilience and promoting economic

Latvia strongly believes that mitigation and
adaptation to climate change, especially finding
concrete solutions, is a common responsibility at all
levels. However, it is crucial to build trust among various
stakeholders, especially to send a strong signal to the
private sector to advance innovation and investment in
the green economy. That will require many changes in
sectoral policies, and, above all, in people’s mindset.
Last December, the United Nations Climate
Change Conference, held in Katowice, Poland, adopted
a balanced package of decisions. It is our urgent task
to fully implement them in order to operationalize the
Paris Agreement. Now, in anticipation of the United
Nations climate action summit, to quote the SecretaryGeneral, “We are at a defining moment”. We truly are,
and the survival of our planet is at stake. This is an
issue we must all care about deeply. We must act for the
sake of future generations.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Italy.
Mr. Stefanile (Italy): Italy welcomes today’s debate.
Italy aligns itself with the statement to be made by
the observer of the European Union.

19-0201037/83

S/PV.8451

Maintenance of international peace and security

Today’s discussion follows a series of meetings of
various kinds organized by Security Council members
since 2007 on the relationship between climate and
security. Italy has constantly contributed to that dynamic
by regularly attending the meetings and by promoting,
during its last term on the Council in 2017, an Arria
Formula meeting on the security implications of rising
temperatures. Therefore, we very much appreciate the
initiative of the Dominican Republic, which ensures
continuity in the discussion and confirms that an
increasing number of Member States are determined to
keep the attention of the Security Council on a topic of
the utmost relevance.
As stated by the Secretary-General, climate
change is the defining issue of our time, and also
a direct existential threat to humankind and our
planet. We are already witnessing the increasingly
destabilizing consequences of climate change and
climate-related disasters in vast areas of the world,
from the Sahel to Central America and the Caribbean,
from South-East Asia to the Pacific, as well as in the
Mediterranean region. Hurricanes, droughts, sea-level
rise and extreme weather conditions can be considered
new forms of a natural hybrid threats to global security
due to their devastating effects on access to water and
food, health conditions and socioeconomic development
in an increasing number of countries.
Some members of the international community,
such as the countries of the Sahel, the Lake Chad basin
and the small island developing States, are especially
vulnerable to climate change, and therefore more
exposed to fragility risks. But the consequences of
climate-related disasters in terms of humanitarian
crises, destabilization, resource-driven conflicts, forced
displacement and migration flows have an immediate,
direct impact on the security of the entire planet.
The first dimension for intervention by the
international community obviously relates to prevention
and mitigation. Reducing the impact of climate-related
disasters will largely depend on our capacity to
contain global emissions within the targets of the Paris
Agreement on Climate Change. Notwithstanding the
progress made at the twenty-fourth Conference of the
Parties, held in Katowice, Poland, much remains to be
done to achieve that crucial goal. The high-level meeting
promoted by the President of the General Assembly
to be held on 28 March and the climate summit to be
convened by the Secretary-General on 23 September
38/83

25/01/2019

will be instrumental in intensifying and accelerating
international action at all levels.
At the same time, it is essential to strengthen global
efforts in terms of adaptation, disaster prevention and
emergency preparedness. The main policy document in
that field is the Sendai Framework for Disaster Risk
Reduction, and the Italian Government is fully engaged
in supporting its effective implementation.
Italy is a high-risk country itself, exposed to
frequent earthquakes, floods, landslides, volcanic
eruptions and other dramatic events. Given that high
vulnerability, Italy has developed strong expertise in
civil protection activities. We are eager to share that
expertise and are actively engaged in supporting local
and international partners to build and develop national
capacities in response to natural disasters.
As far as Africa is concerned, we operated in
response to El Niño in Ethiopia, Mozambique, Malawi,
Eswatini and Zimbabwe. In the Sahel area, Italy is
strongly supporting the United Nations Integrated
Strategy for the Sahel. Next Monday in Rome, in
cooperation with the United Nations Development
Programme and the Food and Agriculture Organization
of the United Nations, we will launch the new Africa
Centre for Climate and Sustainable Development to
facilitate assistance projects on food security, clean
water and energy.
Italy has also established innovative partnerships
with the Pacific small island developing States, the
Caribbean Community and the Alliance of Small Island
States countries, with a focus on reinforcing national
capacities on climate-related issues.
While being mindful of the contents and characteristics
of its mandate, we believe that the Security Council
should also play its part and systematically incorporate
the security dimension of climate-related impacts in
its analysis and deliberations, including on countryspecific situations, in coordination with the wider
United Nations system.
We have before us a global and multidimensional
challenge. All the relevant international actors and
institutions, as well as national authorities and the private
sector, must therefore adopt a coordinated and inclusive
approach to provide the most effective response.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Pakistan.
19-02010

25/01/2019

Maintenance of international peace and security

Mr. Imran Khan (Pakistan): Let me begin by
thanking you, Mr. President, for convening this
meeting. We extend our special thanks to Foreign
Minister Miguel Vargas Maldonado for presiding over
the meeting. I also extend our thanks to the briefers for
giving us insight on the issue.
Today’s meeting is a manifestation of the
importance that we all attach to the issue of climate
change. As the single-biggest challenge the world faces
today, climate change is indeed a defining issue of our
time. The sheer scale of the problem has the potential
to dictate the future of our discussions, business and
financial flows and, above all, the way we live.
Climate change is a threat multiplier for Pakistan.
Besides the tragic human and material costs,
climate-induced threats impede our ability to achieve
national priorities, promote sustainable development
and growth and ensure economic prosperity for our
people. It is also a dilemma of our time that the ones
who have contributed the least to climate change are
suffering the most. For example, Pakistan’s per capita
emission of greenhouse gases is one of the lowest in the
world, yet we are the eighth most vulnerable country
in the world. We are home to one of the world’s oldest
civilizations, which developed around great rivers, and
yet, as a lower-riparian State, we are suffering from
a water-stressed situation, which has the potential to
devastate the breadbasket of not just Pakistan but the
whole of South Asia.
Climate-induced threats to the peace and security of
our planet are no secret. The Council has been discussing
them since 2007. The latest Intergovernmental Panel
on Climate Change report also acknowledges that
climate-related risks to human security will increase
with global warming. The question is how to deal with
that to avoid conflicts. We believe addressing the root
causes of climate change is the solution, as by merely
curing the symptoms we cannot cure the disease.
Over decades we have developed principles and
frameworks supported by scientific evidence. Now it
is time for action. Collectively, we must strengthen
exchanges and cooperation to respond to climate change
and provide assistance to developing countries through
technology transfers, capacity-building and financing.
We believe that discussions on climate change must
acknowledge the long-established principles developed
under the relevant conventions, the most important of
which is the United Nations Framework Convention on

S/PV. 8451

Climate Change. Lastly, we also believe that actions on
this issue should be undertaken under the confines of
the mandates of the relevant bodies.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the observer of the Observer State of the Holy
See to the United Nations.
Archbishop Auza: The Holy See thanks the
presidency of the Dominican Republic for convening
this open debate on addressing the impacts of
climate-related disasters on international peace and
security. The Secretary-General has said that climate
change is the defining issue of our time and that we are
presently at a defining moment. That is why this debate
is so timely.
Climate-related disasters affect all countries, rich
and poor alike. We are witnessing the effects of extreme
weather conditions across the world, from the Caribbean
to the Pacific. In the past year, immense distress
and suffering caused by heavy rains, flooding, fires,
earthquakes and drought have struck the inhabitants
of different regions of world, including the Americas,
South-East Asia and South Asia, among others.
Apart from the tragic loss of life caused by such
extreme climactic changes and the massive financial
costs that such disasters entail, greater sensitivity and
proactivity are needed to prevent conflicts that all too
frequently ensue as national and regional stability
are affected due to a lack of access to food and clean
water and their inevitable impact on the movement
of peoples, sometimes leading to both forced and
protracted displacement.
Suffice it to recall how tensions increase because
of the seasonal phenomenon of transhumance, as
discord between farmers and pastoralists vying for
limited or diminishing resources is aggravated, and in
some instances becomes a further factor that causes
instability. In the Lake Chad basin, for example, which
has long provided a source of life in the desert for
millions of people, we are faced, because of ongoing
regional conflicts and the threat of extremist expansion,
with refugees and internally displaced populations
struggling to find water, to say nothing of the impact
on fishing, further compounding poverty and leaving
already extremely vulnerable populations in even more
desperate conditions.
If indeed extreme climate disasters are
indiscriminate, such examples show that the poorest

19-0201039/83

S/PV.8451

Maintenance of international peace and security

25/01/2019

pay the highest cost. According to recent studies, those
in poorer countries are five times more likely to be
displaced by extreme weather than their counterparts
in wealthier nations. We must act urgently.

basin and the Sahel. In many cases, there are limits
to devising fundamental solutions to such situations
without considering the security implications of
climate change.

Immediate action is needed not only to prevent
the manifold consequences of rising temperatures
in our common home, but also to hold off peace and
security concerns from preventable climate disasters.
Those actions are part of the ecological conversion that
Pope Francis is strongly encouraging the international
community, and each one of us, to undergo.

Secondly, in order to stop climate change from
further escalating into security challenges, we need
a comprehensive response from the United Nations
system as a whole. Climate change is the fundamental
cross-cutting issue of our time. However, the current
United Nations system is fragmented. As such, there is
a need for the United Nations to deepen collaboration
and coordination in responding to the multifaceted
security aspects of climate change. Last week, in
his briefing to the General Assembly in an informal
session, Secretary-General Guterres rightly pointed
out that climate change is one of the United Nations
foremost priorities this year. The Security Council
should be no exception to this system-wide effort. My
delegation is of the view that the joint meeting of the
Peacebuilding Commission and the Economic and
Social Council last year concerning climate change’s
impact on the security and humanitarian situation in
the Sahel region was a meaningful effort in that regard.
The Republic of Korea, as the current President of the
Executive Board of the United Nations Development
Programme, the United Nations Population Fund
and the United Nations Office for Project Services,
will endeavour to strengthen cooperation with other
actors in order to facilitate integrated discussions on
the humanitarian-development-peace nexus. In that
regard, this week at the Executive Board we held an
in-depth interactive dialogue on poverty eradication,
including climate-related poverty, and approaches
to strengthening ties between development and
humanitarian assistance.

This open debate is an opportunity to take a hard
look at some of these problems and offer ambitious,
coherent and action-oriented solutions that show respect
for the planet and concern for the integral development
of all. Speaking to diplomats accredited to the Holy See
at the start of this new year, Pope Francis expressed his
hope for a more decisive commitment on the part of
States to strengthen cooperation to urgently combat the
worrisome phenomenon of global warming.
In that regard, the support of the international
community is urgent for favouring the development
of infrastructure, the growth of prospects for future
generations and the emancipation of the most vulnerable
sectors of society, lest they be forced to fight for food
and wage war for water because of our failure to act.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of the Republic of Korea.
Mr. Park Chull-Joo (Republic of Korea): At
the outset, allow me to thank you, Sir, for convening
today’s open debate. I also thank the four briefers for
their briefings. Regarding today’s topic of debate, the
Republic of Korea would like to highlight the following
three points.
First, it is crucial for the Security Council to
comprehend the security implications of climate
change in a systematic fashion and in line with our
efforts to strengthen preventive diplomacy. Indeed, a
comprehensive approach to the fundamental causes of
conflicts lies at the very centre of preventive diplomacy.
In countries such as small island developing States
climate change itself poses the most significant threat
to security. Elsewhere, it is becoming increasingly clear
that climate change, interacting with other factors,
is creating and pushing regional instability into fullblown conflicts and humanitarian crises, as has been
reported in situations such as those in the Lake Chad
40/83

Thirdly, the relevant Security Council’s discussions
should lead to tangible results. We note presidential
statement S/PRST/2011/15, of 2011, which requests the
Secretary-General to include information on the security
implications of climate change in his reports to the
Security Council. We also draw the Council’s attention
to last year’s presidential statement S/PRST/2018/3,
which emphasizes the need for climate-risk analysis
and a management strategy for such risks in the Sahel
region. We hope to continue discussions on concrete
ways to see follow-up measures.
In order to prevent climate crises from further
spiralling into threats to peace and security,
international cooperation and support for vulnerable
19-02010

25/01/2019

Maintenance of international peace and security

countries are crucial. It is necessary to simultaneously
provide support for both development and governance
capabilities, alongside support for climate adaptation.
To that end, the Republic of Korea will continue to
actively participate in international cooperation and
support efforts.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Mexico.
Mr. Sandoval Mendiolea (Mexico) (spoke in
Spanish): Mexico thanks the Dominican Republic for
convening this open debate on such a relevant topic on
the international agenda. As the Executive Secretary of
the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate
Change recently pointed out, working to combat climate
change is synonymous with working to preserve the
human species.
The scientific evidence contained in the fall 2018
special report of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate
Change is clear, forceful and alarming. Increasing our
resolve is key to tackling the phenomenon, and our
current efforts are falling short. We are very far from
meeting the goal of the Paris Agreement on Climate
Change. In recent years, combating climate change has
consistently been, and will continue to be, a national
and international priority for the Government of
Mexico. Since the sixteenth Conference of the Parties to
the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate
Change (COP16), held in Cancún, Mexico, where we
laid the groundwork for all our current understandings,
we opted for a binding, ambitious and dynamic regime,
which is embodied today in the Paris Agreement, with
the Framework Convention as the main international
intergovernmental forum for negotiating the global
response to climate change. In that regard, Mexico
supports and thanks the Secretary-General for holding
a high-level meeting on climate change this year.
It is important to analytically distinguish among the
causes and scope of the phenomenon in order to identify
the relevant agencies within the United Nations system
able to confront them and consequently ensure that
our efforts are truly coherent, coordinated, effective
and efficient. It is imperative that the Security Council
voice its concern about this critical issue, and we hope
that it will reaffirm that, in that regard, the Framework
Convention is the proper venue for coordinating actions
to address its causes and effects across its mitigation,
adaptation, loss and damage, climate financing,
technology transfer and capacity-building pillars.

S/PV. 8451

The best way to ward off the risks associated with
climate change is to deal with its structural causes
and vulnerability factors. To that end, we must adhere
to the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development,
which translates into building resiliency and fostering
international cooperation. The issues that come up in
discussions on the link between climate change and
security generally reflect the effects of the former, many
of which are related to the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development, including such development challenges as
displacement, migration, food security, water scarcity,
energy production and pandemics, among others. In
other words, the indirect effects of climate change on
populations constitute a threat to international peace
and security and are risk factors with regard to the
emergence and the exacerbation of conflicts. We must,
however, recognize that, although the phenomenon
increases vulnerability, it is not the underlying cause of
the institutional and structural fragility experienced by
many countries. It is not a matter of reconfiguring an
approach to combat climate change into one ensuring
security, but rather of recognizing its devastating
effects, which are intensifying on a daily basis, while
affecting international relations and security.
The discussion on the links between the effects of
climate change and security must always be based on
the context-specific context of countries and regions.
We therefore believe that, in order to provide them
with comprehensive and adequate attention, the effects
of climate change must be included as part of risk
analyses carried out by the Department of Political
and Peacebuilding Affairs on a case-by-case basis,
while maintaining an incremental approach based on
sustainable development and vulnerability.
No part of the planet is immune from the impact of
extreme climate events, hence the imperative need to
improve the mechanisms and methods to successfully
manage the risks they represent and avoid them.
Fortunately, such analyses have begun to be included
in the mandates of some peacekeeping operations that
recognize the effects of climate change as risk factors.
The application of such an approach would be welcome
in reviewing various conflicts on the Council’s agenda
so that it becomes part of the analytical resources
underpinning the decision-making process of the
Security Council and with regard to peacebuilding.
In that regard, the sustaining peace approach offers
a broad, necessary and totally relevant paradigm shift
to approaching this issue. It is precisely peace, not

19-0201041/83

S/PV.8451

Maintenance of international peace and security

conflict, that must be the reference point for prevention
and the motivator for the use of all the resources and
tools available to foster peaceful societies that benefit
from sustainable development, including resiliency to
climate change. The best way to respond to its impacts
is therefore to meet the goals of the 2030 Agenda for
Sustainable Development so as to achieve sustainable
and inclusive development that leaves no one behind.
Before considering making this topic a standing
agenda item of the Security Council, we must have
reliable and rigorous analytical tools that inform and
support the decisions of the Security Council and
can therefore incorporate such a perspective. A clear
division of labour within the United Nations system is
the best way forward to address the impact of climate
change on international peace and security.
Based on all that I have just said, it is vital that,
as one of the principal organs of the Organization, the
Security Council reaffirm its role as a contributor to the
harmonized efforts of the entire system, not as a body
that deals with that link alone or in isolation. In the
same vein, the work of the Security Council should take
advantage of and be appropriately complemented by the
tools and processes for addressing cross-cutting issues
on the agenda of the Organization, such as migration,
food security and disaster risk reduction, among others.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of New Zealand.
Mr. Cheshire (New Zealand): I would like to thank
the Dominican Republic for convening this important
debate. At the outset, New Zealand aligns itself with
the statement to be delivered by the representative of
Nauru on behalf of the Pacific Islands Forum.
In September last year, the leaders of the Pacific
Islands Forum affirmed that climate change presented
the single greatest threat to the livelihood, security
and well-being of Pacific people. Our leaders chose
their words deliberately. Climate change is not a future
challenge to be endlessly discussed; it is a real and
immediate threat.
The Security Council has recognized the
demonstrable links between climate change and
security. When the effects of climate change intersect
with environmental and social issues, it drives
instability and conflict. The issues outlined in the
concept note for this debate (S/2019/1, annex) are the
reality for the States of our region.
42/83

25/01/2019

In the Pacific, climate-related disasters are
increasing, as they are across the world. Cyclones, storm
surges and droughts are increasing the vulnerability of
communities across the region and threatening hardwon development.
The Pacific States are also already feeling the
effects of slow-onset disasters. Sea-level rise is the
most obvious risk to low-lying atoll countries, but the
warming ocean, ocean acidification and salt pollution
of freshwater supplies and agricultural soils are just
some of the many compounding challenges that climate
change brings to our region.
Climate change has already caused some people to
migrate, so far mostly within their countries. There is
no prospect of return for communities that have been
forced to abandon their lands to the advancing sea.
Such displacements are not anomalies; they are our
collective future if the current trends continue.
As part of the Security Council’s efforts to prevent
conflict, the threats to international peace and security
caused by climate change should be identified and
responded to as they emerge. New Zealand firmly
supports the Secretary-General’s efforts to ensure
a more coordinated and integrated response to the
impact of climate change. To help to bring additional
coordination and focus to the efforts across the
United Nations system, we stand in full support of
the proposal by Pacific small island developing States
for the appointment of a high-level representative for
climate change.
Furthermore, we join others who have spoken today
and encourage the Secretariat to enable the Council
to comprehensively address such threats by including
relevant analysis and risk assessments on the impact of
climate change in all reports submitted to the Security
Council. As the Secretary-General has said, climate
change is the defining issue of our time. It is a threat
to livelihoods, a threat to well-being and a threat to
international peace and security.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of India.
Mr. Akbaruddin (India): Climate change is an
unprecedented challenge to global civilization. We
therefore thank you, Mr. President, for providing an
opportunity to articulate views on specific aspects of
this overarching issue. We also thank the briefers for
their perspectives.
19-02010

25/01/2019

Maintenance of international peace and security

India believes that climate action should be a
priority area for international cooperation. Global
institutions should be responsive to felt human needs,
including disaster preparedness, as well as resilience
and response in the face of disasters. Such phenomena
tend to threaten human well-being. In addition, as we
have heard today, in some cases, such as rising sea
levels, the integrity of States is at stake, even in the
absence of violence and conflict.
On the other hand, from a policy perspective, as the
chapter on human security in the fifth assessment report
of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change
summarized: “The evidence on the effect of climate
change and variability on violence is contested.” Thus,
while climate risks are evident in some specific cases,
research findings on the generalized linkages between
climate disasters and security remain ambiguous.
The nexus between climate change and security
is complex, contingent and still contested. As
practitioners wanting to address such matters through
international cooperation, we therefore face dilemmas.
I will highlight three of the many irksome issues in
that regard.
First, can climate security be achieved through the
quick fix of securitization of climate change to address
climate-related disasters? International peace and
security considerations often trump other considerations.
Defining a problem as a security challenge therefore
often increases the attention and resources devoted to
addressing it. Securitizing climate change may help to
heighten public awareness but securitization also has
significant downsides. A securitized approach risks
pitting States into a competition, when cooperation
is clearly the most productive avenue in tackling this
threat. Thinking in security terms usually engenders
overly militarized solutions to problems that inherently
require non-military responses to resolve them. In
short, it brings the wrong actors to the table. As the
saying goes, if all you have is a hammer, everything
looks like a nail.
Secondly, are climate-related disasters amenable
to processes and solutions used to tackle threats to
international peace and security? To put it another
way, can mitigation and adaptation strategies be
fulfilled through enforcement action? Can those that
cite counter-terrorism and non-proliferation actions
by the Council as pathways for punitive measures
explain which are “the others” to be held accountable

S/PV. 8451

for climate disasters? Will it be those that do not fulfil
their nationally determined contributions under the
Paris Agreement? Will those that do not provide the
committed climate financing be forced to provide such
support or will inconvenient truths be sidestepped?
Thirdly, can the needs of climate justice be served by
shifting climate law-making from the inclusive United
Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change
(UNFCCC) to decision-making by a structurally
unrepresentative organization? The disruptive spillover
of such a change, made through a mere decision of
the Council, on the UNFCCC processes and the Paris
Agreement, as well as on the other multilateral organs
currently engaged in cooperatively tackling climate
change, and indeed on multilateral law-making, is real.
We weigh in favour of a cautionary approach on this
contested subject. India supports a path that promotes
cooperation to achieve our common goal of preventing
and addressing serious disasters linked to climate
change. To address such issues, we need to collaborate
on climate actions, consistent with the principle of
common but differentiated responsibilities.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Spain.
Mr. Santos Maraver (Spain) (spoke in Spanish): I
would like to thank the Dominican Republic, a country
that, as both an island State and a Caribbean country,
is exposed to climate-related natural disasters, for
organizing this debate. The Dominican Republic has
a long and rich tradition of environmental policies.
Its experience therefore contributes to promoting
the need for the Security Council to incorporate the
climate dimension into its peace and security strategy,
in particular in the context of strengthening its
preventive function.
As is well known, Spain is a country very vulnerable
to the impacts of climate change. That is why we attach
great importance to considering the effects of climate
change on the maintenance of international peace and
security. We promoted this debate during our recent
term in the Security Council, in 2015 and 2016, when
we co-organized Arria Formula meetings with Malaysia
and Angola and promoted a briefing on desertification
with Egypt. We have noted with satisfaction the
attention that the Council has devoted to the issue in
recent years.

19-0201043/83

S/PV.8451

Maintenance of international peace and security

Scientific evidence warns us repeatedly, most
recently in the latest report of the Intergovernmental
Panel on Climate Change, of the intolerable effects
that rising temperatures will have in the form of
uncontrollable natural disasters, persistent droughts,
irreparable destruction of natural habitats and rises in
sea level that many cannot bear. In turn, those changes
seriously compromise food security, access to drinking
water, and the health of billions of people — changes
that could force massive migratory movements. In
short, climate change has the capacity to generate
serious political, economic and social repercussions
that will inevitably affect international peace and
stability. There is an urgent need to act, and to do so in
the area of security.
Spain has made the fight against climate change
one of its national priorities. The creation of a Ministry
for Ecological Transition clearly expresses our firm
commitment to addressing the effects of climate
change, and the need for a complete transformation of
our system in order to adapt it to the requirements of
true sustainable development. In that context, last week,
the President of the Government of Spain announced an
energy and climate plan that will mobilize €235 billion
over the next 10 years.
But we are aware that national efforts are useless
if they are not combined with essential international
cooperation. It is with that conviction that, here at
Headquarters, Spain joined the Carbon Neutrality
Coalition, which is committed to the net elimination of
emissions by 2050. And it is with the same conviction
that we await with anticipation the climate summit to be
convened by the Secretary-General.
We support the introduction of climate issues into
the deliberations of the Security Council. To confine
climate change to the realm of sustainable development,
or to ignore that it is a multiplier of the factors of
instability, would show a serious lack of responsibility.
The Council needs to equip itself with a system of risk
assessment and strategies that integrate the impact
of climate change into its analysis and into conflict
prevention and peacekeeping.
Spain has incorporated the relationship between
climate and stability in its national security strategy
approved in 2017, which expressly states that “the
effects of climate change function as structural causes
of armed conflicts”. In short, it affirms the intrinsic
relationship between climate and security. If this reality
44/83

25/01/2019

is getting its due at the national level with greater
justification and urgency, it should also have it at the
multilateral level that the Security Council represents.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the observer of the European Union.
Mr. Parenti: The candidate countries Albania,
Montenegro and the former Yugoslav Republic of
Macedonia, the country of the Stabilization and
Association Process and potential candidate Bosnia and
Herzegovina, as well as Ukraine and the Republic of
Moldova, align themselves with this statement.
The European Union (EU) commends the
Dominican Republic for its initiative of holding an
open debate on the important issue of the impact of
climate-related disasters on international peace and
security. The presidency of the Dominican Republic,
which is a small island development State, adds a very
important perspective to our discussion.
As Mr. Steiner noted this morning, in its recently
published 2019 Global Risks Report, the World Economic
Forum asserted that environmental and climate-related
concerns account for three of the top five risks by
likelihood, and four by impact, which corroborates
the findings set forth in the most recent special report
of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change,
entitled Global Warming of 1.5º C, on the magnitude of
the challenges the international community is facing.
The impacts of climate change and environmental
degradation on food security, ecosystems, livelihoods,
water supplies and key economic sectors such as
agriculture are grave in many parts of the world.
Climate change acts as a threat multiplier for conflicts
over access to increasingly scarce resources and for
instability and international and internal displacement,
which is particularly the case in vulnerable or fragile
countries and regions lacking the necessary capacity
for building resilience and coping with disasters during
and after they happen.
The diverse nature of the interlinkages between
climate change and security, together with the range of
measures required to prevent, reduce and address them
effectively, makes it essential to take an integrated
approach. The United Nations Integrated Strategy for
the Sahel, which combines governance, security and
resilience actions, is a good example. We welcome
the reflection of climate and environmental risks in
the latest report of the United Nations Office for West
Africa and the Sahel.
19-02010

25/01/2019

Maintenance of international peace and security

Assessing climate and environmental risks and
their potential impact on socioeconomic stability
should be done in all countries, but especially has to
become a priority in the most fragile situations. That
is essential for promoting resilience and preparedness,
thereby contributing to the implementation of the 2030
Agenda for Sustainable Development and the Sendai
Framework for Disaster Risk Reduction.
Further work is required to ensure that relevant
climate and environmental risks are appropriately
included in the risk assessments that form the basis of
the decisions of the Security Council, and they need
to be included in early-warning systems, thereby
reinforcing the Council’s conflict-prevention role.
Inter-pillar cooperation is essential. In that regard,
we consider the growing advisory role played by the
Peacebuilding Commission vis-à-vis the Security
Council as very important.
We should also remember the greater risks, burdens
and adverse impacts on women and girls during and
following disasters, including a heightened risk of
gender-based violence as they attempt to gain access
to food and other basic needs for family members and
themselves. Empowering women as one of the drivers
of economic growth strengthens societal resilience.
Climate change and disaster-risk-reduction measures
have to be gender responsive, sensitive to indigenous
knowledge systems and respect human rights.
Incorporating climate-security factors into
strategic-level policy frameworks and practical
guidance at national, regional and multilateral levels,
as well as in the national voluntary reviews of the
Sustainable Development Goals, is a first step. As a longterm measure, the sustainable management of natural
resources and close cooperation between countries
where such resources are shared is essential for reducing
the risk of related internal or international conflicts.
Ambitious climate action under the Paris Agreement
and beyond — for example, at the 2019 climate summit
to be convened by the Secretary-General — must remain
the cornerstone of our joint commitment. The EU is
convinced that multilateral action and partnerships,
treating the causes and the symptoms and promoting
cooperation, are central in that regard. We work closely
with our partners around the globe to enhance our
joint capacity to mitigate and adapt to climate change,
confront environmental degradation, manage disasters
and address wider socioeconomic impacts.

S/PV. 8451

With a wide range of programmes, the EU
supports measures to strengthen resilience in an
integrated manner in different regions of the world.
For example, under Euroclima Plus, we are promoting
climate-resilient development in 18 Latin American
countries, with a focus on the most vulnerable. Our
new Pacific initiative, which we launched with partners
at last year’s One Planet Summit, aims at the same
time to address impacts of climate change and build
resilience in 19 countries and overseas territories. With
the Alliance for the Sahel, designed around six priority
sectors, including energy and climate, the aim is to
strengthen the coordination among donors to enhance
the stability and sustainable development of the region.
The EU’s Copernicus satellite imaging has been used
for instant lifesaving response to extreme-weatherevent disasters, through, for example, house-to-house
guidance to find survivors after Hurricanes Harvey and
Irma in 2017. It also guides long-term preparations for
climate impacts that threaten the livelihoods and even
the existence of coastal communities.
We are convinced that, with committed and
targeted action at international, regional, national and
local levels, we can reduce the risk of climate-related
disasters and ensure that their impacts can be better
handled. By achieving that, we would remove a
significant risk for peace and security in many parts of
the world.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Barbados.
Ms. Thompson (Barbados): Today I have the
honour to speak on behalf of the 14 member States of
the Caribbean Community (CARICOM), which aligns
itself with the statement that will be made later today
by the representative of Belize on behalf of the Alliance
of Small Island States.
CARICOM strongly believes that there is a
nexus between peace, security, development and
sustainability — a delicate balance now threatened
by climate change. That threat, which is posed to all
countries, developed and developing alike, cannot go
unanswered, and requires a holistic strategic response
at the national and multilateral levels.
We wish to note, first, that CARICOM adheres to
the view that the United Nations Framework Convention
on Climate Change should remain the primary United
Nations agency to respond to the phenomena of climate
change. Secondly, while the threat to the peace and

19-0201045/83

S/PV.8451

Maintenance of international peace and security

security of the entire human family is real, small island
developing States, including those in the Caribbean
subregion, are in the vortex of an imminent existential
threat, requiring a pre-emptive response that includes
risk assessment, planning and appropriate financing for
resilience and capacity-building. Thirdly, consideration
of this issue by the Security Council should place
emphasis on addressing the full gamut of the risks that
climate change poses to peace and security. Indeed,
a very pertinent issue is how best to coordinate the
panoply of actors at the international and regional
levels to support States in the mitigation of those
security risks.
The Paris Agreement on Climate Change was
historic but, as the Secretary-General reminded us
only last week, while no reversals were suffered in
Katowice, there were no significant advancements
of the cause either. We therefore call on developed
countries to fulfil their financing, capacity-building
and technology-transfer commitments under the Paris
Agreement and to work assiduously and urgently
towards the 1.5°C goal.
In July, the Heads of State and Government of
CARICOM adopted a declaration on climate change
in which they called for a global effort to close the
mitigation ambition gap and place the world on pathways
for low-emissions, climate-resilient development. They
also urged the international community to continue
to support the Caribbean in its ongoing efforts to
contribute to global mitigation, to adapt to the impacts
of climate change and to build our region’s resilience so
as to mitigate and manage the real risk of irreparable
loss and damage and to support the region as it aspires
to become the world’s first climate-smart zone.
Understanding of how climate change threatens
peace and security and drives conflicts needs to be
improved across the United Nations system. Only then
will climate policy underpin all other development
planning and initiatives. We cannot lament migration
trends as threatening security without addressing
the push factor of climate change. We must not place
integrated water resources management and general
resources planning outside the context of climate
change. We should not ignore the history of resource
scarcity and its relationship to conflict and war. We
dare not close our eyes to the potential impacts of sealevel rise coastal inundation on maritime boundaries
and the potential risk for conflict and for State security.
We ought not to speak of global peace, security or
46/83

25/01/2019

sustainability when climate impacts put development
out of reach.
The inclusion of relevant analysis in the SecretaryGeneral’s regular reporting, risk assessments and early
warning is vital. Accordingly, the States of CARICOM
note with interest the call made by the Pacific small
island developing States on 11 July 11 during the
Security Council open debate on climate security
risks (see S/PV.8307) for the appointment of a special
representative on climate and security, who would not
expand the Council’s mandate but instead would serve
the Secretary-General and fill a critical gap in the
United Nations system, while providing the Council
with the information it so badly needs. CARICOM
also supports the call for the Intergovernmental Panel
on Climate Change and the United Nations Office for
Disaster Risk Reduction to brief the Security Council
on climate change security threats resulting from
natural disasters.
In conclusion, CARICOM again thanks the
Dominican Republic for convening this important
conversation on how the Council could address climate
risks in a security context, if at all it should. For
CARICOM this represents yet another potent reminder
that we must act collaboratively and in earnest to
combat climate change before we all find ourselves
far beyond any international capacity to cope with
its consequences.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Portugal.
Mr. Duarte Lopes (Portugal): I thank you,
Mr. President, for organizing this timely open debate.
Portugal fully aligns itself with the statement just
delivered by the observer of the European Union.
We heard the Secretary-General’s warning that
“nothing less than our future and the fate of
humankind depends on how we rise to the
climate challenge”.
Climate change constitutes a direct existential threat
to international peace and security, one that can
be addressed only through the involvement of, and
cooperation between, all Member States. That is the
reality that pushes us to seek action and encourages us
to have climate change more strongly reflected in the
work of the Security Council.
19-02010

25/01/2019

Maintenance of international peace and security

We know all too well the concerning trends
we face — the unprecedented economic costs of
climate-related disasters, energy-related carbon dioxide
emissions at historic highs and warmer and more acidic
oceans than ever before. Those challenges require
urgent and ambitious action. We therefore commend
the convening of the Secretary-General’s 2019 climate
summit in September, as well as the President of
the General Assembly’s high-level meeting slated
for March.
What brings us together today is the recognition
that, among its many effects, climate change also has
a concrete impact on international peace and security.
Climate change is a major threat multiplier, particularly
in already fragile regions. The added tension of
competition over diminishing natural resources adds
fuel to existing conflicts. Existing vulnerabilities
are amplified by rising waters, excessive rainfall and
prolonged drought, thereby increasing social and
economic instability, which often leads people to move
in search of better living conditions. Those concerns
are reflected in the 2017 Hague Declaration on
Planetary Security, with a special focus on combating
desertification in the Sahel region and optimizing
international coordination efforts.
Portugal’s strategic concept of national defence,
adopted in 2013, also addresses that reality by taking
into consideration environmental threats and risks
and paving the way for strengthening our capacity to
prevent, adapt and respond to environment-related
security challenges.
During the Portuguese presidency of the Security
Council in November 2011, the Council held a highlevel briefing (see S/PV.6668) on the new challenges
to international peace and security, where the issue of
the impact of climate change on refugees and displaced
persons was considered. That debate has since evolved,
thanks to the efforts of many Member States that sought
to bring this issue to the fore, including, most recently,
Sweden in 2018. We believe that the time is ripe for
further including relevant climate and environmental
risks in risk assessments that form the basis of the
Security Council’s discussions, thereby bolstering the
Council’s conflict prevention role.
In conclusion, it is essential that the international
community implement the Paris Agreement on Climate
Change, work together to address the impacts of climate
change and ensure support for those States that are most

S/PV. 8451

vulnerable to its effects. The Security Council cannot
ignore the many interlinkages between climate change
and security. It should stand ready to take the necessary
measures required to prevent, reduce and address the
existing risks. Portugal supports an integrated approach
to those challenges, one that is based on inter-pillar
and interregional cooperation and aimed at promoting
resilience and preparedness. And we see that approach
as a necessary step towards the full implementation of
the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development and the
Sustainable Development Goals.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Turkey.
Mr. Sinirlioğlu (Turkey): At the outset, I would like
to thank you, Mr. President, for bringing yet another
critical issue to the attention of the Security Council.
Climate change is an existential challenge, and its
adverse and transboundary impacts on the economy,
health and the environment pose major threats for
future generations.
Climate change-related disasters have become
an underlying cause of social instability in recent
decades, by contributing to large-scale displacements.
Environmental degradation and competition over
resources continue to play a critical role in conflicts
in many regions. They also halt progress on security,
stability and development. The International
Organization for Migration estimates that the number
of people who might be forced to migrate due to
environmental degradation by 2050 could be as high
as 200 million. Climate-related disasters caused
thousands of deaths in 2017 and a loss of $320 billion.
There is no doubt that those figures will put further
pressure on host countries for the displaced and create
new challenges for the existing legal frameworks for
displacement and migration. Those facts oblige us to
reflect on the consequential economic and security
implications of climate change.
The Caribbean and Pacific regions are heavily and
increasingly affected by climate change and related
security consequences, despite having made almost no
contribution to global warming. Slow-onset hazards,
such as increasing sea levels and extreme weatherrelated disasters, endanger the very existence of small
island developing States. Those circumstances also
have critical impacts on the sustenance of people who
are mostly engaged in fishing, forestry or agriculture.

19-0201047/83

S/PV.8451

Maintenance of international peace and security

There is an urgent need to establish and adapt
systematic and comprehensive resilience-building tools
for those countries. Those mechanisms must address
the risks of social and political instability and conflicts
that arise from the interaction of climate change and
sociopolitical factors. The transfer of technology and
know-how to those countries is an urgent necessity.
The capacities of local populations and national
Governments should be strengthened with policies
and strategies that will enable them to better cope with
the devastating effects of climate-related disasters.
Turkey is willing and ready to contribute to such
efforts. Through its humanitarian and development
agencies, Turkey prioritizes assisting countries that
have been critically affected by extreme weather events
and disasters, which cause a heavy toll on people’s
livelihoods, by delivering mobile hospitals and aid
materials and deploying search-and-rescue teams.
Turkey, too, is located in a vulnerable region
with respect to climate change. The region is severely
affected by global warming, which has caused a
decrease in precipitation and a rise in drought and land
degradation — 2017 was the driest year in the past 44
years. Consequently, Turkey is expected to become a
water-stressed country by 2030. Turkey has pursued
a firm position on climate change. In an attempt
to provide its citizens with a low-carbon-intensity
environment, Turkey strives to integrate global climate
change-related objectives in its development policies,
disseminate energy efficiency, increase the use of clean
and renewable energy resources and actively participate
in the global efforts to tackle climate change.
As the Secretary-General has been strongly
warning, climate change is the defining issue of our
time and is running faster than we are. Combating
climate change and related disasters requires global
cooperation and equitable burden-sharing. The
entry into force of the Paris Agreement on Climate
Change and the approval of its rulebook are surely
significant achievements. Turkey actively contributed
to the negotiations with a view to reaching a successful
agreement. Nevertheless, the Paris Agreement can be
successfully implemented only if it is based on the
principles of common but differentiated responsibilities,
respective capabilities and equity. Turkey, as a country
facing critical vulnerabilities related to climate change,
remains committed to implementing the necessary
measures to protect our planet and overcome those
48/83

25/01/2019

challenges on equal terms with countries with similar
development levels.
Today’s debate has reconfirmed the diverse linkages
between climate change, on the one hand, and peace
and security, on the other hand. No nation is immune
to the related challenges. Therefore, we need to work in
unity in facing them. We thank the Dominican Republic
presidency for focusing on this important issue.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Switzerland.
Mr. Favre (Switzerland) (spoke in French): We
thank the Dominican Republic for organizing this
debate on a crucial topic. Switzerland welcomes
this opportunity to discuss the nexus between
climate-related disasters and peace and security in the
Security Council. We recognize the urgent need to take
proactive steps to limit the impact of climate change on
international peace and security.
Today’s open debate clearly demonstrates the
global dimension of climate change, the effects of which
differ according to the specific characteristics of each
country. Switzerland is also increasingly experiencing
the consequences of climate change. For example,
during the heat wave of 2018 in our region, shipping
on the Rhine, which is of high strategic importance to
our country’s economy, was heavily hindered by high
temperatures, insufficient rainfall and, consequently,
low water levels. That interrupted import and export
trade, leaving landlocked Switzerland with limited
access to vital goods, such as fuels. In a globalized
world economy, the acceleration of climate change will
have an increasing impact on human and economic
activities. Such developments threaten our collective
stability and security.
In order to prepare for these new challenges,
Switzerland has adopted a national strategy on
adaptation to climate change. In addition, Switzerland
has commissioned impact studies and an assessment
of existing climate change and safety measures to
implement the adaptation measures needed to protect
its population. Switzerland’s concerns about the effects
of climate change on peace and security are reflected
in its international commitments. For example,
Switzerland launched the Blue Peace Initiative in 2010,
which aims to strengthen cross-border cooperation on
water resource management.
19-02010

25/01/2019

Maintenance of international peace and security

We note that climate change also affects human
security, that is, the material and immaterial security of
individuals in areas as diverse as the economy, health
and culture. In order to mitigate those effects, the focus
should be on prevention. That requires early-warning
systems to systematically identify situations in which
climate change acts as a risk multiplier, in order to
develop adequate responses.
The Security Council has an important role to
play in this context, particularly on two points. First,
the Council must systematically integrate climate
risks into the regional and country situations already
on its agenda. Secondly, the Security Council must be
able to take full advantage of the existing information
and resources available within the United Nations
system. Climate data collections, climate scenarios
and early-warning systems already exist and are being
successfully applied today. It is therefore vital to
exchange that knowledge and utilize synergies within
the United Nations, including the Security Council.
Effective coordination should be established so that the
topics of climate change and security can be adequately
tackled and addressed.
In conclusion, we must take proactive and
systematic measures, including in the Council, in order
to ensure international peace and security in a context
in which the risks of climate fragility, extreme disasters
and slow-onset hazards are increasing. Another
excellent opportunity to address climate change in the
specific context of disasters will be the Global Platform
for Disaster Risk Reduction, which will meet in May
in Geneva.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Australia.
Ms. Bird (Australia): I thank you, Mr. President, for
organizing this important debate. Australia welcomes
this discussion.
We align ourselves with the Pacific Islands Forum
statement to be delivered by the representative of Nauru.
Global warming, rising sea levels and more extreme
weather events are increasing pressure on communities
and stressing food, water and energy resources. As
environmental pressures build, we need to be ready to
address climate-related security threats. Australia has
committed to spending at least $1 billion in developing
countries over five years in order to strengthen
resilience to the challenges posed by climate change,

S/PV. 8451

including $300 million directly to the Pacific region.
As the largest bilateral donor to the Pacific region,
we build resilience through every sector of our aid
programme, including infrastructure, health, education
and food and water security.
In September last year, Pacific Islands Forum
leaders adopted the Boe Declaration on Regional
Security. The Declaration acknowledges that climate
change remains the single-greatest threat to the
livelihoods, security and well-being of the peoples of
the Pacific. To help implement the Boe Declaration,
Australia is working with Pacific partners to establish
a Pacific fusion centre, which will enhance regional
information-sharing and analysis and draw on climate
data and disaster analysis to inform responses to
shared security threats. Australia is also establishing
a $2 billion Australian infrastructure financing facility
for the Pacific. The facility will work with partners in
the Pacific to build key infrastructure in sectors such
as energy, water and transport. That will build on our
decades of support for high-quality climate and sealevel monitoring across the Pacific, as well as significant
humanitarian assistance following disaster events.
Australia believes that we must take a longer-term
development perspective on reducing disaster risk, and
we are committed to helping countries in the AsiaPacific region to implement the Sendai Framework for
Disaster Risk Reduction. Our disaster risk reduction
development assistance has consistently exceeded the
target of 1 per cent of official development assistance
since it was recommended at the Global Platform
for Disaster Risk Reduction in 2009. As part of
that commitment, Australia is looking forward to
co-hosting, with the United Nations Office for Disaster
Risk Reduction, the Asian Ministerial Conference on
Disaster Risk Reduction in 2020.
Integrating disaster risk reduction into our
development assistance investments is at the heart
of Australia’s approach. We do that through climate
and disaster risk screening, climate and disaster
proofing new investments and designing programmes
to ensure that development outcomes are attained,
even under changing climatic conditions. We also
implement mandatory safeguards to ensure that we
protect the environment when delivering programmes
overseas. The Sendai Framework, the 2030 Agenda
for Sustainable Development and the Paris Agreement
on Climate Change are mutually reinforcing. The

19-0201049/83

S/PV.8451

Maintenance of international peace and security

challenge is to translate the policy coherence among
those three frameworks into practice.
Australia recognizes that global and national efforts
to reduce emissions and limit warming must be at the
centre of our approach. Adopting the Paris Agreement
rulebook in Poland last year was a significant step
forward. It reaffirmed the importance of meeting global
challenges with global solutions through the rulesbased order and provides a framework to bring the Paris
Agreement to life. Other parts of the United Nations
system must complement those global and national
efforts and assist us to better understand and address
the security implications of climate change. Australia
would welcome an opportunity to help the many
valuable parts of the United Nations system to coalesce
around a collective response to these pressing issues.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Sri Lanka.
Mr. Perera (Sri Lanka): Allow me to congratulate
the Dominican Republic, not only on assuming the
presidency of the Council for this month but also for
convening this open debate on one of the most pressing
issues of our time — climate change. As an island nation
severely impacted upon by natural disasters, Sri Lanka
understands the challenges faced by all nations affected
by climate change. We also thank all of the briefers for
their valuable contributions here this morning.
The World Meteorological Organization has
observed that the past three to four years were the
warmest on record. Carbon dioxide levels in the
atmosphere continue to rise, increasing the risk of
heat waves, floods, droughts and wild fires. Rising sea
levels and coastal degradation threaten the viability of
lives and livelihoods in low-lying areas. More frequent
flooding and the risk of the loss of territory to the sea
increase the prevalence of displacement, migration
and social unrest. Island nations like Sri Lanka
are particularly vulnerable to the impact of ocean
environments and climate change. In the past decade
or so, Sri Lanka has been devastated by nature-driven
tragedies such as floods, landslides, the massive
tsunami of 2004 and other disasters.
For Sri Lanka the ocean and its resources are
inextricably interwoven with the lives of our people.
The Indian Ocean, in which we are located, provides
employment, food and avenues of trade and commerce.
Our large coastal communities survive at the ocean
level. For us the rise of the seas, the pollution of
50/83

25/01/2019

the oceans, the depletion of fish and good coastal
ecosystems are not abstractions, they are the core of
our existence.
Only a global vision implemented through
commitment and multilateral cooperation, in keeping
with the principles of sovereignty, territorial integrity
and the national unity of States, will halt the degradation
of this planet and the resulting threat to peace and
security. Therefore, solidarity in international relations
is vital, not only in addressing this issue at all levels
and stages — from prevention to post-disaster
management — but also in providing disaster relief,
both in the long and short term. The United Nations
Framework Convention on Climate Change, the Paris
Agreement on Climate Change and the Sustainable
Development Goals, among other instruments,
constitute the fundamental normative framework for
systematically addressing climate change. Sri Lanka
continues to strongly endorse the Paris Agreement.
Indeed, we stand behind every significant international
environmental agreement. It is our hope that the
collective interests embodied in those instruments will
be the basis for global consensus on climate change and
its global impact.
The nexus between climate change and international
peace and security becomes evident in several areas.
Among them is the multiplication of threats. Climate
change multiplies threats, as it creates a scarcity of some
of the most essential natural resources. If resilience is
low, then communities may be internally displaced,
increasing exploitation by extremist elements. The
added tension of competition over diminishing natural
resources could add fuel to existing conflicts. With
regard to increasing migration, refugee movements
and internal shifts in population. Environmental
degradation, together with political, economic and
social insecurity, is also one of the main drivers of
migration and refugee movements. That phenomenon
has caused panic, leading some States to double down
on anti-immigrant rhetoric and resort to sealing off
borders, exacerbating international tensions. With
regard to local competition over resources, according
to media reports, global warming claims approximately
400,000 lives each year worldwide — many due to
extreme weather events, but most due to climate
change-induced hunger and disease. Natural resource
competition and food shortages can contribute to
regional instability or civil conflicts.
19-02010

25/01/2019

Maintenance of international peace and security

As to the international response to extreme weather
events and disasters, the way in which Governments
and the international community respond to natural
disasters could increase or mitigate the risk of conflict.
The need to respect inherent human dignity and
the principles of humanity, neutrality, impartiality
and non-discrimination in providing disaster relief
embodies the underpinning of third-State conduct
regarding a natural disaster that takes place in another
State. A departure from those principles could
lead to international tension and possible threats to
international peace and security. The principle of
impartiality is of particular importance to ensure that
those providing disaster relief carry out their activities
with the sole aim of responding to the disaster in
accordance with humanitarian principles, and not for
the purpose of interfering in the domestic affairs of an
affected State.
Against that background, it is essential to keep
in mind that international cooperation must not
diminish the primary role of the affected State in
the direction, control, coordination and supervision
of relief assistance. International cooperation must
always be complementary to the overriding duty of
the affected State to persons within its jurisdiction. If
those principles are not adhered to, in the worst case it
may create grievances and increase the risk of conflict,
while in the best case Government action can be a
springboard to build peace and increase resilience.
In that context, the recent work accomplished by
the International Law Commission on the topic of the
protection of persons in the event of disasters reflects the
careful balance that must be struck in recognizing the
primary role of the affected State in providing disaster
relief assistance to its people and, at the same time, in
underlining the value of international solidarity and
cooperation in providing disaster relief to an affected
State as a genuine humanitarian measure.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Colombia.
Mr. Gonzalez (Colombia) (spoke in Spanish): We
are grateful for the concept note (S/2019/1, annex)
circulated in support of our discussions on this topic, and
we thank the briefers for their valuable contributions.
This debate is taking place in a decisive year in
which we will hold the Secretary-General’s climate
summit with the presence of world leaders, in search
of heightened international commitment to combating

S/PV. 8451

climate change. That effort is reinforced by the highlevel dialogue on financing for development called for
by the presidency of the General Assembly, as well as
the High-level Political Forum, at which progress will
be reviewed on Sustainable Development Goal 13, on
climate change. Those spaces will also promote, in
addition to an exchange of views on this phenomenon
and its close relationship with the 2030 Agenda for
Sustainable Development, the optimization of a global
response to this threat. The coming decade will be
decisive in terms of climate action. Therefore, if we
do not act now and do not face this phenomenon in a
determined and coordinated way, achieving the goals
set for 2030 will be almost impossible.
The science is clear in that the current nationally
determined contributions under the Paris Agreement
on Climate Change are not sufficient to limit the
temperature increase to 1.5°C by 2030, and that the
countries located in the tropics and subtropics of the
southern hemisphere will experience the greatest
impact on economic growth due to climate change.
As stated in the concept note for this debate,
climate change and its disaster risks are global, but also
differentiated. The Latin American region, including
Colombia, is highly vulnerable to the adverse effects of
climate change. In the case of our country, that is due
to its high level of biodiversity, geographical location
and specific development challenges. That has been
evidenced by the increasingly intense and frequent
phenomena of El Niño and La Niña, which have caused
enormous human, economic and environmental losses.
Between 2010 and 2011, the La Niña phenomenon cost
the country approximately 2.2 per cent of its gross
domestic product. Then, in 2015-2016, we suffered the
El Niño phenomenon, which turned out to be the secondstrongest occurrence in history, with catastrophic
effects that resulted in forest fires, water scarcity and
many hectares of agricultural land being impacted
upon, leading to a dramatic increase in food prices.
That is why adaptation to climate change is a
priority for our country and the region, as it is the only
way to reduce our vulnerability. However, in order to
reduce the impacts of this phenomenon, a substantial
reduction of greenhouse-gas emissions is essential. It is
also crucial that we bolster implementation measures,
namely, the provision and mobilization of financial
resources, technology transfer and capacity-building
in developing countries, with a view to enhancing

19-0201051/83

S/PV.8451

Maintenance of international peace and security

25/01/2019

responses and solutions for the mitigation of, and
adaptation to, climate change.

country, in which the people, not the Government, own
the majority of the land.

My country wishes to take this opportunity to
reiterate the importance it attaches to the work of the
Security Council in maintaining global peace and
stability. We also believe that the natural forum in
which to initiate debates and make decisions related to
the causes and impacts of climate change, in addition to
the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate
Change and the Paris Agreement on Climate Change,
is the General Assembly. That universal organ not only
ensures an inclusive and comprehensive approach and
the participation of all Member States, but also takes
into account the intrinsic relationship between climate
change and the social and economic dimensions.

We are also seeing the same in the northern part
of our country, where people from Manam Island have
been displaced and relocated as a result of regular
volcanic eruptions. Just imagine the same scenario
multiplied several times over and the attendant
consequences posed to peace and security and in a
transboundary context. Those examples demonstrate
the importance of addressing the root causes of the
threats to peace and security, including from climate
change and natural disasters, both at the national level
and collectively through the United Nations system,
including the Council.

Finally, allow me to reiterate my country’s total
commitment to comprehensively pursuing matters
related to climate change.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Papua New Guinea.
Mr. Rai (Papua New Guinea): Small island
developing States, which are sovereign equals at the
United Nations, deserve a seat on the Security Council
on a regular and consistent basis. My delegation is
therefore pleased that the Dominican Republic, a
fellow small island developing State, has been rightly
recognized and empowered to play its part in the
Council. We applaud the Minister for Foreign Affairs,
His Excellency Mr. Miguel Vargas Maldonado, for the
Dominican Republic’s leadership in this open debate
on a topical issue that is highly apt, timely and a great
starting point to launch its tenure on the Council.
I would like to align these remarks with those to
be made by the representatives of Nauru and Tuvalu
on behalf of the Pacific Islands Forum and the Pacific
small island developing States, respectively, and the
statements made by the representatives of Australia,
Fiji and New Zealand.
In my own country, on the sinking Carteret Islands,
in the autonomous region of Bougainville, the majority
of the population has been forcibly dislocated, displaced
and resettled in-country as a consequence of rising
sea levels. Their in-country resettlement continues
to be beset by tension and conflict between them and
the people from the area of settlement over land and
resources. That is due to the land tenure system in my
52/83

Secondly, we remind the Council that, when we
speak of international peace and security in the remit
of the Council, we should not forget that we are talking
about the lives and livelihoods of “we, the peoples of
the United Nations”. The basic needs of humankind are
food, water and air. We are witnessing the diminishing
quality and quantity of those basic needs in many places
around the world, which is affecting countless lives and
livelihoods as a consequence of the adverse impacts of
climate change and natural disasters. The recent report
of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change
is unequivocal. Therefore, all aspects and potential
sources of instability and insecurity that threaten the
welfare of all peoples everywhere must be addressed.
That includes the impacts of natural disasters and
climate change on peace and security. Let us not allow
the doubting Thomases of this world to be the reason for
not saving ourselves from the onward dangerous march
of climate change and its perils to peace and security.
Thirdly, we value and welcome the continuing
debate in the Council on this seminal topic. However, we
remain seriously concerned about the unacceptable gulf
that continues to exist between the views of the General
Assembly and those of the Security Council. General
Assembly resolution 63/281 marked the first time that
the international community collectively recognized
the security implications of climate change. The
resolution specifically invites the relevant organs of the
United Nations to intensify their efforts in considering
and addressing climate change, including its possible
security implications. Despite the resolution, there
remains minimal concrete or coordinated action at the
international level to address the security implications
of climate change. That needs to be strengthened now,
not in the future.
19-02010

25/01/2019

Maintenance of international peace and security

We welcome the small step in the right direction
taken recently by the Security Council in acknowledging
the adverse impact of climate change and peace and
security in the Lake Chad basin and the Sahel region.
We urge that this be viewed in a wider context to cover
many other suffering regions, such as our own.
Finally, let me also congratulate and wish Belgium,
Germany, Indonesia and South Africa well as they
assume their mandate on the Council. We look forward
to working in partnership with them to advance our
cause and address the issue of climate change.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Sweden.
Mr. Skoog (Sweden): We express our thanks to
the briefers this morning. I want to say that, from day
one, climate and security was a top priority for Sweden
during our tenure on the Security Council over the past
two years. We listened to so many countries asking
the Council to better pursue this agenda based on the
realities on the ground. We have heard that again today,
but with further urgency — of course, without prejudice
to the mandates of other bodies inside and outside the
United Nations.
With conflict prevention as our point of departure,
we fully integrated climate-related security risks into
our country- and region-specific work. During our
two-year term, the Council clearly recognized the links
between climate change and security in a number of
distinct geographical contexts. The Council repeatedly
emphasized the need for adequate risk assessments
in order to make our conflict prevention efforts more
effective. I agree that there is a need for, and that it
would be useful to have, a stand-alone resolution of the
Security Council recognizing the connection between
security and climate change. But let us not forget, as I
said, that there are several decisions that are significant
enough to keep the Security Council busy and should
hold it to account when it comes to following up on
these issues. We very much welcome the steps taken by
the Department of Political and Peacebuilding Affairs,
the United Nations Development Programme and the
United Nations Environment Programme to form a
coordination mechanism to that end, which we see as
an embryo of improved analysis of the common threats
that exist between climate change and security and
which need to be put to the Council on a more frequent
basis.

S/PV. 8451

In July 2018, during our presidency of the Security
Council, we organized a thematic debate — as you,
Mr. President, are doing today — which demonstrated
broad and cross-regional support to take the agenda
forward. In that light, we thank the Dominican Republic
for taking up the baton and organizing today’s timely
debate. We have now moved beyond the question of
whether climate change impacts peace and security;
this has been established and recognized. It is now
about what to do, how to do it and to do it now.
Some negative effects of climate change on
security are already evident, including water and food
insecurity, increasingly frequent extreme weather
and natural disasters and sea-level rise. Those are
phenomena that we know risk leading to loss of life,
displacement and competition over scarce resources and
social tensions, and indeed the triggering of conflict.
The fact that countries all over the world are reflecting
those threats in their respective national security
strategies just goes to show how real and widespread
the issue has become. We are entering into unknown
territory. The Intergovernmental Panel on Climate
Change special report Global Warming of 1.5°C makes
that abundantly clear. The world has already crossed
some of its planetary boundaries — I think the briefer
from the World Meteorological Organization stressed
the same issues in his briefing this morning. Of course,
this has far-reaching consequences that are not yet
known, including on international peace and security.
I would like to make three brief practical suggestions
on the way ahead when it comes to addressing the more
immediate concerns.
First, the Council — and other key
decision-making bodies within and outside the United
Nations — need comprehensive climate-related
security risk information, forward-looking analysis and
early-warning mechanisms to be able to make informed
decisions. That was already being called for in the
presidential statement driven by Germany on climate
and security in 2011 (S/PRST/2011/15) and must now
be made a reality.
Secondly, as we begin to better understand the
risks, there is a need to develop approaches that more
effectively address them, including through updated
mission mandates, programmes and allocation of
resources. We must also ensure that diplomatic
efforts, training and mission deployments, as well
as development policies, are informed by due risk
assessments.

19-0201053/83

S/PV.8451

Maintenance of international peace and security

Thirdly, we should increasingly consider
climate-related challenges within mediation efforts.
To meet the challenges related to climate and
security, we need a true institutional home for those
issues within the United Nations. The coordination
mechanism is an important first step and could be
further developed. We believe that the upcoming
climate summit in September would be the appropriate
venue to push this forward.
Finally, the Swedish Government will remain an
active partner on this urgent agenda by building on
our experiences from pursuing these issues on the
Security Council for the past two years. That includes
through our significant contribution to all the relevant
climate funds and our world-leading national policy on
cutting carbon emissions, which is now enshrined in
our national laws.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Bangladesh.
Mr. Bin Momen (Bangladesh): At the outset, I
would like to thank you, Mr. President, for taking
the initiative to discuss the interlinkages between
climate-related disasters and international peace
and security. I would also like to express our deep
appreciation to the briefers for their thought-provoking
presentations.
Disasters induced by global climate change have
the potential to turn into major security concerns. The
findings of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate
Change’s special report on Global Warming of 1.5°C
warn us about the dangerous consequences that will
follow if we fail to limit global warming to 1.5°C, in
particular in the areas of poverty eradication, food
security and public health.
Bangladesh is one of the worst-affected countries
by the impacts of global climate change, due to its
geographical location. It is highly prone to natural
disasters, such as cyclones, floods, landslides and
earthquakes. Climate change poses a serious threat
to our 160 million people, although we have hardly
contributed to the deterioration of the environment. Just
a 1°C increase in the global temperature and resultant
sea level rise will cause the inundation of a large area of
Bangladesh and, we fear, the displacement of 40 million
people by the end of this century. We are also losing 2 per
cent of our annual gross domestic product (GDP) due
to natural calamities and environmental degradation.
54/83

25/01/2019

Climate change-induced salinity and other disasters
are harming our production of rice and other crops.
In addition to all of that, hosting 1.1 million forcibly
displaced Rohingyas from neighbouring Myanmar is
also impacting our fragile environment.
Tackling climate change is directly linked to
sustainable development and resilience-building. In
line with that perspective, under the leadership of
its climate crusader, Prime Minister Sheikh Hasina,
Bangladesh is carrying forward its efforts for
sustainable development with specific plans for carbon
budgeting, the de-carbonization of manufacturing
pathways and low-carbon industrialization. In
considering multidimensional vulnerabilities posed by
climate change and disasters, our Government recently
adopted its Delta Plan 2100 to guide our sustainable
development pathway for the next 100 years.
Bangladesh is committed to implementing its
nationally determined contributions within the
framework of the Paris Agreement on Climate
Change. We have mainstreamed climate actions and
disaster management in our national planning and
sustainable development strategy. Over 1 per cent of
our GDP is being used to combat climate change. To
ensure food security for our people, we have been
investing in transforming our agriculture and making
it more resilient to the impacts of climate change and
disasters. We have taken various initiatives to increase
forestation, including a project worth $50 million for
the conservation of the Sundarbans, the world’s largest
mangrove forest and a UNESCO World Heritage Site.
Despite numerous challenges, at the national
level Bangladesh has been able to reduce casualties
in incidents of natural disasters in recent times by
taking various measures, such as improvements
to our early warning system, the dissemination of
information, the establishment of cyclone shelters
and the active engagement of dedicated Cyclone
Preparedness Programme volunteers for preparedness
and response activities.
Halting global climate change and reducing disaster
risks will largely depend upon the implementation of
the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development, the
Paris Agreement on Climate Change and the Sendai
Framework for Disaster Risk Reduction 2015-2030 to
their true letter and spirit. The recently adopted Global
Compact for Safe, Orderly and Regular Migration
also acknowledges that investing in, and accelerating
19-02010

25/01/2019

Maintenance of international peace and security

global cooperation for, climate change mitigation and
adaptation would contribute to the elimination of the
adverse drivers and structural factors that compel
people to leave their countries of origin.
Therefore, we must redouble our efforts for
sustainable development. Bangladesh is of the firm
view that climate change and related disasters must be
discussed in the mould of international development
cooperation. Big emitters must aim for the rapid
mitigation of greenhouse gases. Also, providing
financial resources and ensuring technology transfer to
vulnerable countries for their adaptation efforts would
be the most effective response to the threats posed by
climate change and related disasters.
While we emphasize that the effective
implementation of the Paris Agreement and other
relevant global documents and mechanisms are a
must to fight the effects of climate change, we are not
ignoring the fact that there could be a nexus between
climate change and international peace and security.
The whole United Nations system should work together
to improve our knowledge and understanding to find
out if climate change poses any direct threat to peace
and security in a specific locality, or if it is one of the
multiplying factors. The whole United Nations system
should also speak with one voice to prevent or resolve
any crisis that is an evident outcome of the adverse
effects of climate change.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the observer of the African Union.
Ms. Mohammed: Let me start by congratulating
your delegation, Mr. President, on the convening of
today’s open debate on a very pressing and important
subject. I would like also to thank all the briefers for
their insightful presentations.
Climate change is undoubtedly one of the most
important global challenges of our time. No country
or region can be considered immune to its devastating
consequences, which not only undermine development
gains but also threaten the very existence of our
communities. This is indeed a critical issue to which we
must devote all the attention it deserves. While in some
domains it is still debated whether climate change and
conflict have a direct or indirect causal relationship,
there is no doubt, as many speakers before me have
stated today, that we must recognize that climate
change could create conditions for conflict, or act as
a threat multiplier in certain circumstances. Those

S/PV. 8451

conditions could become tipping points for difficult
situations and could also narrow options for solving
problems. The situation in the Lake Chad basin and
in the Sahel region, where poor communities heavily
depend upon ever-shrinking natural resources for their
livelihoods, is a clear manifestation of the complex
relationship between climate change and conflict.
Against that background, allow me to emphasize the
following three points.
First, although they are by far less responsible for
the emergence and fast aggravation of this phenomenon,
developing countries suffer the most from the impacts
of climate change. For example, Africa’s contribution to
the greenhouse gases is insignificant, yet our continent
remains one of the most vulnerable areas to the
adverse impacts of climate change, which threaten the
realization of the development aspirations as outlined
in Agenda 2063: The Africa We Want. Some African
countries have, and will, confront risks from sea-level
rise and extreme weather, including stifling heat,
intense rains and powerful storm surges. Others have,
and will continue to, face the risks of more challenging
conditions in terms of food and agriculture, water,
health, fisheries, infrastructure, transportation and
other sources of livelihood. Climate change is also
partially to blame for increased migration, particularly
by our youth.
Secondly, if we are to seriously address climate
change-induced conflicts and security risks, Member
States have no alternative but to fully implement
their respective commitments made in the various
frameworks aimed at tackling the adverse impacts
of climate change. In accordance with the principle
of common but differentiated responsibilities, all
countries — particularly developed ones — should
take concrete measures to honour those obligations and
pledges in line with the Paris Agreement on Climate
Change, by providing sufficient and sustained climate
financing to developing countries, particularly the most
vulnerable ones. The timely provision of a clear means
of implementation for both mitigation and adaptation,
as well as the facilitation of the transfer of appropriate
technology, cannot be overemphasized. Such efforts,
in our view, would complement national and regional
efforts to address the adverse impacts of climate change
and prevent climate change-related security threats
and conflicts.
Thirdly, the African Union’s response to climate
change is demonstrated through its sustained

19-0201055/83

S/PV.8451

Maintenance of international peace and security

commitment to international environmental regimes
and its own environmental framework. Three years
after the conclusion of the Paris Agreement, Africa
continues to consolidate its efforts, focusing particularly
on partnerships, to ensure that African nations are
able to pursue a low-carbon and climate-resilient
development path through the implementation of their
nationally determined contributions. Let me seize this
opportunity to reiterate Africa’s strong commitment
to the Paris Agreement, which provides an ambitious
framework for addressing this global threat.
Most recently, building on presidential statement
S/PRST/2018/3, adopted on 30 January 2018 on West
Africa and the Sahel, which acknowledged the link
between climate change and violence, the African
Union (AU) dedicated the 774th meeting of the Peace
and Security Council, held on 21 May 2018, to an open
session on the link between climate change and conflicts
in Africa and addressing the security implications.
The Peace and Security Council also highlighted the
linkage between climate change and peace and security
in Africa and its threat to global peace and security.
In that context, and noting that no country or region
is immune to climate change, Peace and Security Council
members stated the importance of coordinated efforts
in mitigating the adverse effects of climate change and
provided a set of recommendations to member States
and AU partners. Those recommendations included,
notably, the following: first, the need to enhance
cooperation among stakeholders at the national, regional
and international levels to develop coping mechanisms
and enhance resilience; secondly, the need to develop
institutional frameworks, both at the national and
continental levels, to proactively respond to the security
repercussions of climate change-related conflicts; and,
last but not least, the need to strengthen early-warning
mechanisms to prevent climate-related conflicts.
In conclusion, I would like stress that our endeavour
to fight climate change will not be genuine unless it
is anchored in a multilateral approach, of which the
Paris Agreement remains one of the best illustrations.
Let me assure you, Sir, that the African Union will
continue to advance multilateral cooperation and work
constructively with its partners towards addressing the
root causes and negative effects of climate change and
related security threats and conflicts.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Ecuador.
56/83

25/01/2019

Mr. Gallegos Chiriboga (Ecuador) (spoke in
Spanish): I welcome the Dominican Republic as it takes
a seat on the Security Council for the first time and
presides over it this month. The initiative to convene this
debate on the impacts of climate-related disasters on
international peace and security, as well as the presence
of the Minister of Foreign Affairs of the Dominican
Republic, Mr. Miguel Vargas Maldonado, demonstrates
that bringing this fundamental issue to the attention of
the membership is a priority for the presidency.
Climate change is one of the greatest challenges of
our time, and its adverse effects undermine the ability
of all countries to achieve sustainable development.
Its effects are real and sudden and disproportionately
affect vulnerable groups. Its global nature requires
maximum international cooperation. The United
Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change is
the main intergovernmental forum that possesses the
necessary expertise to negotiate a global response to
climate change. Discussions in the Security Council
on this issue complement global efforts to better
understand the links between climate change and
international peace and security, as well as to mobilize
the capacities of United Nations organs in line with
their respective mandates.
The increase in global temperature, desertification
and droughts, sea-level rise and natural disasters is
leading to the destruction of homes and infrastructure,
loss of crops, food insecurity, unemployment
and increased inequalities. The effects on the
environment, the economy and society can see the
benefits of development gained with so much effort
reversed overnight. The humanitarian consequences
are catastrophic, with the loss of millions of lives,
displacement, the separation of families, exposure to
exploitation and susceptibility to marginalization. It is
alarming that people must travel long distances daily in
search of water and food, to the detriment of education
and work opportunities, and that young people run the
risk of being recruited by violent extremism.
Conflicts generated by climate change, due to
their increasing number, intensity and duration,
deserve urgent and innovative approaches. In that
context, 135.7 million people required humanitarian
assistance in the year 2017, with financing needs of
$23.5 billion. Against that backdrop, Ecuador promotes
the principles of equity and common but differentiated
responsibilities, as well as the right to development.
We advocate for an increase in adequate, predictable
19-02010

25/01/2019

Maintenance of international peace and security

and sustainable financing, in addition to the transfer of
technology, to developing countries.
It is necessary to promote preventive approaches to
address disaster risks in a comprehensive manner, with
people-centred, multi-risk, multisectoral, inclusive
and accessible policies. That is acknowledged in the
Sendai Framework for Disaster Risk Reduction 20152030, as disaster-prone developing countries require
special attention in view of their greater vulnerability
and levels of risk, which often exceed their capacity to
respond and recover.
Sustainable development is not possible without
peace and security, and peace and security are at risk
without sustainable development. We hope that this
debate will promote political will and the mobilization
of resources in the relevant forums to address
climate change.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Kenya.
Mr. Amayo (Kenya): I wish to congratulate the
Dominican Republic on joining the Security Council, as
well as on its ascension to the presidency of the Council
for the month of January. I also wish to congratulate the
other four newly elected non-permanent members of
the Security Council — Belgium, Germany, Indonesia,
and South Africa — and, at the outset, convey our
support to them as they undertake the noble tasks ahead
of them.
I should also not forget to thank you, Mr. President,
for convening this meeting on such an important subject
and for circulating the concept note that has guided this
debate (S/2019/1, annex). I also take this opportunity to
thank all the briefers for their enlightening interventions
this morning on the nexus between climate change and
conflicts, as well as related insecurity.
Kenya attaches great importance to the effective
management of climate-related disasters, which
remain a major threat to sustainable development. The
presentations and experiences shared on climate change
by briefers and various speakers today point to the fact
that many of our nations remain exposed to droughts,
hurricanes, tsunamis, floods and extreme temperatures,
among other existential risks. Those hazards have
often wiped out investments, destroyed livelihoods,
engendered conflict and propagated poverty.
Where poverty is high and adaptive capabilities
insufficient, there is considerable vulnerability, even

S/PV. 8451

to mildly extreme weather and other climatic shocks.
In most cases it is women, children and persons
with disabilities who bear the greatest risk. Cases
of climate-related extreme weather events, such as
droughts and floods, have become regular occurrences
in many parts of Africa and are a leading threat
to sustainable development, as well as peace and
security. For instance, in the Horn of Africa, persistent
droughts often cause food insecurity in addition to
water- and pasture-related conflicts, let alone general
economic instability.
My delegation believes that, through greater global
cooperation and collaboration, we can adapt to, and
improve our resilience against, climate-related disasters
that continue to threaten international peace and
security. We may not be able to change the time, place,
frequency or magnitude of climate-related disasters,
but we can at least prepare, plan and minimize their
impact whenever they occur.
Many climate-related international frameworks,
such as the Sendai Framework for Disaster Risk
Reduction 2015-2030 and the United Nations Framework
Convention on Climate Change, are anchored on the
assumption that, through our collective efforts, we can
effectively combat disasters and cultivate resilience,
especially among the most vulnerable in our societies.
However, the key challenge remains mobilizing
means of implementation, particularly at local levels.
Moreover, due to insufficient financing and a lack
of appropriate technologies and other capacities in
developing countries, the uniform domestication of
international guidelines becomes a major challenge.
To succeed, we must close implementation gaps
through more investments and the strengthening of the
relevant national institutions responsible for disaster
preparedness and management. Kenya updated its
national disaster risk management policy in 2018,
after benchmarking the best practices in disaster risk
management. The policy lays down strategies to ensure
that the Government commits itself to enhancing
research in disasters and the formulation of risk
reduction strategies. The policy is hinged, inter alia, on
an effective early-warning, information and prediction
system, mainstreaming disaster management in
development planning and a strong institutional
framework, particularly at the grass roots level, to
coordinate various stakeholders.

19-0201057/83

S/PV.8451

Maintenance of international peace and security

We believe that we should renew our commitment at
the global level and revitalize international cooperation
and partnerships for disaster and risk reduction,
particularly in the key areas of climate-related
information gathering, early warning, research and
development. Therefore, the mobilization of adequate
and predictable financial resources, technology transfer
and capacity-building will also enable Governments
and regional organizations to respond to the negative
effects of climate change more effectively and avert
many conflicts and related security threats.
In conclusion, I reiterate Kenya’s support
for multilateral efforts to address the impact of
climate-related disasters on international peace
and security. We therefore welcome the SecretaryGeneral’s prioritization of, and call for, greater ambition
on climate action. We look forward to the climate
summit scheduled for September.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give
the floor to the representative of Saint Vincent and
the Grenadines.
Ms. Miguel (Saint Vincent and the Grenadines):
Saint Vincent and the Grenadines congratulates the
Dominican Republic, a member of our Caribbean
family, on raising this important discussion in the
Security Council
We would like to align ourselves with the statement
delivered by the representative of Barbados on behalf
of the Caribbean Community, and with the statement to
be delivered by the representative of Belize, on behalf
of the Alliance of Small Island States.
We reaffirm that the United Nations Framework
Convention on Climate Change is the primary body for
addressing climate change, while also recognizing that
we need a multi-pronged approach to fight it. Those
two ideas are not mutually exclusive. The dire need for
economy-wide carbon reduction makes climate change
an irrefutably political matter, and its effects make it
an existential matter of the highest order, it goes to the
very existence of our country.
In all of that, we must admit that some have far
more responsibility for those assaults on our shores
than others. As ironic as it is, those least responsible
suffer the most, for example, small island developing
States and the Sahel. In effect, major emitters that
fail to set and honour ambitious mitigation pledges
are committing a direct act of hostility against small
58/83

25/01/2019

island developing States, and we ought to resist their
recklessness against our interests. We draw a direct,
causal connection between any such abdication and
the future death and destruction that island States
face as the result of increasingly frequent and intense
weather events.
The climate threat is unique, unprecedented and
urgent. Because of that, it is often difficult to deal with.
But that is no reason to sweep it under the rug. The rise
of climate change as the existential threat of our era has
not replaced the persistent peril of armed conflict across
the globe. The human suffering in Syria, Yemen and
Myanmar demands greater international attention and
action. Similarly, the potential threats to international
peace and security posed by tensions on the Korean
peninsula, among the Gulf States and in the State of
Palestine require persistent and prioritized diplomacy.
Moreover, the historical injustices done to Africa must
be made right as we navigate the myriad and complex
peace and security issues on the continent. However,
we must be careful not to present a false choice among
those issues. We have to deal with them all, no matter
how inconvenient climate-related security may be.
We raise our voice in this organ to call on carbon
emitters to make deep cuts to stop the causes of climate
change, and we echo the call to make the Security
Council more aware of, and more sensitive to, the
terrible consequences for international peace and
security. If we first recognize climate as a security
threat and then work in solidarity to protect all people
from it, we are on the right track. Saint Vincent and
the Grenadines would be honoured and humbled by the
opportunity to bring principled analysis and problem
solving to this issue in the Security Council and to
build bridges to that end.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Ireland.
Mr. Flynn (Ireland): I would like to begin by
thanking the Dominican Republic for hosting today’s
debate on this important and urgent topic, and extend
Ireland’s congratulations to you, Mr. President, on your
presidency of the Security Council. The voices of small
island developing States (SIDS) must be heard and
heeded in this Chamber.
Climate change is real. Its impact is global, and our
security is at risk. The denial of climate change needs
to end. The denial of the link between climate change
and the mandate of the Council also needs to end.
19-02010

25/01/2019

Maintenance of international peace and security

S/PV. 8451

It is crystal clear that the international community
has struggled to coherently respond to the challenge of
climate change. While the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development and the Paris Agreement on Climate
Change are important steps, the glaring reality is
that climate-related disasters are a major threat and
will continue to occur, and the Security Council
must respond to their impacts. We know that existing
fragilities are exacerbated by climate-related disasters,
which can erode food and water security, increase
gender inequality and damage livelihoods. A growing
body of research has demonstrated the links among
climate change, conflict and displacement. Put simply,
climate change is a threat multiplier.

and lead solutions. Today we also heard eloquently
about the role of young people. Let us listen more to
those who are rarely invited to this table.

While the impact of climate-related disasters on
international peace and security varies across regions
and States, a global response is the only way we can
address the threat. We believe that climate and security
concerns should be considered across all countryspecific situations on the Security Council’s agenda.
We want to see United Nations operations across the
peace and development nexus assessing the risks of
climate change.

You can rely on Ireland, Mr. President, as a
prospective non-permanent Security Council member
for the term 2021-2022, to work hard and be ambitious
for this agenda.

We must work to identify best practices in
addressing the threat of climate to security. Success
factors can be replicated, and we must find a way to
do that, through, for example, the Security Council
finding ways to move from discussing the risks of
climate change to action. That includes working more
systematically with regional and subregional bodies to
help us better understand the challenges we face and
how to address them.
The global community should also generate
evidence-based analysis upon which to draw, in order
to better understand the links between climate and
security. That must be complemented by hearing
the testimonies of those most affected, if we are
to understand the complexity of the linkages, how
they vary across contexts and how to negate risks. A
human rights-based approach to climate policy and
the international response is important. The voices of
vulnerable small island developing States need to be
heard here, and we favour the consideration of better
representation of SIDS around this table.
The recognition of women as a resource that can
bring about transformative change is also important.
Women are those who are most directly affected by
climate change, but are also uniquely placed to generate

Finally, but important, the appointment of a special
representative of the Secretary-General on climate
and security is another concrete step that we can
take to advance our work in this area. The future of
this planet and all of our futures rely on stepping up
to face the reality and the threat multiplier that we see
every day in climate change. Our peace, equality and
development depend upon it. But we will have neither
peace nor security if we fail to address the impacts of
climate-related disasters in our world.

The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Chile.
Mr. Skoknic Tapia (Chile) (spoke in Spanish): We
wish to thank the Dominican Republic for presiding over
and convening this important Security Council debate
on addressing the impacts of climate-related disasters
on international peace and security. We appreciate
and are grateful for the presence of the Minister for
Foreign Affairs of the Dominican Republic, Mr. Miguel
Vargas Maldonado, at this debate. We also thank the
Administrator of the United Nations Development
Programme, Mr. Achim Steiner; the Under-SecretaryGeneral for Political and Peacebuilding Affairs,
Ms. Rosemary DiCarlo; and scientists Mr. Pavel Kabat
and Ms. Lindsay Getschel, for their briefings.
This debate could not be more timely, as it is
being held following the adoption by the international
community of the Paris Agreement on Climate
Change work programme, which establishes the rules
and guidelines for the implementation of the Paris
Agreement, in Katowice on 16 December, as part of the
twenty-fourth Conference of the Parties to the United
Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change.
However, the November report of the Intergovernmental
Panel on Climate Change describes new challenges
and warns us that attaining the goal of limiting global
warming to 1.5°C above pre-industrial levels will
require a drastic reduction in global greenhouse gases,
as well as far-reaching and in-depth adaptation policies.

19-0201059/83

S/PV.8451

Maintenance of international peace and security

The environment is changing faster than our
efforts to understand and protect it. Alarm bells are
still ringing; the time for hesitation is over. The threat
of climate change will define this century and those
to come and requires a profound multilateral effort. It
is a serious, urgent and growing threat that we cannot
continue to ignore or downplay.
We must work together to improve our understanding
of the security implications of natural disasters that are
related to climate change and devise strategies to assess
and mitigate the risks of such disasters. It is therefore
essential to develop analytical skills within the United
Nations system that allow us to swiftly evaluate the
possible climate change-related threats to international
security, while providing the Security Council with
useful information on those threats and helping States
develop and implement action plans for tackling
them appropriately.
In that regard, through the Chilean International
Cooperation Agency for Development, our country
has implemented innovative cooperation mechanisms
for building capacity to reduce the risk of disasters at
the regional level. We highlight the success achieved
through the Kizuna Project, with the Government of
Japan, which seeks to train thousands of professionals
in Latin America and the Caribbean to manage
emergencies and disasters.
We welcome the initiative of Secretary-General
António Guterres to host the 2019 climate summit to be
held on 23 September. In that regard, I wish to declare
the firm and decisive commitment of the Government
of Chile to collaborate in the global efforts aimed at
addressing the devastating effects of climate change.
For that reason, my country will host and preside over
the twenty-fifth Conference of the Parties to the United
Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change
(COP25) in January 2020. Indeed, that fills us with
pride, but at the same time represents a huge challenge
for our country, which is compelling us to work hard to
ensure the success of that important event that will unite
the international community. We are undertaking that
role based on Chile’s commitment to multilateralism,
and in particular with the conviction that climate
change is a collective task that must be addressed by all
members of the international community.
In conclusion, we firmly believe that COP25
should mark a milestone in the drive towards greater
climate action. It is important that countries take
60/83

25/01/2019

that opportunity to announce concrete steps towards
heightened levels of ambition in the global response to
climate change.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Nauru.
Ms. Moses (Nauru): I have the honour to speak
on behalf of the Pacific Islands Forum member States
represented at the United Nations.
I would like to begin by thanking and congratulating
the Dominican Republic, a fellow small island
developing State, on demonstrating such commendable
leadership by placing the issue of climate change
squarely on the Security Council agenda. Few countries
wanted to discuss the security implications of climate
change one decade ago, but it is now impossible to
ignore that this once manageable challenge has become
a world-changing crisis.
The Pacific Islands Forum leaders met in Nauru
in 2018 under the theme, “Building a Strong Pacific:
Our People, Our Islands, Our Will”, and adopted the
Boe Declaration on Regional Security in September.
The Pacific region knows that it is stronger when it
works together, and it has shown collective leadership
to address the impact of climate change-related
disasters. The Declaration reaffirms that climate
change remains the single-greatest threat to the
livelihoods, security and well-being of the peoples of
the Pacific. It also recognizes an expanded concept
of security — that climate change poses multifaceted
challenges to human security, humanitarian assistance
and environment security.
We are already seeing dangerous impacts in our
countries and communities, with the most vulnerable
among us bearing the greatest burden. According to
scientists, climate change has contributed to many of
the recent extreme weather events that have devastated
communities around the world. Notwithstanding
the Paris Agreement, climate change is not going
away. There will be no return to a normal climate
in our lifetimes. In fact, the situation will continue
to deteriorate, even if we achieve our goal to limit
temperature rise to 1.5°C. From the perspective of
our leaders, the institutions needed to respond to the
security implications of climate change are not in place,
in part because we know very little about how our human
systems will respond to growing climate impacts.
19-02010

25/01/2019

Maintenance of international peace and security

For our purposes here at the United Nations, we
must recognize that this type of problem cannot be
tackled by countries individually. Through the Boe
Declaration the Pacific is committed to working
together on coordinated actions that build resilience to
the security risks posed by climate change. For better
or for worse, our fates are now linked through a global
system that often leaves the poorest in a very precarious
situation. Our national response matters, but a problem
of this magnitude requires much greater regional and
international cooperation than what exists today. It also
requires the United Nations to work more effectively
across institutions with related mandates
I would like to focus for a moment on food
production and distribution, because we have some
recent experiences to draw upon. The food crisis in
2007 and 2008 provoked social unrest in countries
around the world and prompted some to declare states
of emergency. Our global supply chains are often
celebrated as a marvel of modern capitalism. However,
during the food crisis they were unable to get food to
the people who needed it at a price they could afford.
Many variables contributed to the food crisis, but they
included climatic factors in key food producing regions
of the world. Scientists are projecting agricultural yields
to fall dramatically in a warmer world, and therefore it
is only a matter of time before the next food crisis hits.
The food system is not alone in its vulnerability
to climate change. Water distribution, international
transport, industrial production, finance and insurance
markets are complex human systems that are
inter-connected, global in reach and often quite fragile.
A breakdown in any one of those human systems
might be more dangerous than the climate impact that
provokes it.
In our view, the appointment of a special
representative on climate and security is a critical next
step to prepare for the security implications of climate
change. I should note that that is not a new proposal;
the small island developing States of the Pacific first
raised it in 2011. Such a special representative of the
Secretary-General would serve the following functions:
keep the Secretary-General and Security Council well
informed about emerging climate risks that threaten
international peace and security; facilitate greater
regional and cross-border cooperation on issues that
might be affected by climate change; monitor potential
tipping points at the climate-security nexus; engage
in preventive diplomacy, as appropriate; and support

S/PV. 8451

post-conflict situations when climate change is a risk
factor that could undermine stability. The special
representative would also be well placed to coordinate
the efforts of the relevant United Nations bodies in
this area, including the Department of Political and
Peacebuilding Affairs, the Office for the Coordination
of Humanitarian Affairs, the United Nations Office
for Disaster Risk Reduction, the Office of the United
Nations High Commissioner for Refugees and the Food
and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations.
We need the courage to grapple with the reality
of our present situation, no matter how politically
inconvenient it may be. Climate change will be the
biggest security challenge of the century. This is not
just about containing a handful of hot spots; it will often
require a fundamental rethink of how we cooperate in
our highly integrated and increasingly dangerous world.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Brazil.
Mr. Duque Estrada Meyer (Brazil): First
and foremost, allow me to thank the Dominican
presidency for organizing this timely debate on such
a critical matter. This open debate provides us with
a unique opportunity to shine a light not only on the
question of climate-related disasters in all its urgency
and complexity, but also on how to best address it
institutionally under the aegis of the United Nations.
Brazil empathizes profoundly with the predicament
of countries affected by climate-related disasters,
especially those people located in disaster-prone areas,
who time and again are faced with the insurmountable
task of starting anew at the end of every hurricane
season or when the earth finally stops shaking.
Brazil recognizes the particular challenges that small
island developing States face, dealing with the fallout
caused by earthquakes, floods, mudslides and other
climate-related disasters on their people’s safety and
well-being, as well as on critical national infrastructure.
Multilateral humanitarian coordination in the wake of
natural disasters is crucial to improving the situation on
the ground, be it by saving lives, providing immediate
relief to those in need or, at a later stage, assisting the
disaster-struck country with its reconstruction efforts.
Brazil has a long history of showing solidarity
with disaster-struck nations, and it could not act any
differently. To highlight one example among many, in
the aftermath of the devastating earthquake that struck
Haiti a little over eight years ago, Brazilian Blue Helmets,

19-0201061/83

S/PV.8451

Maintenance of international peace and security

serving under the United Nations Stabilization Mission
in Haiti, were able to act as first responders, handing
out clean water, food and basic medicine to the most
vulnerable segments of the Haitian population. Host to
both the United Nations Conference on Environment
and Development in Rio in 1992 and its follow up
conference, Rio+20, Brazil is proud of its credentials
on sustainable development and climate change, both
domestically and internationally.
Our understanding is that environmental issues
do not fall squarely under the authority of the Security
Council, the primary organ charged with maintaining
international peace and security by the Charter of
the United Nations. Linking security issues to the
environmental agenda risks mistakenly assuming that
any environmental stress, or natural disaster for that
matter, will automatically lead to social unrest, armed
conflict and, eventually, to a threat to international
peace and security. There is no direct cause-and-effect
relationship between a natural disaster and the outbreak
of conflict, the causes of which, most of the time, are
manifold and vary on a case-by-case basis.
That is not to say that the Security Council should
refrain from taking climate factors into consideration
when a concrete and specific situation surfaces that
poses a danger to international peace and security.
If, on the one hand, natural disasters can have
consequences for the security environment, it is also
true that, conversely, armed conflicts can pose a danger
to the environment. Involving the entire community
of nations, and not only a few selected members, is
critical to coming up with the legal formula and the
institutional mechanisms necessary to put in place
the risk management strategies and the coordination
efforts needed to help Member States, Governments
and their peoples reduce the impact of natural disasters.
We should spare no effort in ensuring that our counties
are equipped with the legal framework and institutional
architecture necessary to deal with natural disasters.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Trinidad and Tobago.
Ms. Beckles (Trinidad and Tobago): At the
outset, Trinidad and Tobago wishes to align itself
with the statement delivered by the representative of
Barbados, on behalf of the Caribbean Community, and
the statement to be delivered by the representative of
Belize, on behalf of the Alliance of Small Island States.
62/83

25/01/2019

Allow me to also congratulate the Dominican
Republic on assuming the presidency of the Security
Council and to confirm your leadership, Mr. President,
in bringing this significant and urgent issue before
this Chamber. As small island developing States, both
Trinidad and Tobago and the Dominican Republic
remain at the forefront of this pressing challenge, and
the convening of this open debate reflects the necessity
for the international community to truly pursue
ambitious commitments and, above all, action towards
addressing the impacts of climate change, in particular
the nexus between that phenomenon and international
peace and security.
Over the past few years, Trinidad and Tobago
has experienced harsh dry seasons, record-breaking
rainfall and flooding and coastal erosion at an alarming
rate. Those experiences are not unique to my country;
they are the current reality facing many small island
developing States. During the twenty-fourth Conference
of the Parties to the United Nations Framework
Convention on Climate Change, in Katowice, Poland,
the Secretary-General stated that the international
community is in deep trouble concerning climate
change. The Intergovernmental Panel on Climate
Change’s special report Global Warming of 1.5 °C
found that the effects of human-induced climate change
are worse than previously projected and, therefore,
increase the risks to health, livelihoods, human security
and economic growth.
However, those climate change-related risks do
not occur in a vacuum. At this critical juncture, the
far-reaching economic, environmental and social
consequences of climate change can exacerbate the
vulnerabilities of many countries, including my
own. As a threat multiplier, climate change applies
additional stress on limited resources, social and
economic pressures and the adaptive capacity of our
fragile ecosystems, all of which can lead to scarcity,
population displacement and conflict.
It is therefore undeniable that the complex and
interrelated causes and consequences of climate change
on people and the planet require a comprehensive and
integrative approach that spans across all the relevant
mechanisms and agencies of the United Nations
System, including the Security Council. In that
regard, Trinidad and Tobago welcomes the Security
Council’s recognition of the adverse effects of climate
change in several specific contexts — the Lake Chad
basin, West Africa, the Sahel and Somalia — while
19-02010

25/01/2019

Maintenance of international peace and security

also stressing the need for improved climate-related
security risk assessments to more effectively predict
potential conflicts.
Notwithstanding that, there is a need to further
enhance the understanding about climate change-related
security threats and the security implications of
climate-related disasters in order to better inform the
Security Council about those threats, especially in
those regions that are most vulnerable, including small
island developing States. By leveraging the institutional
knowledge of the Council’s peace and security
machinery with that of the wider system, there is
considerable potential to create synergies among States
and the United Nations system towards effectively
building resilience through early action aimed at
investigating and mitigating climate change-related
threats to peace.
Lastly, and probably most fundamental, is the
determination of the long-term role of the Security
Council and its engagement on this issue. While
my delegation fully recognizes the United Nations
Framework Convention on Climate Change and the
Paris Agreement as the primary forums for coordinating
the global response to climate change, Trinidad and
Tobago is of the view that an enhanced understanding
of climate-related security risks and how to address
them in the Security Council should not, and will not,
duplicate the responsibilities of the General Assembly or
other United Nations bodies. Rather, it will strengthen
the coordinated response of the United Nations and its
entities to better deliver on their respective mandates.
In conclusion, Trinidad and Tobago thanks you,
Mr. President, for convening this important debate,
which serves to galvanize increased attention around
the security implications of climate change. For my
country, which is on the front line of this existential
threat, now is the time for ambitious and earnest action
towards addressing climate-change disaster risks to
international peace and security.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Viet Nam.
Mr. Dang (Viet Nam): Viet Nam highly appreciates
the Dominican Republic’s initiative to hold this open
debate on this very important subject. We also thank
the briefers for their informative interventions.
The climate is changing faster than we expected,
faster than we can move and faster than we can adapt.

S/PV. 8451

The frequency and intensity of climate-related and
extreme weather disasters, as well as the severity of
their consequences, increase every year. Devastating
tropical storms, heavy precipitation, flooding and
droughts have caused untold suffering to hundreds of
millions of people.
As a result, the displacement and migration of
people and food and water insecurity are potential
security risks and have been the cause of actual
conflict in some cases. The most threatening impact of
climate change is sea level rise. Studies show that, in
the most optimistic scenario, by 2050, without concrete
climate and development action from the international
community, hundreds of countries and territories
will be affected. The very survival of small island
States is at risk. The direct impact of climate change
on international peace and security has become more
evident. The threat is already here. The way in which
we respond to it will define our future.
During the past 20 years, Viet Nam has been
among the 10 countries most affected by climate risks,
and for the past four years, we have been among the top
six. Let me mention just one aspect — sea level rise. A
study shows that if the sea level rises by approximately
1 metre by the year 2100, nearly 40 per cent of the
Mekong Delta will be flooded. There is already
increasing soil salinization by sea water in a large area
of the Delta. That will not only affect the livelihoods
of nearly 20 million people in that region of Viet Nam
but also have an impact on food security beyond its
borders, as we are one of the top three rice exporters
and the Mekong Delta accounts for 90 per cent of our
rice exports.
Viet Nam supports a comprehensive approach
to address climate change, including its security
implications. We are encouraged to see that in recent
years the Security Council has increasingly recognized
the importance of this issue and remains focused on it.
We emphasize the important roles of the United Nations
system, including the Security Council, and many
regional organizations. Those roles are very important
to ensuring that the security dimension is addressed
in their work and cooperation in support of national
and regional efforts. In Southeast Asia, in the spirit of
the Association of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN)
Declaration on One ASEAN, One Response: ASEAN
Responding to Disasters as One in the Region and
Outside the Region, the ASEAN Coordinating Centre
for Humanitarian Assistance on Disaster Management

19-0201063/83

S/PV.8451

Maintenance of international peace and security

is responsible for facilitating cooperation on and
coordination of disaster preparedness and response
among the 10 ASEAN member States. We call on the
United Nations and international partners to closely
cooperate with us and to assist us.
We would also encourage further informative
exchanges with representatives and experts, including
the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change, on the
security implications of climate change, as well as more
integrated sharing of data and expertise.
We support a comprehensive climate change
response plan that addresses all aspects of the issue,
including the security implications, and involves the
active participation of all United Nations organizations
at the Headquarters, regional and country levels,
working closely with national Governments and
regional organizations to effectively address this issue.
We count on the continued leadership of the Security
Council in that direction.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of the Islamic Republic
of Iran.
Mr. Al Habib (Islamic Republic of Iran): I thank
you, Mr. President, for convening this meeting.
The frequency, scope, speed and severity of
climate-related disasters are a source of deep concern.
Such disasters occur almost everywhere, in both
developed and developing countries. However, their
impact on the lives of people is extremely different.
According to one of the most recent publications of
the United Nations Office for Disaster Risk Reduction,
over the past 20 years, people in the poorest nations
were over seven times more likely to die and over six
times more likely to be injured than the equivalent
populations in the richest nations as a result of such
disasters. That alone proves that our efforts must be
aimed at reducing the number of deaths and injuries in
disaster-affected areas.

25/01/2019

to undermine the relevant international instruments,
including by withdrawing from them, must be strongly
opposed. We also underline that developing countries,
in particular those that are more vulnerable to such
disasters, must be empowered through capacitybuilding. That means the sharing of best practices,
exchange of experiences and the unconditional and
non-discriminatory transfer of financial resources, as
well as climate-friendly know-how and technologies.
That will enable such countries not only to
contribute to addressing climate change but also to
being prepared so as to save more lives in the event
of a disaster. Moreover, it will contribute to achieving
sustainable development in those societies by removing
the barriers resulting from climate change. That is the
case in our region with respect to sand and dust storms,
which challenge socioeconomic development in our
societies. Needless to say, capacity-building efforts
should be complemented by promoting regional and
international cooperation.
If those are the goals that we need to achieve, they
should be pursued in the relevant forums, including
the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate
Change, the General Assembly, the Economic and Social
Council and other such bodies, not here in the Security
Council, which has neither the legal competence nor the
technical capacity to address this issue. In the related
meetings of the Council since 2007, there has been no
consensus either among the Council members or the
general membership of the United Nations stating that
this issue falls within the Council’s purview. Rather, it
was considered by many countries as an example of the
Council’s encroachment upon the powers and functions
of other United Nations organs. While the Council
has not even been able to fully address certain serious
conflicts, its insistence on delving into issues that are
not proved to threaten international peace and security
is incomprehensible.

We should also vigorously strive to address
climate change, thereby contributing to fewer
climate-related disasters. That, of course, must be done
based on the principle of common but differentiated
responsibilities of States, as well as the availability of
related technologies.

We share the related concerns of small island
developing States and underline the fact that their
climate-related problems can be solved only through
capacity-building as well as financial and technical
assistance, which is beyond the competence and power
of the Council. With that in mind, we urge the Council
to stick to its core mandate only and to avoid making
promises of solutions that it cannot ultimately fulfil.

Likewise, we should promote related multilateral
instruments and institutions. In that regard, any attempt

The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Iraq.

64/83

19-02010

25/01/2019

Maintenance of international peace and security

Mr. Marzooq (Iraq) (spoke in Arabic): I am
honoured to join you, Mr. President, in participating
in this open debate of the Council on addressing the
impacts of climate-related disasters on international
peace and security. This vital issue is at the heart of the
international community’s concerns, and I commend the
Dominican Republic for having convened this debate.
We believe that the United Nations Framework
Convention on Climate Change is the optimal United
Nations forum for discussion of such issues. However,
we are concerned at the threats posed by climate
change and believe that as this is a shared international
responsibility, we must take the preventive measures
necessary to avert such disasters and threats at all
levels, which pose a challenge for the United Nations.
We believe that climate change can adversely affect
the three pillars of the United Nations. The increasing
temperatures at the Earth’s surface pose a direct and
concrete threat to our survival and would exacerbate
other threats and potential disasters. These threats
are more complicated in certain regions of the world,
including in the Middle East, as they stand in the way
of the realization of the Sustainable Development Goals
in our countries.
Lack of rainfall and the unsustainable use of
water sources lead to water scarcity and to further
unsustainable use of resources, thus increasing the
chances of migration and displacement. Everyone
knows the causes of migration that ends in death.
The great rivers in my country are subject to
pressure as a result of the excessive use of and control
over common water resources, in the absence of
effective conventions or regional frameworks for using
water in a fair and reasonable way. There is a lack of
respect for the provisions of international law that
would preserve the rights of the countries that share
such water resources.
The environmental deterioration of the Iraqi
delta on the Arabian Sea is a clear example of the
transformation of an ecological freshwater system
rich in biodiversity and abundant in palm trees into a
seawater system as a result of the shrinking of other
water resources, especially freshwater resources. We
would also note the destructive effects of terrorism on
civilian and water infrastructure. In addition, instability
and fragile socioeconomic factors have led to the spread
of extremism and radicalism. That is why we need to

S/PV. 8451

establish adaptation measures as part of our approach
to addressing economic, political and social problems.
We commend the support provided by the
international community to Iraq, which has helped us
eliminate terrorism from our country. At the same time,
we call for respect for our water rights, especially on the
Tigris and the Euphrates rivers, in order to contribute to
the maintenance of peace, security and stability.
In closing, I would note that climate change is a
global phenomenon that transcends political borders.
We therefore need regional and inclusive approaches
that are based on international law and diplomatic
initiatives to address problems between countries that
share water resources. Such approaches would help
us defuse any climate-related tensions and threats,
eliminate terrorism and expedite reconstruction of
the infrastructure, as well as promote adaptation
capacity and contribute to the sustainable use of natural
resources as a prelude to achieving the 2030 Agenda for
Sustainable Development.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Morocco.
Mr. Hilale (Morocco) (spoke in French): Allow me
at the outset to thank you, Mr. President, for having
convened this open debate addressing an extremely
important and timely issue that is having a severe impact
on the future of many countries. As the SecretaryGeneral has emphasized,
“Climate change is the defining issue of our time …
We face a direct existential threat.”
Indeed, in many regions climate change is
damaging critical systems such as water, food and health
security and contributing to population displacement.
Climate-related disasters are also having an impact
on conflicts and undermining social and economic
development, in particular in countries that are heavily
dependent on certain sectors such as agriculture or
tourism. Moreover, slow-onset events such as sea-level
rise endanger the very existence of certain States in the
Pacific and Indian oceans. Those islands risk becoming
uninhabitable well before they are swallowed up by the
sea owing to the numerous types of storms affecting
them, land erosion and ocean acidification, which
erode their means of livelihood and undermine the
agriculture, fishing and tourism sectors. It is therefore
essential that the negative impacts of climate change
be addressed not only because of their direct impact

19-0201065/83

S/PV.8451

Maintenance of international peace and security

on food security but also because they pose a threat to
international peace and security.
To that end, the international community must
redouble its efforts to address the threats of social and
political instability, insecurity and conflicts resulting
from the interaction between climate change and
social, economic, demographic and political factors. It
is equally necessary to invest more in strengthening the
capacity of communities to enhance their resilience in
the face of natural disasters.
In that context, measures are urgently required
in order to minimize and mitigate the potential
consequences of natural disasters. The private sector
should be called upon to step up its efforts and its
involvement in natural-disaster risk management
activities as well as humanitarian assistance, in order
to reduce needs and mobilize additional resources
through planned funding mechanisms.
The Kingdom of Morocco became aware early on
of the threats posed by climate change, including its
threat-multiplier aspect, and adopted a proactive policy
to address them. That commitment has been translated
into the adoption of several sectoral strategies that place
the well-being of citizens and women’s empowerment
at the heart of their implementation and that promote
a balance between the environmental, economic and
social dimensions, in line with international standards.
The Africa Action Summit, held on the margins
of the twenty-second session of the Conference of the
Parties to the United Nations Framework Convention
on Climate Change in Marrakech in November 2016,
was an opportunity for African leaders to coordinate
and harmonize their efforts to combat climate change
and to seek better solutions to the climate challenges
that our continent faces. That Summit led to several
initiatives, namely, the establishment of the Climate
Commission and the Congo Basin Blue Fund, on the
initiative of His Majesty King Mohammed VI.
During the Conference, the Security, Stability
and Sustainability (3S) in Africa initiative was also
launched. That initiative seeks to address the root
causes of instability, which are amplified by land
degradation and climate change. Through the 3S
initiative, our country intends to combine leadership
on climate-change issues with the African Union
mandate to coordinate the migration programme in
the context of African Union Commission. Moreover,
during the Marrakech Conference, the Adaptation of
66/83

25/01/2019

African Agriculture initiative was also launched. It was
adopted by 27 African countries and establishes a true
coalition in order to better adapt African agriculture to
climate change.
Water and its proper management are also two
major priorities for Morocco. The world, and the
African region in particular, are facing the problem of
water scarcity. The Kingdom of Morocco continues to
invest in large-scale modern irrigation projects and to
set up drinking water supply programmes in the most
vulnerable areas. At the legislative level, the adoption
of a new water law, which establishes the rules for
comprehensive, participative and decentralized water
resource management, has enabled significant progress
to be made in anticipating and ensuring water security,
especially in times of drought.
Morocco aims to become, by 2030, one of the
main suppliers of renewable energies, particularly
solar and wind energy, not only in the Maghreb, but
also in Africa and the Euro-Mediterranean region.
Although it is a low emitter of greenhouse gases,
Morocco is making considerable efforts by devoting
64 per cent of the country’s climate expenditure to
adaptation, which is equivalent to 9 per cent of overall
investment expenditure.
In that regard, the Noor power station in Ouarzazate,
Morocco’s first solar energy project, is the largest
energy complex in the world, with a total capacity of
580 megawatts. Covering more than 3,000 hectares, the
Noor power station consists of four multi-technology
solar power plants. It was developed in full compliance
with international standards, both technological and
environmental, and is associated with a research and
development platform covering more than 150 hectares.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Uruguay.
Mr. Bermúdez Álvarez (Uruguay) (spoke in
Spanish): I would like to begin my statement by
congratulating the Dominican Republic on its successful
presidency of the Security Council, with a substantive
agenda for January. We welcome the presence of
Mr. Miguel Vargas Maldonado, Minister for Foreign
Affairs of the Dominican Republic, in presiding over
this open debate, and we thank the briefers for their
valuable briefings.
Uruguay believes that it is timely to reaffirm
that climate change poses a real threat to the present
19-02010

25/01/2019

Maintenance of international peace and security

and near future for all of humankind, and as such
international peace and security are also affected. The
fight against climate change is a very high priority
for Uruguay. My country’s economy, including its
export sector, is highly dependent on agricultural
production, which in turn is exposed to the fluctuations
of the climate and increasingly intense and damaging
meteorological phenomenons.
The commitment to renewable energies made
over the past decade in seeking energy independence
through economic and environmental policies is
the best example of Uruguay’s commitment to the
environment and the fight against climate change.
Likewise, developing countries, and in particular the
States of our Latin American region, are particularly
vulnerable to climate change and increasingly frequent
natural disasters.
While we view this open debate as a contribution
to the discussion on a priority topic for the future of
life on our planet, my country believes that, in order
to avoid linking climate change to security issues,
the discussion of specific related topics should be
restricted to the corresponding decision areas, namely,
the Conference of the Parties to the United Nations
Framework Convention on Climate Change, the
United Nations Environment Programme, the World
Meteorological Organization, the General Assembly
and the Economic and Social Council.
The Paris Agreement on Climate Change, as
the international community’s main multilateral
instrument to meet the challenge of climate change,
is irreversible, and we therefore call on all parties to
defend it and accelerate its implementation. We must
continue to work within the United Nations Framework
Convention on Climate Change, the Paris Agreement
and the Sendai Framework for Disaster Risk Reduction
2015-2030, among others, and fulfil our commitments.
Notwithstanding all this, the Security Council is
very good at regularly considering the indissoluble
link between climate change and the exacerbation
of devastating impacts of conflict, poverty and
underdevelopment. As a participant in several Security
Council missions to the Sahel, the countries of the Lake
Chad basin, Somalia and Haiti from 2016 to 2017, and
as a result of field visits and interviews with authorities
and community members, were able to see how tensions
are often exacerbated by the effect of climate change.

S/PV. 8451

Uruguay is convinced that adequate and flexible
cooperation between the different organs, programmes
and specialized agencies of the United Nations is crucial
to addressing climate degradation processes that affect
conflicts, starting with tackling their underlying causes.
Secretary-General António Guterres recently stated that
climate change is the definitive issue of our time. If we
do not act soon, and in a coordinated and joint manner, it
will be too late to combat this existential threat hanging
over us all. Future generations have the right to inhabit
a safe planet, ripe for sustainable development.
To conclude, we would like to underscore the
importance of the climate summit, to be held in
September, as a way to reinforce the commitments
already made and intensify joint efforts in the fight
against climate change.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the Permanent Observer of the International
Committee of the Red Cross to the United Nations.
Mr. Mardini: I thank you, Mr. President, for
convening this important discussion today. On behalf of
the International Committee of the Red Cross (ICRC),
the International Federation of Red Cross and Red
Crescent Societies and the national Red Cross and Red
Crescent Societies, I will share our field perspective of
what we see as the double impact of climate change and
armed conflict. I will also address how international
humanitarian law protects the environment.
The double impact of climate shocks and armed
conflict harms people’s ability to cope. Climate change
exacerbates vulnerabilities and inequalities, especially
in situations of armed conflict, in which countries,
communities and populations are the least prepared and
the least able to protect themselves and adapt. Conflicts
harm the structures and systems that are necessary to
facilitate adaptation to climate change.
Last week, ICRC President Peter Maurer concluded
an eight-day visit to the Sahel. In that area, armed
conflict, deepening poverty, weakening public services
and disruption of traditional means of survival are
due not only to conflict but also to diminishing usable
land and unpredictable water resources. He saw firsthand, just as we see in our operations in other regions,
that communities facing those dual challenges are
disproportionately affected. They often face growing
risks of flood or drought and are forced to look for new
livelihoods, change their lifestyle or move away from
their homes.

19-0201067/83

S/PV.8451

Maintenance of international peace and security

We also know that in armed conflict the natural
environment or civilian infrastructure is often harmed
or destroyed, which can in turn have environmental
consequences that can contribute to climate change.
While international humanitarian law does not
explicitly address climate change, it does contain rules
that protect the natural environment. For instance,
international humanitarian law sets out protections
for vital natural resources, the exploitation of which
can have implications for climate risk. International
humanitarian law also protects certain natural
resources, such as drinking water or agricultural areas,
as objects that are indispensable to the survival of the
civilian population.
When discussing the impacts of climate-related
disasters on international peace and security, we must
consider how climate change can multiply people’s
vulnerability in situations of armed conflict. Indeed,
our own movement’s humanitarian response must be
sensitive to that growing challenge and is involving
local actors in disaster risk reduction and adaptation.
This year, with the support of the Red Cross Red
Crescent Climate Centre, we are convening a series of
climate round tables within the International Red Cross
and Red Crescent Movement to address those issues. In
addition, this year the ICRC’s legal division is revising
the 1994 ICRC guidelines for military manuals and
instructions on the protection of the environment in
times of armed conflict. We look forward to continued
dialogue with Member States and the United Nations
concerning this critical matter.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of the Sudan.
Mr. Elnour (Sudan) (spoke in Arabic): I thank
your friendly country, Mr. President, for convening
this important debate. I also thank the briefers for their
valuable briefings this morning.
My delegation aligns itself with the statement
delivered earlier by Ambassador Fatima Mohammed,
Permanent Observer of the African Union.
Armed conflicts and international terrorism are
not the sole fundamental threats posed to international
peace and security in today’s world. The list now
includes threats caused by climate and environmental
changes, which represent an additional driver of the
factors threatening international peace and security,
thereby causing deterioration in living conditions,
human security and Governments’ abilities to provide
68/83

25/01/2019

their citizens with their basic needs, particularly in
situations simultaneously involving other economic,
social, demographic and political challenges. We note
that societies and States that are vulnerable to scarcity
of resources are most exposed to the negative impact of
climate change.
The Sudan is one of the States that has suffered
from the impact of climate change, leading to the
outbreak of conflict and complicating the resolution of
conflicts, including the conflict in Darfur, which began
in 2003. The main cause underlying that conflict was
climate change, which led to drought, desertification
and scarcity of water. The major economic activity of
Darfur’s population had been grazing and agriculture.
Tensions arose among farmers and herders as a
result of competition over scarce resources, which
were diminishing due to drought and desertification
throughout the entire African coastal region. That
was complicated by an increase in the population, the
proliferation of weapons and easy access to them as a
result of conflicts in neighbouring States.
At the national level, in order to confront climate
change, the Government of the Sudan has taken several
measures. We have stepped up efforts to achieve peace
throughout the country, as peace is the first, fundamental
step towards achieving sustainable development in its
economic, social and environmental dimensions. We
have also striven to achieve development throughout
the country, in addition to increasing hydroelectricity
and seeking other sources of renewable energy,
particularly solar energy, while planting more trees
through Africa’s Green Wall initiative, which includes
a number of African States from Senegal in the west to
Djibouti in the east.
In order to move forward in addressing
climate-related threats, we would offer the following
suggestions on how to cooperate among various actors
in order to address the great challenge that faces
our world.
First, we must strengthen preventive diplomacy
and address the effects of climate change before they
lead to conflict, while promoting cooperation among
the Security Council, the Secretariat and its related
agencies with respect to climate change, on the one
hand, and international financial institutions, on the
other. Efforts must be stepped up to implement the
Paris Agreement on Climate Change. In that regard,
my delegation hopes that the 2019 September climate
19-02010

25/01/2019

Maintenance of international peace and security

summit, to be convened by the Secretary-General on
the margins of the seventy-fourth General Assembly,
will be a critical juncture in our work to address climate
change and its effects.
Secondly, greater attention must be paid to
early-warning systems, particularly with regard to
climate-related conflicts.
Thirdly, developed States must honour their
pledges to developing States, thereby empowering them
to achieve sustainable development and enabling them
to be more resilient in facing effects of climate change.
Fourthly, efforts must be intensified to achieve
peace, especially in areas affected by climate change,
while increasing focus on post-conflict countries.
Fifthly, the capacities of developing countries must
be strengthened in order to enable them to address
climate change and adapt to environmental change
while benefiting from technological advances in
that regard.
Sixthly, we must promote cooperation between
the United Nations and regional organizations on
climate issues and conflicts, and pay greater attention
to the regional aspects of security threats caused by
climate change.
Lastly, we must confer a greater role on peacekeeping
missions, special political missions and United Nations
regional offices in addressing climate change, and offer
solutions at the local and national levels.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Finland.
Mr. Sauer (Finland): We welcome this open debate
and thank the Dominican Republic for drawing our
attention to this topic. We also thank the briefers for
their contributions.
The threat of climate change and climate-related
disasters posed to international peace and security is
real. Climate change affects food and water security
and multiplies risks related to conflicts and forced
migration. We must tackle those global challenges in
an integrated manner and strengthen the bridge linking
early warning, preparedness and early action. We
believe that the Security Council has a role to play in
addressing this question. As the current Chair of the
Arctic Council, Finland has treated climate change with
its implications to the Arctic region as a priority issue.

S/PV. 8451

The recent wake-up call from the Intergovernmental
Panel on Climate Change (IPCC) is clear. An average
rise in temperature of only 1.5°C degrees is still
dangerous, but 2°C would be devastating. Responding
to the findings of the IPCC report Global Warming
of 1.5°C, I would like to inform the Council that,
this morning in Helsinki, the Prime Ministers of the
five Nordic countries — Denmark, Finland, Iceland,
Norway and Sweden — signed a declaration to work
together towards carbon neutrality.
Conflicts over natural resources, such as water, are
often the root causes of armed conflict. From a conflictprevention and mediation perspective, addressing these
issues inclusively is crucial. Women are often among
the first to suffer from climate change-related risks,
and women’s contribution to peaceful solutions is
decisive. Engaging youth is equally important. We have
seen encouraging examples of young people taking the
lead on climate, and we should do more to support this.
Climate-related disasters cause tremendous
human suffering and economic loss. While enhancing
mitigation remains the most important way to reduce
future risks, we must also do more to respond to storms,
floods and droughts today. As attested by the briefing
earlier in this meeting, the World Meteorological
Organization (WMO) has increased the global impact
of the Organization. Finland commends the role of
the WMO in finding solutions to climate challenges
and thereby participating in the conflict-prevention
efforts of the Secretary-General. Finland has stressed
the importance of hydrometeorological cooperation
and facilitated collaboration between the WMO and
national meteorological institutes around the globe.
Our development aid in the field of meteorology is
the second-highest in the world. Improved capacity to
produce high-quality weather and climate information
will help countries to respond to the increased
climate-related risks.
In conclusion, the most important way to reduce
climate-related risks in the future is to enhance
mitigation. If the Paris Agreement on Climate Change is
to truly deliver, we must raise the level of our ambitions.
We look forward to the Secretary-General’s climate
summit next September, which will be an opportunity
for us to show our determination to keep the increase in
global temperatures below 1.5°C.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I give the floor
to the representative of Uzbekistan.

19-0201069/83

S/PV.8451

Maintenance of international peace and security

Mr. Nazirov (Uzbekistan): At the outset, I would
like to thank you, Mr. President, and the Permanent
Mission of the Dominican Republic for convening this
open debate to address the impacts of climate-related
disasters on international peace and security, which,
from Uzbekistan’s perspective, is a very important and
timely event given the various serious challenges in the
contemporary world in protecting the environment and
confronting climate change.
Today, I would like to draw the Council’s
attention to one of the most serious environmental
disasters — the desiccation of the Aral Sea, which has
caused a cascade of environmental, socioeconomic,
health and humanitarian challenges for the Governments
and communities in the region. The fivefold reduction
in water flow from the Amu Darya and Syr Darya rivers
has decreased the volume of the Aral Sea by a factor
of more than 14 over the past 50 years. Salinity levels
have increased by a factor of 25, and now significantly
exceed those of the world’s oceans. Today, in place of
once-flourishing fishing waters, a sandy salt desert of
more than 5.5 million hectares is a breeding ground for
dust and salt storms, carrying more than 75 million tons
of dust and poisonous minerals into the atmosphere
every year across thousands of kilometres.
The Aral catastrophe has exacerbated climatic
conditions in the region, increasing dryness and heat
in summer and extending periods of cold in the winter.
According to the forecasts of experts, by 2035 to 2050,
the air temperature in the region could increase by
another 1.5°C to 3°C relative to current indicators.
Moreover, the threatening impact of the Aral
catastrophe is observed all over the world. According
to international experts, poisonous salts from the Aral
region are found on the coasts of Antarctica, in the
glaciers of Greenland, in the forests of Norway and
many other parts of the globe.
The President of the Republic of Uzbekistan,
Mr. Shavkat Mirziyoyev, in his address during the
seventy-second session of the General Assembly in
New York in 2017 (see A/72/PV.5), drew the special
attention of the world leaders to the Aral Sea crisis
and emphasized the need for concerted efforts by the
international community. During the summit of the
Heads of the Founder States of the International Fund
for Saving the Aral Sea, the President of Uzbekistan
emphasized the importance of unifying efforts to
overcome the consequences of the Aral catastrophe. In
particular, Uzbekistan’s leader put forward a number
70/83

25/01/2019

of initiatives, including the designation of the Aral
Sea region as a region of ecological innovation and
technology. This initiative aimed at unifying Central
Asian countries’ efforts to create the conditions to
attract foreign investments to develop and introduce
ecological, clean technologies, ensure the broad
application of the green economy, prevent further
desertification, develop ecotourism and implement
other measures.
At the same time, one should admit that an
insufficient level of funding and coordination of
activities of international financial organizations and
donor countries in the Aral Sea region limit the efforts
of the Central Asian States to effectively address this
ecological problem. Such a situation has prompted
Uzbekistan and the United Nations to establish a unified
platform for mitigating the consequences of the Aral
Sea crisis and ensuring the sustainable socioeconomic
development of the Aral Sea region.
On 27 November 2018, at the high-level meeting
held at United Nations Headquarters in New York,
the Multi-Partner Human Security Trust Fund for
the Aral Sea Region was established. It was presided
over by Secretary-General António Guterres, who
personally visited the Aral Sea in June 2017 and
described it as one of the world’s biggest man-made
environmental disasters. The Trust Fund is designed to
be transformative, evidence- and human rights- based,
and inclusive in its goal of catalysing and strengthening
a multi-sectoral and people-centred response to address
its consequences. Taking into account the planetary
nature of the Aral catastrophe, it is necessary to expand
joint actions by the world community in this direction
by implementing deeply thought-out, targeted and wellfunded projects.
In conclusion, I would like to underline that the
establishment of the aforementioned Trust Fund should
encourage the international financial institutions and
donor-countries to look anew at the Aral Sea problem
and to make concerted efforts to address this global
issue. For its part, the Government of Uzbekistan
stands ready to closely collaborate with them and other
stakeholders in mitigating the consequences of this
acute ecological problem of our time.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Romania.
19-02010

25/01/2019

Maintenance of international peace and security

Mr. Jinga (Romania): Allow me first to commend
the Dominican Republic for organizing this meeting on
such an important matter.
Romania associates itself with the statement
delivered on behalf of the European Union.
Climate change is not an immediate cause of clashes
or disrupted peace. It acts gradually and imperceptibly.
In its own way, climate change embodies the crisis to
come, whose slow progress often escapes our attention
but can be just as dangerous as open conflict. In the
Sahel region, in Central Asia, the Middle East, the
Caribbean region or the Pacific Islands, climate change
and its effects are of great concern. Sometimes it is even
an existential issue, as is the case for the group of small
island States, which are fighting for survival, faced with
the risk of submersion caused by rising temperatures.
Climate change directly impacts the number of
displaced populations, food insecurity, the lack of
water, drought and rising sea levels. It may also be a
threat to regional stability by creating political and
diplomatic tensions between neighbouring countries,
internal clashes between herders and farmers, and the
major displacement of populations. According to a
recent report by the World Bank, 140 million people
are expected to be displaced by 2050 as they seek to
avoid the impact of climate catastrophes.
Climate change is now a priority for the United
Nations, as underscored by the Paris Agreement on
Climate Change, the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development and the United Nations Framework
Convention on Climate Change. Romania is fully
committed to those cornerstone documents. In
December 2018, my country participated in the twentyfourth Conference of the Parties to the United Nations
Framework Convention on Climate Change and signed
the Ministerial Katowice Declaration on Forests for the
Climate and the Silesia Declaration on Solidarity and
Just Transition.
During our presence in the United Nations
Stabilization Mission in Haiti and its successor
mission, we witnessed the evolution of a humanitarian
crisis having at its core climate-related security risks.
Romania also stood by its friends in the Caribbean
region by offering financial support to Dominica,
Antigua and Barbuda and Saint Kitts and Nevis right
after the devastating Hurricanes Irma and Maria.

S/PV. 8451

Current
humanitarian
crises
around
the
world demonstrate that climate-related security
risks are becoming more prevalent and require
integrated security, economic, political, military and
environmental responses. Having a deep understanding
of the multidimensional root causes of insecurity in the
Sahel region, as Chair of the Peacebuilding Commission
(PBC) Romania took the initiative to build more on
this topic and proposed as theme for the joint PBCEconomic and Social Council meeting on 13 November
2018 “Linkages between climate change and challenges
to peacebuilding and sustaining peace, with a particular
focus on the Sahel”. We are very grateful that our
proposal was accepted by consensus by all members
of the Economic and Social Council and the PBC and
that the meeting contributed to raising awareness of
the adverse effects that climate change has on stability
in the Sahel, of the challenges to peacebuilding in
the region and of the need for coherence, cooperation
and coordination in strengthening resilience to
climate change.
Romania attaches great value to international
cooperation, and we believe that multilateralism is the
proper framework for addressing threats to international
peace and security. In that spirit, we have engaged in
the Group of Friends on Climate and Security as part
of our commitment to maintaining, developing and
achieving sustainable peace and development in an
inclusive manner. Moreover, we believe in prevention
and building resilience as concrete solutions.
In that regard, last month our Mission organized,
here at United Nations Headquarters, a side event on
strengthening preparedness against natural disaster.
On that occasion, the Chief of the Romanian Office
for Emergency Response presented our experience in
the field of preparing institutions to respond to natural
disasters and shared best practices on the protection of
civilians, including the most recent exercise that took
place in Romania, in partnership with the European
Union and seven other States, and which involved an
extensive component of international cooperation.
In conclusion, climate change not only exacerbates
threats to international peace and security, but is itself
a threat to international peace and security. Therefore,
we believe that the international community needs to
better assess the connections between climate change
and security risks and to offer support to countries and
regions most affected.

19-0201071/83

S/PV.8451

Maintenance of international peace and security

The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Qatar.
Ms. Al-Thani (Qatar) (spoke in Arabic): We would
like to begin by commending you, Mr. President, for
your wise management of Council affairs during this
month, and we thank you for convening this meeting.
We also thank the Administrator of the United Nations
Development Programme, the Under-SecretaryGeneral for Political Affairs, the Chief Scientist of the
World Meteorological Organization; and the Research
Assistant at the Environmental Security Program of the
Stimson Center for their valuable briefings.
Climate change is one of the foremost issues of our
times. Climate change-related challenges and concerns
are intensifying and therefore require a serious and
effective response from the international community.
This is no longer an issue of the distant future; its effects
are happening on our planet right now. The planet is
suffering the effects of this phenomenon, both slowly
and rapidly. It is of concern in many areas, including
natural disasters, threats to food and water security,
the prevalence of diseases, threats to biodiversity, the
scarcity of natural resources, leading to increased
competition for those resources, high tensions and
massive human displacement as a result of droughts,
floods and the loss of traditional livelihoods, such as
agriculture and fishing.
Vulnerable regions and communities, in particular
small island States and arid regions, are the most
threatened by the aforementioned dangers and adverse
effects. However, no region — including our own,
which is considered to be one of the world’s most
arid — is spared the negative effects of climate change.
Developing countries in particular pay a heavy price
when it comes to climate change. Therefore, we must
step up the pace of our collective efforts to address
the climate threat within the framework of the United
Nations and at the international level in order to
confront climate change in a systematic manner. We
need to make this a priority issue across all relevant
forums and international bodies, in line with their
expertise and mandate.
In addition to the impact of climate change and
natural disasters on socioeconomic development and
human rights, there is a link between climate, peace
and security. The Security Council is increasingly
aware of that link, as noted in its presidential statement
S/PRST/2011/15, as well as in the Council’s consideration
72/83

25/01/2019

of certain regional issues, particularly in Africa. There
is a need to better understand climate-related dangers
and their effect on conflicts. There is also a need to
improve the collection and assessment of information,
as well as early-warning mechanisms, in order to
effectively respond to those threats, prevent conflict
and maintain peace.
The Paris Agreement on Climate Change reflects
the political will to work together to address the
negative impacts of climate change. We, together
with the international community, intend to fulfil the
commitments arising from the Paris Agreement. The
State of Qatar was honoured to host an important
segment of this process, which then led to the Paris
Agreement. We hosted the eighteenth session of
the Conference of the Parties to the United Nations
Framework Convention on Climate Change, and joined
in the consensus reached in Poland in December 2018
at the twenty-fourth session of the Conference of the
Parties to the Framework Convention on implementing
the 2015 Paris Agreement.
In line with our commitments under the Paris
Agreement, the Qatar Investment Authority is investing
in climate-related funding projects. We are a founding
and active member of the One Planet Sovereign Wealth
Fund, established at the One Planet Summit held in
Paris in 2017 to strengthen the global allocation of
funds to contribute to a harmonious transition to more
sustainable and low carbon economies.
The State of Qatar is interested in environmental
protection, as can be seen in the environmental
development projects within the framework of our
2030 National Vision. We have developed national
strategies and plans to protect the environment and
reduce dependence on hydrocarbons. We also have a
number of national projects for clean energy and energy
efficiency, including the use of solar energy. Our
dependence on solar energy will account for more than
20 per cent of our use by 2030. We are making efforts
to reduce carbon footprint by diversifying our revenue
sources and reducing dependence on depleted energy.
In conclusion, the State of Qatar underscores
its full commitment to cooperating with the United
Nations and the international community to respond
to all emerging threats and international challenges,
in particular climate change and natural disasters,
with a view to ensuring the well-being of present and
future generations.
19-02010

25/01/2019

Maintenance of international peace and security

The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Costa Rica.
Mr. Carazo (Costa Rica) (spoke in Spanish): My
delegation would like to thank the Dominican Republic
for convening this open debate on this important topic,
which affects us all. The Secretary-General has called
climate change a defining issue of our times and a
direct threat to our existence. He has warned us that
“we are in trouble”.
It has been established time and again that
climate change is inextricably linked to some of the
most pressing security challenges, given the serious
consequences of the loss of livelihood, food insecurity,
environmental degradation, marginalization and
socioeconomic insecurity, as well as other impacts that
leave entire populations vulnerable, defenceless and
more prone to disease, poverty and/or displacement
to other territories. Such factors often give rise to
disagreements, conflicts and even armed confrontations
between countries seeking access to increasingly
limited resources or control over parts of our planet
that are still unregulated or have only just begun to
be regulated.
Costa Rica is in an area of high climatic vulnerability.
As the Chief Scientist of the World Meteorological
Organization told us this morning, Hurricane Nate, in
2017, was the greatest natural catastrophe in the history
of Costa Rica. We understand the situation and we are
taking the necessary measures to comprehensively
address the attendant challenges.
In 2017, the Comptroller General of the Republic
issued a report that reveals that Costa Rica fell from
forty-eighth in 2015 on the global climate risk index to
ninety-first in 2017, showing a substantial deterioration
in that area. Similarly, between 1998 and 2010, there have
been 320 events linked to climate change. According
to the same report, the annual cost of repairing and
rebuilding infrastructure affected by floods, storms and
droughts increased from $14.83 million to $337 million
in the same period. The current cost of natural disasters
is increasing at the rate of 3 per cent per quarter and is
estimated to reach 2.5 per cent of our gross domestic
product in 2025.
Against that backdrop, my country has raised the
need to create a climate-specific fiscal framework that
will allow for efficient investment and allocation of
resources to mitigate and cope with extreme weather
events, which are no longer infrequent emergencies but

S/PV. 8451

recurring phenomena. Costa Rica has also designed a
series of national policies and plans aimed at following
through with our nationally determined contributions,
as well as the National Decarbonization Plan 20182050, which, taken in conjunction with our national
development plan, our investment plan and other key
sectoral instruments, include 10 axes of decarbonization
that cover the entire economy, from the agricultural
and transportation sectors to the industrial, waste
management and energy sectors.
It is a fact that some regions of the world are more
prone than others to directly experiencing the impact of
climate change. However, it is important to recognize
that its effects are felt globally and at all latitudes of the
planet, and that those persons and regions in situations
of greater vulnerability and marginalization are always
the most affected.
Similarly, it has been shown that the impact of
climate change is borne disproportionately by women,
who are forced to miss out on long-term educational
and economic opportunities. Consequently, Costa
Rica has devised a strategy known as the Coalition
for All, which seeks to address gender issues in major
environmental treaties and agreements, prioritizing
gender equality and human rights issues in multilateral
environmental agreements in a cross-cutting way. The
Coalition for All already enjoys institutional support
from the United Nations through the UN-Women and
the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner
for Human Rights, as well as from a significant number
of countries in different regions.
Costa Rica is convinced that if we do not take
prompt and decisive action, the consequences will
be devastating for everyone. The latest report of the
Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change, which
we fully endorse, alerts us to the need for far-reaching
action to avoid the serious consequences of climate
change. Such action would also bring clear benefits for
human beings and ecosystems, as well as the possibility
of a more sustainable and equitable society.
We must use scientific evidence to create policies
and take actions that improve our risk assessment,
early warning and above all conflict analysis abilities,
as well as strengthen our resilience at the national
level and at the level of the United Nations, in order
to better understand and address the security risks
related to climate change at all levels. This requires that
those issues be kept on the various agendas of United

19-0201073/83

S/PV.8451

Maintenance of international peace and security

Nations bodies and agencies, starting with the Office
of the Secretary-General, and that we strengthen and
harmonize coordination among organizations dealing
with climate change.
Similarly, we must strengthen international
cooperation on those issues, as well as inter-agency
coordination and the mobilization of the relevant
United Nations agencies, particularly with regard to
the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate
Change and the Paris Agreement on Climate Change. In
previous debates on this issue, the proposal to appoint
a special representative on climate and security has
emerged, a suggestion that, given the evidence, would
be worth considering.
Only through concerted and institutionalized
action will we, as an international community, be
able to address the consequences of climate change,
which, in turn, will also enable us to tackle any related
security challenges.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Kazakhstan.
Mr. Tumysh (Kazakhstan): The delegation of
Kazakhstan thanks the Dominican presidency of the
Council for organizing this open debate. We commend
you for the choice of this very timely and critical issue
and look forward to greater awareness and action in
that regard.

25/01/2019

In that context, Kazakhstan focuses on the problems
that occur elsewhere owing to the degradation and
desertification of land, the lack of drinking water and
the increasingly frequent hurricanes, earthquakes, wild
fires and landslides that lead to disruption, culminating
in violent conflicts. We therefore are proactive by
gaining a comprehensive understanding of the risks
and vulnerabilities associated with climate-related
disasters, by setting up early warning systems and by
adopting risk reduction and disaster preparedness and
management strategies. Those are reinforced by timely
information-sharing and risk management through a
multilateral approach among Member States, as well as
the United Nations and other international organizations.
There must be better synergy among the Security
Council, the General Assembly and the Economic and
Social Council as they work to implement the United
Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change,
the Paris Agreement and the most recent robust set of
implementation guidelines for the Paris Agreement,
adopted in Katowice. We can therefore look forward to
the climate summit debate in September this year for
more effective road maps.

We also express our appreciation to today’s
briefers — Mr. Achim Steiner, Administrator of the
United Nations Development Programme, and UnderSecretary-General Rosemary DiCarlo — for their
comprehensive insights.

The global state of the environment in recent
decades threatens all regions, including Central Asia.
Kazakhstan is affected by global warming, in particular
by the dramatic pace at which glaciers are melting,
which greatly risks drinking and irrigation water
supplies in the region being exhausted by 2050. That is
a global problem experienced in Peru, Tajikistan, Nepal
and many other countries. In that vein, the Central
Asian Regional Glaciological Centre, established in
close cooperation with UNESCO, will contribute its
input to that global challenge.

We acknowledge that the planet’s climate is an
ever-increasing security problem, with innumerable
direct and indirect consequences in many regions of the
world. We see the direct interlinkages between human
insecurity and violent conflict, and between climate
change and the lack of development. They are based
on the vulnerability of local places and social groups,
the nature of livelihoods and the role and capacity of
States with regard to development and peacemaking,
as well as access to natural resources that sustain
livelihoods. Likewise, rising sea levels endanger the
very existence of small island developing States.
Sustainable development helps to mitigate climate
change. It is impossible to alleviate the environmental
damage without it.

Kazakhstan is also negatively impacted by the
Aral Sea disaster, which gravely affects the sustainable
development of the region, as also mentioned by our
Uzbek colleagues. My country spares no effort in
mitigating the negative effects of the dramatically
shrinking Aral Sea over the past four decades. We
actively engage in fruitful transboundary water
cooperation among the Central Asian States within the
mandate of the International Fund for Saving the Aral
Sea. Because of that laudable initiative, in recent years
we have increased the area of the Aral Sea by 1,000
square kilometres and doubled its volume from 15 to
almost 30 cubic kilometres. We have also recovered
19 lakes in the Aral Sea basin. However, international
support is still relevant for the region.

74/83

19-02010

25/01/2019

Maintenance of international peace and security

In addition, since 2016, we have taken the lead by
establishing the Central Asia Centre for Emergency
Situations and Disaster Risk Reduction in Almaty to
mitigate the risk of emergencies and their consequences
and to coordinate a joint response through regional
and international cooperation. The Centre plans to
act as an operating base in the event of a large-scale
emergency in Central Asia. It is important to note that,
together with other donor agencies and international
organizations, the Centre has initiated and implemented
more than 20 joint programmes and projects in the field
of emergency situations and disaster risk reduction
to the tune of $1.7 million. Afghanistan has been
granted observer status at the Centre. The Centre could
therefore potentially become the regional centre for
disaster management in Central Asia and Afghanistan.
New globalization trends imply transnational and
cross-border threats, which require a new paradigm to
address them. That, in turn, necessitates the transition
from a country-specific to a regional strategy.
Kazakhstan therefore proposes establishing a United
Nations regional centre on the Sustainable Development
Goals in Almaty, aimed at enhancing the synergy
among United Nations agencies, regional Governments
and civil society to mitigate and manage crises, build
resilience and ensure sustainable development.
Kazakhstan reiterates its commitment to conserving
the Earth’s precious resources for the common legacy
and wealth of all the peoples in the world.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Armenia.
Ms. Simonyan (Armenia): Armenia expresses its
appreciation to the Council presidency, the Dominican
Republic, for initiating this open debate. Today’s
meeting provides a good opportunity to discuss the
wide-ranging negative consequences of climate change
and related disasters, as well as their immediate
impact on human societies in terms of peace and
security considerations. The meteorological records
and climate projections provide abundant evidence of
the vulnerability of ecosystems and populations and
highlight the need to step up international, regional and
subregional cooperation efforts for effective adaptation
to climate change and disaster risk reduction.
As the world continues to experience the risk of
natural disasters, including those related to the impacts
of climate change, understanding vulnerability,
developing capacity for effective early warning,

S/PV. 8451

formulating coordinated disaster response plans and
ensuring the availability of the necessary infrastructure
and services will be fundamental to mitigating the risk
to human lives, peace and security. The recognition
of mutual dependency, a strong political will and the
genuine commitment of States to cooperation are
critical prerequisites for successful risk mitigation.
Located in one of the most seismically active
regions of the world, Armenia is very familiar with
the risk of natural disasters and their potential to cause
grave destruction. Last December marked the thirtieth
anniversary of the devastating earthquake that struck
the northern region of Armenia in 1988, claiming
the lives of more than 25,000 people, leaving tens of
thousands injured and hundreds of thousands without
shelter. Armenia is still suffering the aftermath of the
devastation, as many families were left fragmented,
communities destroyed and industries crippled, and the
haunting memories remain.
Our experience has shed light on the significance
of regional and global cooperation for disaster response
and risk mitigation and has led our country to prioritize
building resilience and strengthening national capacity
for disaster preparedness. Given the vulnerabilities of
its mountainous terrain and the ecosystems, Armenia’s
standing as a middle-income country and a landlocked
developing country necessitates the prioritization of
climate change and disaster risk reduction strategies.
In defining our policies on climate change adaptation
and mitigation, we have been guided by the ecosystem
approach, in line with the principles of the green
economy and with a special focus on the sectors of
public life that are most vulnerable to climate change.
Last June, Armenia hosted the subregional
platform on disaster risk reduction in Central Asia and
the Caucasus, which brought together representatives
of the Central Asian and South Caucasus countries
and various stakeholders involved in development and
humanitarian affairs. Three years after the adoption
of the Sendai Framework for Disaster Risk Reduction
2015–2030 and the Paris Agreement, participants
reviewed progress, shared insights and reaffirmed their
commitment to effective multilateral cooperation for
better disaster preparedness. We underline the potential
of such cooperation in the broader context of promoting
regional peace and security, as well as economic
growth. Armenia stands ready to provide a platform
for regional dialogue and to contribute to exchange and

19-0201075/83

S/PV.8451

Maintenance of international peace and security

cooperation towards better integration of disaster risk
reduction into sustainable development policies.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Slovakia.
Mr. Mlynár (Slovakia): At the outset, let me
congratulate you, Mr. President, on your assumption
of the presidency of the Security Council and for
having taken the initiative to hold this important
ministerial-level open debate to further underscore the
nexus between human and environmental security and
how the Security Council can perform its functions
with respect to climate-related risks to international
peace and security. We are very pleased to see that,
in its work, the Security Council is paying increased
attention to environmental issues.
My delegation had the honour to serve on the
Council as an elected member when the United
Kingdom delegation first introduced this discussion
in 2007 (see S/PV.5663). Since then, there has been
an increase in the Security Council’s consideration
of climate change-related security issues. In 2017, the
Council unanimously adopted resolution 2349 (2017)
on the Lake Chad basin, and in March 2018 resolution
2408 (2018) on Somalia, which also incorporated
language on climate and security. Those are important
steps in the right direction.
My delegation fully associates itself with the
statement made by the observer of the European Union.
I would like to make a few additional remarks to
complement that statement.
In general, it makes no difference from where the
risk of conflict stems if it is real. Climate change is a
very real phenomenon and a very real threat to all of us
in the twenty-first century. It poses grave risks to our
health, nutrition, economic growth and security and
to the livelihoods of future generations. The impact of
climate change has already contributed to the increased
vulnerability of certain populations around the world.
It is stretching the capacities of Governments and
societies and driving people out of their homes.
We need climate action that is timely, concerted
and sustainable in order to alleviate its negative
consequences, improve energy security and protect
the environment. We need to accelerate actions to
implement the Paris Agreement on Climate Change.
We welcome the efforts of the Secretary-General to
bring the climate to the top of the international agenda
76/83

25/01/2019

and his sustained political and diplomatic mobilization
at the global level. Indeed, the United Nations should
to the best of its ability lead in facilitating and
coordinating global efforts on climate action, working
with regional partners and other key stakeholders,
including non-State actors such as businesses and local
authorities, which play an increasingly important role
in this field.
My delegation would like to encourage the Security
Council to continue to identify ways of addressing
the impacts of climate change on conflict and to
seek the necessary policy responses in accordance
with its respective purview and mandate to maintain
international peace and security.
Indeed, we need an integrated response from
the United Nations, including its Security Council,
focusing on preventive diplomacy, peacebuilding,
peacekeeping and resilience. Institutional and sectoral
divides must be overcome in order to be able to work
in a more integrated fashion, linking humanitarian,
development, climate-mitigation and peace and
security-related action.
On 27 May 2016, the United Nations Environment
Assembly in Nairobi adopted a resolution that recognized
the role of healthy ecosystems and sustainably managed
resources in reducing the risk of armed conflict. We
have to take further steps to more effectively address
the critical threats that war and armed conflict pose
to the environment and conservation efforts, as well
as the role that natural resources may play in fuelling
armed conflicts.
The final issue that I would like to address relates
to environmental management in peace operations. It is
a well-known fact that large peacekeeping operations
and the number of peacekeepers deployed therein can
have a potentially adverse environmental impact on the
host country. We call for the full implementation of the
Environment Strategy launched by the United Nations
in November 2016 in this particular context. All parts
of the United Nations system involved, including the
Security Council, should closely cooperate to address
such potential risks.
An overwhelming majority of us view climate
change as the defining challenge of this era. The
Secretary-General has warned us that
19-02010

25/01/2019

Maintenance of international peace and security

“Climate change is running faster than we are and
we must catch up sooner rather than later, before it
is too late”.
Multilateralism is a key tool that can and should
deliver on global solutions, including climate change.
The motto of the twenty-fourth session of the United
Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change,
held in Katowice, Poland, was “changing together”.
With this in mind, we believe that the Security Council
should make its own contribution to managing and
mitigating climate change. I can assure the Council
that Slovakia is fully committed to doing its part in the
context of our collective responsibility in this regard.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of the Netherlands.
Ms. Gregoire Van Haaren (Netherlands): Allow
me to warmly congratulate you, Mr. President, and
the people of the Dominican Republic on your elected
membership of the Security Council and for having
convened this debate on an issue that, as you know, is
very close to our hearts. With its membership on the
Council, the Dominican Republic has an opportunity to
represent the voice of the small island developing States
(SIDS) — a voice that we amplified throughout our
membership of the Council, as a Kingdom consisting of
four autonomous countries, of which Aruba, Curaçao
and Sint Maarten are SIDS. Unfortunately, the Prime
Minister of Sint Maarten, who had really wanted to be
present here at today’s debate, had to cancel her trip at
the last minute owing to pressing engagements.

S/PV. 8451

shelters. Today still, St. Maarteners and other Caribbean
citizens are confronted with its aftermath.
The link between climate change and security is clear
and undeniable. Increased risks of climate disasters mean
increased threats to human security and exacerbated
vulnerabilities. Today’s briefers demonstrated this
by emphasizing that climate-related disasters such as
hurricanes severely impact socioeconomic development
and cause environmental degradation.
In this context, let me draw the Council’s attention
to the “3P” approach: if we want to prevent, we need
to predict and prepare. If we could predict the security
implications of natural disasters, we would be one step
closer to addressing such risks. It is for this reason that
the Kingdom of the Netherlands has repeatedly called
for an integrated risk assessment and analysis, and for
the strengthening of institutional capacity in that area.
Integrated risk assessments should include all threat
multipliers, including water stress and climate change.
During an Arria Formula meeting on water, peace
and security, which we co-hosted with the Dominican
Republic, among others, the World Resources Institute
presented an early-warning tool to enhance such risk
assessments. Tools such as these can help Governments
and the United Nations system enhance risk assessment
and analysis.

By organizing today’s debate on the impacts of
climate-related disasters on international peace and
security, the Dominican Republic is asking Member
States to address an issue that the Secretary-General
deemed as the defining issue of our time: climate
change. As the countries in our Kingdom are some of
its closest neighbours, we welcome this focus.

We welcome the progress that the Council has
made to this effect and encourage it to expand this to
the relevant country situations and mission contexts.
Sound risk assessments would enable us to develop
joint risk management strategies, in other words,
prepare. The United Nations system and Member States
need to be better prepared not just to identify risks, but
also to strengthen operations and develop programmes
accordingly. For this, it is crucial that mandates reflect
the necessity for integrated risk assessment and that
missions and United Nations entities are given the
institutional capacity and means to do so. The United
Nations should respond coherently across its pillars in
order to address climate- and water-related security
risks in a timely manner.

The Caribbean is a region that is especially
vulnerable to the effects of climate change. As the
Council is aware, Sint Maarten was among the islands
most heavily affected by Hurricane Irma, in September
2017. The strongest Atlantic hurricane on record, it
left 70 per cent of the houses there severely damaged,
forcing an unprecedented number of people into public

Outside of the United Nations, we need to do more
to share knowledge and best practices and explore
actionable responses. To that end, on 13 December
2018, the Kingdom of the Netherlands, together with
the Centre of Excellence for Sustainable Development
of SIDS and the Caribbean Community’s Caribbean
Disaster Emergence Management Agency, organized

The Kingdom of the Netherlands aligns itself
with the statement made by the observer of the
European Union.

19-0201077/83

S/PV.8451

Maintenance of international peace and security

a Caribbean conference on planetary security. Its
outcomes will contribute to the Planetary Security
Conference to be held in The Hague on 19 and
20 February. We hope to see many of the participants in
today’s meeting at that Conference.
To conclude, if we predict better through early
warning and prepare better through early action, we can
prevent conflict. The Sustainable Development Goals
(SDGs) are the ultimate prevention agenda, in which
addressing climate change — SDG13 — is embedded.
Its security implications are as pertinent as rising sea
levels, environmental degradation and the growing
number of climate-related disasters affecting human
security. Sint Maarteners remember all too vividly what
this could lead to. We therefore welcome the SecretaryGeneral’s climate summit this September. The summit
is an opportunity to address all aspects of climate
change, including addressing the adverse effects of
climate change on international peace and security and
building resilient societies through adaptation.
As the Secretary-General has said, climate change is
the biggest threat that our generation faces, and we urge
the Council to assign the issue the priority it deserves by
calling for integrated risk assessments and encouraging
climate- and conflict-sensitive programming.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Belize.
Ms. Young (Belize): I have the honour to deliver
this statement on behalf of the Alliance of Small Island
States (AOSIS).
Allow me to congratulate the Dominican Republic,
a fellow small island developing State (SIDS), on its
election as a non-permanent member of the Security
Council, and to commend you, Mr. President, for the
bold decision to start your tenure in the Security Council
with a debate on a topic that encompasses an issue that
is — irrefutably — a defining issue of our time.
I can say that with absolute conviction because
I represent a group of countries on the front line of
climate change. If the people from our islands and
low-lying coastal States could sit with us here today,
they would tell us about the daily challenges they are
confronting to sustain their humble livelihoods: saltwater intrusion, which infiltrates their drinking water
and water for irrigation; farmers forced into more
debt as they try to adapt to changing rainfall patterns;
fisherfolk forced to go further and further afield in order
78/83

25/01/2019

to get even one day’s catch, as marine life migrates to
areas beyond their traditional grounds; and families
confronting rising seas and super hurricanes denied
home, work and, sadly, sometimes even their loved
ones. That reality is being replicated across the globe
at an alarming pace and with unprecedented impacts.
The Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change
(IPCC), in its special report entitled Global Warming
of 1.5ºC, concluded that the effects of human-induced
climate change are worse than previously projected
and that the associated risks have increased immensely
for our ecosystems, economies and social well-being.
Therefore, what we witness in the conflicts over scarce
resources, the large-scale displacement of people and
loss of territory are the manifestation of the associated
risks referred to in the IPCC’s special report. Those are
the experiences of the climate-vulnerable in our world
today, whose already fragile hope for peace and security
continues on a path to depletion. The IPCC findings
confirm that, without drastic systems-transitions, the
current human-induced global-warming trajectory
will cause severe and often irreversible impacts to our
planet, with inevitable humanitarian consequences.
Faced with those prospects and the impacts already
having dire consequences for people and planet, we
have but one urgent global imperative, and that is to act
now. Our first line of response to climate change and to
attenuate climate-related risks is definitive ambitious
climate action in line with the science of 1.5°C.
Of paramount importance is ensuring that
developing countries have the support they need to
adapt, and, where our adaptive capacities have been
exhausted, that we have the support to address loss
and damage. We reaffirm that the United Nations
Framework Convention on Climate Change (UNFCCC)
and its related process, including the Paris Agreement, is
the primary forum for negotiating and coordinating the
global response to climate change. AOSIS underscores
that increased near-term ambition is urgently required
to limit global warming to 1.5°C. We also underscore
the urgent need for remedying the persistent funding
gap for adaptation. Likewise, we emphasize the need
for a strong international mechanism to address loss
and damage.
We hope that the outcome of today’s debate will
include issuing an urgent call to the international
community to take the ambitious action needed in line
with the Paris Agreement goals and 1.5°C pathways. The
19-02010

25/01/2019

Maintenance of international peace and security

outcome should also involve calling upon our developed
country partners to marshal the necessary resources so
that developing countries, in particular SIDS, can be
assured access to adequate, predictable and additional
finance, technology and capacity-building.
Notwithstanding the necessary climate action and
support under the UNFCCC, we must also acknowledge
that climate change has multidimensional implications,
even outside the purview of the UNFCCC, and
therefore must be addressed in a coordinated and
concerted manner across all the relevant frameworks,
mechanisms and United Nations bodies. In that context,
it has become increasingly necessary for the Security
Council to have a more comprehensive understanding
of the international peace and security risks arising
from climate change and climate-related disasters, to
be in a position to act appropriately.
We are pleased to note initial efforts to include
climate-risk assessments in the reports of the SecretaryGeneral to the Council, as well as efforts to provide
information and training to peacekeeping operations
on climate-related security-risk implications. AOSIS
urges the Council to use this debate to muster the
political will to ensure that these initial efforts will be
standardized and improved. To that end, we propose
three factors for consideration.
A preliminary factor is to ensure that the work of
the Security Council in ascertaining risks is guided by
the best available science on climate change, such as
the IPCC assessment reports. A second related factor
is the need for the analytical capacities of the United
Nations system to be improved in order to assess
climate-change-related security threats according to
the specific circumstances, needs and situations on the
ground. The third factor is the need to coordinate the
work of other United Nations entities and international
organizations so as to improve the United Nations
system’s overall capacity to support States and other
stakeholders, including the most vulnerable groups,
such as women, youth and indigenous communities, to
mitigate those threats. In that way the United Nations
system, including the Security Council, would be better
positioned to identify the security threats arising from
climate-change impacts, prepare for them and harness
complementary roles in order to prevent escalation of
those threats to the level where international peace and
security is at risk.

S/PV. 8451

A more comprehensive understanding of the
implications of climate change on international peace
and security must be seen as a critical link in the chain
of a global response to climate change. That response
includes actions to mitigate global warming through
more ambitious emission-reduction targets, build
resilience to disasters and adapt, in both the short and
long term, to the impacts of climate change. Because of
their interlinkages and interdependence, further steps
are required to defragment the United Nations system
so as to harmonize those actions and ensure that our
chain of response suffers no gap or weakness.
Climate change is an issue that transcends not only
nations and borders, but also customary institutional
norms and mandates. It is a fundamental threat to the
future of our planet and the existence of all humankind
as we know it. We hope that this debate will constitute
a stepping stone to reinforcing the global response to
climate change, with the Security Council resolved to
do its part.
I take this opportunity to inform participants of the
side event entitled “Building resilience and expanding
development horizons through global partnerships”,
which AOSIS will host on 19 February. All are invited
to attend.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Tuvalu.
Mr. Laloniu (Tuvalu): I have the honour to speak
on behalf of the 12 members of the Pacific small island
developing States (SIDS), namely, Kiribati, Fiji, the
Federated States of Micronesia, Nauru, the Republic
of the Marshall Islands, Papua New Guinea, Palau,
Samoa, Solomon Islands, Tonga, Vanuatu and my own
country, Tuvalu.
First, let me convey the Pacific’s warmest
congratulations to you, Mr. President, and to the
Permanent Mission of the Dominican Republic on
assuming the presidency of the Security Council. I
convey the appreciation of the Pacific family for the
convening of this debate on how climate-induced
disasters are impacting our stability, peace and security.
We align ourselves with the statement delivered by
the Permanent Representative of Belize on behalf of
the Alliance of Small Island States. We align ourselves
also with the statement delivered by the Permanent
Representative of the Republic of Nauru on behalf of

19-0201079/83

S/PV.8451

Maintenance of international peace and security

the Pacific Islands Forum members represented at the
United Nations.
Climate change is a global threat to peace and
security causing severe water stress, more prolonged
droughts, more frequent floods, and more severe and
intense cyclones. The devastating effects of more
frequent and intense natural disasters are being
experienced by all countries.
While the recovery and rebuilding aspects of
extreme weather events are well understood, although
still far from being adequately addressed, the peace and
security elements are less so. As Pacific small island
developing States (SIDS), we have long advocated for
due recognition to be given to the security implications
of climate-induced disasters and the existing threats to
our very way of life. These threats are the realities that
our Pacific peoples face on a daily basis.
We draw the Security Council’s attention to the
increasing frequency of climate-induced disasters. In
the last month alone, the Pacific region has faced a
number of tropical cyclones and depressions, causing
severe rain and seawater flooding and damaging vital
infrastructure in Kiribati, in the Republic of Marshall
Islands, in Solomon Islands and in Fiji.
When small economies such as ours face sustained
damage year in and year out, our economies struggle to
have enough breathing space to recover. Climate-induced
disasters harm our economic stability, and without
urgent and serious efforts economic instability has the
potential to harm stability in governance and within the
wider society.

25/01/2019

We are addressing the Security Council to appeal
to it to recognize the grave international security
dimensions of the issue. For this, the Security Council
needs to track and receive a clear analysis of the
ongoing security implications of climate-induced
disasters; the United Nations needs to focus attention on
climate-security issues through a special representative;
and preventive interventions need to be supported to
protect small States from falling into prolonged cycles
of instability.
We want to highlight the need for proper
assessment and analysis. An assessment is needed on
the capacity of the United Nations system to respond
to the security implications of climate change. We need
more information on the potentially dangerous points at
the nexus of climate and security. We need assessments
on ways in which we can improve our monitoring
and response. We need a climate-related security risk
analysis and information so that the Council is better
equipped to make more informed decisions. Such
information, assessment and analysis will allow the
Council and the system as a whole to better position
itself and allow for a targeted response that provides the
necessary assistance to vulnerable countries.
It is for this reason that we have been calling for
the appointment of a special representative on climate
and security. Such an appointment could ensure the
provision of a proper analysis and address the gaps and
issues of coordination among the various bodies of the
United Nations system. We reiterate our call for such a
special representative, and we seek the support of all
members of the Council.

Our Pacific leaders, including those of Australia
and New Zealand, in 2018 reaffirmed that climate
change was the single greatest threat to the livelihoods,
security and well-being of the peoples of the Pacific. Our
leaders recognized the contributions of climate change
to a growing complex regional security environment
with the potential to harm both national and regional
stability and create extreme fragility.

Looking ahead, the challenges that are before us can
be achieved only through new modes of operation. We
therefore urge the Security Council not to turn a blind
eye to the very real security challenges that climate
change poses but to heed our call for action now.

The Pacific SIDS have spoken about the impacts
of enhanced fragility in numerous forums, and we
reiterate those sentiments. The Pacific is now the global
epicentre of illegal, unreported and unregulated fishing
(IUU). International networks use IUU for moneylaundering, illicit drug trafficking and the illegal
movement of peoples across the oceans.

Mr. Boukadoum (Algeria): Mr. President, I would
like at the outset to convey my best wishes on your
presidency, which I would say has been extremely
prolific and successful so far. I thank you for having
initiated this open debate and for letting me share with
the Council our views on the issue under consideration.
I wish also to thank this morning’s briefers.

80/83

The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Algeria.

19-02010

25/01/2019

Maintenance of international peace and security

First, it might seem awkward for the Security
Council to take into consideration the effects of
climate-related disasters and climate change on
international peace and security. The Security Council
has numerous issues on its agenda, and a great deal
is expected of it in terms of action and efficiency in
preventing conflicts and resolving existing ones. We
might think that it is natural for the Council to focus on
them rather than on opening new, undefined territories
for consideration.
Second, we believe that the link between climate
and international peace and security is not remote, and
we are witnesses, including in my geographical area,
to the fact that climate change has without a doubt
had negative and dangerous effects in Africa and the
Mediterranean region, considered as hot spots by the
Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change.
Third, I want to point out specifically that while
Africa, our continent, is the least responsible for
anthropogenic climate change, it is the continent
that suffers the most from such perilous hazards as
desertification, land degradation, drought, sea-level
rise and ocean acidification. Not only regions such
as the Sahel but also small island developing States
are directly impacted by such adverse consequences.
Ignoring that the situation has had repercussions on
those already poverty-prone populations would be a
tragic mistake. Humankind fought for food and shelter
in ancient times, and humankind will continue to fight
for water, food and shelter when these are rare and
when access to requirements to meet basic needs is for
any reason denied.
Fourth, it is obvious to us that this situation of
poverty and scarcity of resources is an open door to
all maleficent groups, including terrorist and criminal
groups, to thrive as they are doing in the Sahel. It is clear
also that this dangerous situation will continue to push
the various peoples affected to leave their dwellings and
embark on a forcible migration, generally north-bound,
where they believe resources are richer and the land
more secure, giving rise to all the tragedies that we are
all witnessing today, such as that in the Mediterranean.
Fifth, the situation is a complex one and involves a
large number of stakeholders. For the Security Council,
the question is simple: do climate-change-induced
natural disasters provoke conflicts, or do conflicts
prevent us from tackling environmental issues and
development in the areas concerned?

S/PV. 8451

Sixth, it is our view that it is not illegitimate to
think that the Security Council has a role, a mission
and a responsibility that are yet to be defined. In fact,
the Security Council embarked on this journey in
2011 with its first presidential statement on this issue
(S/PRST/2011/15), and I remind Council members that
it rightfully pointed then to the responsibilities and
mandates of the General Assembly and the Economic
and Social Council. I cannot but recall that we have
committed ourselves, as the international community,
to tackle the issue through the Paris Agreement on
Climate Change. It is important to recall that the 2011
presidential statement mentioned that the United Nations
Framework Convention on Climate Change (UNFCCC)
had a role and responsibility as “the key instrument
for addressing climate change” (S/PRST/2011/15, third
para.). It is still our view that the Paris Agreement
under the UNFCCC is the best framework to address
the issue through commitments that must be respected.
Seventh, my country continues to advocate for
the prevention and solution of conflicts by tackling
their root causes, be they political, economic, social
and — yes, today it has to be said as clearly as
possible — environmental roots. The question at
stake is multifaceted. It is true that we are still at odds
when it comes to defining the notion of “impacts of
climate-related disasters on international peace and
security”, which has to clearly be clarified in some way.
In the meantime, work at this juncture — and, I should
say, our homework — must start through prevention
and cooperation and always bear in mind that no one
is immune from the effects of inaction or indifference.
I would cite as a blatant example the case of my
continent, Africa. It has been rightfully mentioned this
morning that there is a link between the depletion of
Lake Chad and terrorist-related activities. It is obvious
that terrorist and criminal groups have found fertile
terrain. The scarcity of resources leaves no other way
to the populations than forced migration or falling
into the hands of the rogue groups. At this juncture,
the legitimate question is: What we can do and what
specific role does the Security Council have to play?
First, we must rely on and cooperate and act jointly
with regional organizations, and in our specific case
the African Union. The mechanisms are now in place. I
strongly suggest that in the Security Council’s meeting
with the African Union Peace and Security Council, an
agenda item on the effects of climate-related disasters on
peace and security be discussed. Secondly, with respect

19-0201081/83

S/PV.8451

Maintenance of international peace and security

to prevention, mechanisms like the African Union,
but also such subregional entities as the Economic
Community of West African States and peacekeeping
operations, are perfectly fit for the purpose of at least
informing the Security Council of what they believe
to be the effects of climate change. Thirdly, we have
to rely on the work, including the analytical work,
of the United Nations Development Programme, the
United Nations Environment Programme, and the
Resident Coordinators of the new United Nations
Development System.
I would finish by calling for a clear stocktaking
defining ways to move ahead with the issue.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of the United Arab Emirates.
Ms. Nusseibeh (United Arab Emirates): I would
like to join others in congratulating the Dominican
Republic on assuming the presidency of the Security
Council, and for bringing this important matter to the
attention of the Council. The length of the speakers list
today attests to the importance of this issue to many
Member States. As others have said, there is no doubt
that climate change is the defining issue of our time,
and I would like to thank the Minister for Foreign
Affairs of the Dominican Republic, Mr. Miguel Vargas
Maldonado, for convening today’s critical discussion,
and this morning’s briefers for their presentations.
The United Arab Emirates is committed to climate
action and we eagerly await the Secretary-General’s
climate summit later this year. We applaud his leadership
and his tireless work to fight climate change. We are
therefore proud to be hosting the summit’s preparatory
meeting in June in Abu Dhabi, as announced by the
Secretary-General yesterday.
Climate change has long ceased to be a concern
only for environmentalists. Coping with climate
change — or “adaptation”, in the words of experts—is
now a fact of life as United Nations Member States face
extreme temperatures, increasingly intense natural
disasters and climate-influenced human migration.
This adaptation is furthermore often synonymous with
humanitarian relief and planning.
Though not strictly a security issue in the traditional
sense, as many have said here today, and while other
matters discussed before the Council are equally
important to us, we must recognize that climate change
will worsen existing security concerns in the future and,
potentially, create new ones. In fact, military experts in
82/83

25/01/2019

many countries concluded long ago that the changing
climate poses existential threats of displacement and
extinction to some nations. Furthermore, food and
water insecurity, the loss of shelter, the deterioration
of livelihoods and the sense of powerlessness in the
wake of repeated disasters create breeding grounds for
desperation, extremism and, therefore, instability.
The United Arab Emirates is deeply concerned
over the impact of these pressing climate-related
challenges, not only within our own borders but around
the world, because we know that the security of our
country is contingent on the security of others, and
because we know that this is actually an issue that
we can collectively tackle together. In the Pacific and
Indian Oceans, climate change poses a threat to the very
survival of many small island States, so if we fail to act
on climate change a number of these countries could be
continually devastated or even submerged under water,
triggering population movements and creating new
challenges around territorial control and integrity.
Addressing the link between climate change and
international security does not necessarily require a
change in the mechanics of the Security Council, but
we should do more to reframe climate action. Curbing
greenhouse gas emissions and funding livelihoods in
drought-stricken regions, though traditionally regarded
as development or humanitarian matters, are in fact
investments in security and should be understood
as such.
In general, Member States, donors and the United
Nations system need to explicitly target insecurity
through climate action. This could come in the form
of commitments to scaling up development work in
places that are most likely to experience climate-linked
insecurity or are already experiencing it. For example,
many of the countries vulnerable to climate change have
high unemployment rates, particularly among young
people. Targeted development and humanitarian work
that provides livelihoods, education or training could
mitigate the risk that climate-related unemployment
contributes to insecurity.
Similarly, Member States, donors and the United
Nations system could combine their existing efforts
to cut greenhouse gas emissions with a renewed effort
to build resilient infrastructure in climate-vulnerable
communities. For example, using solar energy to
power health centres, schools and businesses could
simultaneously mitigate climate change and factors that
contribute to insecurity.
19-02010

25/01/2019

Maintenance of international peace and security

S/PV. 8451

Donor countries and international development
agencies could also allocate their funding based on
scientific models that predict where climate disasters
are likely to occur. Forecast-based financing can build
resilience in at-risk communities and contain the
fallout of a natural disaster that triggers insecurity and
population migrations. These are the kind of practical
options and possible commitments we hope to showcase
at the climate summit preparatory meeting in June in
the United Arab Emirates. We very much look forward
to welcoming all Member States there.

threat to the peace, stability and sustainability of our
planet, causing humanitarian disasters, contributing
to political violence and undermining the capacities
of Governments. The potential of climate-related
migration and displacement to cause conflict and pose
a threat to international peace and security cannot be
overstated. Such a threat can only be properly addressed
through greater cooperation, global leadership and
shared responsibilities. The Security Council is
therefore the appropriate platform to address this threat
to the security and prosperity of the globe.

Today’s meeting is proof that the link between
climate change and insecurity is real and is recognized
as such by the international community. It demands
concrete action and attention from this Chamber.

We all watched with great hope the historic
breakthrough of the Paris Agreement on Climate
Change. We must, however, concede today that progress
has been largely inadequate. Climate-related events all
over the planet are worsening and becoming apocalyptic.
The era of unprecedented global warming is upon us. A
recent report of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate
Change has confirmed that the climate-related risks to
health, livelihoods, food security, water supply, human
security and economic growth are projected to worsen
with global warming of only 1.5°C.

The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Mauritius.
Mr. Soomauroo (Mauritius): I commend the
Dominican Republic for the initiative of convening
this open debate focused on addressing the impacts
of climate-related disasters on international peace
and security. We are particularly appreciative of the
concept note (S/2019/1, annex), containing pertinent
questions that have guided our discussion today. We
are very pleased to see a fellow small island developing
State chairing this important meeting.
Mauritius aligns itself with the statement delivered
by the representative of Belize, Ambassador Lois
Young, on behalf of the Alliance of Small Island States.
I also wholeheartedly thank the participants for their
enlightening testimonies and briefings this morning.
Bringing climatic change discussion to the Security
Council has been a major challenge, but taking decisions
that will require Member States to take proactive
decisions is an even greater challenge. We therefore
welcome this opportunity to sincerely hope that the
President’s summary will lead to a concrete action plan
that Member States will eventually implement.
For small island developing States, climate
change represents an existential challenge because
of their specific vulnerabilities. However, no country
is immune to the perils of climate change. The
wide participation of countries large and small in
today’s meeting is testament to the importance that
we all attach to the subject. Addressing climate
change is everyone’s responsibility. It is not only an
environmental or development issue but also a complex

As far as my country is concerned, all the
climate-related indicators are showing signs of
deterioration. Rising air temperatures and sea levels,
falling levels of annual rainfall and precipitation,
the erosion of beaches — a major pillar of our
economy — grim projections of water stress and the
possible decline of our agricultural production may all
imperil our livelihood and stability.
We cannot agree more with the Secretary-General
when he says that climate change is a defining issue of
our time. Unfortunately, we see that humanity is losing
the race against climate change. Now the time has come
for us to go beyond words. For us, the Security Council
remains part of the solution to such a vexing problem.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I wish to thank
everyone, especially the briefers.
I think this has proved a good forum and a successful
debate, in which 82 representatives spoke, expressing
their views. Some countries still do not understand how
developing countries like ours feel. We live in fear that
we will either disappear or be hit by a natural disaster
that knocks our economies back 10 or 15 years. I hope
that we will continue raising our voices loud and clear
until they are heard.
The meeting rose at 6.15 p.m.

19-0201083/83
