General Assembly-Thirty-ninth Session

20

tion of the Declaration and Programme of Action of the
Second International Conference on Assistance to Refu­
gees in Africa; 25
24. Requests the Secretary-General to draw the atten­
tion of the specialized agencies and other organizations of
the United Nations system to the need to give increasingly
wide publicity to all matters relating to the social and eco­
nomic development of Africa, in particular to the critical
economic situation facing African countries;
25. Calls upon United Nations organs - in particular
the Security Council, the Economic and Social Council,
the Special Committee on the Situation with regard to the
Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of
Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples, the Spe­
cial Committee against Apartheid and the United Nations
Council for Namibia - to continue to associate closely the
Organization of African Unity with all their work concern­
ing Africa;
26. Urges the specialized agencies and other organiza­
tions concerned within the United Nations system to con­
tinue and to expand their co-operation with the Organiza­
tion of African Unity and, through it, their assistance to
the liberation movements recognized by that organization;
27. Invites the Secretary-General to continue his com­
mendable efforts in alerting and sensitizing the interna­
tional community to the plight of African countries, in
mobilizing additional assistance to Africa and in co-ordi­
nating the activities of the United Nations system in
Africa, monitoring the situation and presenting periodic
reports thereon;
28. Requests the Secretary-General to report to the
General Assembly at its fortieth session on the implemen­
tation of the present resolution and on the development of
co-operation between the Organization of African Unity
and the organizations concerned within the United
Nations system.
54th plenary meeting
8 November 1984

39/9. Co-operation between the United Nations and
the League of Arab States
The General Assembly,
Recalling its previous resolutions on the promotion of
co-operation between the United Nations and the League
of Arab States, in particular resolutions 36/24 of 9 Nov­
ember 1981, 37/17 of 16 November 1982 and 38/6 of 28
October 1983,
Having considered the report of the Secretary-General
on co-operation between the United Nations and the
League of Arab States, 26
Having heard the statement of the Permanent Observer
of the League of Arab States on co-operation between the
United Nations and the League of Arab States27 and having
noted the emphasis placed therein on follow-up projects,
actions and procedures on the recommendations adopted
at the meeting between representatives of the General Sec­
retariat of the League of Arab States and its specialized
organizations and the secretariats of the United Nations
and other organizations of the United Nations system,
held at Tunis from 28 June to I July 1983, 28 as well as on
various sectoral activities related to development priorities in the Arab region,
25 N39/402, annex.

26 Af39/4 I 8 and Add.I.
27 Official Records of the General Assemh/r Thmr-r11mh Sessum. Ple11af\"
Meetings, 54th meeting. paras. 43-58.

Recalling the relevant Articles of the Charter of the
United Nations which encourage activities through
regional arrangements for the promotion of the purposes
and principles of the United Nations,
Noting with appreciation the desire of the League of
Arab States to consolidate and develop the existing ties
with the United Nations in all areas relating to the mainte­
nance of international peace and security, and to co-oper­
ate in every possible way with the United Nations in the
implementation of United Nations resolutions relating to
the question of Palestine and the situation in the Middle
East,
A ware of the vital importance for the countries members
of the League of Arab States of achieving a just, compre­
hensive and durable solution to the Middle East conflict
and the question of Palestine, the core of the conflict,
Realizing that the strengthening of international peace
and security is directly related, inter alia, to disarmament,
decolonization, self-determination and the eradication of
all forms of racism and racial discrimination,
Convinced that the strengthening and furtherance of co­
operation between the United Nations and the organiza­
tions of the United Nations system and the League of Arab
States contribute to the work of the United Nations system
and to the promotion of the purposes and principles of the
United Nations,
Noting that the Tunis meeting defined the framework of
co-operation between the United Nations and the League
of Arab States in certain priority sectors, without deter­
mining specific projects that could lend themselves to joint
implementation,
Recognizing the need for closer co-operation between
the United Nations system and the League of Arab States
and its specialized organizations in realizing the goals and
objectives set forth in the Strategy for Joint Arab Eco­
nomic Development adopted by the Eleventh Arab Sum­
mit Conference, held at Amman from 25 to 27 November
1980,
I. Takes note with satisfaction of the report of the
Secretary-General;
2. Expresses its appreciation to the Secretary-General
for his efforts towards the implementation of the recom­
mendations of the meeting between representatives of the
General Secretariat of the League of Arab States and its
specialized organizations and the secretariats of the United
Nations and other organizations of the United Nations
system, 28 as well as to the specialized agencies and other
organizations of the United Nations system for their sub­
stantial contributions to that meeting;
3. Expresses its satisfaction at the results achieved at
the meeting on food and agriculture in the Arab region,
held in Rome on 27 and 28 September I 984, within the
framework of the Food and Agriculture Organization of
the United Nations; 29
4. Requests the Secretary-General to strengthen co­
operation with the General Secretariat of the League of
Arab States for the purpose of implementing United
Nations resolutions relating to the question of Palestine
and the situation in the Middle East in order to achieve a
just, comprehensive and durable solution to the Middle
East conflict and the question of Palestine, the core of the
conflict;
5. Requests the Secretariat of the United Nations and
the General Secretariat of the League of Arab States.
c8 See A/381299 and Corr. I, sect. V.
!9See A13914l8iAdd I

II.

Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

within their respective fields of competence, to intensify
their co-operation towards the realization of the purposes
and principles of the Charter of the United Nations, the
strengthening of international peace and security, disarma­
ment, decolonization, self-determination and the eradica­
tion of all forms of racism and racial discrimination;
6. Requests the Secretary-General to strengthen co­
operation and co-ordination between the United Nations
and the organizations of the United Nations system and
the League of Arab States in order to enhance their capac­
ity to serve the mutual interests of the two organizations in
the political, economic, social and cultural fields;
7. Takes note of the proposals and recommendations
contained in the report of the Secretary-General and
requests him to take the necessary steps to ensure their
implementation, including the following measures:
(a) Setting up of joint sectoral inter-agency working
groups for follow-up of multilateral projects;
(b) Promotion of contacts and consultations regarding
projects of a multilateral nature between the counterpart
agencies, programmes and bodies concerned;
(c) Follow-up of the implementation of the approved
proposals mentioned in paragraph 8 of the report of the
Secretary-General;30
8. Calls upon the competent bodies of the United
Nations, the specialized agencies and other organizations
of the United Nations system:
(a) To give urgent consideration to the various recom­
mendations contained in the report of the Secretary-Gen­
eral and to inform him not later than 15 May I 985, of the
action taken on them;
(b) To promote contacts and consultations regarding
projects of a bilateral nature between the counterpart agen­
cies, programmes and bodies concerned;
9. Reaffirms its recommendation contained in resolu­
tion 38/6 that another sectoral meeting on social develop­
ment be organized in April 1985, under the aegis of the
General Secretariat of the League of Arab States, in a
country member of that organization, to give careful con­
sideration to projects prepared for joint implementation,
in conformity with the priorities set forth in paragraphs 61
and 62 of the report of the Secretary-General,3 1 including
joint sectoral meetings;
I 0. Requests the Secretary-General to co-operate
closely with the Secretary-General of the League of Arab
States concerning arrangements for the organization of the
above-mentioned meeting and to provide all necessary
assistance and facilities to ensure its success;
11. Also requests the Secretary-General, in close co­
operation with the Secretary-General of the League of
Arab States, to convene ad hoe meetings between repre­
sentatives of the Secretariat of the United Nations and of
the General Secretariat of the League of Arab States for
consultations on follow-up policies, projects, actions and
procedures;
12. Further requests the Secretary-General to submit to
the General Assembly, at its fortieth session, a progress
report on the implementation of the present resolution;
13. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its
fortieth session the item entitled "Co-operation between
the United Nations and the League of Arab States".
54th plenary meeting
8 November 1984
30 N39/418.
3 I N38/299 and Corr. I

21

39/10. International Year of Peace
The General Assemhly,
Recalling its resolution 37/16 of 16 November I 982, in
which it declared 1986 to be the International Year of
Peace,
Recalling also its resolution 38/56 of 7 December 1983
concerning the preparations and the draft programme for
the International Year of Peace,
A ware that peace constitutes one of the principal aspira­
tions of mankind and that the attainment and preservation
of peace is a universal responsibility,
Mindful of the paramount objective of the United
Nations as enunciated in the Charter, namely, to save suc­
ceeding generations from the scourge of war, which twice
in our lifetime has brought untold sorrow to mankind,
Recognizing that the foundation of international peace
and security can and must be strengthened within the
framework of the United Nations and that this requires a
strong commitment by Member States,
Recognizing also that the fortieth anniversary of the
United Nations, at which time the International Year of
Peace will be proclaimed, constitutes a unique opportunity
for Member States to reaffirm their commitment to the
purposes and principles of the Charter of the United
Nations,
I. Takes note with satisfaction of the implementation
of resolution 38/56, as reflected in the report of the Secre­
tary-General, 32 and of the updated version of the draft pro­
gramme for the International Year of Peace contained
therein; 33
2. Invites all States, United Nations organs, intergov­
ernmental and non-governmental organizations, educa­
tional, scientific, cultural and research organizations and
the communication media to make an even greater contri­
bution to promote international peace and security on the
basis of the Charter of the United Nations;
3. Appeals to Member States to submit proposals on
specific activities which can be carried out by the United
Nations, as well as those that they decide to execute at the
national level, including the establishment of national co­
ordination committees or other machinery for the obser­
vance of the International Year of Peace;
4. Welcomes the establishment of the Voluntary Fund
for the Programme of the International Year of Peace and
invites all States and interested organizations to contribute
to the Fund;
5. Decides to convene a pledging conference during the
first quarter of 1985 so that all Member States which have
not yet announced their voluntary contributions may have
an opportunity to do so;
6. Emphasizes the importance of the co-ordination
and co-operation established between the preparations for
the International Year of Peace and the World Disarma­
ment Campaign, the International Youth Year, the United
Nations Decade for Women and the celebration of the for­
tieth anniversary of the United Nations;
7. Requests the Secretary-General to report to the Gen­
eral Assembly at its fortieth session on the contribution of
the regional seminars devoted to promoting the objectives
of the International Year of Peace, to be organized during
1985;
8. Also requests the Secretary-General to report to the
General Assembly at its fortieth session on the final ver­
sion of the draft programme of the International Year of
32 N39/500 and Add. I.
33 A/391500, annex I, and A 39/500/Add. I, annex.
