A

UNITED
NATIONS

General Assembly
Distr.
GENERAL
A/RES/50/186
6 March 1996

Fiftieth session
Agenda item 112 (b)
RESOLUTION ADOPTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY
[on the report of the Third Committee (A/50/635/Add.2)]
50/186.

Human rights and terrorism

The General Assembly,
Guided by the Charter of the United Nations, the Universal Declaration
of Human Rights, 1/ the Declaration on Principles of International Law
concerning Friendly Relations and Cooperation among States in accordance with
the Charter of the United Nations 2/ and the International Covenants on
Human Rights, 3/
Bearing in mind the Declaration on the Occasion of the Fiftieth
Anniversary of the United Nations, 4/
Taking into account the fact that acts of terrorism in all its forms and
manifestations aimed at the destruction of human rights have continued despite
national and international efforts,
Bearing in mind that the most essential and basic human right is the
right to life,
Bearing in mind also that terrorism creates an environment that destroys
the freedom from fear of the people,

1/

Resolution 217 A (III).

2/

Resolution 2625 (XXV), annex.

3/

Resolution 2200 A (XXI), annex.

4/

See resolution 50/6.

96-77059

/...

A/RES/50/186
Page 2

Recalling the Vienna Declaration and Programme of Action, adopted by the
World Conference on Human Rights on 25 June 1993, 5/
Recalling also its resolutions 48/122 of 20 December 1993 and 49/185 of
23 December 1994,
Taking note of Commission on Human Rights resolution 1995/43 of
3 March 1995, 6/
Reiterating that all States have an obligation to promote and protect
human rights and fundamental freedoms, and also that every individual should
strive to secure their universal and effective recognition and observance,
Seriously concerned at the gross violations of human rights perpetrated
by terrorist groups,
Profoundly deploring the increasing number of innocent persons,
including women, children and the elderly, killed, massacred and maimed by
terrorists in indiscriminate and random acts of violence and terror, which
cannot be justified under any circumstances,
Noting with great concern the growing connection between the terrorist
groups and other criminal organizations engaged in the illegal traffic in arms
and drugs at the national and international levels, as well as the consequent
commission of serious crimes such as murder, extortion, kidnapping, assault,
taking of hostages and robbery,
Mindful of the need to protect human rights of and guarantees for the
individual in accordance with the relevant international human rights
principles and instruments, particularly the right to life,
Reaffirming that all measures to counter terrorism must be in strict
conformity with international human rights standards,
1.

Expresses its solidarity with the victims of terrorism;

2.
Reiterates its unequivocal condemnation of the acts, methods and
practices of terrorism as activities aimed at the destruction of human rights,
fundamental freedoms and democracy, threatening the territorial integrity and
security of States, destabilizing legitimately constituted Governments,
undermining pluralistic civil society and having adverse consequences on the
economic and social development of States;
3.
Calls upon States to take all necessary and effective measures in
accordance with international standards of human rights to prevent, combat and
eliminate all acts of terrorism wherever and by whomever committed;
4.
Urges the international community to enhance cooperation at
regional and international levels in the fight against terrorism in accordance

5/

A/CONF.157/24 (Part I), chap. III.

6/
See Official Records of the Economic and Social Council, 1995,
Supplement No. 3 and corrigenda (E/1995/23 and Corr.1 and 2), chap. II, sect. A.
/...

A/RES/50/186
Page 3

with relevant international instruments, including those relating to human
rights, with the aim of its eradication;
5.

Condemns incitement of ethnic hatred, violence and terrorism;

6.
Requests the Secretary-General to continue to seek the views of
Member States on the possible establishment of a United Nations voluntary fund
for victims of terrorism, as well as ways and means to rehabilitate the
victims of terrorism and to reintegrate them into society, and to submit to
the General Assembly at its fifty-second session, for its consideration, a
report containing comments made by Member States on the subject;
7.
Also requests the Secretary-General to transmit the text of the
present resolution to all Member States and to competent specialized agencies
and intergovernmental organizations for their consideration;
8.
Encourages special rapporteurs, special representatives and
working groups of the Commission on Human Rights, as well as treaty bodies, to
pay appropriate attention, within their mandates, to the consequences of the
acts, methods and practices of terrorist groups;
9.
Decides to consider this question at its fifty-second session
under the item entitled "Human rights questions".
99th plenary meeting
22 December 1995
