A /67/PV.44

United Nations

asdf

General Assembly

Offi cial Records

Sixty-seventh session

44th plenary meeting
Thursday, 29 November 2012, 3 p.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Jeremić . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (Serbia)

The meeting was called to order at 3.30 p.m.
Agenda item 37
Question of Palestine
Report of the Committee on the Exercise of
the Inalienable Rights of the Palestinian
People (A/67/35)

faith, demonstrating that they are excellent champions
of the Palestinian cause. I especially welcome President
Abbas, Abu Mazen, our brother the leader. I welcome
his delegation to this historic meeting on this historic
day.

I now give the floor to the representative of the
Sudan to introduce draft resolution A/67/L.28.

I also have the honour and the pleasure of introducing
the draft resolution entitled “Status of Palestine in the
United Nations”, as contained in document A/67/L.28,
under agenda item 37, entitled “Question of Palestine”. I
introduce the draft resolution on behalf of the following
countries: Afghanistan, Algeria, Angola, Argentina,
Azerbaijan, Bahrain, Bangladesh, Belarus, Belize,
Bolivia, Brazil, Brunei Darussalam, Chile, China,
Comoros, Cuba, the Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea, Djibouti, Ecuador, Egypt, Grenada, Guinea,
Guinea-Bissau, Guyana, Iceland, India, Indonesia,
Iraq, Jordan, Kazakhstan, Kenya, Kuwait, Kyrgyzstan,
the Lao People’s Democratic Republic, Lebanon,
Libya, Madagascar, Malaysia, Maldives, Mali,
Mauritania, Morocco, Namibia, Nicaragua, Nigeria,
Oman, Pakistan, Peru, Qatar, Saint Vincent and the
Grenadines, Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Seychelles, Sierra
Leone, Somalia, South Africa, Sri Lanka, the Sudan,
Suriname, Tajikistan, Tunisia, Turkey, the United Arab
Emirates, Uruguay, Venezuela, Viet Nam, Yemen,
Zimbabwe and Palestine.

Mr. Osman (Sudan) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, I have the honour, as Permanent Representative
of the Republic of the Sudan and Chairman of the
Group of Arab Ambassadors at the United Nations, to
welcome the sincere children of Palestine present here,
who have displayed patience, steadfastness and good

This important draft resolution aims to take
a historic decision to grant Palestine the status of
a non-member observer State. Its preambular part
reaffirms the unacceptability of the acquisition of
territory by force, as stipulated in the Charter. Other
preambular paragraphs reaffirm the right of the

Report of the Secretary-General (A/67/364)
Draft resolutions (A/67/L.17, A/67/L.18,
A/67/L.19, A/67/L.20 and A/67/L.28)
The President: At the request of the sponsors and in
view of the presence of the President of the Palestinian
Authority, His Excellency Mr. Mahmoud Abbas, I
should like to advise members that the Assembly
will first take action on draft resolution A/67/L.28,
entitled “Status of Palestine in the United Nations”.
The Assembly will then continue to hold its debate on
agenda item 37 immediately following its consideration
of the draft resolution.
In the light of that circumstance, and there being no
objection, we shall proceed accordingly.

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. Corrections should be submitted to the original
languages only. They should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature
of a member of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room
U-506. Corrections will be issued after the end of the session in a consolidated corrigendum.

12-61635 (E)

*1261635*

A/67/PV.44

Palestinian people to self-determination, including the
right to an independent State of Palestine.
The preambular paragraphs reaffirm relevant
Security Council and General Assembly resolutions
concerning the peaceful settlement of the question of
Palestine, mentioning, among other things, that Israel
must withdraw from Palestinian territory occupied
since 1967, including East Jerusalem, and that the
inalienable rights of the Palestinian people, starting
with the right to self-determination and the right to
establish an independent State, must be realized, along
with an equitable settlement for the Palestinian refugees
in accordance with resolution 194 (III) and a complete
cessation of Israeli settlement activities in the occupied
Palestinian territory, including East Jerusalem.
The preambular part further recalls resolution
43/177, in which the Assembly acknowledged the
proclamation of the State of Palestine by the Palestine
National Council on 15 November 1988. It also
reaffirms the right of all States in the region to live
in peace within secure and internationally recognized
borders and the right of both States to live side by side
in peace and security.
In its operative paragraphs, the draft resolution
reaffirms the right of the Palestinian people to selfdetermination and independence in their State of
Palestine on the Palestinian territory occupied since
1967.
We call on the General Assembly to grant Palestine
the status of a non-member observer State. I will
repeat that. We are asking the General Assembly to
accord Palestine non-member observer State status
in the United Nations, without prejudging the rights,
privileges and role accorded the Palestine Liberation
Organization as representative of the Palestinian
people.
The operative paragraphs also affirm the
determination of the General Assembly to contribute
to the achievement of the inalienable rights of the
Palestinian people and the attainment of a peaceful
settlement of the Middle East conflict that ends the
Israeli occupation that began in 1967, making possible
the realization of the vision of two States. They
also express the urgent need to resume and expedite
negotiations in order to achieve a peaceful, just, lasting
and comprehensive solution.
Paragraph 6 urges all States and the specialized
agencies and organizations of the United Nations
2

system to continue to support the Palestinian people in
the early realization of their right to self-determination,
independence and freedom. Those are all principles
that have been enshrined in the Charter of the United
Nations. On this historic date, those principles will be
enshrined.
The draft resolution before the Assembly today,
which will make this body’s views official, has been
a long time in coming. Sixty-five years ago today,
when the United Nations decided to partition historic
Palestine into two States, one acquired independence,
but the other one waited until this historic day. The
eyes of all the children of Palestine are looking to this
moment and to this Assembly to see their aspirations
and hopes fully realized.
Since that day 65 years ago, the General Assembly
has annually adopted many important resolutions
reaffirming the rights of the Palestinian people,
including the right to self-determination, as well as the
need to achieve a just and comprehensive solution to the
question of Palestine under resolutions of international
legitimacy. In that respect, the draft resolution is a
qualitative addition along the path to achieving the
international will to establish a real peace in the Middle
East based on the two-State solution. That is why I call
upon all States to contribute today to making history
and to pave the way to the future by voting for the draft
resolution.
To conclude, I can only express, on behalf of the
Arab Group, our great gratitude and appreciation to
all the States that have sponsored the draft resolution,
thereby demonstrating their support for the principles
of the Charter. This is a victory for the values of justice
and truth and for the Palestinian question and the
Palestinian people, who are watching us today.
The President: The Assembly will now hear an
address by the Chairman of the Executive Committee
of the Palestine Liberation Organization and President
of the Palestinian Authority.
Mr. Abbas (Palestine) (spoke in Arabic): Palestine
comes today to the General Assembly at a time when
it is still tending to its wounds and burying its beloved
martyrs — the men, women and children who fell victim
to the latest Israeli aggression — a time when it is still
searching for remnants of life amid the ruins of homes
destroyed by Israeli bombs on the Gaza Strip, wiping
out entire families, their men, women and children, all
murdered along with their dreams, their hopes, their

12-61635

A/67/PV.44

future and their longing to live an ordinary life and to
live in freedom and peace.
Palestine comes today to the General Assembly
because it believes in peace and because its people,
as proven in the course of the past few days, are in
desperate need of it.
Palestine comes today to this prestigious
international forum, the representative and protector
of international legitimacy, reaffirming our conviction
that the international community now stands before the
last chance to save the two-State solution. Palestine
comes to the Assembly today at a defining moment
regionally and internationally, in order to reaffirm
its presence and to protect the possibilities and the
foundations of the just peace that is deeply hoped for
in our region.
The Israeli aggression against our people in the
Gaza Strip has confirmed once again the extraordinary,
urgent and pressing need to end the Israeli occupation and
for our people to gain their freedom and independence.
That aggression also confirms the Israeli Government’s
adherence to the policy of occupation, brute force and
war, which in turn obliges the international community
to shoulder its responsibilities towards the Palestinian
people and towards peace. That is why we are here
today.
I say with great pain and sorrow that there was
assuredly no one in the world who asked dozens of
Palestinian children to lose their lives in order to
reaffirm the aforementioned facts. There did not
have to be thousands of deadly raids and tons of
explosives for the world to be reminded that there was
an occupation that needed to end and that there was a
people that needed to be freed. Nor was there a need for
a new, devastating war in order for us to be aware of the
absence of peace. That is why we are here today.
The Palestinian people miraculously recovered
from the ashes of Al-Nakba of 1948, which was intended
to extinguish their being and to expel them, to uproot
them and erase their presence, which was rooted in the
depths of their land and the depths of history. In those
dark days, hundreds of thousands of Palestinians were
torn from their homes and displaced within and outside
their homeland. As part of one of the most dreadful
campaigns of ethnic cleansing and dispossession in
modern history, they were thrown from their beautiful,
embracing, prosperous country into refugee camps.

12-61635

In those dark days, our people looked to the United
Nations as a beacon of hope and appealed for an end to
the injustice, for justice and peace and for the realization
of our rights. Our people still believe in those aims and
continue to wait. That is why we are here today.
In the course of our long national struggle, our
people have always strived to ensure harmony and
consistency among the goals and means of their struggle,
international law and the spirit of the era, in accordance
with the prevailing realities and changes. Despite the
horrors that befell them, and continue to befall them
today, as a consequence of Al-Nakba and its horrors, our
people have always strived not to lose their humanity,
their highest and deeply held moral values and their
innovative ability for survival, steadfastness, creativity
and hope. Despite the enormity and complexity of that
task, the Palestine Liberation Organization, the sole
legitimate representative of the Palestinian people and
the committed leader of their revolution and struggle,
has consistently strived to achieve that harmony and
consistency.
In 1988, when the Palestine National Council
decided to pursue the Palestinian peace initiative and
adopted the declaration of independence, on the basis
of resolution 181 (II) of 29 November 1947, under the
leadership of the late President Yasser Arafat, it in fact
took a historic, difficult and courageous decision that
defined the requirements for a historic reconciliation
that would turn the page on war, aggression and
occupation. That was no easy matter. Yet, we had
the courage and sense of responsibility to take the
right decision in order to protect the higher national
interests of our people and to affirm our adherence to
and conformity with international legitimacy. In that
same year, that decision was welcomed, supported and
endorsed by the Assembly that is meeting today.
Over the past months in particular, we and the
members of the General Assembly have heard a constant
stream of Israeli threats in response to our peaceful,
political and diplomatic effort for Palestine to acquire
non-member observer status in the United Nations.
Members have certainly witnessed how some of those
threats were barbarically and horrifically carried out in
the Gaza Strip only days ago.
We have not heard a word from any Israeli official
expressing any sincere concern about saving the peace
process. On the contrary, our people have witnessed,
and continue to witness, an unprecedented escalation
of military attacks, the blockade, settlement activities
3

A/67/PV.44

and ethnic cleansing, particularly in occupied East
Jerusalem. They have seen mass arrests and attacks by
settlers, as well as other practices with which the Israeli
occupation is becoming synonymous. Israel’s apartheid
system of colonial occupation institutionalizes the
plague of racism and entrenches hatred and incitement.
The Israeli Government’s conviction that it is
above international law and that it is immune from
accountability and responsibility allows it to blatantly
continue its aggressive policies and perpetration of war
crimes. Unfortunately, that belief is bolstered by the
failure of some to condemn and to demand the cessation
of those violations and crimes and by positions that
equate the victim and the perpetrator. The time has
come for the world to say clearly enough aggression,
enough settlements and enough occupation. That is
why we are here now.
We have not come here seeking to delegitimize a
State established decades ago, that is, Israel. Rather,
we have come to affirm the legitimacy of a State that
must now achieve its independence, namely, Palestine.
We have not come here to add further complications to
the peace process, which Israel’s policies have cast into
disarray. Rather, we have come to launch a final serious
attempt to achieve peace. We seek not to put an end
to what remains of the negotiations process, which has
lost its utility and credibility, but rather to try to breathe
new life into the negotiations. We seek to ensure a solid
foundation for that process, on the basis of the terms
of reference of the relevant international resolutions, so
that the negotiations can succeed.
On behalf of the Palestine Liberation Organization,
I say that we will not give up, we will not tire and our
determination will not wane. We will continue to strive
to achieve a just peace. However, above all, I affirm that
our people will not relinquish their inalienable national
rights, as defined by United Nations resolutions. Our
people cling to the right to defend themselves against
aggression and occupation. They will continue their
popular and peaceful resistance and their historic
resolve and will to build their land. They will end the
hateful division and strengthen their national unity.
We will accept no less than the independence of the
State of Palestine, with East Jerusalem as its capital,
on all the Palestinian territory occupied in 1967, living
in peace and security alongside the State of Israel, as
well as a solution to the refugee issue on the basis of
resolution 194 (III), in line with the operative part of
the Arab Peace Initiative.

4

I do not believe that this is some kind of terrorism
that we pursue in the United Nations. Nevertheless, in
that connection, we once again reiterate the warning that
the window of opportunity is narrowing and that time
will soon run out. Patience is wearing thin and hope is
withering. The innocent lives that have been taken by
Israeli bombs — amounting to more than 168 martyrs,
mostly children and women, including 12 members of
the Dalou family in Gaza — are a painful reminder
to the world that the racist and colonial occupation is
making the two-State solution, and the prospect for
realizing peace, a very difficult, if not an impossible,
choice. It is time for action and the moment to move
forward. That is why we are here today.
The world is being asked today to answer a
specific question that we have often repeated: is there
a surplus of people in our region? Tell us. The world
must say whether we are a surplus people or whether
there is a State missing, which must be established on
its land, that is, in Palestine. The world is being asked
to take a significant step in the process of rectifying
the unprecedented historical injustice inflicted on the
Palestinian people since Al-Nakba of 1948.
Every vote in the Assembly supporting our
endeavour today is a most valuable voice of courage,
and every State that grants support today to Palestine’s
request for non-member observer State status is
affirming its principled and moral support for freedom,
the rights of peoples, international law and peace. The
Assembly’s support for our endeavour today will send
a promising message to millions of Palestinians in
the land of Palestine and in the refugee camps both in
the homeland and throughout the diaspora and to the
prisoners struggling for freedom in Israel’s prisons
that justice is possible and that there is a reason to be
hopeful, and that the peoples of the world do not accept
the continuation of the occupation. That is why we are
here today.
The support of the Assembly for our endeavour
today will give a reason for hope to a people besieged
by a racist, colonial occupation. Unfortunately, failure
in this endeavour would almost amount to complicity in
Israel’s aggression and in a state of paralysis that some
are striving to impose on the will of the international
community. The Assembly’s support will confirm to
our people that they are not alone and that their wager
on international law will never be a losing proposition.
In our endeavour today to acquire non-member
observer status for Palestine in the United Nations,
12-61635

A/67/PV.44

we reaffirm that Palestine will always adhere to and
respect the Charter and resolutions of the United
Nations and international humanitarian law, uphold
equality, guarantee civil liberties, uphold the rule of
law, promote democracy and pluralism, and uphold
and protect the rights of women. That is what we are
pledging today. As we promised our friends and our
brothers and sisters, we will continue to consult with
them upon the approval of our request to upgrade
Palestine’s status by this body. We will act responsibly
and positively in our next steps, and we will work to
strengthen cooperation with the countries and peoples
of the world for the sake of a just peace.
Sixty-five years ago on this day, the General
Assembly adopted resolution 181 (II), which partitioned
the land of historic Palestine into two States and became
the birth certificate for Israel. Sixty-five years later and
on the same day, which this body has designated the
International Day of Solidarity with the Palestinian
People, the General Assembly stands before a moral
duty, which it must not hesitate to undertake; before an
historic duty, which cannot endure further delay; and
before a practical duty to salvage the chances for peace,
which is urgent and cannot be postponed.
The General Assembly is called upon today to issue
a birth certificate to the reality of the State of Palestine.
That is specifically why we are here today. Our hope
is in God and in the General Assembly. May peace be
upon the Assembly.
Mr. Prosor (Israel): Today I stand before the
Assembly, tall and proud, because I represent the
world’s one and only Jewish State, a State built in the
Jewish people’s ancient homeland, with its eternal
capital, Jerusalem, as its beating heart. We are a nation
with deep roots in the past and bright hopes for the
future. We are a nation that values idealism but acts
with pragmatism. Israel is a nation that never hesitates
to defend itself, but will always, always extend its hand
for peace.
Peace is a central value of Israeli society. The Bible
calls on us and says “Seek peace and pursue it”. Peace
fills our art and poetry. It is taught in our schools. It
has been the goal of the Israeli people and every Israeli
leader since Israel was re-established 64 years ago.
Israel’s declaration of independence states:
“We extend our hand to all neighbouring States
and their peoples in an offer of peace and good

12-61635

neighbourliness, and appeal to them to establish
bonds of cooperation and mutual help”.
This week was the thirty-fifth anniversary of
President Anwar Sadat’s historic visit to Jerusalem. In
a speech just before the visit, President Sadat famously
stood in the Egyptian Parliament in Cairo and stated
that he would go “to the ends of the Earth” to make
peace with Israel. Israel’s Prime Minister at the time,
Menachem Begin, welcomed President Sadat to Israel
and paved the way for peace. This morning, Prime
Minister Netanyahu stood at the Menachem Begin
Center and said this about the draft resolution on which
the General Assembly is about to vote:
“Israel is prepared to live in peace with a
Palestinian State, but for peace to endure, Israel’s
security must be protected. The Palestinians
must recognize the Jewish State and they must be
prepared to end the conflict with Israel once and
for all. None of these vital interests, these vital
interests of peace, none of them appear in the
draft resolution that will be put forward before the
General Assembly today, and that is why Israel
cannot accept it. The only way to achieve peace
is through agreements that are reached by the
parties and not through United Nations resolutions
that completely ignore Israel’s vital security and
national interests. And because this resolution is
so one-sided, it doesn’t advance peace; it pushes it
backwards.
“As for the rights of Jewish people in this land,
I have a simple message for those people gathered
in the General Assembly today: no decision by the
United Nations can break the 4,000 year-old bond
between the people of Israel and the land of Israel.”
The people of Israel wait for a Palestinian leader
who is willing to follow in the footsteps of President
Sadat. The world waits for President Abbas to speak
the truth that peace can be achieved only through
negotiations by recognizing Israel as a Jewish State. It
waits for him to tell them that peace must also address
Israel’s security needs and end the conflict once and for
all. For as long as President Abbas prefers symbolism
over reality, as long as he prefers to travel to New York
for United Nations resolutions, rather than to Jerusalem
for genuine dialogue, any hope of peace will be out of
reach.
Israel has always extended its hand in peace and
will always extend its hand for peace. When we faced

5

A/67/PV.44

an Arab leader who wanted peace, we made peace.
That was the case with Egypt, and that was the case
with Jordan. Time and again, we have sought peace
with the Palestinians. Time and again, we have been
met by rejection of our offers, denial of our rights and
terrorism targeting our citizens.
President Abbas described today’s proceedings as
historic, but the only historic thing about his speech
was how much it ignored history.
The truth is that 65 years ago today, the United
Nations voted to partition the British Mandate into two
States: a Jewish State and an Arab State. Two States for
two peoples. Israel accepted that plan. The Palestinians
and Arab nations around us rejected it and launched a
war of annihilation to throw the Jews into the sea.
The truth is that from 1948 until 1967 the West Bank
was ruled by Jordan and Gaza was ruled by Egypt. The
Arab States did not lift a finger to create a Palestinian
State. Instead, they sought Israel’s destruction and
were joined by newly formed Palestinian terrorist
organizations.
The truth is that at Camp David in 2000, and again
at Annapolis in 2008, Israeli leaders made far-reaching
offers for peace. Those offers were met by rejection,
evasion and even terrorism. The truth is that to advance
peace, in 2005 Israel dismantled entire communities
and uprooted thousands of people from their homes in
the Gaza Strip. And rather than use that opportunity to
build a peaceful future, the Palestinians turned Gaza
into an Iranian terror base, from which thousands
of rockets were fired into Israeli cities. As we were
reminded just last week, the area has been turned into a
launching pad for rockets into Israeli cities, a haven for
global terrorists and an ammunition dump for Iranian
weapons.
Time after time, the Palestinian leadership has
refused to accept responsibility. They have refused to
make the tough decisions for peace.
Israel remains committed to peace, but we will not
establish another Iranian terror base in the heart of our
country. We need a peace that will endure, a peace that
will secure the future of Israel.
Three months ago, Israel’s Prime Minister stood in
this very Hall, at this very rostrum (see A/67/PV.12),
and extended his hand in peace to President Abbas.
He reiterated that his goal was to create a solution
of two States for two peoples, where a demilitarized

6

Palestinian State would recognize Israel as a Jewish
State. That is right — two States for two peoples.
In fact, I did not hear President Abbas use the
phrase “two States for two peoples” this afternoon. In
fact, I have never heard him say the phrase “two States
for two peoples”, because the Palestinian leadership has
never recognized that Israel is the nation State of the
Jewish people. They have never been willing to accept
what this very body recognized 65 years ago — Israel
is the Jewish State. In fact, today he asked the world
to recognize a Palestinian State, but he still refused
to recognize the Jewish State. Not only does he not
recognize the Jewish State, he is also trying to erase
Jewish history. This year, he even tried to erase the
connection between the Jewish people and Jerusalem.
He said that Jews were trying to alter the historical
character of Jerusalem. He said that we are trying to
“Judaize Jerusalem”.
I would like to say to President Abbas that the
truth is that Jerusalem had a Jewish character long
before most cities in the world had any character. Three
thousand years ago, King David ruled from Jerusalem,
and Jews have lived in Jerusalem ever since.
It is time that President Abbas, instead of revising
history, started making history by making peace with
Israel.
This draft resolution (A/67/L.28) will not advance
peace. This draft resolution will not change the
situation on the ground. It will not change the fact
that the Palestinian Authority has no control over
Gaza — and that is 40 per cent of the territory they
claim to represent. President Abbas cannot even visit
nearly half the territory of the State he claims to
represent. That territory is controlled by Hamas, an
internationally recognized terrorist organization that
rains missiles on Israeli civilians. That is the same
Hamas that fired more than 1,300 rockets into the heart
of Israel’s major cities this month.
This draft resolution will not confer statehood on
the Palestinian Authority, which clearly fails to meet
the criteria for statehood. This draft resolution will not
enable the Palestinian Authority to join international
treaties, organizations or conferences as a State. This
draft resolution cannot serve as acceptable terms of
reference for peace negotiations with Israel because it
says nothing about Israel’s security needs. It does not
call on the Palestinians to recognize Israel as the Jewish

12-61635

A/67/PV.44

State, and it does not demand an end to the conflict and
a termination of all claims.
Let me tell the Assembly what this draft resolution
does do. This draft resolution violates fundamental
binding commitments, including a commitment that
many of the States represented here today in this Hall
were themselves witness to — a commitment that
all outstanding issues in the peace process would be
resolved only in direct negotiations. The draft resolution
sends a message that the international community is
willing to turn a blind eye to peace agreements.
For the people of Israel, it raises a simple question:
Why continue to make painful sacrifices for peace in
exchange for pieces of paper that the other side will
not honour? It will make a negotiated peace settlement
less likely, as Palestinians continue to harden their
positions and place further obstacles and preconditions
to negotiations and peace. And, unfortunately, it will
raise expectations that cannot be met, which has always
proven to be a recipe for conflict and instability.
There is only one route to Palestinian statehood, and
that route does not run through this Hall in New York.
That route runs through direct negotiations between
Jerusalem and Ramallah that will lead to a secure and
lasting peace between Israelis and Palestinians. There
are no shortcuts, no quick fixes and no instant solutions.
As President Obama said in 2010, “Peace cannot be
imposed from the outside”.
The real message of this draft resolution for the
people of Israel is that the international community will
turn a blind eye to violations of these agreements by the
Palestinians.
In submitting this draft resolution, the Palestinian
leadership is once again making the wrong choice.
Sixty-five years ago, Palestinians could have chosen to
live side by side with the Jewish State of Israel. Sixtyfive years ago, they could have chosen to accept the
solution of two States for two peoples. They rejected it
then, and they are rejecting it again today.
The international community should not encourage
that rejection. It should not encourage the Palestinian
leadership to drive forward recklessly with both feet
pressing down on the gas, no hands on the wheel and
no eyes on the road. Instead, it should encourage the
Palestinians to enter into direct negotiations without
preconditions in order to achieve an historic peace in
which a demilitarized Palestinian State recognizes the
Jewish State.
12-61635

Winston Churchill said, “The truth is incontrovertible.
Panic may resent it, ignorance may deride it, malice may
distort it, but there it is”. The truth is that Israel wants
peace, and the Palestinians are avoiding peace.
Those who are supporting the draft resolution today
are not advancing peace; they are undermining peace.
The United Nations was founded to advance the cause
of peace. Today the Palestinians are turning their back
on peace. Let not history record that today the United
Nations helped them along on their march of folly.
Mr. Natalegawa (Indonesia): The time has come.
The time has come for the international community to
set things right. No longer can the world turn a blind
eye to the long sufferings of the Palestinian people,
the denial of their basic human rights and fundamental
freedoms and the obstruction of their rights to selfdetermination and to independence. No longer can the
world deny the fact that despite the enormous barriers
erected by the occupying Power, Palestinians have
diligently and with great resolve built the capacity to
function as a State ready to stand equal to any other
State in this Assembly and ready to unleash its full
potential as a positive force for progress.
There can be no reason, therefore, why the
international community cannot endorse the request to
accord non-member observer State status to Palestine,
an entity that some 24 years ago the Assembly, through
its resolution 43/177, acknowledged as a State. Indonesia
is therefore a sponsor of the draft resolution before
the Assembly (A/67/L.28), and we reiterate the hope
that Palestine’s application for full membership in the
United Nations will be favourably considered. We hold
that Palestine’s full membership is consistent with the
shared vision of a two-State solution. We believe that an
independent State of Palestine, with equal rights and,
indeed, responsibilities equal to those of other States,
will contribute to the attainment of a just, lasting and
comprehensive peace in the Middle East.
The recent cycle of indiscriminate violence and
disproportionate use of force in Gaza, Palestine,
serves as a serious reminder of the need for an earnest
resumption and acceleration of the peace process and
thus of the need to create conditions conducive to that
process. That means ending illegal settlement activities
and lifting the blockade of Gaza, thereby putting to an
end the inhumane policy of collective punishment. There
is a need, too, for Palestine to enhance intra-Palestinian
dialogue at this very historic moment.

7

A/67/PV.44

By according non-member observer State status to
the State of Palestine, we are signaling the primacy of
diplomacy and the rejection of violence. We are making
a strong statement on the need for mutual respect
among nations. We are placing faith in the principle of
universality of membership of the United Nations. We
are beginning to redress a festering historic injustice,
and we are affirm that all of humankind, including
the long-suffering people of Palestine, are entitled to
human rights and fundamental freedoms.
Mr. Baird (Canada): Canada opposes draft
resolution A/67/L.28 in the strongest of terms because
it undermines the core foundations of a decades-long
commitment on the part of the international community
and the parties themselves to a two-State solution,
arrived at through direct negotiations.
While we understand that a fi nal resolution remains
elusive, Canada has long opposed unilateral actions
by either side, as they are unhelpful. The outstanding
issues are too intricate and too complex to be resolved
by simplistic unilateral measures. We do not believe that
unilateral measures taken by one side can be justified
by accusations of unilateralism directed at the other.
That approach can only result in the steady erosion and
collapse of the very foundations of a process that, while
incomplete, holds the only realistic chance of bringing
about two peaceful, prosperous States living side by
side as neighbours.
Canada’s support for a negotiated settlement, like
our opposition to the initiative before us today, is rooted
in the very history of this venerable Organization and in
the sustained international effort to resolve this matter.
Canada was proud to be one of the countries preparing
the blueprint for peace as part of the 1947 United Nations
Special Committee on Palestine. That Committee came
up with the proposal for a two-State solution — one
predominantly Jewish and the other predominantly
Arab, living side by side — that ultimately resulted,
in November 1947, in the passage of resolution 181 (II)
setting out the Partition Plan. However, not all of those
who should have supported that vision were prepared
to do so, and the people of the region have suffered for
seven decades as a result.
Even in those early, difficult days, however, the
principle of collaboration between the two parties
was seen as an inherent necessity, as reflected in the
elaboration of a plan for economic union between the
two sides. While resolution 181 (II) has never been
fully implemented, the principle — the idea that the two
8

parties need to work together to achieve their mutual
and intertwined destinies and potential — has survived
as an essential ingredient in successive efforts to find
an elusive peace.
In 1948, resolution 194 (III) set up a Conciliation
Commission aimed at finding solutions to the full
range of problems facing the two sides. It established an
important principle in calling for the parties involved to
seek agreement through negotiations, with a view to the
final settlement of all questions outstanding between
them.
In 1967, the Security Council adopted resolution 242
(1967). The Council requested the dispatch of a special
representative of the Secretary-General to the region
to promote agreement and assist efforts to achieve a
peaceful and accepted settlement, entrenching further
the principle that solutions required the acceptance and
collective action of both sides. That idea was reaffirmed
in 1973 in Council resolution 338 (1973), which decided
that immediately and concurrently with the ceasefire,
negotiations should start between the parties concerned
under appropriate auspices aimed at establishing a just
and durable peace.
Those two Security Council resolutions, 242
(1967) and 338 (1973), form the explicitly recognized
cornerstone of all subsequent peace commitments,
accords and understandings between the two parties,
enshrining the need for negotiations as a core principle.
Both the Israelis and the Palestinians reaffirmed
their acceptance of the principles and obligations laid
out in both resolutions in 1993, with the historic signing
of the Oslo Accords. Article I made the point explicitly
in highlighting that the interim arrangements are an
integral part of the whole peace process and that the
negotiations on the permanent status will lead to the
implementation of Security Council resolutions 242
(1967) and 338 (1993).
In 1995, the Oslo II agreement built on those
important foundations. In the preamble, both sides
reaffirmed their desire to achieve a just, lasting
and comprehensive peace settlement and historic
reconciliation through the agreed political process.
Final clause 7, under article XXXI, stipulated that
neither side shall initiate or take any step that will
change the status of the West Bank and Gaza pending
the outcome of the permanent status negotiations.
Those principles were again reaffirmed in 2002.
Security Council resolution 1397 (2002) called on
12-61635

A/67/PV.44

the Israeli and Palestinian sides and their leaders to
cooperate in the implementation of the Tenet work plan
and Mitchell Report recommendations with the aim of
resuming negotiations on a political settlement. It also
offered support to the Secretary-General and others in
their efforts to resume the peace process.
The following year, 2003, the Middle East Quartet
was established. It developed the road map, which
was a performance-based, goal-driven plan covering
peace, security and humanitarian areas. Its approach
and directions were based explicitly on the principles
contained in Security Council resolutions 242 (1967),
338 (1973) and 1397 (2002). A key element of the
Quartet principles contained in the road map was
that a clear, unambiguous acceptance by both parties
of the goal of a negotiated settlement was needed to
reach the destination. It goes on to underscore that a
settlement negotiated between the parties will result
in the emergence of an independent, democratic, and
viable Palestinian State living side by side in peace
and security with Israel and its other neighbours.
The Quartet road map requires, by its very nature, a
collaborative effort explicitly requiring reciprocal steps
by the two sides.
Later that year, Security Council resolution 1515
(2003) formally endorsed the Quartet road map, while
calling on the parties to fulfil their obligations under
the road map in cooperation with the Quartet and to
achieve the vision of two States living side by side in
peace and security.
Resolution 1850 (2008) underscored the Council’s
explicit support for the negotiations undertaken
in Annapolis in 2007 and its commitment to the
irreversibility of the bilateral negotiations. That
resolution reaffirmed international support for the
Quartet principles and supported the determination
of both parties to reach their goal of concluding a
peace treaty resolving all outstanding issues, without
exception. It also called on both sides to refrain from
any steps that could undermine confidence or prejudice
the outcome of negotiations.
Successive Security Council resolutions and
various international commitments and understandings
over nearly seven decades have formed the building
blocks of a collaborative peace process that remains
unfinished. The path to peace has historically rested in
direct negotiations between the two parties to resolve
the outstanding issues, and it remains the same today.

12-61635

Solutions can come only through the two sides working
together.
The draft resolution before us will not advance the
cause of peace or spur a return to negotiations. Will
the Palestinian people be better off as a result? No. On
the contrary, this unilateral step will harden positions
and raise unrealistic expectations while doing nothing
to improve the lives of the Palestinian people.
Canada is committed to a comprehensive, just and
lasting peace in the Middle East, whereby two States
live side by side in peace, security and prosperity. Any
two-State solution must be negotiated between and
mutually agreed upon by both sides. Any unilateral
action, by either side, outside of the bilateral framework
outlined above is ultimately unhelpful.
Canada has long supported efforts to bring the two
sides to the bargaining table to resolve all outstanding
issues, and we remain committed to that objective
today. But we cannot support an initiative that we
are firmly convinced will undermine the objective of
reaching a comprehensive, lasting and just settlement
for both sides. It is for those reasons that Canada is
voting against the draft resolution. As a result of this
body’s utterly regrettable decision to abandon policy
and principle, we will be considering all available next
steps.
We call on both sides to return to the negotiating
table without preconditions. Canada will be there to
offer its good offices and full support.
Mr. Davutoğlu (Turkey): In Turkish we have a
saying: “One who closes his eyes only makes himself a
night”. For 65 years, the whole world has shut its eyes to
the plight of the Palestinian people. For many decades,
we closed our eyes to the right of Palestinian people
to their State. And for 65 years, no resolution adopted
by this body supporting a Palestinian State has been
honoured.
However, no one can wash away the sorrow of the
Palestinian people by just closing his eyes. The reality
of Palestine is simple, yet harsh. It is on the streets of
Gaza, where thousands of people suffer an inhumane
blockade in an open prison. It is on the streets of the West
Bank, where people have to go through checkpoints on
nearly every corner. It is in the heart of the Palestinian
people, who have been subjected to exiles, massacres,
wars, collective punishment and blockades for many
decades. The reality of Palestine is a bleeding wound in
the conscience of all humanity — of all of us.
9

A/67/PV.44

I personally witnessed that reality when I recently
visited Gaza with a group of Arab ministers at the
height of the recent crisis. In Shifa hospital, in Gaza,
I came across a father — Basil Asheva — who had
lost his daughter Yusha a moment earlier, during the
bombardment that also left his wife severely wounded.
Leaning his head on my chest to seek some relief, he
had no words, only tears, to tell of his family’s tragedy.
His tears reflected not only his personal sorrow, but also
the tragedy of the whole Palestinian nation, desperately
seeking relief.

beside this building. That flag will not only represent
an independent Member State among our family of
nations. It will represent the fact that we have finally
stood together to correct a decades-long injustice to
the Palestinian people and the State of Palestine. That
is our responsibility to the Palestinian people. Let me
be clear. Our vision of justice, international order and
human rights will not be achieved until the moment
that we actually see the flag of the State of Palestine
standing side by side with ours, as a full Member of the
United Nations. And that day will come soon.

Today is a milestone. Finally, today we have a
chance to open our eyes to reality. Today we have an
opportunity to give comfort to the Palestinian people
who aspire to have a chance to uphold their dignity,
after years of humiliation. I am pleased and honoured,
therefore, to participate in this historic meeting of the
General Assembly. We have gathered here to correct a
historical injustice against the Palestinian people.

We have three main reasons to do so. First and
foremost, it is a humanitarian and moral obligation
on our part. No one can deny the suffering of the
Palestinians since the First World War until today.
There has always been an excuse for the inhumane
treatment of the Palestinian people.

We all believe in and cherish the vision of a just,
peaceful and harmonious future. For that future, we
should all stand together behind the Palestinian bid to
become a non-member observer State. It is a moment of
truth for all of us. We are all aware that the right of the
Palestinians to a State has, unfortunately, been denied
for decades. The denial of that right of the Palestinians
has no justification on any ground, whether moral,
political or legal.
Last year, the President of the Palestinian Authority,
Mahmoud Abbas, submitted an application for United
Nations membership for Palestine (see A/66/PV.19).
Unfortunately, the application has been left unanswered
by the Security Council. Here comes another chance
for us. We call on the international community, the
members of this body, to honour their already belated
obligation to the Palestinians and to grant them the
status of a non-member State. It is high time for all of
us to uphold the universal values of justice and dignity.
If there is one term that characterizes humankind, it
is dignity. One can do without bread, but not without
dignity. The struggle of the Palestinian people over
the past 65 years has also been about protecting their
dignity. They want respect and recognition of their
right to determine their fate and future.
We cannot shy away from supporting a fully
legitimate demand by the Palestinian people to
have a State of their own. If we are to talk about an
international order and place our trust in the United
Nations system, then the Palestinian flag should fly
10

Secondly, it is about the political and historical
context. Unfortunately, the negotiation process towards
a comprehensive peace on the basis of two States, living
side by side in peace, has been put on ice. Instead, we
see a deviation, day by day, from the internationally
accepted solution that calls for an independent Palestine
established with East Jerusalem as its capital inside
its 1967 borders. The current status quo is neither
sustainable nor acceptable. The recent Israeli attack
on Gaza, which resulted in the loss of many innocent
civilian lives, was a testimony to that fact. Meanwhile,
the continued expansion of the illegal settlements
undermines the vision of a two-State solution.
The third aspect concerns our strategic vision
for Palestine and for our region. Peace in the Middle
East and beyond cannot be achieved without a just and
comprehensive resolution to the Palestinian issue. The
deadlock in the negotiations and the current stalemate
in the region serve the interest of no one. Supporting the
Palestinian bid is about whether we want a lasting peace
in the Middle East and beyond. Granting Palestine the
status of a non-member observer State at the United
Nations will serve as a booster. It will create the longneeded momentum for a negotiated, comprehensive
solution, rather than serve as a substitute for it. Our call
is for peace, no more and no less.
We need to address the issue in a constructive
and unbiased manner. It requires wisdom, prudence
and vision to no longer deny the prospect of peace and
stability in the region. It obliges us to listen to the call
for relief and justice for the Palestinian people, to which
we have turned a deaf ear so far.
12-61635

A/67/PV.44

I would also like to address certain misguided
efforts aimed at stopping the Palestinians from winning
statehood at the United Nations. The argument that the
Palestinians must resume negotiations before getting
statehood is superficial. We regret to see that there have
also been efforts to deter the Palestinians in their bid at
the United Nations, as well as efforts to dissuade United
Nations Members from supporting that bid. We have
often heard, “Now is not the right time”, as was the case
when President Abbas submitted the Palestinian bid for
membership to the Secretary-General.
For some, the timing was also not right when the late
President Arafat read out the Palestinian declaration of
independence on 15 November 1988. One can trace the
argument back to when the General Assembly adopted
resolution 181 (II), on the partition, on this very date
in 1947. So let me ask bluntly: If not now, when? When
will it be the right time for the Palestinians to achieve
their right to statehood, if not today?
The current stalemate in the peace process can no
longer be used as a pretext to undermine the Palestinian
bid for becoming an internationally recognized State.
The recognition of Palestinian statehood is not an option
but a moral, political, strategic and legal obligation for
the international community. And I want to address and
salute all Palestinians from Al-Khalil to Bethlehem,
from Jenin to Ariha, from Ramallah to Khan Yunis,
from Jerusalem — Al Quds Al-Sharif — to Gaza.
Turkey will stand by the Palestinians forever. They
are not alone, and we will not abandon them. We will stand
by them until there is a free and independent Palestine,
with Al-Quds Al-Sharif as its capital, now and forever.
I call on all United Nations Members to fulfil their long
overdue responsibility towards the Palestinians. I call
on them to fulfil a long overdue promise, made with the
General Assembly resolution 181 (II) of 1947.
Draft resolution A/67/L.28, on which members will
be voting shortly, will be only an initial step in the right
direction to bring some relief to the entire Palestinian
nation. Now is the moment of truth. It is time to defend
the basic right of the Palestinians to statehood. The flag
of Palestine should rise in this Assembly next to ours.
The State of Palestine must be moved from the shade
and given its rightful place in the sun forever.
The President: Before proceeding to consider draft
resolution A/67/L.28, entitled “Status of Palestine in
the United Nations”, allow me to make a few remarks in

12-61635

my capacity as the President of the General Assembly
at its sixty-seventh session.
During the course of this meeting, we have had the
distinct privilege of hearing from the representatives
of two great nations, President Mahmoud Abbas of
Palestine and Ambassador Ron Prosor of the State of
Israel. They are each children of Abraham — one a
descendant of Ishmael, the other of Isaac. Both come
from a land that has been almost continuously tormented
by conflict over many centuries, with countless victims
on all sides. The strife has not abated during the 67 years
of the Organization’s existence, despite the fact that it
came into being to save succeeding generations from
the scourge of war.
Notwithstanding the valiant efforts of some of
the greatest statesmen of the twentieth century, a
negotiated, comprehensive settlement enabling Israel
and Palestine to live side by side, in peace and security,
has yet to materialize. And so we continue to witness
enmity, estrangement and mistrust as parents continue
to bury their children.
In today’s globalized, interconnected world what
happens between the River Jordan and the shores of the
Mediterranean has become the key to the security and
well-being of all humankind.
I have no doubt that history will judge this day to
have been fraught with significance. But whether it will
come to be looked upon as a step in the right direction
on the road to peace will depend upon how we bear
ourselves in its wake. Let us therefore find the wisdom
to act in furtherance of the goal that we all share.
In coming to the end of my remarks, allow me to
extend an appeal from this rostrum to all memberes,
in particular to my dear friends from Palestine and
Israel, to work for peace, to negotiate in good faith
and, ultimately, to succeed in reaching the historical
settlement. That is our common and most solemn duty
to the entire world, but first and foremost to the proud
men and women who live in a land that is holy to so
many of us.
In the Zohar it is written that “God is peace, his
name is peace, and all is bound together in peace.” And
in the Holy Koran we read that “Allah invites [all] to the
abode of peace and guides whom he pleases onto the
right path” (The Holy Koran, X:25).
In a few moments, I will ask members to cast their
ballots as they see fit. I am sure that each member will

11

A/67/PV.44

do so with a veritable feeling in their hearts that their
choice is serving the cause of a righteous peace.
The Assembly will now take a decision on draft
resolution A/67/L.28, entitled “Status of Palestine in the
United Nations”. I give the floor to Under-SecretaryGeneral Graisse.
Mr. Graisse: (Department for General Assembly
and Conference Management): I should like to announce
that, since the submission of draft resolution A/67/L.28,
in addition to those delegations listed in the document,
the following countries have become sponsors:
Angola, Azerbaijan, Belarus, Belize, Grenada, Guinea,
Kyrgyzstan, the Niger, Sri Lanka, Suriname and Viet
Nam.
The President: A recorded vote has been requested.
A recorded vote was taken.
In favour:
Afghanistan, Algeria, Angola, Antigua and Barbuda,
Argentina, Armenia, Austria, Azerbaijan, Bahrain,
Bangladesh, Belarus, Belgium, Belize, Benin,
Bhutan, Bolivia (Plurinational State of), Botswana,
Brazil, Brunei Darussalam, Burkina Faso, Burundi,
Cambodia, Cape Verde, Central African Republic,
Chad, Chile, China, Comoros, Congo, Costa Rica,
Côte d’Ivoire, Cuba, Cyprus, Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea, Denmark, Djibouti, Dominica,
Dominican Republic, Ecuador, Egypt, El Salvador,
Eritrea, Ethiopia, Finland, France, Gabon, Gambia,
Georgia, Ghana, Greece, Grenada, Guinea,
Guinea-Bissau, Guyana, Honduras, Iceland, India,
Indonesia, Iran (Islamic Republic of), Iraq, Ireland,
Italy, Jamaica, Japan, Jordan, Kazakhstan, Kenya,
Kuwait, Kyrgyzstan, Lao People’s Democratic
Republic, Lebanon, Lesotho, Libya, Liechtenstein,
Luxembourg, Malaysia, Maldives, Mali, Malta,
Mauritania,
Mauritius,
Mexico,
Morocco,
Mozambique, Myanmar, Namibia, Nepal, New
Zealand, Nicaragua, Niger, Nigeria, Norway,
Oman, Pakistan, Peru, Philippines, Portugal,
Qatar, Russian Federation, Saint Kitts and Nevis,
Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines,
Sao Tome and Principe, Saudi Arabia, Senegal,
Serbia, Seychelles, Sierra Leone, Solomon
Islands, Somalia, South Africa, South Sudan,
Spain, Sri Lanka, Sudan, Suriname, Swaziland,
Sweden, Switzerland, Syrian Arab Republic,
Tajikistan, Thailand, Timor-Leste, Trinidad and
Tobago, Tunisia, Turkey, Turkmenistan, Tuvalu,

12

Uganda, United Arab Emirates, United Republic
of Tanzania, Uruguay, Uzbekistan, Venezuela
(Bolivarian Republic of), Viet Nam, Yemen,
Zambia, Zimbabwe
Against:
Canada, Czech Republic, Israel, Marshall Islands,
Micronesia (Federated States of), Nauru, Palau,
Panama, United States of America
Abstaining:
Albania, Andorra, Australia, Bahamas, Barbados,
Bosnia and Herzegovina, Bulgaria, Cameroon,
Colombia, Croatia, Democratic Republic of the
Congo, Estonia, Fiji, Germany, Guatemala, Haiti,
Hungary, Latvia, Lithuania, Malawi, Monaco,
Mongolia, Montenegro, Netherlands, Papua New
Guinea, Paraguay, Poland, Republic of Korea,
Republic of Moldova, Romania, Rwanda, Samoa,
San Marino, Singapore, Slovakia, Slovenia, the
former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Togo,
Tonga, United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland, Vanuatu
Draft resolution A/67/L.28 was adopted by 138
votes to 9, with 41 abstentions (resolution 67/19).
The President: I now give the floor to His
Excellency Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon.
The Secretary-General: An important vote
has taken place today in the General Assembly. The
decision by the General Assembly to accord Palestine
non-member State status in the United Nations was
a prerogative of the Member States. I stand ready to
fulfil my role and report to the Assembly as requested
in resolution 67/19.
My position has been consistent all along. I believe
that the Palestinians have a legitimate right to their own
independent State. I believe that Israel has the right to
live in peace and security with its neighbours. There is
no substitute for negotiations to that end.
Today’s vote underscores the urgency of a
resumption of meaningful negotiations. We must give
a new impetus to our collective efforts to ensure that
an independent, sovereign, democratic, contiguous
and viable State of Palestine lives side by side with
a secure State of Israel. I urge the parties to renew
their commitment to a negotiated peace. I count on all
concerned to act responsibly, preserve the achievements
in Palestinian State-building under the leadership
of President Abbas and Prime Minister Fayyad, and

12-61635

A/67/PV.44

intensify efforts towards reconciliation and the just and
lasting peace that remains our shared goal and priority.
The President: I thank the Secretary-General for
his statement.
We shall now proceed to explanations of vote. I
should like to remind delegations that explanations of
vote are limited to 10 minutes and should be made by
delegations from their seats.
Ms. Rice (United States of America): For
decades, the United States has worked to help achieve
a comprehensive end to the long and tragic ArabIsraeli conflict. We have always been clear that only
through direct negotiations between the parties can the
Palestinians and Israelis achieve the peace that both
deserve — two States for two peoples, with a sovereign,
viable and independent Palestine living side by side in
peace and security with a Jewish and democratic Israel.
That remains our goal, and we therefore measure
any proposed action against that clear yardstick.
Will it bring the parties closer to peace or push them
further apart? Will it help Israelis and Palestinians
return to negotiations or hinder their efforts to reach
a mutually acceptable agreement? Today’s unfortunate
and counterproductive resolution 67/19 places further
obstacles in the path to peace. That is why the United
States voted against it.
The backers of today’s resolution say they seek a
functioning, independent Palestinian State at peace
with Israel. So do we. But we have long been clear
that the only way to establish such a Palestinian State
and resolve all permanent status issues is through the
crucial, if painful work of direct negotiations between
the parties. That is not just a bedrock commitment
of the United States. Israel and the Palestinians have
repeatedly affirmed their own obligations under
existing agreements to resolve all issues through direct
negotiations, which have been endorsed frequently
by the international community. The United States
agrees — strongly.
Today’s grand pronouncements will soon fade,
and the Palestinian people will wake up tomorrow and
find that little about their lives has changed, save that
the prospects of a durable peace have only receded.
The United States therefore calls upon both parties to
resume direct talks without preconditions on all the
issues that divide them, and we pledge that the United
States will be there to support the parties vigorously
in such efforts. The United States will continue — in
12-61635

the region, in New York, and elsewhere — to urge all
parties to avoid any further provocative actions. We will
continue to firmly oppose any and all unilateral actions
in international bodies or treaties that circumvent or
prejudge the very outcomes that can only be negotiated,
including Palestinian statehood, and we will continue
to stand up to every effort that seeks to delegitimize
Israel or undermine its security.
Progress towards a just and lasting two-State
solution cannot be made by pressing a green voting
button here in this Hall, nor does adopting any resolution
create a State where none indeed exists or change the
reality on the ground. For that reason, today’s voting
should not be misconstrued by any as constituting
eligibility for United Nations membership. It does not.
The resolution does not establish that Palestine is a
State.
The United States believes that the current
resolution should not and cannot be read as establishing
terms of reference. In many respects, the resolution
prejudges the very issues it says are to be resolved
through negotiation, particularly with respect to
territory. At the same time, it virtually ignores other
core questions, such as security, that must be solved for
any viable agreement to be achieved. President Obama
has been clear in stating what the United States believes
is a realistic basis for successful negotiations, and we
will continue to base our efforts on that approach.
The recent conflict in Gaza is just the latest
reminder that the absence of peace risks the presence
of war. We urge those who share our hopes for peace
between a sovereign Palestine and a secure Israel to
join us in supporting negotiations and not to encourage
further distractions. There simply are no short cuts.
Long after the votes have been cast, long after the
speeches have been forgotten, it is the Palestinians and
the Israelis who must still talk to each other — and
listen to each other — and find a way to live side by
side in the land they share.
Mr. Araud (France) (spoke in French): In voting
today for the recognition of Palestine as a non-member
observer State of the Organization, France has voted
in favour of the two-State solution, of two States for
two peoples, Israel and Palestine, living side by side
in peace and security within secure and internationally
recognized borders; we have voted in favour of a solution
that we had advocated before the entire international
community rallied to it — in favour of a solution today

13

A/67/PV.44

threatened by the impasse in the peace process. It is a
clear-sighted and coherent choice.

France is ready to meet it as a friend of Israel and of
Palestine.

As early as 1982, before the Knesset in Jerusalem,
President Mitterrand called for the creation of a
Palestinian State. Since then, France has spared no
effort to promote that solution. Following in that
tradition, President François Hollande undertook
in 2012 to support international recognition of the
Palestinian State.

Mr. Chua (Singapore): My delegation supports the
right of the Palestinian people to a homeland. That is
why Singapore supported resolutions 66/17 and 66/18
of 30 November 2011. However, we abstained in the
voting on today’s resolution 67/19 because we believe
that only a negotiated settlement consistent with
Security Council resolution 242 (1967) can provide the
basis for a viable, long-term solution. Both sides have
legitimate rights and shared responsibilities, and must
be prepared to make compromises to achieve the larger
good of a lasting peace.

France could not miss that rendezvous, which is a
new phase in moving towards the two-State solution.
France could not fail to hear the appeal of President
Abbas for the resumption of a credible peace process;
just days after the new explosion of violence between
Israel and Gaza, we could not fail to lend our full
support to the peace partners as those espousing armed
struggle endeavoured to win the day.
The Palestinian move comes at a difficult moment,
and the repercussions could be serious. But France
calls on all the parties to understand and acknowledge
its major significance, and to respond by resuming
negotiations, not with reprisals that help no one but
extremists. France also calls on the international
community — Americans, Europeans and Arabs — to
mobilize in order to contribute to that end.
France also appeals to the Palestinians to build on
this political success in order to contribute to future
peace. That means, first, continuing to fight terrorism
and to do everything possible to end the all-too-frequent
attacks against Israel; to move forward, on the basis of
the Palestine Liberation Organization commitments,
towards inter-Palestinian reconciliation, without which
the two-State solution is a mere mirage; above all, to
return to the negotiating table immediately and without
preconditions; and, finally, to avoid launching a cycle
of sterile confrontations in international bodies. For the
hardest part is before us and them.
This vision of two States for two peoples must
become a reality. The international recognition that
the Assembly has today given the proposed Palestinian
State can become fact only through an agreement
based on negotiations between the two parties on all
final status issues, within the framework of a fair
and comprehensive peace settlement that responds
to Israel and Palestine’s legitimate aspirations. That
is a challenge not only for the two Governments and
peoples, but for the international community as well.

14

It is precisely because the rights and responsibilities
of both sides are inextricably intertwined that no
unilateral move can result in a just, peaceful and durable
outcome. Palestine’s attempt to upgrade its status in the
United Nations to that of a non-member observer State
should be viewed in the context of its efforts last year to
obtain full United Nations membership. Its aspirations
are not helped, because the facts on the ground will not
be changed.
Singapore hopes that Israel and Palestine will
resume negotiations. Singapore will continue to support
all international efforts to facilitate a negotiated solution
that will be in the long-term interests of Palestine, Israel
and the region as a whole.
Mr. Schaper (Netherlands), Vice-President, took
the Chair.
We join the international community in welcoming
the cessation of attacks on Gaza and southern Israel. We
deeply regret the loss of life and the damage caused on
both the Palestinian and Israeli sides. We hope that both
sides will uphold the latest ceasefire and immediately
address any humanitarian issues that have resulted
from the violence.
Sir Mark Lyall Grant (United Kingdom): The
United Kingdom is gravely concerned about the
dangerous impasse in the peace process over the
past two years. We believe that the window onto a
two-State solution is rapidly closing. Our central
objective is to achieve a return to credible negotiations
in order to secure a two-State solution. That is the
guiding principle that determined how we voted on
resolution 67/19 today.
In support of that objective, we sought a
commitment from the Palestinian leadership to return

12-61635

A/67/PV.44

immediately to negotiations, without preconditions.
That was the single most important factor shaping our
vote. We also sought an assurance from the Palestinians
that they would not pursue immediate action in United
Nations agencies and the International Criminal Court,
since that would make a swift return to negotiations
impossible. We are in no doubt that President Abbas
is a courageous man of peace, and we have engaged
intensively with the Palestinians ahead of today’s voting
to try to secure those assurances. But in their absence,
we were not able to vote in favour of the resolution, and
we therefore abstained.
Our priority now is to restart negotiations. We urge
all parties, including Israel, to avoid taking steps in
response to today’s events that could damage the peace
process. Palestine will be a non-member observer State
in the United Nations from this date onward, but that
does not change the situation on the ground. The only
way to give the Palestinian people the State that they
need and deserve, and to give the Israeli people the
security and peace they are entitled to, is through a
negotiated two-State solution. We look to the United
States, with the strong and active support of the United
Kingdom and the international community, to do all it
can in the coming weeks and months to take a decisive
lead in restarting negotiations, and we look to the
Israelis and Palestinians to be ready to enter into such
talks.
Mr. Wittig (Germany): Germany firmly believes in
two States, Israel and Palestine, for two peoples in the
Middle East. We share the goal of a Palestinian State.
Germany has worked towards that end for years, mainly
through its support for the State-building efforts of the
Palestinian Authority. Yet it must be clear to everybody
that a Palestinian State can be achieved only through
direct negotiations between Israelis and Palestinians.
We believe that there is reason to doubt whether the
step taken today is helpful to the peace process at this
point in time. We are concerned that it might lead to
further hardening of positions instead of improving the
chances of reaching a two-State solution through direct
negotiations.
It is our expectation that the Palestinian leadership
will not take unilateral steps on the basis of today’s
resolution 67/19 that could deepen the conflict and
move us further away from a peaceful settlement. We
call on both sides to engage in serious negotiations,
without conditions or further delay. Parties must refrain

12-61635

from any action that undermines the prospects of
negotiations and the objective of a two-State solution.
Germany explicitly welcomes the fact that the
resolution adopted today calls for a two-State solution,
and hence fully recognizes the right of Israel to exist
in peace. I repeat that Israel’s legitimate security
concerns must be addressed in a credible manner or the
peace process will remain stalled. Germany will do its
utmost to support all efforts aimed at paving the way
for a genuine negotiating process. That can be achieved
only with a demonstration of the necessary political
will on both sides and the active commitment of the
international community, including the Quartet and
regional actors.
Mr. Seger (Switzerland) (spoke in French):
Switzerland’s decision to vote in favour of resolution 67/19,
adopted today by the General Assembly, was motivated
by our desire to resolve the current stalemate in
Israeli-Palestinian negotiations and to relaunch the
peace process. We believe that Palestine’s elevation
to observer State status within the United Nations
will revive the concept of a two-State solution in the
context of the Israeli-Palestinian peace negotiations.
In that respect, we endorse the peace efforts of the
international community, calling for a solution with
two States, Israel and Palestine, living side by side in
peace and security.
The resolution recalls the importance of resolutions
adopted in the past, notably, resolution 181 (II) of
29 November 1947, concerning the creation of an
Arab State and a Jewish State, and resolution 43/177,
of 15 December 1988, which acknowledges the
proclamation of the State of Palestine by the Palestine
National Council on the Arab nature of one State and
the Jewish nature of the other. The resolution just
adopted refers to Jerusalem as the capital of the two
States. In the light of these formulations, among others,
we see the resolution as an appeal for the resumption
of direct negotiations and as the keystone supporting a
two-State solution, the prospects of which are fading.
The elevation of Palestine to the status of a United
Nations observer State endows Palestine not only with
rights but also with obligations, in particular that of
refraining from the threat or use of force as enshrined
in the Charter of the United Nations. It also opens the
door to several international conventions, particularly
those on the protection of human rights and the fight
against terrorism.

15

A/67/PV.44

This decision does not involve a bilateral
recognition of a Palestinian State, which will depend
on future peace negotiations.
Mr. Grauls (Belgium) (spoke in French): Belgium
fully associates itself with the statement to be made by
the observer of the European Union in this debate, and
wishes to make the following observations.
Today’s vote is a significant step towards the
creation of a State of Palestine, which we all look
forward to. But Belgium believes that true progress will
be made when the Palestinians will be able to benefit
on the ground from the existence of a future State that
has the necessary institutions, personnel and tools to
function properly. Belgium fully shares the goal of
resolution 67/19 just adopted — a two-State solution,
with Israel living side by side in peace and security with
a future State of Palestine that is democratic, viable and
sustainable. The two-State solution is in fact the only
possible solution to the Israeli-Palestinian conflict, and
every effort must be engaged to that end.
For Belgium, the resolution adopted today by the
General Assembly does not yet constitute a recognition
of a State in the full sense. The establishment of a
fully legal State must result from negotiations between
Israelis and Palestinians. In our view, there is no
alternative to negotiations, however difficult they
might be. Priority must therefore be given to a rapid
resumption of peace talks. In this context, both Israel
and the Palestinian Authority must abstain from any
unilateral act that could undermine the credibility of
the peace process.
With its European partners, Belgium calls on all
the parties and all the stakeholders involved to start
work immediately on resolving the conflict. We are
determined to cooperate actively with the United States
on an initiative that would establish parameters for the
negotiation process and offer enough guarantees and
incentives for both parties. The voting today was a
clear sign that the peace process must be accelerated. A
rapid and unconditional resumption of negotiations is
necessary. What must be done at all costs is to bring the
Israeli and Palestinian negotiators together at the table.
Mr. Tafrov (Bulgaria): Bulgaria subscribes to the
declaration on the Middle East peace process and the
statement to be made shortly on behalf of the European
Union. Allow me in my national capacity to present a
brief explanation of our vote.

16

My delegation abstained in the voting on
resolution 67/19 after careful analysis. We do not expect
the resolution to change the reality on the ground between
Israel and Palestine, or to speed up a negotiated twoState solution. Our understanding is that the adoption
of the resolution giving Palestine non-member observer
status in the United Nations should in no way prejudice
the process of direct negotiations. Therefore, we call
for their immediate resumption without preconditions.
These talks, based on the Quartet principles, existing
agreements and relevant Security Council and
General Assembly resolutions, continue to be the
only sustainable way to achieve the establishment of
a sovereign, democratic and viable Palestinian State,
living in peace and security alongside Israel.
Bulgaria consistently supports the legitimate
aspirations of the Palestinian people pertaining to their
right to self-determination. My country was among the
first to recognize the State of Palestine back in 1988.
Just as the Jewish people have a homeland in the State
of Israel, the Palestinian people have the right to an
independent State of Palestine.
On the bilateral level, Bulgaria has built and
continues to develop close and friendly relations with
both Palestine and Israel. Our main concern, however,
is the possible adverse impact of the resolution on
the prospect for an early resumption of negotiations.
In view of the critical situation in the region and the
international context in which the resolution was moved
forward, we have serious doubts as to whether it will
further advance the peace process.
We have continually stressed the fact that
unilateral actions by either side are counterproductive
and threaten the ultimate viability of the two-State
solution. Bulgaria calls on the parties to refrain from
any such actions, both bilaterally and in international
settings, that could be detrimental to the peace process.
We also appeal to them to work in good faith towards
a negotiated settlement and to abide by their publicly
undertaken commitments.
The critical situation in Gaza and southern Israel
makes the immediate renewal of the peace efforts
more pressing and urgent than ever. Bulgaria greatly
appreciates the diplomatic efforts made by Egypt, the
United States and the Secretary-General, which have
led to the current ceasefire and encouraged hopes for a
resumption of the peace process.

12-61635

A/67/PV.44

Mr. Starčević (Serbia): First of all, I want to
warmly congratulate Palestine on achieving the status
of non-member observer State in the United Nations.
This is an important step in the long — and I would
say far too long — journey towards the realization of
the legitimate aspirations of the Palestinian people to
statehood. For the 132 Members of the United Nations
that have so far recognized the State of Palestine, it is
a sign that their support for the Palestinian cause is
bringing results and strengthening the Palestinians’
right to their self-determination and an independent
State.
Like Yugoslavia before it, Serbia is among those
132 Member States. Our support for the Palestinian
struggle for self-determination and independence
has never wavered. It is based on our own sense of
justice and on the solid foundation of a number of
Security Council and General Assembly resolutions,
reaching all the way back to the beginnings of the
United Nations — all of them reaffirming the right of
Palestinians to an independent and sovereign State of
their own, based on the two-State solution.
Unlike Yugoslavia from 1967 to 1992, Serbia has
had diplomatic relations with Israel and maintains
good and friendly cooperation with that State. We
are therefore fully conscious of Israel’s legitimate
security concerns and have an interest in promoting
such a solution, which would bring about statehood for
Palestine and security and peace for both Israel and
Palestine. Neither a nation whose people was a victim of
the Holocaust nor a nation still in quest for its statehood
deserves to live in the same precarious state lasting for
more than 60 years. The people of both States are weary
of conflict; they should not be made to wait any longer
for it to end. We must never accept the cynical view that
the conflict can not be resolved and that the world must
simply live with it.
The Middle East peace process negotiations should
be urgently resumed and accelerated so that a peace
agreement based on the relevant Security Council
resolutions, the Madrid principles, the road map
and the Arab Peace Initiative can be reached. In the
meantime, let us hope and let us act in such a way that
the present ceasefire holds. The people of both States
have a vested interest in that, even if their hawks try to
create a different impression.
Ms. Flores (Honduras) (spoke in Spanish): As we
voted today in favour of resolution 67/19 on the status
of Palestine in the United Nations, the Government
12-61635

of Honduras could not help but recall the motives
that led our peoples to establish this extraordinary
Organization — to save succeeding generations from
the scourge of war and reaffirm our faith in fundamental
human rights, in the dignity and worth of the human
person, and in the equal rights of nations large and
small. The ultimate lodestar of the United Nations is
that, to achieve peace, we must practice tolerance and
live together as good neighbours.
Honduras firmly supports a solution between the
two States, Israel and Palestine. The Honduran people
deeply share the inalienable desire of the peoples of the
Middle East for peace. Our decision to vote in favour
of granting Palestine non-member observer status in
the United Nations was based on our fervent wish to
contribute to a just, comprehensive and lasting peace
that we believe should be based on the right to selfdetermination of both the Jewish and Palestinian
people, the need for mutual recognition between the
States of Israel and Palestine, the rights of Israel and
Palestine to their own territory and to live in peace
within stable and safe borders, and the need for a
comprehensive, directly negotiated solution to all the
remaining differences between both parties.
Honduras understands that today’s voting neither
attempts to make decisions nor claims that the
international community should multilaterally make
decisions that rightfully belong only to Israel and
Palestine. On the basis of our own national experience,
we know that peace cannot be imposed from outside, but
can arise only from the people themselves. Recognition
of Palestine and Israel by third parties cannot achieve
peace between those two nations. To achieve a twoState solution and to benefit both peoples, there must be
direct negotiations and understandings between them.
Still, our recognition of both States aims to send an
unambiguous signal of respect from Honduras to both
peoples, whom we would fervently like to see coexist
in peace. We know well that in the end what will seal a
definitive peace between those nations is their mutual
recognition of the right to self-determination and their
right to exist as States, rather than any resolution of the
international community.
In voting for the resolution, Honduras takes no
position on the territorial and border claims of the
parties, since we also know from the lessons of our own
experience that such matters should not be a matter
for political pronouncement by third parties. Such
intervention not only exceeds our authority as third

17

A/67/PV.44

parties and our legitimate interest, but makes it more
difficult to resolve disputes and hardens positions.
It is a very different matter when an impartial third
party — acting on their behalf within the framework
of good offices or through a process of mediation,
arbitration or judicial procedure — is charged by
the parties with finding a peaceful solution to their
differences.
The same applies to the separate but delicate issues
that remain open to negotiation or understanding. The
solution to those matters lies in direct negotiation
between the parties. It is therefore vital for Israel and
Palestine to return to the negotiating table and to focus
on finding formulas to address the concerns between
them, including security. The international community
should support those efforts and remain ready to
facilitate and support them in every constructive way
possible.
Today’s vote recognizing Palestine’s non-member
observer status in the United Nations should be
construed not as representing a victory for one side
or defeat for the other, but rather as the expression of
the ardent desire of the United Nations for concord and
progress to reign in the Middle East. Honduras calls
for moderation and for the rights and privileges that
Palestine was granted as a non-member observer State
in the United Nations to be used to open new avenues of
direct understanding and to draw closer to the ultimate
goal of the resolution, which is peaceful coexistence
and solidarity among peoples and nations.
Mr. Staur (Denmark): On this very day 65 years
ago in this Assembly (see A/PV.128), Denmark voted in
favour of the establishment of two States in the former
mandate of Palestine. Today, by voting in favour of
resolution 67/19, we reaffirmed our commitment to
a two-State solution, with the State of Israel and an
independent, democratic, contiguous and viable State of
Palestine living side by side in peace and security — a
commitment we share with the rest of the European
Union.
Denmark has consistently stood by Israel and
its inherent right to self-defence in accordance
with international law. We have also supported the
Palestinian right to statehood and the building of the
Palestinian Authority. That achievement deserves our
full acknowledgment, and we will continue to building
the institutions of a sovereign State of Palestine. In
that regard, Denmark calls on all Palestinians to
support President Abbas in his efforts to promote
18

inter-Palestinian reconciliation as an important element
for the unity of a future Palestinian State.
While we welcome last week’s ceasefire agreement,
the sudden escalation of confl ict in Gaza highlighted the
urgent need to move forward a comprehensive solution
to the conflict. We strongly appeal to both sides to
build on today’s decision and to resume direct, bilateral
negotiations immediately and without conditions on all
final status issues, respecting previous agreements and
understandings. Only a political solution to the conflict
can bring about lasting security. At the same time, we
also appeal to the parties to refrain from taking any
steps that could negatively affect the situation and
efforts towards a negotiated solution. The time to heed
the call made in resolution 181 (II), adopted 65 years
ago, for creating two States, is long overdue.
The resolution adopted, henceforth according
Palestine the status of a non-member observer State
in the General Assembly, is a natural continuation
of our firm support for a two-State solution and for
Palestinian State-building. Our vote, however, does
not imply formal bilateral recognition of a sovereign
Palestinian State. That is a separate question that we will
continue to consider within a framework established by
international law.
Mr. Ragaglini (Italy): In accordance with the
long-standing position of the European Union, Italy
is strongly committed to a comprehensive negotiated
peace between Israelis and Palestinians, as being in the
fundamental interests of the European Union as well
as of the parties in the region. Our strong support for
Palestinian State-building efforts and our excellent
bilateral relations with both parties are grounded in
the firm conviction that a comprehensive peace must
and can be achieved on the basis of a two-State solution
with the State of Israel and a sovereign, democratic,
contiguous and viable State of Palestine, both living
within agreed borders and enjoying peace and security.
Italy stands by its conviction that such an agreement
can be reached only through bilateral negotiations,
and strongly supports the European Union’s call on all
parties to pursue actions conducive to an environment
with the confidence necessary to ensure meaningful
negotiations, and to refrain from actions that undermine
the credibility of the process.
Italy decided to vote in favour of resolution 67/19.
We took that decision in the light of the information
we received from President Abbas on the constructive
approach he intends to take after this vote. I refer in
12-61635

A/67/PV.44

particular to his readiness to resume direct negotiations
without preconditions and to refrain from seeking
membership in other specialized agencies in the current
circumstances, or pursuing the possibility of the
jurisdiction of the International Criminal Court. With
regard to the latter, Italy would not accept instrumental
actions intended to question Israel’s inalienable right to
defend itself or to have recourse to measures necessary
to protect the lives of its citizens. We also wish to
underline our firm conviction that the new status
of the Palestinian Authority should not, under any
circumstances, be applied retroactively. Italy stresses
that today’s vote in no way prejudges its commitment
to a comprehensive negotiated peace settlement, which
remains the only possible path to Palestinian Statehood
and full United Nations membership.
I would like to conclude by restating Italy’s
unwavering support for a negotiated two-State solution,
based on the relevant Security Council resolutions,
the Madrid principles, the road map, the agreements
previously reached by the parties and the Arab Peace
Initiative.
Mr. Mitsialis (Greece): Greece’s vote in favour of
resolution 67/19, on upgrading Palestine’s status to that
of a non-member observer State, was guided by our
long-standing position of principle that the resolution of
the Middle East question should be based on two States,
an independent and viable Palestinian State coexisting
in peace and security with the State of Israel. It is our
firm belief that that is the only solution assuring the
long-term interests of the two peoples, as well as peace
and stability in the region, and it is therefore the duty of
the international community to safeguard it.
Paragraph 5 of the resolution contains an important
provision. Greece believes that the inalienable and
non-negotiable right of the Palestinian people to
statehood can be fulfilled through a results-oriented
peace process and direct negotiations between the two
parties on all final status issues. A comprehensive
settlement, by definition, includes the safeguarding of
the inherent right of the State of Israel to peace and
security. By voting in favour of this resolution, Greece
believes that it contributes towards a resumption of
the peace process without preconditions, and to the
promotion of a two-State solution. In that regard, we
urge the Palestinian side to refrain from unilateral
steps, and the Israeli side to refrain from actions on
the ground that could jeopardize the viability of such
a solution.

12-61635

Mr. Körösi (Hungary): Hungary abstained in
the voting on resolution 67/19 based on the following
considerations.
Hungary’s position on the Middle East peace
process, the status of Palestine and the decision made
today are based on the fundamental interest of Hungary
and the European Union in peace and stability in the
region. When we evaluate any initiatives, including
today’s resolution, we pay attention to all the important
factors, including their possible implications for the
prospects for a resumption of the Middle East peace
process. In that context, we are very concerned about
the possible negative consequences that could result
from the adoption of today’s resolution. Our position
on the statehood of Palestine remains valid and leaves
no room for a negative consideration of the resolution.
It is our firm belief that a settlement of the Middle East
conflict must be based on the two-State solution. With
that aim, we support the establishment of a sovereign,
viable and contiguous State of Palestine living side by
side in peace and security with Israel, to be implemented
through direct negotiations. In line with the statement
made earlier today on behalf of the European Union by
High Representative Catherine Ashton, we support all
efforts to bring about substantive, direct negotiations
between the parties in the coming months.
Mr. Sajdik (Austria): Austria would like to express
its full support for the positions expressed in the
statement of the High Representative of the European
Union for Foreign Affairs and Security Policy,
Catherine Ashton, earlier today, and for the statement
by the observer of the European Union to be delivered
later.
Austria’s vote in favour of resolution 67/19 is
a vote in support of a two-State solution. It is a vote
of confidence in the serious efforts of the Palestinian
Authority, under the leadership of President Abbas,
to build efficient State institutions. It is a call to that
leadership to fulfil its commitment to returning to the
negotiating table with Israel without further conditions,
and a call to both parties to re-enter into negotiations
in good faith. Equally, it is a call to the Palestinian
people and their political factions to unite behind
their leadership’s efforts to seek a durable negotiated
solution, as stipulated in the resolution.
Mrs. Hrdá (Czech Republic): I would like to
reiterate the Czech Republic’s support for negotiations
leading to Palestine’s statehood and all constructive
steps to that end. In that regard, we continue to
19

A/67/PV.44

encourage both sides to return to direct talks leading
to a negotiated two-State solution without delays or
preconditions. On several occasions the Czech Republic
has called on all the parties concerned to avoid any step
that might interfere with or prejudice the outcome of
that process. That is why the Czech Republic voted
against resolution 67/19.
The Czech Republic fully supports Palestine’s
aspirations to statehood through a comprehensive
negotiated agreement between the two parties that
results in two States, namely, the State of Israel and the
State of Palestine, living side by side in peace, security
and mutual recognition.
Mr. Viinanen (Finland): Finland voted in favour
of resolution 67/19 with the aim of strengthening
prospects for a Palestinian State and showing support
for the moderate forces that are committed to pursuing
that objective through negotiations. We are committed
to a two-State solution, with the State of Israel and an
independent, democratic, contiguous and viable State
of Palestine living side by side in peace and security.
We have witnessed how the Palestinian Authority
now has institutions that pass the threshold of what
one can expect from a modern State. That achievement
deserves our full recognition. Finland will continue
to contribute to building the future institutions of a
sovereign State of Palestine. We appeal to all sides
to build on this decision, to engage in negotiations
immediately and without conditions, and to refrain
from taking any steps that could negatively affect the
situation and the efforts towards a negotiated solution.
Our vote today in favour of the resolution, which
accords Palestine non-member observer State status
in the United Nations, is a natural continuation of our
firm support for a two-State solution and Palestinian
state-building. However, Finland’s vote does not imply
formal recognition of a sovereign Palestinian State.
That is a separate question and we will determine our
national position on the matter in accordance with the
procedures set out in the Constitution of Finland.
Mr. Quinlan (Australia): Australia’s decision to
abstain in the voting on resolution 67/19 balances our
long-standing support of the right of the Palestinian
people to self-determination and their own State with
our concern that the only durable basis for the resolution
of this conflict is direct negotiations between Israel
and the Palestinians. The resolution does not confer
statehood; it grants non-member observer State status

20

to the Palestinian Authority in the United Nations. We
have long supported a negotiated two-State solution that
allows a secure Israel to live alongside an independent
future Palestinian State. Australia has concerns that
this resolution may actually make it harder rather than
easier for the two parties to return to direct negotiations.
But our support for a future Palestinian State achieved
through negotiations remains steadfast, as does our
support for Israel’s legitimacy and right to security.
In looking beyond today’s vote, we urge all sides
to return immediately to negotiations in good faith.
It is critical that no party seek to exploit or overreact
to the outcome of today’s vote, including within the
United Nations system, in ways that could undermine
prospects for a just and lasting settlement.
Mr. McLay (New Zealand): New Zealand’s vote in
favour of resolution 67/19 is consistent with our longheld policy on the Palestinian issue and our support for
a two-State solution. The resolution supports existing
internationally agreed-on parameters for resolving
the Israel-Palestine issue. Our vote supports Israel’s
absolute right to exist, with a vibrant society living in
freedom and prosperity, free from fear of attack, not
least from Hamas rockets, with that Israeli State living
side by side with an independent, contiguous, viable
Palestinian State with recognized borders. All that, we
know, can be achieved only through a negotiated twoState solution.
The events of the past month have demonstrated
President Abbas’s capacity as a partner for peace. We
underscore our support for him and for Prime Minister
Fayyad and others who are working to make a twoState solution viable. We hope that with this decision
both sides can now do whatever is required to return
to the negotiating table, and that nothing is said or
done to impede that return. We also hope that reactions
to this vote do not jeopardize progress in Palestinian
state-building efforts. The President of the General
Assembly was indeed right to speak of all of us being
judged by how we bear ourselves after this vote.
Whatever the significance of today’s vote, we must
now turn to what happens tomorrow. This resolution
is a political symbol of the commitment of the United
Nations to a two-State solution. New Zealand has cast
its vote accordingly based on the assumption that our
vote is without prejudice to New Zealand’s position
on its recognition of Palestine. But resolutions and
debates here in New York will not bring about a secure
Israel living peacefully alongside a viable, contiguous
12-61635

A/67/PV.44

Palestinian State. Indeed, it is regrettable that today’s
decision had to be achieved by a vote at the United
Nations and not by direct negotiations. But that is the
reality of the situation on the ground, to which many
others have referred.
Today, we must therefore mark the beginning of a
new dynamic, with the parties immediately and without
any preconditions returning to negotiations, before the
opportunity of a two-State solution is lost to us all.
Mr. Pedersen (Norway): Norway is a strong
supporter of Palestinian rights and aspirations to
statehood in accordance with international law. We
are committed to continuing to empower Palestinian
institutions. The Palestinian Authority has already
passed the threshold of a functioning State in key
sectors. That was endorsed by the Ad Hoc Liaison
Committee, chaired by Norway, both in 2011 and 2012.
We support Palestine’s upgraded status in the General
Assembly to that of a non-member observer State. That
is consistent with our long-standing position on the
resolution of the Israeli-Palestinian conflict based on
the two-State solution. We supported the Partition Plan
in the General Assembly in 1947, Israel’s admission
as a full State Member of the United Nations in 1949,
including the declarations made in that context, and we
recognized it as a State in the same year.
Resolution 67/19 is based on the two-State solution
and the principles therein, and does not prejudge the
outcomes of final status negotiations between the
parties. Neither does it violate the Oslo Accords.

12-61635

The Palestinians have a legitimate right to take this
step, based on the right of the Palestinian people to
self-determination. Furthermore, it is time for the
General Assembly to recognize the serious efforts the
Palestinian Authority has made to build effective State
institutions.
Upgrading Palestine’s status in the United Nations
is not a provocative step. It sends a message that the
Palestine Liberation Organization and President
Abbas are genuinely committed to a peaceful solution
based on diplomatic means. But with rights come
responsibilities. It is time for the Palestinians to unite
in building a society based on democracy, the rule of
law and human rights. The fact that this resolution has
broad backing on the Palestinian side is a positive step.
Norway is strongly committed to the two-State solution
with a sovereign, democratic, contiguous and viable
Palestinian State living side by side with the State
of Israel in peace and within secure and recognized
borders. Only a negotiated solution between the parties
can bring about lasting peace and security for both
Palestinians and Israelis. We appeal to both sides to
build on today’s decision in a constructive manner
and urgently resume comprehensive final status
negotiations.
Our support of an upgraded status for Palestine
in the United Nations does not prejudge the question
of recognition. The national procedures to formally
recognize the State of Palestine are still pending.
The meeting rose at 6 p.m.

21
