United Nations

S/PV.5735

Security Council

Provisional

Sixty-second year

5735th meeting
Tuesday, 28 August 2007, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Gayama . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Congo)

Members:

Belgium . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Ghana . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Indonesia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Italy . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Panama . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Peru . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Qatar . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Slovakia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
South Africa . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . .
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Mr. Verbeke
Mr. Liu Zhenmin
Mr. Lacroix
Mr. Yankey
Mrs. Asmady
Mr. Mantovani
Mr. Suescum
Mr. Chávez
Mr. Al-Qahtani
Mr. Shcherbak
Mr. Matulay
Mr. Kumalo
Sir John Sawers
Mr. Wolff

Agenda
Maintenance of international peace and security
Role of the Security Council in conflict prevention and resolution, in particular
in Africa
Letter dated 14 August 2007 from the Chargé d’affaires a.i. of the Permanent
Mission of the Congo to the United Nations addressed to the SecretaryGeneral (S/2007/496)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the
delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room C-154A.

07-49195 (E)

*0749195*

S/PV.5735

The meeting was called to order at 10.10 a.m.
The President (spoke in French): I should like, at
the outset of this meeting, to extend, on behalf of the
Council, a warm welcome to Sir John Sawers, new
Permanent Representative of the United Kingdom to
the United Nations. I look forward to working closely
with him in the work of the Council.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Maintenance of international peace and security
Role of the Security Council in conflict
prevention and resolution, in particular
in Africa
Letter dated 14 August 2007 from the
Chargé d’affaires a.i. of the Permanent
Mission of the Congo to the United Nations
addressed to the Secretary-General (S/2007/496)
The President (spoke in French): I should like to
inform the Council that I have received letters from the
representatives of Algeria, Argentina, Benin, Canada,
Croatia, the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
Guatemala, Honduras, Japan, Kenya, the Libyan Arab
Jamahiriya, Namibia, Norway, Portugal, the Sudan,
Switzerland, Uganda, the United Republic of Tanzania
and Viet Nam, in which they request to be invited to
participate in the consideration of the item on the
Council’s agenda. In conformity with the usual
practice, I propose, with the consent of the Council, to
invite those representatives to participate in the
consideration of the item, without the right to vote, in
accordance with the relevant provisions of the Charter
and rule 37 of the Council’s provisional rules of
procedure.

the Peacebuilding Commission, to participate in the
consideration of the item.
It is so decided.
The Security Council will now begin its
consideration of the item on its agenda. The Council is
meeting in accordance with the understanding reached
in its prior consultations.
I should like to draw attention to document
S/2007/496, which contains the text of a letter dated
14 August 2007 from the Chargé d’affaires a.i. of the
Permanent Mission of the Congo to the United Nations
addressed to the Secretary-General, transmitting a
concept paper on the item under consideration.
I welcome the presence of the Secretary-General,
Mr. Ban Ki-moon, at this meeting. I now give him the
floor.
The Secretary-General: It is a pleasure to join
the members of the Security Council today for this
open debate on conflict prevention and resolution,
particularly in Africa. Thank you, Mr. President, for
your initiative.
I should like to officially welcome Ambassador
Ripert of France and Ambassador Sawers of the United
Kingdom, who have joined the Council and the United
Nations as new Permanent Representatives. I am
confident that their wide experience will make very
valuable contributions to all the work of the United
Nations, including that of the Council.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

Since the time I assumed office as SecretaryGeneral, I have made it clear that the resolution of
Africa’s most difficult conflicts is a top priority of my
agenda. At the same time, a greater investment in
prevention could save us considerable pain and
expense — in Darfur, in Somalia, in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, in northern Uganda, in Western
Sahara and elsewhere.

At the invitation of the President, the
representatives of the aforementioned countries
took the seats reserved for them at the side of the
Council Chamber.

We must devote more resources to conflict
prevention. We must also strengthen our capacity for
mediation. It is only through political settlements that
conflicts can be resolved.

The President (spoke in French): Pursuant to the
invitations extended by the Council under rule 39 of its
provisional rules of procedure, I invite Ambassador
Léo Mérorès, on behalf of the President of the General
Assembly, and Ambassador Leslie Kojo Christian,
Acting Chairman of the Organizational Committee of

Conflicts have grown ever more complex.
Sustainable solutions, therefore, require increasingly
complex, multifaceted approaches. The United Nations
system already contributes significantly to the
prevention and resolution of armed conflict. Yet the

2

07-49195

S/PV.5735

increasing complexity of the demands placed upon us
has stretched the capacity of the Organization.
We need to develop new approaches. We need to
address the underlying causes of conflicts. If we do not
deal with the root causes of conflict — and offer
sustainable solutions — we will be left with
peacekeeping missions without end.
In 1998, my predecessor developed a plan to deal
with these issues. He sought to identify the causes of
conflict and to provide recommendations for the
promotion of peace and development in Africa. But
much has changed since then. Shortly, I will submit to
the sixty-second session of the General Assembly my
report on the causes of conflict and the promotion of
durable peace and sustainable development in Africa.
In it, I will recommend a comprehensive review of the
1998 recommendations. The review will cover the
commitments made, the actions taken, the progress
achieved and the lessons learned.
In the next few months, I will also present
proposals for strengthening the capabilities of the
Department of Political Affairs, with the goal of
making more effective use of my good offices. I
believe in engagement and dialogue, not confrontation.
It is better to respond proactively, before a crisis fully
develops. I count on the Council’s support as we move
forward in this endeavour.
Already, the Department has moved to create a
standing team of mediation experts. It is establishing a
comprehensive data bank of peace agreements and
lessons learned on peacekeeping. It is undertaking
proactive mediation efforts in such places as the Sudan
and northern Uganda.
Regional organizations can contribute. Again, I
point to the Sudan, where the United Nations is
working with the African Union. The goal is to
strengthen our collective capacities to address Africa’s
peace and security challenges. With the Council’s
adoption of resolution 1769 (2007) on Darfur, we have
entered a new era in United Nations-African Union
cooperation. The African Union-United Nations hybrid
operation is an unprecedented undertaking and it
reflects the international community’s commitment to
end the suffering in Darfur. The United Nations and the
African Union are also collaborating closely in pushing
forward the political process in Darfur. Again,
peacekeeping is only a start; there must be a political
solution, but that has taken too long. The tragedy of

07-49195

Darfur reminds us how much more needs to be done
before we complete our transformation from a culture
of reaction to one of effective prevention.
In that regard, I would like to inform you that I
am going to visit the Sudan in early September, from
3 to 6 September. I want to go and see for myself the
very difficult conditions under which the forces will
operate. I also want to know first-hand the plight of
those they seek to help.
Let me emphasize from the outset that this is not
a trip about breakthroughs; rather the visit is about
consolidating the progress to lay the groundwork for
forward movement. In Juba, I plan to underscore the
commitment of the United Nations to the
Comprehensive Peace Agreement between the North
and the South, the cornerstone of peace in the Sudan. I
also wish to show solidarity with colleagues who are
working under very difficult conditions in the field.
In today’s world, prevention must go beyond
mere diplomacy. The most difficult conflicts occur
when a variety of factors come together; for example,
when tensions over issues of identity within a
community are combined with unequal access to
political and economic resources. Africa is particularly
affected by those problems, perhaps because of the
manner in which its colonial borders were drawn up.
In order to prevent or resolve such conflicts, we
must promote tolerance of diversity within societies.
The solutions should be as inclusive and representative
as possible. That means providing advice on
constitutional frameworks. It means promoting human
rights and the rule of law, helping to organize elections
and building democratic institutions. It means training
police and pursuing efforts to stop weapons smuggling.
The United Nations is assisting in all those areas,
through its own programmes and through support to
regional organizations like the African Union.
Conflict prevention and sustainable development
reinforce each other. That is why it is crucial that we
make progress in our race to achieve the Millennium
Development Goals. That means reinforcing and
accelerating our efforts to reduce extreme poverty,
combat disease, promote universal primary education,
ensure environmental sustainability and advance
gender equality. Empowering women is not only a
means to achieving lasting development, it is also
critical to the promotion of peace and security, as

3

S/PV.5735

underlined in resolution 1325 (2000) on women, peace
and security.
It is important to note that we are on track to
realize the Millennium Development Goals in most
developing countries — but not in Africa. Why? We
need fresh thinking and new approaches to lifting our
poorest nations out of poverty. Part of that means
dealing with the conflicts and problems of governance
that affect so many African countries.
Equally crucial is the need to build peace in
countries emerging from conflict — Burundi, Sierra
Leone, Guinea Bissau, Liberia. In those and other
fragile post-conflict countries, peacebuilding is in fact
prevention, since it is designed to prevent a relapse
into war. We are working with the United Nations
Peacebuilding Commission and the Human Rights
Commission to support reconciliation and confidencebuilding, end impunity and consolidate the peace.
By some estimates, there has been a 40 per cent
decline in armed conflict around the world since the
1990s. Recent research credits expanded United
Nations peacemaking, peacekeeping and conflict
prevention activities as a major factor behind this
decline. That is encouraging. But, it is not good
enough. Violent conflicts continue to inflict immense
suffering on countless people, mostly civilians around
the world. For those victims and for the sake of future
generations, we have an obligation to take more
seriously the challenge of prevention. There must be
sustained international political will to reinforce
preventive action in its broadest sense. And there must
be adequate resources invested for the diverse and
complex tasks that prevention entails.
I trust you will have a fruitful debate on this most
crucial issue, in which the Council has an essential role
to play.
The President (spoke in French): I thank the
Secretary-General for his statement.
I shall now give the floor to Mr. Léo Mérorès,
Permanent Representative of Haiti, speaking on behalf
of the President of the General Assembly.
Mr. Mérorès (Haiti) (spoke in French): I have
the pleasure to deliver, on behalf of Her Excellency
Ms. Haya Rashed Al-Khalifa, President of the General
Assembly, the following statement.

4

“The Security Council meets today to
convene a thematic debate on its role in conflict
prevention and resolution, in particular in Africa.
I am pleased to participate in today’s debate in
my capacity as President of the sixty-first session
of the General Assembly, which is the chief
deliberative, policymaking and representative
organ of the United Nations. I would like to thank
Mr. Pascal Gayama, the President of the Council
for the month of August, for his invitation to
address the Council today.
“At the 2005 World Summit, when heads of
State and Government gathered in New York,
they stressed the importance of the prevention of
armed conflicts and solemnly renewed their
commitment to strengthen the capacity of the
United Nations in that regard.
“They also stressed the need for the
Security Council, the General Assembly, the
Economic and Social Council and the SecretaryGeneral to coordinate their activities within their
respective Charter mandates. I am convinced that
there is still room for progress to enhance that
coordination and cooperation.
“The prevention of armed conflict is one of
the principal purposes of the United Nations and
lies at the centre of many of the Organization’s
efforts. The issue has been included as a specific
item on the agenda of the General Assembly in
2002 and every session since — an indication of
the increasing perception of the concept’s
importance.
“By
establishing
the
Peacebuilding
Commission (PBC) in 2005, the General
Assembly took an important step forward in the
field of conflict prevention. The efforts of the
Commission constitute an essential component in
solidifying peace and preventing relapse into
conflicts. But that is not enough. We need to
reinforce the mediation and good offices
capabilities of the United Nations system in its
entirety. We should strive to provide the
necessary tools for the United Nations to play
that crucial role, while fully respecting the
sovereignty of all Member States.
“Just as conflict prevention is a
multidimensional task involving a set of political,
humanitarian, development and other measures

07-49195

S/PV.5735

tailored to each specific context, a successful
preventive strategy is dependent upon the
cooperation of many different actors, including
Member States, international, regional and
subregional organizations, the private sector, nongovernmental organizations and other civil
society actors.
“However, in the final analysis, it is up to
each State to take responsibility to prevent
conflicts. In his 2006 report on the prevention of
armed conflict (A/60/891), the Secretary-General
remarked that ‘A culture of prevention is
beginning to take hold at the United Nations’ but
that ‘An unacceptable gap still remains between
rhetoric and reality’. The most important priority
is, then, to make conflict prevention an
operational reality.
“In conclusion, I would like express the
hope that cooperation and coordination among
the principal organs of the United Nations will
intensify in this crucial domain, which remains at
the heart of the goals of our Organization.”
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to Mr. Leslie Kojo Christian, Acting Chairman of
the Organizational Committee of the Peacebuilding
Commission.
Mr. Christian: On behalf of the Peacebuilding
Commission, I wish to thank the President of the
Security Council for the invitation and will make the
following statement in my capacity as Acting Chair of
the Peacebuilding Commission.
First, I wish to commend the delegation of the
Republic of the Congo for organizing this debate. We
welcome the presence of the Secretary-General and his
briefing.
In recognition of the need for a coordinated,
coherent and integrated approach to international
peacebuilding efforts, the Security Council and the
General Assembly passed concurrent resolutions to
give effect to the recommendation made in the
Outcome Document of the World Summit of 2005
(General Assembly resolution 60/1) on the need for a
peacebuilding commission to serve as an institutional
mechanism dedicated to addressing the particular
challenges faced by countries emerging from conflict.
The ultimate goal of the Peacebuilding Commission, as
envisaged by its founding resolutions, is to help

07-49195

countries emerging from conflict to lay the foundations
for their post-conflict recovery and reconstruction, to
enable them to experience sustainable peace and
development, thereby preventing them from relapsing
into violence.
Besides the expert bodies and the studies
undertaken under the auspices of the Secretary-General
over the past years, I would be remiss if I did not
acknowledge the efforts of the Security Council’s ad
hoc working group on conflict prevention and
resolution over the past ten years. Those efforts
contributed to the groundwork for the establishment of
the Peacebuilding Commission. The Commission looks
forward to benefiting from the rich storehouse of
innovation vested in this body.
It is especially relevant that today’s open debate
is geared towards Africa, as the Commission, during its
first year of operations, has so far focused its attention
on two African countries — Burundi and Sierra Leone.
One of the Commission’s key accomplishments has
been to maintain international attention on the
peacebuilding efforts in those two countries. This has,
in turn, instilled a greater sense of accountability and
responsibility among the national and local actors on
the ground to ensure long-term peace.
Furthermore, with the full support of the
Governments in those countries, the Commission has
engaged with relevant United Nations and non-United
Nations actors involved in peacebuilding there to
support the Governments’ development of integrated
peacebuilding strategies. It is hoped that international
efforts will be more coherent and that enhanced
resources can be mobilized around those strategies.
In addition, by virtue of the Commission’s
consideration of Burundi and Sierra Leone, the
Secretary-General announced earlier this year that he
would allocate funding envelopes of $35 million to
each, from the Peacebuilding Fund, for those countries’
peacebuilding priorities.
We wish to welcome the results of the first round
of elections in Sierra Leone and the free and
transparent manner in which they were conducted. We
wish the people of Sierra Leone well as they go to the
second and final round of the polls, so that the gains
made so far in the post-conflict recovery in
collaboration with the Peacebuilding Commission will
be consolidated.

5

S/PV.5735

The Commission also has an important role to
play in contributing to the development of
comprehensive strategic visions for United Nations
actions in conflict prevention and resolution by
ensuring that such strategies take peacebuilding
priorities into consideration. In that way, conflict
prevention and resolution efforts can help to foresee
and forestall the potential for relapse into conflict.
As mandated, the Commission is working to
improve the coordination among all relevant actors,
both inside and outside the United Nations, in order to
focus attention on the reconstruction and institutionbuilding efforts necessary for recovery from conflict
and to bring those actors together to marshal resources
for peacebuilding. Indeed, peacebuilding is an integral
part of improving the United Nations capacity for
conflict prevention and resolution, and we hope that
the Commission will be able to significantly enhance
the international community’s efforts to prevent
countries from lapsing or relapsing into conflict, as
envisioned in its founding resolutions.
In this regard, it will be important to increase
cooperation and engagement between the Security
Council and the Peacebuilding Commission. Indeed,
one of the issues we hope to address in the coming year
is how the Commission can best engage with the
Security Council, as well as with the General Assembly
and the Economic and Social Council, including in
developing the most appropriate mechanisms for
providing advice as necessary and in accordance with
its founding resolutions. It may be useful to have
regular interaction between the Commission and the
Council, including by participating in meetings such as
this open debate. The open debate organized by the
Security Council earlier this year, during the
presidency of the Russian delegation, demonstrated the
Council’s commitment to finding ways to strengthen
the effectiveness of the Peacebuilding Commission.
The
Commission’s
first
annual
report
(S/2007/458), to be debated during the General
Assembly session and also to be submitted to the
Security Council for review in the course of this year,
highlights some of the Commission’s challenges and
achievements during its first year of existence. It is our
hope that the contents of the report will provide food
for thought in fine-tuning the mandate of the
Peacebuilding Commission.

6

The President (spoke in French): In accordance
with the understanding reached among Council
members, I wish to remind all speakers to limit their
statements to no more than five minutes, in order to
enable the Council to carry out its work expeditiously.
Delegations with lengthy statements are kindly
requested to circulate the texts in writing in the
Chamber and to deliver a condensed version when
speaking.
Mr. Suescum (Panama) (spoke in Spanish):
Before starting, I would like to welcome the SecretaryGeneral to this Chamber. I would also like to welcome
Ambassador Mérorès, sitting in for the President of the
General Assembly, and Ambassador Christian as
Acting Chairman of the Organizational Committee of
the Peacebuilding Commission. Welcome to all. If you
permit me, Mr. President, I would also like to thank
you for taking the initiative to organize this important
debate.
The responsibility for resolving disputes and
preventing a conflict rests, as a founding principle of
this Organization, in the first place with the States
party to a conflict. Achieving peace, however, depends
to a large extent on our commitment to the architecture
of collective security that we have brought together in
the United Nations. This Council and the Assembly
should redouble efforts to facilitate the success of the
measures provided for under Chapter VI of the Charter
for the peaceful settlement of disputes, given the
human consequences inherent in any conflict.
Contrary to a very well-known quote, conflicts
are not diplomacy by other means. On the contrary,
they are the result of the failure of diplomacy or of
dialogue that was undertaken without due seriousness.
The increase in the number of peace missions is a
troubling indicator of an increasing number of such
failures. Both the General Assembly and the Council
can and should strengthen mechanisms for the
prevention and peaceful solution of conflict.
In the case of Africa, systematic cooperation
between the United Nations and the African Union is
on the agenda. The role provided for in Chapter VIII of
the Charter for regional arrangements has been
strengthened by recent agreements between these two
organizations. These agreements bear witness to the
emergence in the United Nations of a culture of
prevention that has given rise to new instruments and

07-49195

S/PV.5735

mechanisms. However, a divide still exists between
aspirations and reality.
As the Secretary-General said today, and as his
report (S/2001/574) of 7 June 2001 on the prevention
of armed conflict indicates,
“Preventive action should be initiated at the
earliest possible stage of a conflict cycle in order
to be most effective. One of the principal aims of
preventive action should be to address the deeprooted socio-economic, cultural, environmental,
institutional and other structural causes that often
underlie the immediate political symptoms of
conflicts.” (S/2001/574, executive summary)
It is unfortunate that the efforts of the Security
Council tend initially to address root causes during the
post-conflict period, whether through integrated
missions or the Peacebuilding Commission. The time
has come to consider the desirability of extending,
redesigning or commingling existing mechanisms to
step up the use of the Council’s preventive efforts.
Lastly, I should like, in a general way, to touch
upon some particularly important factors in preventing
conflict in Africa.
It is important to redouble efforts to implement
resolution 1325 (2000). Without concrete efforts to
increase the participation of women as stakeholders in,
and beneficiaries of, the prevention of conflict, we
diminish the value of the good offices of a sector of the
population that, as often the primary victims of the
ravages of violence, have a great deal of experience to
bring to bear in preventing violence.
Justice is also an essential component of peace,
reconciliation and the prevention of conflict. We would
therefore emphasize the need for Governments and
political actors to strengthen and respect the
institutions needed to ensure the rule of law, as well as
to cooperate fully with the work of international
tribunals.
In conclusion, in Africa in particular,
international cooperation is essential in combating and
controlling the illicit trade in small arms and light
weapons.
Mr. Chávez (Peru) (spoke in Spanish): Allow me
to join in the welcoming words addressed to our guests
today, namely, the Secretary-General and the
Ambassadors of Haiti and Ghana, who are here

07-49195

representing the General Assembly and the
Peacebuilding Commission, respectively. I also wish to
welcome the new representatives of France and the
United Kingdom.
As we know, African issues comprise a
significant part of our agenda. We therefore welcome
the President’s initiative to once again place before the
Security Council the issue of its relationship with
Africa, especially as regards the prevention and
resolution of conflicts. I should like to orient our
discussion today towards the root causes of conflicts
and the tools at the disposal of the Security Council to
address and prevent them.
Poverty and ethnic, social, economic and
religious exclusion are at the primary causes of
violence, instability and the disintegration of African
States. Economic dysfunction, disputes over natural
resources — intensified by social and cultural
differences — and corruption in the management of
public affairs have served to wear away at the fabric of
societies and to undermine the capacity of States to
provide basic services and exercise authority over their
territory. In many societies that has led to violent civil
conflicts whose devastating results we are all aware of.
Peru therefore believes that effective preventive
efforts in Africa can only be sustained through ongoing
attention to the most basic needs of African
populations and the long-term sustainability of the
continent’s economies. It is essential that Africa
achieve the Millennium Development Goals and begin
to benefit from integration into the global economy.
African Governments have the primary responsibility
to ensure that. International financial institutions and
major donor countries also face the challenge and
responsibility of providing African countries with
consistent and effective assistance. For its part, the
Security Council should bear in mind the underlying
causes of conflict, to which I have referred, in the
efforts it undertakes, especially with regard to
peacekeeping operations.
In addition to the powers conferred upon the
Security Council by the Charter, the Council also has at
its disposal numerous tools to ensure the effectiveness
of its capacity to prevent conflict. Resolution 1625
(2005) details those tools, which range from early
warnings provided to the Council by the SecretaryGeneral and follow-up to his preventive diplomatic
initiatives to the importance of considering effective

7

S/PV.5735

broad-based prevention strategies that not only involve
the security sector but also the economic, social,
humanitarian, governmental and human rights spheres
in countries affected by crises. We should also
underscore the need to strengthen the capacities of civil
society organizations to those ends.
On the operational level, a contribution can be
made by having programmes, funds and agencies of the
system work together with the organs that establish
their mandates in the drafting and implementation of
policies. Peacekeeping operations and ad hoc offices,
such as those set up in Liberia and Sierra Leone to
consolidate peace, can therefore provide useful lessons
for the African continent. Other examples of such a
way of doing things can be found in the conflict
mediation mechanism established by the Department of
Political Affairs, as well as in various other earlywarning instruments, including the establishment of the
post of Special Adviser of the Secretary-General on the
Prevention of Genocide and Mass Atrocities.
Those instruments should not lead us to forget
that, as stipulated in the Charter of the United Nations
and as Peru has reiterated on various occasions,
regional agreements should constitute some of the most
effective tools at the disposal of the Security Council
in the prevention and resolution of conflicts. In that
regard, we appreciate the fact that the African Union
and, in particular, its Peace and Security Council have
established their relevance and value. That shows that
African countries have taken the lead in resolving their
problems. In addition to its role in attempting to ensure
that the devastating conflict in Darfur comes to an end,
we can also refer to such other contributions by African
countries in recent months as the initiative led by the
former President of Mozambique to reach agreements
between Uganda and the Lord’s Resistance Army and
the efforts by the council of elders in the recent
elections in the Democratic Republic of the Congo.
Other African subregional mechanisms have also taken
an active part in these tasks. A recent case in point was
the mediation provided by the President of Burkina
Faso in his capacity as the Chairman of the Economic
Community of West African States with regard to the
conflict in Côte d’Ivoire, as well as the signing of the
Ouagadougou Agreements.
The resolution of conflict — as well as its
prevention — also require practical measures to limit
access to the resources that make it possible for armed
violence to take root in societies in conflict. In that

8

regard, it is necessary that we combat more resolutely
the illegal exploitation of natural resources, which
finances armed movements, by implementing
certification instruments with regard to various
products such as the Kimberly Process for diamonds.
The illicit trafficking in small arms and light
weapons — which was the subject of a presidential
statement (S/PRST/2007/24) adopted this past June —
is another of the many problems that must be
addressed. We trust that that statement will promote
decisive efforts to prevent, combat and eradicate illicit
trafficking and lead to the implementation of an
internationally binding instrument to end the prevailing
situation of impunity and evasion of responsibility.
As is clear, the necessary mandates and tools
exist to prevent conflicts and contribute to resolving
them. Nevertheless, there is also a need for concrete
and effective measures that address both the root
problems that lead to conflicts, as well as for efforts to
tackle the conflicts once they break out or prevent or
minimize the possibility that conflicts evolve into
widespread violence. Those are the challenges that
must be addressed in Africa in order to overcome
current conflicts and, above all, save succeeding
generations from the scourge of war.
Mr. Matulay (Slovakia): We thank the Congolese
presidency for initiating this important and timely
debate, and welcome the presence of the SecretaryGeneral.
Earlier this month, this Council authorized the
largest peacekeeping mission ever. We are in the midst
of preparations to launch a multidimensional
international presence in Chad and the Central African
Republic. The international community has been
struggling to accumulate the resources necessary for an
adequate reaction to the crisis in Somalia. Meanwhile,
there are a number of peacekeeping missions deployed
worldwide, costing billions of United States dollars
each year. Many of these costs could have been spared,
if there had been an effective conflict prevention
mechanism.
Nevertheless, all the expenses of the United
Nations are negligible compared to the loss of human
life, suffering and destruction that could have been
averted, at least partially, if there had been a working
system of conflict prevention. We therefore fully
support all the efforts aimed, as mentioned by the
Secretary-General, at moving from the culture of

07-49195

S/PV.5735

reaction to the culture of prevention within the United
Nations system.

State and entails the prevention of such crimes through
appropriate and necessary means.

Resolution 1625 (2005) set up an ambitious
agenda that has seen partial implementation. We
therefore believe that conflict prevention should be
given further serious consideration during the current
reforms of the United Nations system in general and
the Secretariat in particular. This does not necessarily
imply establishing new institutions or introducing new
bureaucratic procedures. The United Nations system
should, however, pay much more attention in its
functioning to different aspects of conflict prevention.
The Council has recently shown leadership in that
regard by discussing various issues related to conflict
prevention, such as security sector reform, energy
security and climate change, and natural resources and
conflict.

Slovakia strongly believes that this responsibility
can be best fulfilled though the introduction and
implementation of policies that have proven effective
in this regard in many countries, including our own.
These policies imply strict adherence to and
implementation and enforcement of internationally
recognized human rights standards and democratic
principles, the rule of law and good governance,
including the sound management of national wealth,
and security sector reform. The implementation of
these principles has helped make our continent stable
and secure. We believe in the universal applicability of
these principles, and we are therefore convinced that
they will help Africa find the path to peace and
stability, just as they helped Europe.

For our part, we are glad to inform the Council
that the debate on security sector reform that took
place in February will have a follow-up in Africa later
this year. A regional seminar on security sector reform
in Africa, co-organized by South Africa and Slovakia,
will take place in Cape Town in November.

Finally, the responsibility to protect also implies
that, when national capacities and the ability to face
extensive potential threats are inadequate, the
responsibility to identify possible risks and ask for the
assistance of the United Nations and the international
community lies primarily with the national authorities.

We believe that such thematic debates should
become an integral part of the deliberations of other
United Nations bodies as well. In addition, on a more
operational basis, further steps should be taken to
achieve more cohesion and cooperation between the
different parts of the United Nations in the fields of
risk assessment, best practices and policy planning. Mr.
Secretary-General, we believe we can rely on your
leadership in this regard in the context of the reform of
the Secretariat and efforts for system-wide coherence.

Mr. Mantovani (Italy): The unprecedented surge
in United Nations commitments in the field of
peacekeeping — rightly or wrongly perceived as
having been undertaken with scant attention to
sustainability — makes today’s reflections on the issue
of conflict prevention more timely than ever. Italy is
very grateful to the Congolese presidency for
promoting this reflection, both today and through the
chairmanship of the working group, and welcomes the
participation of the Secretary-General in this debate.

In addition, there is clearly a need to improve the
cooperation of the United Nations with regional and
subregional organizations, which can provide
invaluable input and early warning through their
expertise and knowledge of the actual situation on the
ground. On the other hand, the input of the regional
organizations will usually be indispensable in the
mediation efforts aimed at the prevention of conflicts.

Italy fully endorses the statement that will be
made by the Portuguese presidency of the European
Union, and wishes to make some additional
observations in our national capacity.

Last but not least, all these efforts cannot
substitute for the leadership and work done by national
authorities, who hold the primary responsibility for
conflict prevention. The 2005 World Summit codified
the responsibility to protect populations from genocide,
war crimes, ethnic cleansing and crimes against
humanity. This responsibility lies with each individual

07-49195

There are objective limits to the Council’s action
in the field of prevention, and they are due to the fact
that the Council’s agenda is dominated by current
events, if not emergencies. The Council is, to use an
expression that has often been heard in this chamber,
“the fireman who puts out crises”.
Having said this, there are also many things that
the Council can do to contribute to collective efforts at
conflict prevention.

9

S/PV.5735

First, it can set appropriate guidelines for its
action. The Council’s action to implement resolution
1625 (2005) should be built on the recognition that the
primary responsibility for conflict prevention resides
with Member States. The experience of the African
continent demonstrates that the absolute prerequisite
for any change is the political will of national actors,
especially in countries emerging from conflicts. The
Council should encourage and support the efforts of
national actors.
The Council’s action should also stem from a
clear partnership of the United Nations with the
regional and subregional organizations that operate
within the framework of Chapter VIII of the Charter of
the United Nations and from an active promotion of the
principle of regional ownership. As we see it, this
promotion should strive for a balanced development of
the capacities of regional and subregional bodies. In
this light, we see particular potential in paragraph 7 of
the joint communiqué signed at the end of our mission
to Addis Ababa, which places our partnership with the
Peace and Security Council of the African Union in a
comprehensive framework, ranging from prevention to
peacebuilding and reconstruction. The communiqué
rightly underlines the strategic value of implementing
of the framework for the 10-year capacity-building
programme for the African Union.
In this connection, we commend recent,
innovative examples of cooperation with the Africa
Union, notably the African Union Mission in Sudan
(AMIS), the African Union Mission in Somalia
(AMISOM) and the Council’s decision to deploy a
hybrid operation in Darfur.
Second, conflict prevention should be a collective
effort of the whole United Nations system, and I would
like to take this opportunity to pay tribute to the
General Assembly for having laid the foundations for
our common work, particularly through its resolution
57/337. I also wish to welcome here the participation
of the presidencies of the General Assembly and of the
Organizational Committee of the Peacebuilding
Commission, represented by Mr. Mérorès and
Mr. Christian.
As for the specific role of the United Nations
Secretariat, Italy thinks that the Council should, first
and foremost, work closely with the Secretary-General,
who needs to feel the full weight and convinced

10

support of all the members of the Council in promoting
United Nations preventive diplomacy.
Resolution 1625 (2005) was born of the
awareness that the contribution of the United Nations
to operative conflict prevention lies essentially in the
hands of the Secretary-General. The current SecretaryGeneral and his predecessor have repeatedly drawn
attention to the contradiction between the awareness of
the need to strengthen the Secretariat’s capacity for
mediation and early warning, which was expressed at
the highest level at the 2005 World Summit, and the
lack of sufficient resources. Italy supports the view that
the resources available to the Secretariat, particularly
the Department of Political Affairs, be commensurate
with their actual needs. As regards those needs, we
believe that particular importance should be attached to
strengthening political missions operating in crisis
situations, in support of existing political processes.
The most recent resolution on Somalia has given us an
excellent example of the recognition of this priority. In
our view, based on the positive experience of the
United Nations Office for West Africa (UNOWA) in
West Africa, we think the Security Council should
consider applying more widely a subregional approach
to the root causes of instability, which often go beyond
national borders.
Thirdly, we should like to underscore the
importance of exploiting the full potential of the
instruments already available to the Security Council to
assist in promoting effective prevention. I refer, in the
first instance, to the Peacebuilding Commission, but
also to the United Nations Integrated Offices and to the
definition of peacekeeping operations mandates by this
Council.
The effectiveness of our collective efforts is
undermined by artificial divisions within the United
Nations family. If we are to overcome these divisions,
a wider sense of ownership of United Nations activities
in the field of conflict prevention is needed. Regular
interaction between the wider membership and the
Secretariat, particularly on issues pertaining to the
long-term prevention of conflicts, should be envisioned
as a necessary complement to the existing dialogue
between the Department of Political Affairs and the
Security Council. Such interaction would be critical in
strengthening confidence and cooperation among the
various United Nations bodies involved in conflict
prevention, giving the Secretariat a stronger and more

07-49195

S/PV.5735

credible mandate to carry on its activities on the
ground.
In conclusion, Mr. President, let me express my
country’s confidence that today’s debate and its followup will contribute, from the Security Council
perspective, to the elaboration of a comprehensive
conflict prevention strategy, based on the concurrent
efforts of all United Nations bodies.
Mr. Wolff (United States of America): The
United States would like to thank the Republic of
Congo for raising the important issue of the role of the
Security Council in conflict prevention and resolution,
particularly in Africa. We agree with you,
Mr. Secretary-General, and with you, Mr. President,
that the United Nations, and more particularly this
Council, can and must enhance its capacity to prevent
conflict, particularly on the continent of Africa.
For the United Nations to be more effective in
preventing conflict in Africa, the Security Council
must work more cooperatively and more efficiently
with regional and subregional organizations. In this
regard, the United States joins other members of this
Council in welcoming the provisions of the joint
communiqué of the United Nations Security Council
and the African Union Peace and Security Council that
was issued in June 2007 and that calls for a stronger
relationship between the two bodies.
According to the World Bank, 16 of the world’s
20 poorest countries have suffered a major war in the
past 15 years. On average, four of every ten countries
coming out of war relapse to conflict in the first five
years of peace. My Government supports conflict
prevention and conflict resolution in Africa through a
variety of bilateral and multilateral programmes.
As announced at the Group of Eight meeting in
2004, the Global Peace Operations Initiative (GPOI)
was created to address the disparity between the
persistent demand for trained peacekeeping forces and
their inadequate availability, especially for missions in
Africa. In 2005, GPOI trained and equipped 27,000
military personnel from 37 countries to participate in
United Nations peacekeeping operations. That number
is expected to increase to 75,000 by the end of the year.
The United States is supporting four of the eleven
GPOI Peace Operations Training Centres in Africa —
in Ghana, Kenya, Mali, and Nigeria.

07-49195

The Transportation and Logistics Support
Arrangement (TLSA) of the GPOI contributed $11.5
million in 2005-2006, $5 million of which went to
construct portions of 34 base camps in Darfur. In 2007,
the United States has obligated $32 million to TLSA to
support initiatives including $12 million in equipment
to the Economic Community of West African States
(ECOWAS), $6.8 million for the training and
equipping of Ugandan troops supporting the African
Union Mission in Somalia (AMISOM), and $6 million
to support Nigerian deployment to the African Union
Mission in Sudan (AMIS).
GPOI’s predecessor, the African Contingency
Operations Training and Assistance (ACOTA)
programme provided training and non-lethal equipment
to over 52,000 peacekeepers from African partner
militaries through July 2007. These partners are now
contributing, or have contributed, to a number of
African peacekeeping operations.
Understanding that economic development is a
crucial component of conflict prevention and conflict
resolution, the United States Congress passed the
African Growth and Opportunity Act (AGOA) on
18 May 2000. This Act offers tangible incentives for
African countries to continue their efforts to open their
economies and build free markets. Thirty-eight of the
48 sub-Saharan States are now eligible for African
Growth and Opportunity Act support. As a result, twoway trade between the United States and sub-Saharan
African countries increased by 17 per cent in 2006
alone, reaching almost $71.3 billion, with both United
States exports to and, perhaps more importantly,
United States imports from the region growing.
In 2004, President Bush created the Office of the
Coordinator for Reconstruction and Stabilization
(CRS) to harness the full breadth of United States skills
and resources to transform conflict.
As this partial list makes clear, we do have
important programmes in place. What we clearly need
now is more effective coordination between our efforts,
other Governments’ efforts, Security Council efforts,
and the efforts of the African Union and other regional
and subregional organizations. With such enhanced
coordination, we would all be better positioned to help
prevent conflict before it starts and to assist States
emerging from conflict so the violence of the past is
not repeated.

11

S/PV.5735

Sir John Sawers (United Kingdom): It is an
honour to represent the United Kingdom in this
Council and at the United Nations, and I am grateful to
you, Sir, for your kind words of welcome and for those
from the Secretary-General, whose presence is very
welcome here today.
I also wish to begin by congratulating you,
Mr. President, on your choice of conflict prevention for
this debate. We welcome the presidential statement to
be adopted which I hope will be adopted at the close of
this meeting and I also endorse the statement to be
given by the European Union presidency later in this
debate.
The Charter of the United Nations begins with an
expression of our collective determination “to save
succeeding generations from the scourge of war …”.
But in the six decades since the adoption of the
Charter, our record has been mixed.
In Western Europe, torn apart by war twice in the
first half of the last century, peace and cooperation are
now, thankfully, the norm. But Africa, the focus of our
discussion today, has experienced more conflict in
recent decades than any other continent. We have
witnessed signs of hope — the ending of some
appalling conflicts in recent years in West and Central
Africa, and the development of the African Union, as a
political and security entity, a sign of African common
purpose. But across the continent, the memories of war
and the human and material cost of conflict are all too
obvious.
In preparing to take up this job, I have been to the
Sudan, the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
Ethiopia and Tanzania. I have seen the international
effort to help countries in conflict, or deal with conflict
on their borders. A huge effort is being made, led by
the United Nations, and there are many good stories to
tell. I would commend, Mr. Secretary-General, your
words on Sudan, and warmly welcome your visit there
next week to push forward our peace efforts in that
country.
My Government welcomes the commitment of
African nations to greater efforts to prevent conflicts
breaking out in the first place, as well as to their
resolution. The solving of the long-running dispute
between Nigeria and Cameroon over the Bakassi
peninsula is a model. We need more such successes.

12

I would emphasize two landmarks in the last two
years, on which we need to build. The first was the
adoption of resolution 1625 (2005) by the Security
Council Summit meeting.
This ambitious text called for regular monitoring
of regions at risk of conflict and set out the range of
factors that need to be part of a comprehensive
approach: not just security and political issues, but
economic, social and humanitarian factors and issues
of governance and human rights. It stressed also the
importance of a regional approach.
The second landmark — as highlighted by our
Italian and United States colleagues — was the
agreement in June this year between this Council and
the Peace and Security Council of the African Union,
setting out our joint commitment to a stronger and
more structured relationship, including on conflict
prevention.
So we have the institutional framework and we
have the declared political will to improve our efforts
on conflict prevention. I pay tribute to the work of your
delegation, Mr. President, in leading the Council’s
working group on this issue.
How, practically, can we make progress with
preventing conflict? I think there are three areas of
activity.
First, we need to be engaged and active long
before problems turn into conflicts. This means the
Council being prepared to discuss regions and
countries struggling with problems and, working in
partnership with the Secretary-General, helping to
prevent them turning into armed conflict, rather than
just confronting wars once they have started, as we
tend to do today. It requires more capacity in the
Secretariat, as called for at the World Summit, for
political analysis and conflict assessment, and a more
joined-up approach across the United Nations system
so that we have early warning of a worsening problem.
It also means more regular briefings to the Council by
the Secretariat on the prevention priorities of the day.
Secondly, we need to strengthen the partnership
for prevention between the Council and regional and
subregional organizations, particularly those in Africa.
We need to support African efforts as the African
Union (AU) builds its own systems and decisionmaking capacity, through sharing best practice and
know-how. We should make full use of the annual

07-49195

S/PV.5735

meetings between the Security Council and the AU
Peace and Security Council to discuss prevention
priorities, perhaps making conflict prevention a
standing item on their agenda. Mediation efforts by the
United Nations and the AU should be coordinated. Our
envoys should work together, as Jan Eliasson and
Salim Salim are doing in Darfur.
Thirdly, there is the wider dimension, as the
Secretary-General has eloquently set out in his
introductory remarks. We all agreed in 2005 that
development, security and human rights are interlinked
and mutually reinforcing.
For sustained peace, we need to re-energize the
world’s efforts to achieve the Millennium Development
Goals, as my Prime Minister called for here on 31 July.
We need to be more effective in addressing human
rights abuses and social exclusion, which are often at
the root of conflict, and in ensuring that those who
perpetrate
serious
violations
of
international
humanitarian law are held to account. How can
countries move on from past conflicts without justice,
restitution and, ultimately, reconciliation?
And we need to encourage good governance and
fuller political participation, not just in Africa but in
the Middle East and elsewhere. Progress on all these
fronts will promote peaceful coexistence and
reconciliation, both between countries and within
them. My Government is committed to playing its part,
and I personally will do everything that I can over my
time on this Council to make progress towards these
goals.
Mr. Yankey (Ghana): We too are pleased to
welcome the Secretary-General and Ambassador Léo
Mérorès, who is representing the General Assembly.
We thank them for their statements. We further wish to
commend the delegation of the Republic of the Congo
for organizing the debate on conflict prevention and
resolution in Africa, which, in the view of my
delegation, remains a crucial challenge in the agenda
for peace in Africa. We also thank the Congolese
delegation for drawing up a concept paper that is very
forward-looking in terms of its overall posture, not
only towards the question of peace but also by
emphasizing the need to build on existing initiatives
and institutional mechanisms in the furtherance of
peace on our continent.
It is important to stress that African States are
increasingly taking ownership of the process of

07-49195

addressing the peace and conflict issues that affect
them. Over the past decade, there has been significant
progress in strengthening peace and security in Africa
through peace processes in Mozambique, Sierra Leone,
Mali, Liberia and Côte d’Ivoire, as well as in building
Africa’s own capacity to manage conflicts through the
African Union (AU) and the New Partnership for
Africa’s Development (NEPAD). Through the
framework of the African security architecture, in
particular the Peace and Security Council, the AU has
established an integrated and a comprehensive
mechanism that provides early warning on potentially
explosive situations.
In addition, the Constitutive Act of the African
Union binds its members to a number of democratic
principles, including the rejection of unconstitutional
change of government. The African Peer Review
Mechanism (APRM) is another instrument to address
governance issues identified as being among the major
root causes of most of the conflicts in Africa. These
and other initiatives clearly demonstrate a
determination and commitment of African countries to
resort to intra-African solutions in dealing with crisis
in the region.
These developments are consistent with the
position outlined by the Secretary-General in his report
in document A/60/891, where it is correctly observed
that the multilayered nature of effective preventive
action and crisis management means no State or
organization can act alone.
Although the African Union is determined to play
a leading role in the maintenance of peace and security
in Africa, it seeks to do so in close partnership with the
United Nations in particular and the world community
generally. This is evident in the numerous initiatives
undertaken by both the African countries themselves
and by non-African organizations, including bilateral
partners, to strengthen cooperation with the AU and
other, subregional, organizations. The most notable
initiative is the adoption in 2005 of the United Nations
Ten-year Capacity-building Programme for the African
Union, followed last year by the Declaration on
Enhancing UN-AU Cooperation. Both the Programme
and Declaration reflect our joint commitment to find
more effective ways to advance peace and security in
Africa. The United Nations is also working with the
AU to develop a standby force capable of rapid
deployment.

13

S/PV.5735

Recently, the Peace and Security Council of the
African Union and the United Nations Security
Council, meeting in Addis Ababa, committed
themselves to the development of a stronger and more
structured relationship in the areas of the prevention,
management and resolution of conflict and
peacekeeping and peacebuilding. With this new
framework of cooperation, a new dynamism is
expected in the overall relations between the two
organizations.
The G-8 African Action Plan, among other
objectives, also seeks to support efforts by African
countries and the United Nations to better regulate the
activities of arms brokers and traffickers and to
eliminate the flow of illicit weapons to and within
Africa. Bilateral partners like the United Kingdom, the
European Union, the United States and others have all
contributed in diverse ways to support Africa and
enhance its capacities to deal with the complex
conflicts afflicting the continent.
The ultimate objective in all these efforts, I
believe, is to develop a new peace and security
architecture that can contribute to preventing conflict
and maintain durable peace on the continent. But as the
Secretary-General’s
report
acknowledges,
an
unacceptable gap still remains between rhetoric and
reality in the area of conflict prevention, and that too
often the international community spends vast sums of
money to fight fires that could have been extinguished
through preventive actions. A fraction of the $18
billion mentioned in the Secretary-General’s report
could have been expended on efficient and effective
prevention action.
The observation by the Secretary-General,
coupled with the myriad of conflict-resolution
strategies tried out over the years, should prompt us to
question why our efforts have not had the desired
impact. Part of the answer lies with lack of political
will and part with lack of commitment to address the
root causes of conflicts.
For the Security Council to define its role
properly, as well as to enhance its capacity to
contribute meaningfully towards conflict prevention
and resolution in Africa, it is imperative that we pay
careful attention to the underlying causes of these
conflicts in the first place. Related to this issue is the
question of what problems should be and should not be
discussed by the Council.

14

It is widely acknowledged that most armed
conflicts in Africa arise out of failures in governance
and chronic economic vulnerability and their
destabilizing impact on the process of democratization,
the rule of law and respect for human rights. Hence,
the issues of sustainable development and transparency
and accountability in public institutions are central not
only to consolidating peace and stability, but also to
preventing tension from turning into violence.
The Security Council, as the organ with the
primary responsibility for the maintenance of
international peace and security, must of necessity be
interested in these issues as ones of strategic
importance to its mandate. The time has come,
therefore, for the Council to redefine its relationship
with the other organs of the United Nations bearing
direct responsibility for some of the problems that
account for the proliferation of conflicts in Africa.
On the other hand, my delegation believes that
the Council could exercise the necessary discretion,
albeit prudently, when it becomes necessary to consider
looming threats to peace in exceptional circumstances.
The Council must equally be mindful of emergent
challenges — especially in the area of the
environment — that have far-reaching implications for
international peace and security in the foreseeable
future.
In all these efforts, African Governments owe
their countries and citizens a responsibility to protect
lives and property. They must demonstrate the political
will and, in collaboration with civil society, the private
sector and the international community, fulfil their
share of the responsibilities.
In conclusion, we must accept that we are all in
this together. Instability in Africa has global
implications, as it can create zones of lawlessness,
which can be exploited by criminals and terrorists.
Without increased investment in conflict prevention,
Africa will not achieve the rapid acceleration in
development that its people seek. Investing in
development is itself an investment in peace and
security.
Mr. Kumalo (South Africa): We wish at the
outset to express our appreciation to the Congolese
presidency for organizing this important meeting. We
also wish to welcome the Secretary-General and to
thank him for his unwavering support for Africa. We
believe that his trip to the Sudan comes at just the right

07-49195

S/PV.5735

time, when we need a push to make sure that the
people of Darfur are not forgotten. In addition, we
welcome Ambassador Mérorès, representing the Office
of the President of the General Assembly, and
Ambassador Christian in his other incarnation,
representing the Peacebuilding Commission.
This debate comes after the recent visit by the
United Nations Security Council to Addis Ababa to
consult with the African Union on common strategies
to address ongoing conflicts in Africa. During the
historic working session between the Security Council
and the African Union Peace and Security Council,
concrete suggestions were made about developing
synergies in the area of conflict prevention and
peacekeeping at the institutional and operational levels.
Our deliberations today can only further strengthen the
response of the international community to making
peace sustainable in Africa and, indeed, elsewhere in
the world.
Conflict prevention cannot be addressed in
isolation. Matters of conflict prevention, conflict
resolution and peacekeeping are linked inextricably to
peace and stability, good governance and the deepening
of democracy, and all can contribute to concrete efforts
towards achieving sustainable social and economic
development.
Conflicts in one country have the potential to
destabilize neighbouring countries, with devastating
consequences. It is therefore critical to build on
national processes and to implement regional strategies
to combat such challenges as transnational crime, drug
and human trafficking and the proliferation of small
arms. South Africa has always welcomed efforts by
national Governments, the African Union and the
United Nations to address challenges of conflict
prevention in a meaningful manner. It is important that
strategies dealing with conflict prevention continue to
be further developed and harnessed in order to produce
tangible and visible results. In other words, there can
be no peace without sustainable development,
democracy and the protection of fundamental human
rights.
Nearly a decade ago, former Secretary-General
Kofi Annan published a comprehensive report on the
causes of conflict and the promotion of durable peace
and sustainable development in Africa. The report
stressed, among other reasons, the following factors
contributing to instability in the African continent:

07-49195

historical legacies — that is, colonial frontiers,
political legacies and commercial relations established
under colonial rule; support for authoritarian regimes
during the Cold War era; internal factors such as the
nature of power-sharing and the politicization of
ethnicity; and external factors — that is, economic
interest, competition for resources, the destabilization
of neighbouring States and the effects of war
economies. The former Secretary-General called on the
United Nations to adopt a prevention strategy rather
than rely on the usual reactive response to conflict. He
argued that such a strategy called for a more holistic
and developmental focus in addressing the root causes
of conflict, including addressing socio-economic,
cultural, environmental, institutional and other
structural causes of conflict, rather than treating only
its symptoms.
Two further reports on the prevention of armed
conflict, in 2001, and a progress report on the
prevention of armed conflict, in 2006, were published.
They contained numerous recommendations on how
the United Nations could collectively mobilize greater
coherence and focus for conflict prevention.
Yet Africa remains confronted by conflicts driven
by underdevelopment, poverty and hunger, lack of
democracy, injustice, religious extremism and plain
ignorance. It would therefore seem obvious that a
reassessment of how the United Nations contributes to
conflict prevention must be undertaken, taking into
account the practical experience gained over many
years of resolving conflict in Africa. The active role
that the African Union has played and continues to play
in conflict prevention and resolution in Africa is a huge
asset in complementing the efforts of the United
Nations.
The establishment of the Peace and Security
Council; the African standby force; the Early Warning
System; the Pan-African Parliament; the Economic,
Social and Cultural Council; the New Partnership for
Africa’s Development; and the African Peer Review
Mechanism have gone a long way in improving
security as well as creating sustaining conditions of
political stability, good governance and economic
development.
It is now up to the United Nations to use its
convening power to link all global efforts to create a
better and safer world for all the world’s citizens. We
all share the responsibility to ensure that the United

15

S/PV.5735

Nations lives up to expectations in strengthening
regional and continental structures to complement
global initiatives in conflict prevention. In organizing
this open debate on conflict prevention and resolution,
the Congolese delegation has given us the opportunity
to discuss ways to improve the manner in which the
United Nations can address the issue of conflict
prevention in a coherent and coordinated fashion. We
believe that the draft presidential statement before us
lays a good foundation for that effort, and we support
it.
Mr. Al-Qahtani (Qatar) (spoke in Arabic): First,
I wish to state how much my delegation appreciates the
efforts of the president of the Council for the month of
August. We wish to commend you Sir, for wisely
choosing to hold this thematic debate on the role of the
Security Council in conflict prevention and resolution,
in particular in Africa.
My delegation would have preferred the debate to
be more extensive and more focused on the role of the
Council in conflict prevention in general, because there
are a number of conflicts throughout the world where
the Council has virtually no presence and where it does
little to put an end to those conflicts, such as in the
Middle East. At the same time, we will have an
opportunity to debate that issue tomorrow morning.
Two years ago, meeting at the level of Heads of
State and Government, Council members adopted
resolution 1625 (2005) to promote the effectiveness of
the role of the Security Council in the prevention of
armed conflict, in particular in Africa. The resolution
contained important preventive measures that
addressed among other issues the handling of emerging
conflicts, as a preliminary to their resolution. We wish
to draw attention in particular to conflict prevention,
rather than confining ourselves to addressing existing
conflicts.
My delegation wishes to emphasize the
importance of analysing the experiences of past
conflicts in Africa. In fact, a number of reports
published by the Secretariat in past years warned that
there could be conflicts in some countries that could
risk spilling over from one country to another. The
question should be posed — what are the causes of the
proliferation of those conflicts? Were the warnings not
taken seriously; or was there a lack of resources that
prevented the Council from taking up the challenge?
Has the Council failed to address the root causes of

16

those armed conflicts such as illiteracy, economic
corruption, inadequacies in domestic policies, lack of
transparency and credibility, non-compliance by
Governments with the rule of law, violations of human
rights, the illegal trafficking of small arms and light
weapons, or the role of the illegal exploitation of
natural resources which has ignited conflicts as those
resources have been pillaged?
Cooperation between the United Nations and the
African Union must be solidified in the area of the
maintenance of international peace and security in
order to overcome the obstacles and challenges
concerning armed conflict in Africa, in particular
following the adoption of the joint communiqué
between the African Union Peace and Security Council
and the Security Council in Addis Ababa during the
mission of the Security Council last June. Prior to that,
a communiqué was issued in November 2006, also in
Addis Ababa, which was a memorandum of
understanding between the two organizations on a
10-year partnership. In order for the memorandums and
communiqués to have any effect, we hope that in
future, Council resolutions concerning cooperation
between the United Nations and the African Union, as
well as other international and regional organizations,
would be issued under Chapter VIII of the United
Nations Charter so that words will be followed by
actions and there will be true partnerships between the
United Nations and other organizations, in particular
the African Union.
In addition, the United Nations must not hesitate
to bring to bear its resources and expertise for the
benefit of regional initiatives undertaken by the
African Union. Such extremely praiseworthy initiatives
include the African Union Mission in the Sudan
(AMIS) and the African Union Mission in Somalia
(AMISOM) to maintain peace in Somalia. As the
Council is aware, political and financial reasons have
prevented AMISOM from benefiting from necessary
support when the last resolution on Somalia was
adopted (S/RES/1772 (2007)).
The role of the Economic Community of West
African States, which has contributed to the
establishment of an effective collective security regime
at the subregional level as a member of the Standing
Advisory Committee on Security Questions in Central
Africa, must also be strengthened. That Committee was
created in 1992 and since then has played a role in
preventive diplomacy and conflict prevention. In

07-49195

S/PV.5735

addition to regional and subregional measures which
have been emphasized in today’s presidential
statement, Qatar also wishes to call upon countries in
the Great Lakes region of Africa to implement the Pact
on Security, Stability and Development among those
countries, which was adopted during the summit
meeting of the International Conference on the Great
Lakes Region held in Nairobi in December 2006.
Those arrangements and mechanisms are part and
parcel of the international collective security system as
provided for in the United Nations Charter. It is thus
essential to genuinely recognize the importance of
those arrangements and of enhancing them as a part of
the mechanisms for maintaining international peace
and security that the United Nations must support
financially and logistically when necessary.
We can note as an example, and as we noticed
during the last Council mission to Africa in June, there
are important questions that are not given adequate
attention. They require that the Council adjust the
method of addressing them so that our working
methodology in preventing and resolving conflicts in
Africa is balanced and professional and so that our
focus is not just on resolving on certain topics that do
not serve the principles of maintaining international
peace and security and equality among States.
For example, the Council must address the
challenges of cross-border security between African
States and the deplorable humanitarian conditions,
violations of human rights and the ethnic conflicts in
some African countries, particularly in West Africa,
which the Prosecutor of the International Criminal
Court was repeatedly unable to visit in order to study
the humanitarian situation there.
If we wish to work seriously to prevent and
resolve conflicts in Africa, we must change our tactics
and methodology of work, particularly in the Security
Council, which must be able to deal with all issues of
Africa transparently, justly and fairly while respecting
fully States’ sovereignty and territorial integrity.
Finally, protection of children and youth must
also be seen as an important aspect of any
comprehensive conflict prevention strategy. The
Council’s action in this regard should not be restricted
to considering the conditions of children affected by
existing conflicts. Child protection programmes should
include measures to address the decline of levels of
primary education and high unemployment rates

07-49195

among young people, which is considered the main
cause of many children engaging with the parties of
any conflict.
Mr. Liu Zhenmin (China) (spoke in Chinese):
The Chinese delegation welcomes the initiative of the
delegation of the Republic of the Congo to hold this
open debate on prevention and resolution of conflicts,
in particular in Africa.
The Security Council bears the primary
responsibility for the maintenance of international
peace and security. Effective implementation of this
noble mandate hinges on the trust and support of all
Member States of the United Nations and on the
coordination and cooperation of regional and
subregional organizations, as well as on its own
persistent efforts to explore new solutions.
The Chinese delegation would like to make the
following four points on the topic before the Council
today.
First, greater importance should be attached to
preventive diplomacy, as was rightly pointed out in the
letter addressed to the Secretary-General by the
delegation of the Republic of the Congo, of 14 August
2007 (S/2007/496). Although the Security Council has
on many occasions underscored its determination to
enhance the effectiveness of United Nations efforts to
prevent armed conflicts and to develop an effective,
comprehensive strategy on conflict prevention,
progress on the work in this area remains less
satisfactory. The main reason for this is that the
tendency towards conflict resolution rather than
prevention is yet to be effectively redressed.
In the past five years, the United Nations has
spent more than $18 billion on peacekeeping
operations. If more effective efforts had been carried
out in the area of conflict prevention, much less would
have been spent and many more lives would have been
saved from the scourge of conflict. It is therefore
important to be fully committed to putting all ideas
about conflict prevention into practice.
Secondly, more reform and ingenuity should be
encouraged. Since its inception sixty years ago, the
United Nations has made unremitting efforts and
widely acknowledged achievements in the field of
conflict prevention and resolution. Nevertheless,
confronted by various natures and forms of armed
conflict today, the Council should be adapted to

17

S/PV.5735

changing circumstances and come up with solutions
more suitable to current situations.

international affairs in general. The Council should
attach greater importance to its work in this area.

While dealing with the domestic conflicts of a
country, it is essential to bring into full play the active
role of the Government of the country concerned. The
Council’s overall objective in this area is to help the
national Government to establish social stability. In
case of sudden crisis, it is all the more important for
the Council’s actions to be attuned to the background
and the environment that shape the crisis and to
intervene in a timely manner so as to effectively
resolve the crisis.

Lastly, more efforts must be made to fully utilize
resources within the United Nations system and to give
full play to the good offices of the Secretary-General.
Multiple track approaches — addressing problems in
political, security, social and economic areas — are
needed to prevent and resolve conflicts. Given their
respective expertise and vast experience within their
own fields, the Security Council, the Economic and
Social Council, the Peacebuilding Commission and the
General Assembly should set an example for the
international
community
by
enhancing
their
communication and exchanges and learning from one
another so as to make up for their own shortfalls with a
view to making concerted efforts.

Special attention should be paid to dealing with
problems both at their surface level and at their roots
by taking an integrative approach addressing the
economic and social causes of the conflict. All the
armed conflicts on the African continent stem from a
multitude of causes, most of which are related to
poverty and arms proliferation. Only by addressing the
deeply rooted causes of conflict can it be possible to
gradually emerge from playing a reactive role as
firefighters and gain more leverage in the endeavour to
prevent conflict, thus improving the effectiveness of
United Nations peacekeeping efforts.
Thirdly, coordination and cooperation with the
regional and subregional organizations should be
significantly enhanced. It is widely acknowledged that
in recent years the African Union (AU) has played an
ever more important role in coping with the conflicts in
the African region on behalf of the international
community, and it has made invaluable contributions to
the maintenance of world peace and security. As an
embodiment of the will of African countries to achieve
unity and self-reliance, the AU is endowed with a
unique political, moral and geographical advantage in
handling conflict prevention and resolution in Africa.
The Security Council should continue to
strengthen its cooperation with the African Union and
its Peace and Security Council, fully utilizing its
regional early warning mechanism and peacekeeping
capacity and providing various types of assistance to
the AU to help it to strengthen its capacity-building. At
present, matters related to Africa account for over
60 per cent of the issues on the Council’s regular
agenda dealing with regional hot-spot problems. As a
matter of fact, by providing assistance to the African
Union and to subregional organizations in Africa, the
Council is also improving its own capacity to handle

18

In recent years, the efforts of the SecretaryGeneral and his representatives to actively participate
in resolving regional conflicts through their
international good offices have yielded noticeable
results. In doing so, they have benefited to a great
extent from the trust and support of the Security
Council. In the future, the Council should continue to
support, through various ways and means, the
Secretary-General’s role in this area.
Mr. Verbeke (Belgium) (spoke in French): First
of all, I would like to thank you, Sir, in your role as
President of this Council, for taking the initiative to
organize this open debate on the issue of conflict
prevention and resolution, in particular in Africa — a
region that, as you know, is particularly close to our
hearts. We welcomed the participation of the SecretaryGeneral at the beginning of our debate, and we
welcome now the presence of the Deputy SecretaryGeneral, who is with us for the continuation of this
very important work.
Belgium fully adheres to the statement to be
made shortly by our Portuguese colleague in the name
of the European Union. It especially aligns itself with
the comments on the role of the International Criminal
Court in the prevention of the use of force, as well as
on the importance of the role of women in both the
prevention and resolution of conflicts.
We welcome the increased attention given to
conflict prevention in the different organs of the United
Nations, particularly in the Security Council. It is the
responsibility of all parts of the United Nations to
reflect on how to reinforce this culture of prevention,

07-49195

S/PV.5735

referred to by the Secretary-General in his report last
year (A/60/891).
We welcome the continuation by the Security
Council of the work begun by resolution 1631 (2005).
That resolution emphasized the importance of closer
cooperation between the United Nations on one hand,
and regional and subregional organizations on the
other, in all phases of crisis management. During the
open debate last March on this topic (5649th meeting),
we said that cooperation, coordination and capacity are
the three key concepts determining the success of any
joint effort between the Council and regional and
subregional organizations.
Belgium advocates a pragmatic and empirical
approach in this sphere. In this context, we welcome
the publication of a joint communiqué by the Security
Council and the African Union during the joint meeting
on 16 June in Addis Ababa. We would particularly like
to highlight the decision to hold a meeting at least once
per year between the Security Council and the Peace
and Security Council of the African Union.
As my Peruvian colleague has already pointed
out, continuing and expanding the discussion begun
during the public debate held this past June on the
subject of natural resources and conflict should be
another element of the Security Council’s efforts in the
area of conflict prevention. In the presidential
statement adopted by the Council on that occasion, the
Council took note of the role that natural resources can
play in armed conflict and post-conflict situations. As
we are all aware, natural resources can act as a
destabilizing factor. There is, therefore, a need for
sound management of natural resources, not only in
terms of development but also of peace and security
and the prevention of conflict.
What can, and should, the Security Council do?
The Council should, of course, not seek to exercise
some sort of stewardship over existing initiatives, such
as the Kimberly Process and the Extractive Industries
Transparency Initiative, which are not directly under
the Council’s purview. However, those initiatives do
have an impact upon international peace and security,
which are the primary responsibilities of the Security
Council. The efforts already being carried out by the
Council with regard to natural resources — through the
sanctions committees, among other ways — should be
strengthened and made more coherent. In its
management of conflicts, the Council should consider

07-49195

at an earlier stage whether it is appropriate for it to
address the natural resources aspect. The group of
experts mechanism could be strengthened through the
establishment of a standing expertise centre within the
Secretariat — without, however, placing a further
burden on existing structures.
Mr. Shcherbak (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): The Russian delegation welcomes the
participation of Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon at
today’s meeting, especially as it is taking place on the
eve of his trip to Africa.
We believe that the President’s initiative to have
the Security Council take up the issue of the prevention
and resolution of conflicts in Africa is both important
and timely.
The United Nations, the Security Council, the
Secretary-General and the African Union have recently
done significant work to identify the causes of conflict
in Africa. Resolving those conflicts entails in particular
overcoming old and well-known political and socioeconomic problems, which are being exacerbated by
new challenges and threats. There is no doubt that
African States must themselves play the primary role in
resolving those problems. As experience has
demonstrated, our African colleagues do indeed have
the desire to do so. Not only is that evident in the
measures undertaken by African States themselves to
overcome critical socio-economic problems, carry out
structural economic reforms and reforms in the areas of
management, promoting democracy, law and order,
judicial systems and the establishment of democratic
armed forces; it is also borne out by the course charted
by African States to strengthen regional inter-African
cooperation, thereby ensuring a joint platform to
collectively resolve the major challenges facing Africa,
to strengthen peace, stability and security on the
continent,
to
increase Africa’s
peacekeeping
capabilities, to combat infections diseases and to
improve environmental conditions in Africa. We
believe that the course of action plotted by African
States merits support, given the interrelated causes of
conflict on the continent.
As the Council is aware, there is no quick or easy
fix to meeting the major challenges that exist in
preventing conflict. Africa’s friends, and Africans
themselves, must undertake multifaceted and
painstaking joint efforts in order to break the vicious
circle, in which insufficient development breeds social

19

S/PV.5735

problems that in turn intensify political and military
instability, thereby leading to conflict and ultimately
destroying social and economic development
programmes.
We are pleased that we have come to today’s
meeting with some positive results. The SecretaryGeneral today gave us some optimistic information in
saying that the number of conflicts in Africa has recently
declined. Another positive element has been the
constructive practical dialogue between the Security
Council and the Peace and Security Council of the
African Union in resolving acute crisis situations — a
dialogue that recurs on a regular basis. We believe that the
existing agreements between the two bodies, especially
the Addis Ababa agreement of 16 November 2006 and the
joint communiqué of 16 June 2007, which was issued
during the Council’s mission to Africa, serve to
strengthen the basis for that interaction and sets a course
of action for the long term. We also support the proposal
to have the Council once again consider ways to further
implement resolution 1625 (2005), once the SecretaryGeneral submits his report on the issue.
I should also point out the evident increase in the
efforts of African States themselves in the area of
preventing and resolving conflicts on the continent,
especially through the work of the African Union and
regional and subregional organizations. That illustrates
Africa’s readiness and capability to assume
responsibility for resolving its problems. In that regard,
I should like to note another important element,
namely, that the further development of early-warning
mechanisms, which have been frequently referred to
today, must go hand-in-hand with the strengthening of
cooperation and coordination mechanisms within the
United Nations system as well as with international
partners, especially with African regional and
subregional organizations. In our view, successful early
identification of such conflicts will depend upon how
comprehensively we implement the early warning
system and on how carefully we bear in mind the
specificities of individual conflict situations.
We share the view of the Secretary-General that
investing in logistical and intelligence capacities in
order to prevent conflicts and strengthen the
capabilities of the United Nations in the area of
conflict mediation and political analysis to assess
conflict situations will be very beneficial for the
international community, as it will contribute to
lowering the number of conflicts in Africa.

20

There is no doubt that without truly achieving
long-term resolution of local conflicts it will not be
possible to ensure that Africa can really achieve robust
sustainable development and full integration into the
world economy.
One of the key components of a strategy to
strengthen peace must be the establishment of an
effective pan-African security architecture that aims
both at conflict prevention and resolution and at
comprehensive
resolution
of
post-conflict
reconstruction issues.
The international community must do everything
possible to ensure that the mechanisms to prevent and
resolve conflict set up by the African Union and the
continent’s subregions become fully operational.
We also believe that we must do more to activate
the provisions of Chapter VIII of the Charter,
encouraging regional organizations to take proactive
steps in the areas of preventive diplomacy and the
peaceful resolution of disputes. That entails in
particular continuing the practice of African
peacekeeping operations supported by the Council and
providing assistance to establish African rapiddeployment forces and early-warning systems. In doing
so, we must of course comply with the prerogatives set
for the Council by the Charter as regards the
establishment of peacekeeping operations whose
mandates include the use of force.
Russia will continue to provide all possible
assistance to resolve the problems of African countries,
with which we have traditionally had ties of friendship
and partnership. Africa was, and continues to be, a
priority focus. We have been very pleased to note the
growing role of African States in world affairs and
their contributions to strengthening the multilateral
approach to resolving the most acute problems of our
time.
In conclusion, I would like to note that the
Russian delegation supports the draft presidential
statement that has been prepared by the President with
regard to today’s agenda item. In our view, this
document contains key provisions that constitute a
programme of action for the international community
in its efforts to maintain peace and security and to
further enhance the role of the Security Council in
conflict prevention and resolution in Africa.

07-49195

S/PV.5735

Mrs. Asmady (Indonesia): Allow me to join
others in thanking you and your delegation for taking
the initiative of organizing this open debate on a very
important issue. I would also like to thank the
Secretary-General, Mr. Mérorès, who has spoken on
behalf the President of the General Assembly, and
Mr. Christian, Acting Chairman of the Organizational
Committee of the Peacebuilding Commission, and to
welcome the Deputy Secretary-General, Mrs. Migiro,
to the Council.
Conflict prevention and resolution in Africa is a
major concern of the Security Council and is an
important part of its work for the maintenance of
international peace and security. The Council’s
institutional and practical cooperation with the African
Union in this regard continues to evolve, moving today
in the direction of greater partnership. We welcome
this development.
There are five major points underlying the
Indonesian perspective on this issue.
The first is that the quantity and nature of
conflicts in Africa have been changing. Conflicts that
five or ten years ago may have seemed intractable are
now being resolved, particularly in the Great Lakes
region and in West Africa. Other difficult problems,
however, persist, as in Somalia and the Western
Sahara, and some new ones have emerged, particularly
in East and Central Africa. These conflicts, moreover,
are far more complicated and wide-ranging,
interlinking intra- and inter-State conflict dynamics.
The United Nations, together with the African Union
and subregional organizations, has confronted these
issues and is deploying new ways of cooperating and
collaborating to address recent and persistent conflicts.
Second, preventive measures are cost-effective
and save lives. The best way to maintain peace and
security is to stop conflicts before they start and, when
they do start, to keep them contained. The tinderbox of
unrest in Africa needs to be monitored and kept in
check, lest it threaten to ignite as a result of polarizing
issues and economic adversity and deprivation.
In order to prevent a flame from becoming a
wildfire, we need an early awareness of the possibility
that conflict might occur. An early warning mechanism
helps alert us to potential or latent conflicts. While the
concept of an early warning system is not new, we
believe its full potential has not been realized. It is not
enough to simply be aware of hot spots for conflicts.

07-49195

We need resources and the means to alter the situation
on the ground and contribute to the maintenance of
peace in addition to the ability to predict where conflict
might arise.
It has never been very clear, however, what calls
for preventive measures by the international
community and what falls within the domestic
jurisdiction of States under Article 2 of the Charter of
the United Nations. It is clear that conflicts in Africa
today are, with one exception, intra-State conflicts. We
believe that countries have the primary responsibility
to prevent and resolve their internal conflicts. The
preventive methods called for in the report of the
Secretary-General last year on the preventive of armed
conflict are applicable; in all cases these include
structural, operational and systematic prevention
methods.
Our next point is that conflict prevention is
closely related to efforts to address the root causes of
conflict. Particularly important is the fact that the
sources of conflict are frequently economic and social
in nature. Consequently, the Security Council should
more closely engage its partners in the United Nations
system that are competent in economic and social
issues. Indeed, Article 65 of the Charter lays the
foundation for such cooperation. The Security Council
affirmed in resolution 1625 (2005) its determination to
cooperate with the Economic and Social Council.
Fourth, while we should do all we can to prevent
conflict in Africa in terms of committing troops to
peacekeeping, there are many advantages to troops
being drawn from within the African region. As
recently highlighted in Darfur and Somalia, we need to
put a mechanism in place whereby more troops can be
trained and the African standby force can become truly
operational.
Utilizing regional forces is beneficial, as they
have the advantage of familiarity with the region,
cultures and people and in many cases have the
potential to gain greater trust among the parties. Such a
force could also be deployed faster and have an
immediate impact on the ground while the Security
Council considers the issue. There are also greater
incentives to commit troops to conflicts in
neighbouring countries, because of their inherent
interest in regional stability. It is essential that United
Nations peacekeeping operations or United Nations-

21

S/PV.5735

mandated operations should be neutral and perceived
as such.
Finally, we are convinced that United
Nations/African Union cooperation, coordination and
collaboration are essential for the maintenance of peace
and security in Africa. We welcome recent
strengthening of that cooperation, in which African
countries and the African Union play a central role,
while the United Nations strengthens the provision of
resources for the African Union.
The joint communiqué between the Security
Council and the Peace and Security Council of the
African Union of last June is an essential instrument
for strengthening and developing a stronger and more
structured relationship on conflict prevention,
management and resolution; on peacekeeping and
peacebuilding; and on information-sharing on conflict
situations on the agendas of the two bodies.
A multi-pronged approach is required to prevent,
resolve and eradicate violent conflict in Africa. There
are promising signs in many of the existing conflicts in
Africa today, and with appropriate preventive and
innovative measures we may be able to ensure that
there are fewer human tragedies in the region in the
future. We should commit our intellectual, political,
financial and institutional resources to this effort and
develop more advanced coordination with regional
economic and political institutions. The time to act is
now.
Mr. Lacroix (France) (spoke in French): First of
all, I would like to thank you, Mr. President, for having
organized this public debate. The involvement of the
Congo, which chairs the working group on conflict
prevention established in accordance with resolution
1625 (2005), is long-standing and active. We welcome
this involvement and the presence, at the beginning of
this debate, of the Secretary-General, that of the
Deputy Secretary-General and their commitment to
Africa. I would also like to thank Mr. Mérorès and Mr.
Christian for their statements. I would like to state that
my delegation associates itself fully with the statement
that will be made in a few moments by the Permanent
Representative of Portugal on behalf of the European
Union.
The subject of today’s debate is of particular
importance for the French authorities, within the
general framework of our commitment to peace in
Africa. In this spirit, the President of the French

22

Republic will chair, in New York, in conjunction with
the opening of the upcoming session of the General
Assembly, a Security Council meeting of heads of State
and Government on the theme of Africa and the
challenges to international peace and security. The
Security Council is stepping up its involvement in
combating conflicts, particularly in Africa, increasingly
taking account of their regional dimension, as it did in
its successive dealings with the case of Darfur, and the
regional consequences of this crisis for neighbouring
countries.
We should continue along these lines, but also
give greater thought to prevention. The Council should
perhaps reflect on what is the specific feature of
prevention that would cause it to intervene in sensitive
contexts, where the absence of an open crisis makes it
more difficult — even when time is of the essence —
to justify actions that need to be taken on an
emergency basis. How, specifically, could or should the
Council act in this context?
The Secretary-General shared his thinking on
what could be done to make the Secretariat more
effective in conflict prevention. My delegation would
like to suggest some ways in which we could develop
our thinking on this issue.
First of all, the Council, through the Secretariat,
should doubtless be better and more quickly informed
of the multiple precursors portending a crisis. That
requires a strengthening of the tools of the Secretariat
to become aware of and assess crisis situations. Indeed,
the Secretary-General plays an essential role in this
area, since the Charter of the United Nations authorizes
him to draw the attention of the Council to
different situations, but also because the SecretaryGeneral plays — often discreetly — an effective
mediation role, as was done on the question of the
border between Cameroon and Nigeria, and
particularly the Bakassi peninsula.
A more ambitious prevention policy also requires
more cooperation, in the case of Africa, between the
United Nations and the African Union, in particular
between the Security Council and the African Union
Peace and Security Council, allowing the goal of
prevention to be served by the close links forged
between these organizations with regard to issues such
as Sudan and Darfur. This cooperation of the United
Nations with the African Union as well as with the
European Union or regional organizations such as the

07-49195

S/PV.5735

Economic Community of West African States
(ECOWAS), enables specific actions to be taken in key
areas for conflict prevention. Such key areas include,
for example, the sending of electoral observers at times
that are, by definition, moments of high political
tension, in which the international community has a
role to play both in encouraging the political actors,
and in affirming its vigilance, as the Council did very
recently regarding the elections in Sierra Leone.
The United Nations and the Council should also
continue to work on the causes of instability. First of
all, beyond national political conflicts, they must better
understand and deal with issues such as illegal
exploitation of natural resources, based on what was
done in the case of the blood diamonds, or arms
trafficking, particularly of small arms and light
weapons, the proliferation of which makes it all the
more difficult to extricate countries from crises.
Combating these threats and, more generally, an
active conflict prevention policy also requires steadfast
support to improvements in the capacities of countries
and organizations that are on the front lines in Africa.
The international community must intensify its already
substantial efforts to build African administrative and
judicial capacities, to improve the rule of law, and to
upgrade the organization of the security sector. The
European Union, not only through its training
programmes, but also in the form of an unprecedented
level of financing, in particular, the Peace Facility and
programmes of the European Development Fund, is a
solid partner to national and regional programmes that
contribute to conflict prevention. Consideration is
being given, in particular in West Africa, to tripartite
programmes that would bring together the United
Nations, the European Union and subregional
organizations like ECOWAS.
Furthermore, protection of civilians is also a
condition for avoiding conflicts and their resurgence.
The Council is working in this area, particularly with
respect to the issue of women and children in armed
conflicts. France is pleased at the Secretary-General’s
appointment last May of Mr. Francis Deng as Special
Adviser on the Prevention of Genocide.
Finally we should do a better job of allowing for
the risks of resumption of conflict and relapse into
violence. Several countries in Africa, with the support
of the United Nations, have found their way out of the
crises under which they were suffering. The

07-49195

Peacebuilding Commission must play its full part in
retaining what has been achieved and in guaranteeing a
solid investment by the international community in the
post-conflict phase. Moreover, combating impunity is
an essential factor in consolidating the gains of the
peace process, preventing the resurgence of conflicts
and dissuading those who seek to achieve their ends
through massive violations of human rights. It is one of
the challenges facing international justice in general,
and the International Criminal Court, in particular.
The Security Council therefore has an important
role to play to allow for greater coordination and
greater coherence in conflict prevention, both within
the United Nations system and beyond it, and in close
coordination with partners such as the African Union
or the European Union.
But our debate also speaks to the need for the
international community to go further and to take up,
as a part of its approach to conflict prevention, the
broader challenges that have an impact on stability in
Africa and elsewhere, notably issues of health or of
climate change. It is the wish of France that we will be
able to deal with these issues in a more in-depth
manner during the high-level Security Council event in
September to which I referred earlier.
The President (spoke in French): I would now
like to make a statement in my capacity as the
representative of the Republic of Congo.
First of all, I would like to thank SecretaryGeneral Ban Ki-moon and Deputy Secretary-General
Ms. Asha-Rose Migiro for their personal involvement,
and also commend Ambassador Mérorès and
Ambassador Christian for their statements as
representatives of the President of the General
Assembly and the Chairman of the Peacebuilding
Commission, respectively.
Nowadays, we see human distress on too many
faces around the world, marking the anguish of
aftermath which reflects a lack of security that is
unworthy of our times. We live, in fact, in a world
drenched in consumption, intoxicated by scientific and
technological prowess and stunned by economic
performance.
On the other hand, we are rightly revolted by
what is happening in Darfur, the situation in Somalia is
of concern to us, and we are very anxious at the turn of

23

S/PV.5735

events in the eastern part of the Democratic Republic
of the Congo, to give just a few examples.
This contrasting picture brings us up against the
purposes of the United Nations which, according to the
Charter, are to be a centre for harmonizing the actions
of nations in the attainment of the common ends of
peace and security, development and fundamental
freedoms.
Furthermore, maintaining international peace and
security, the main responsibility for which lies with the
Security Council, cannot be validly accomplished
except if being coupled with a process to lessen the
relative inability of nations to deal with the phenomena
that bring about insecurity.
Equipping ourselves with tools capable of making
such an investment in human security represents, in the
view of my country, an attitude and culture of
prevention that is well understood and seriously
undertaken.
Until recently, the balance of terror rested upon
the well-known adage, “if you want peace, prepare for
war”, which excused the international community from
taking any bold initiative directed at the protagonists of
an imminent conflict. Today, we do not read conflicts
in the same way. There are many variables involved —
disputes among States, obviously, but also and
increasingly disagreements within States, as well as
cross-border insecurity due to phenomena such as
terrorism or illicit trafficking in conventional arms or
natural resources.
Our debate is therefore valuable because it brings
us up to date on a topic that is certainly familiar but
that, given the diversity of approaches involved, risks
forever remaining a noble idea, inspiring in theory, that
is difficult to carry out in practice.
In proposing this item, the Congo wished to raise
awareness of the multidimensional character of any
approach to conflict prevention — to the extent that a
peacekeeping operation can be multidimensional. Even
the formula for hybrid operations has an identical
approach, in that such operations, by definition,
involve active cooperation among local, subregional or
regional organizations.
Through its resolution 1625 (2005), the Security
Council gave itself a solid foundation enabling it to
play the effective role that it assumed during its 5261st
meeting, at the level of heads of State and Government,

24

on 14 September 2005. Nonetheless, peacekeeping
operations have always taken precedence over
prevention. That is confirmed by the thematic debates
organized by the Council on issues as varied as the
protection of civilians, the role of women, natural
resources and even energy and climate change. The
Council could not provide better evidence of the
inclusive nature of its mission in this area.
The Council is thus gradually including the
underlying causes of conflicts in its field of research
for better ways to address issues related to peace and
security. The emergence of non-State actors and the
multiplicity of risk factors compel us to resort to new
initiatives to better adapt Council action to the
challenges that they pose.
Strengthening the role of the Security Council —
the terms of reference of this debate — can therefore
be seen at three levels of intervention.
The first level deals with institutions of the
United Nations system or organs directly involved,
such as the General Assembly, the Economic and
Social Council, the Peacebuilding Commission, the
Human Rights Council and humanitarian organizations,
which could do more to join forces with the Security
Council in an appropriate forum to show a spirit of
coherence, which the United Nations needs in the area
of conflict prevention.
The second level concerns States or groups of
States expected to establish, at the local level, national
mechanisms open to civil society to serve as an
interface with the international community in their
partnership relationships.
The third level deals with the relations between
the United Nations and regional organizations, under
Chapter VIII of the Charter. The United Nations
reaffirmed its commitment to those relations by
signing, on 16 November 2006, the Declaration on
Enhancing UN-AU cooperation: Framework for the
Ten-year Capacity-building Programme for the African
Union.
We are convinced that, in its practical modalities,
such cooperation will draw on the channels of existing
subregional mechanisms. Currently, the most
developed are those of the Economic Community of
West African States, supported by the United Nations
Office for West Africa — the first decentralized
regional office of the Department of Political Affairs;

07-49195

S/PV.5735

the Pact on Security, Stability and Development in the
Great Lakes Region; and the Council for Peace and
Security in Central Africa, which is eagerly awaiting
technical assistance from the United Nations Standing
Advisory Committee on Security Questions in Central
Africa, managed by the Department for Disarmament
Affairs.
With regard to the framework for the Ten-year
Capacity-building Programme for the African Union,
its strategic nature means that it will also target African
subregional organizations. That will make it possible to
focus the efforts of the United Nations and the African
Union, “with priority on conflict prevention, mediation
and good offices, peacekeeping”, given the heavy
losses inflicted by conflicts on populations of many
regions of the continent.
The concept of collective security, thus
reconsidered, is supported by my country. That is why
President Denis Sassou Nguesso is one of its most
resolute defenders, as attested by the Congo’s
endorsement of two pacts — the Great Lakes pact and
the Economic Community of West African States
pact — whose complementarity is shown in the
similarity of their mechanisms. Indeed, they are based
on the principles of non-aggression, mutual assistance,
democracy, good governance and co-development so as
to make the needs and aspirations of peoples the
components of a normalized rule of law.
So that the Security Council can soon make good
use of such political and legal instruments, the working
group that we chair wishes to be able to draw from
them the elements of a coherent comprehensive
strategy that will benefit the Council. To that end, in
November we plan to hold a seminar to explore in
greater depth the views expressed during this debate
and emphasized in the presidential statement to be
adopted.
Finally, an African thinker who died recently,
Professor Joseph Ki-Zerbo, said of Africa that it must
not remain lying down, under pain of death, but should
stand up. That is an attitude of vigilance that endows
the duty of mobilization with its raison d’être — that is
to say, prevention and betting on the future.
I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.
I call on the representative of Portugal.

07-49195

Mr. Salgueiro (Portugal): For the sake of time, I
will not read out the complete text of my intervention,
which is being distributed to members.
I have the honour to speak on behalf of the
European Union. The candidate countries Croatia,
Turkey and the former Yugoslav Republic of
Macedonia and the countries of the Stabilization and
Association Process and potential candidates Albania,
Bosnia and Herzegovina and Serbia, as well as
Ukraine, the Republic of Moldova, Armenia and
Georgia, align themselves with this statement.
The European Union (EU) would like to thank
you, Sir, for organizing today’s debate. Since this is the
first time that we have spoken under your presidency,
allow me to congratulate you on the assumption of
your duties. I would also like to express our
appreciation to the Secretary-General for his very
pertinent intervention and for his personal commitment
to this issue. In the same vein, I would like to welcome
the interventions of Ambassador Léo Mérorès and
Ambassador Leslie Kojo Christian and to salute the
presence of the Deputy Secretary-General, Ms. AshaRose Migiro.
The European Union supports the
presidential statement to be adopted later today.

draft

The European Union is very pleased to note the
strengthening of a culture of prevention across the
United Nations system. Moreover, in the institutional
context, recent United Nations reforms, including the
creation of the Human Rights Council and the
Peacebuilding Commission, are assisting countries on
the path towards sustainable peace and development,
thus helping to prevent the emergence or recurrence of
conflict.
However, further cooperation, coordination and
coherence are needed in this field, not only among the
main United Nations bodies, but also between the
United Nations and international and regional
organizations and other relevant actors, including nongovernmental organizations. We also encourage
Member States to focus resources in order to enhance
United Nations preventive mechanisms, and we
suggest that regular reporting to the Security Council
on prevention and early warning would help the
Council to better support that aim.
The European Union underlines the primary
responsibility of the Security Council for the

25

S/PV.5735

maintenance of international peace and security. In that
regard, we appreciate the contribution of and the
partnerships between the Council and international,
regional and subregional organizations in the
facilitation of political processes, as well as in
peacekeeping and post-conflict scenarios.
The European Union believes that the United
Nations should be open to using innovative approaches
proposed by regional and subregional actors, while
establishing clear arrangements for cooperation and the
division of work and responsibilities. We are
particularly pleased with the substantive progress in
the cooperation between the United Nations and the
European Union in crisis management, in particular the
signing on 12 June 2007 of the Joint Statement on UNEU Cooperation in Crisis Management. United
Nations-European
Union
cooperation
is
also
developing well in the field of conflict prevention,
notably through regular desk-to-desk dialogues.
We are also pleased with the joint communiqué
agreed to on 16 June 2007 between the United Nations
and the African Union, and we encourage a close
relationship between the United Nations, the African
Union and subregional organizations. We commend
them for setting up — with the support of the
international community, including the European
Union — peacekeeping operations on the African
continent, notably the African Union Mission in Sudan,
the African Union Mission in Somalia, and we
welcome the United Nations Security Council decision
to deploy a hybrid operation in Darfur.
Ownership and responsibility are important
principles of the European Union Strategy for Africa,
adopted by the European Council in December 2005.
We recognize that enhancing Africa’s capabilities is
crucial for African ownership. In that context, in
November 2006, the Council of the European Union
adopted Conclusions on Strengthening African
Capabilities for the Prevention, Management and
Resolution of Conflicts. A joint strategy between
Europe and Africa for the next decade is currently
under negotiation and should be adopted later this year
at the second European Union/Africa Summit, in
Lisbon.
In the area of peace and security, the ongoing
establishment of an African peace and security
architecture, including the operationalization of the
African Standby Force and the development of the

26

African Peace Support Trainers’ Association, is a key
initiative that will benefit from broad European Union
support.
Sustainable, predictable and flexible funding for
African-led peace-support operations is another major
challenge. In 2004, the European Union established the
African Peace Facility to enable us to support, using
financial instruments, African capacities in planning
and executing peace operations. The capacities of
African subregional organizations in conflict
prevention are further supported through substantial
regional programmes financed by the European
Development Fund. Tripartite capacity programmes
involving the United Nations are being considered,
notably in West Africa involving the Economic
Community of West African States.
The effective implementation of Security Council
resolution 1325 (2000) on women, peace and security
is a prerequisite for achieving, maintaining and
promoting sustainable peace. A gender perspective
must be integrated into all conflict prevention and
peacekeeping activities, in particular when developing
measures for HIV/AIDS prevention and care and
against gender-based violence.
The continued failure to protect children in
conflict, and the abuses and harms that persist after
conflicts have ostensibly ended underline the need to
give high priority to strengthening child protection in
conflict. Therefore, we welcome resolution 1612
(2005) and the mechanisms it created, as well as the
adoption of the Paris guidelines on the protection and
reintegration of children associated with armed forces
or armed groups of February 2007, as well as the Cape
Town Principles on the prevention of recruitment of
children into the armed forces and demobilization and
social reintegration of child soldiers in Africa.
Understanding the multidimensional root causes
of conflicts is the basis of conflict prevention — it is
far better to prevent than to correct. Civil society is an
important partner in preventing violent conflicts and
their recurrence, in strengthening democracy and in
promoting human rights. The European Union has
devoted considerable resources to supporting civil
society and strongly encourages others to do likewise.
United Nations organs and international and regional
organizations should also explore ways of building
partnerships with civil society groups in order to

07-49195

S/PV.5735

facilitate conflict prevention
settlement of conflicts.

and

the

peaceful

My last point is that there is no peace without
justice. Justice and the rule of law are at the core of the
peaceful settlement of disputes and of harmonious
coexistence both at the national and the international
level. The newly established unit on the rule of law
will contribute, in our opinion, to enhancing
coordination and support for rule of law issues in the
United Nations system.
Moreover, the role of the International Criminal
Court (ICC) is fundamental. The European Union
remains firmly committed to the effective functioning
of the ICC. We stress the importance of full
cooperation with the Court and call on States that have
not yet done so to accede to the Rome Statute.
The European Union welcomes the progress
made by the Court in recent years, and we believe that
the Security Council has a particular role to play in
combating impunity and preventing the most heinous
international crimes, as it is empowered to refer
situations to that Court.
The European Union will continue contributing to
international peace and security in every way possible,
including here at the United Nations, where conflict
prevention and resolution, in particular in Africa, must
continue to be of the highest priority and urgency.
The President (spoke in French): Still pursuant
to rule 37 of the provisional rules of procedure, we will
continue with the list of speakers. I now give the floor
to the representative of the Sudan.
Mr. Mohamad (Sudan) (spoke in Arabic): Allow
me to begin by stating how pleased I am to see your
delegation, Sir, presiding over the work of the Council
during the month. Yours is a brotherly African country
with a deep and valuable involvement in the
international community and my delegation wishes to
thank you for holding this very important debate. The
initiative is particularly important because it addresses
conflict prevention and resolution, in particular in
Africa, our mother continent. We hope that today’s
discussion will follow an operational and objective
approach that will contribute to strengthening the role
of the Security Council in preventing conflicts, in
keeping with the goal of eliminating the root causes of
such conflicts through peaceful settlement, in order to
achieve lasting peace and security.

07-49195

Over two years have passed since the Security
Council adopted resolution 1625 (2005), which
stressed the importance of drafting global and effective
strategies and seeking to build the capacity of the
United Nations in preventing conflicts and in building
the national capacities of individual countries involved
in conflicts by remedying the underlying causes. That
leads us to stress an important idea, namely, the need to
create priorities through the work of the Security
Council. As a first stage in addressing such problems,
we must establish priorities and then move on to
tackling those problems.
Defining the causes of conflict and settling
conflict through dialogue are matters of the highest
priority. However, the Security Council has always
taken the view that the settlement of conflicts should
be dealt with in political terms only as a second stage.
For that reason we have not been able to develop
strategies to resolve conflicts in the past because
peacekeeping operations, whatever their names and the
numbers involved, cannot recreate peace from nothing.
Thus, it is very beneficial for the Security Council to
include among its priorities the question of the political
settlement of disputes.
The prevention of armed conflicts also rests on
the particularly important premise, namely, the
constant and important role of regional and subregional
entities. Early recognition of the root causes is likewise
important, and the Security Council must emphasize
this as well. Keeping within the provisions of Chapter
VIII of the Charter and without undermining the
importance of the regional and subregional bodies that
have played an important role and have much in
common with the countries directly involved, the
African Union has shown itself to be a prime example
of regional involvement in its dealing with the situation
in Darfur. The imperative of resolving conflicts means
that the United Nations has a leading role to play here.
Another matter that should be given consideration
is strengthening the role of the United Nations in
economic and social sectors. We must also bolster the
various United Nations bodies: the General Assembly,
the Economic and Social Council, and the agencies and
funds relevant to these concerns, while also building
national capacities to achieve the Millennium
Development Goals (MDG). We must also bolster
national reconstruction and economic recovery,
technology transfer, combating climate change and

27

S/PV.5735

deterioration of the environment. Expertise needs to be
shared in these regards.
Development is a key and prime factor in
preventing conflict, and the United Nations should,
therefore, enhance its economic and social role rather
than deal with conflict prevention in a reactive manner.
Tackling the root causes of conflict will guarantee that
the peace that is developed is of a lasting nature. It also
ensures that there will be no return to war. The United
Nations could thus avoid the tremendous expenses of a
return to war and the ensuing costs of peacekeeping
operations.
The President (spoke in French): I give the floor
to the representative of Norway.
Mr. Løvald (Norway): Norway welcomes
endeavours to increase the involvement of the Security
Council in conflict prevention and resolution in Africa.
A strong commitment by the Security Council is
needed to ensure a coordinated and comprehensive
involvement of the international community in
preventing and resolving conflicts in Africa.
We support the role the regional organizations
play in the prevention and resolution of conflicts. The
African Union has already been shouldering a heavy
burden with regards to peace and security on the
African continent. We are encouraged by the fact that
African countries themselves are taking a leading role
in the settlement of African disputes by peaceful means
and in the promotion of preventive action in response
to threats to regional peace and security. To strengthen
these important regional efforts, we support close
cooperation between the United Nations and other
partners. We welcome the commitment of the Security
Council and the Peace and Security Council of the
African Union, as agreed at Addis Ababa on 16 June, to
cooperate more closely in the areas of conflict
prevention and resolution.
Norway also attaches great value to increasing
women’s role in decision-making with regard to
conflict prevention and resolution. The United Nations
and the African Union must work together to ensure
increased representation of women at all decisionmaking levels in national, regional and international
institutions and mechanisms for the prevention and
resolution of conflict.
When deployed, the African Union-United
Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur (UNAMID) will

28

be a big step forward in international peace operations.
The ability of UNAMID to fulfil its mandate to provide
security, prevent threats and attacks against civilians
and protect humanitarian operations will influence
future cooperation between the African Union and the
United Nations. An immediate challenge confronting
the two bodies is their common effort to negotiate a
peace deal in Darfur. Norway strongly supports this
cooperation. We are willing to contribute both
financially and with human resources to the joint
negotiation secretariat for the upcoming peace talks.
We hope that the United Nations will work in close
contact with its partners and ask for support when
needed during this important process.
The peace negotiations present the United
Nations with many challenges. In the Sudan, the
United Nations is now actively involved in the security
sector, the humanitarian sector, the development sector
and now also in the peace negotiations. To add to the
complexity, the United Nations is involved in two
different security operations in different parts of the
country. To succeed, it is absolutely necessary that the
United Nations is perceived as a single unified actor
and that it is able to act as one.
It is a sad fact that more than half of all conflicts
that are solved through negotiations relapse into
conflict within a few years. There is an urgent need to
improve our ability to support post-conflict countries
and strengthen their ability to meet expectations. A
more effective United Nations working closely with its
regional partners will make an important contribution
in this regard. It is also fundamental that we continue
to learn from experience in order to develop better
mechanisms and responses.
The Peacebuilding Commission, together with the
Peacebuilding Support Office and the Peacebuilding
Fund, has the potential to be a powerful tool to meet
these challenges in a more coordinated and
comprehensive manner.
The challenges are daunting. If we do not manage
to contribute meaningfully to sustainable peace in
Burundi and Sierra Leone, it would not only be at huge
costs for the people in both countries, but also for
Commission and the credibility of the United Nations.
I have been honoured to chair the Burundi-specific
format of the Peacebuilding Commission. The Strategic
Framework for Peacebuilding in Burundi was endorsed
by the Commission in June as an instrument of

07-49195

S/PV.5735

engagement and dialogue among Burundi, the
Commission and other stakeholders. The document
defines the crucial peacebuilding priorities faced by
Burundi. It will provide a helpful guide for reaching
peacebuilding objectives and mobilizing the necessary
financial and political support.
Preventing and resolving conflicts in Africa
presents us with enormous challenges. A better
coordinated and more comprehensive approach by the
United Nations will strengthen regional efforts by the
African Union to safeguard peace and security in
Africa.
The President (spoke in French): I give the floor
to the representative of Switzerland.
Mr. Baum (Switzerland) (spoke in French):
Important financial resources have been dedicated to
the management of conflict, but the funds invested in
the prevention of wars and crises have remained
modest. This, despite the fact that effective conflict
prevention would save not only innumerable lives but
also reduce excessive spending. Thus, we consider the
subject of today’s debate very timely and we thank you
for the concept paper you have provided us.
Switzerland, which is Co-Chairperson of the Group of
Friends on conflict prevention, is grateful to you,
Mr. President, for the opportunity you have given us to
take up this very important issue. Today I shall focus
on institutional aspects.
First, cooperation between the United Nations
and the African Union to resolve the conflict in Darfur
is an example of a productive and innovative
partnership between the two organizations. Switzerland
welcomes the joint communiqué issued by the Security
Council and the Peace and Security Council of the
African Union on 16 June 2007. My country
encourages the Security Council to continue to explore
ways of strengthening cooperation and improving the
sharing of tasks with the African Union.
Secondly, preventing, managing and resolving
conflicts begins at the local and regional levels and
must involve all parties concerned — in particular,
civil society, women, young people and the victims of
violence. Ceasefire and peace agreements must be
based on an inclusive approach and be acceptable to
all. Reconciliation cannot be based solely on the
establishment of a new order; it must also ensure that
past injustices and abuses be brought before the courts
and that fair compensation is provided. It is for that

07-49195

reason that the Secretariat should maintain regular
contacts with the regional organizations and
institutions concerned, so as to think these matters
through together and identify best practices and
innovative approaches.
Thirdly, the Department of Political Affairs
should be strengthened in order that it can fulfil its
mandate in the area of conflict prevention. The
establishment of a Mediation Support Unit is a first and
very important step towards that end. Switzerland will
continue to support those efforts. However,
strengthening capacities for conflict prevention,
mediation and good offices alone cannot depend upon
the good will of contributors. New resources in the
form of assessed contributions will also be necessary.
Conflict prevention should not merely be a desirable
activity for the United Nations, it should have the
status of a principal activity of the Organization.
Switzerland supports a strong and effective role
for the Security Council in the area of conflict
prevention. We also believe there is a need for a wellinformed and structured debate on how to strengthen
the institutional capacity of the United Nations in this
area. We think that the time has come for the General
Assembly to seriously take up this issue, during its
sixty-second session, on the basis of the SecretaryGeneral’s most recent report on the prevention of
armed conflict.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Canada.
Mr. Normandin (Canada) (spoke in French):
Canada is pleased to participate in this debate on the
prevention of conflict in Africa. We thank the President
for his initiative to hold this open debate.
Situations such as those in Darfur, northern
Uganda, Somalia and the Democratic Republic of the
Congo — in which civilians continue to suffer the
effects of war — illustrate that the immediate and longterm costs of the failure to prevent armed violence, and
of delaying our response to it, are incalculable.
However, as we look back on our experience in the
area of conflict prevention, it is important not to lose
sight of the progress we have made. The Human
Security Report has concluded that there has actually
been an 80 per cent decrease in the number of armed
conflicts since the 1990s. That situation is attributed to
an extraordinary increase in the efforts of the
international community.

29

S/PV.5735

Since the adoption of resolution 1625 (2005), we
have created new tools to reduce the risk of conflicts
breaking out and to ensure that peace agreements do
not unravel once they are in place. Moreover, regional
cooperation has improved — the most recent example
of which is the new hybrid mission to Darfur. The
Peacebuilding Commission has also been established,
and Canada favours expanding its agenda to include
additional States at risk as well as such cross-cutting
themes as children affected by armed conflict and the
role of women in peace and security.
The Mediation Support Unit is an additional tool
in the area of preventive diplomacy. Canada supports
and encourages the timely and proactive deployment of
its capabilities.
We also encourage expanding the African Union’s
Council of Elders.
It is clear, however, that improved cooperation
with the African Union and other regional and
subregional organizations is essential if we wish to
prevent conflicts in Africa.
Canada will continue to contribute to the
strengthening of the peace and security architecture of
the African Union, especially as regards the
deployment of civilian and military monitors, regional
centres of excellence for the deployment of trained
military and police components to peace support
operations, and the establishment of a future permanent
integrated force in Africa.
Nevertheless, those efforts are not enough. As the
Secretary-General pointed out in his most recent
report, a significant gap remains between rhetoric on
conflict prevention and the reality on the ground. The
World Summit’s endorsement of the responsibility to
protect must now be translated into swift international
action to prevent genocide, war crimes and crimes
against humanity. That must be done both by
improving the capacity of States themselves to
intervene and by more speedy international efforts.
We urge the Security Council to continue to
integrate cross-cutting themes into its work —
especially as regards such principal causes of conflict
as the proliferation of light weapons, the exploitation
of natural resources, gender equality, human rights
violations and challenges in protecting civilians.
We also encourage the Secretary-General to
resort more frequently to the reporting functions

30

conferred upon him by resolution 1625 (2005), as well
as to inform the Security Council about increasingly
worrying situations that could benefit from the
Council’s attention.
(spoke in English)
We commend the Secretary-General for his recent
and timely reporting on the situation in Somalia, and
encourage the Council to give that worsening situation
its focused attention. Canada is deeply concerned about
the situation in Somalia, including targeted attacks
against journalists, and has provided substantial
humanitarian assistance accordingly.
When the international community works
together, much can be accomplished. Security Council
cohesion is critical to overcoming the conflicts in the
Sudan. The Council’s strong support for the
Comprehensive Peace Agreement and its prompt
deployment of the United Nations Mission in the
Sudan have at last helped to end one of Africa’s longest
civil wars.
With respect to Darfur, the Council’s unanimous
approval of resolution 1769 (2007) — authorizing the
hybrid mission — “opens a new chapter”, in the words
of the Secretary-General. That key development has
already improved the atmosphere for the peace process
being led by the special envoys of the African Union
and the United Nations.
We emphasize, however, that the continuing
engagement of the international community is vital,
both in Darfur and in implementing the Comprehensive
Peace Agreement. Since the adoption of resolution
1556 (2004), Canada has been a core contributor to the
African Union’s peacekeeping mission, committing
$286 million to provide critical airlift, armoured
vehicles and technical advisors. Canada has also
responded to the urgent appeal from the Council to
assist the African Union’s mission until the African
Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur can
be deployed.
Uganda is a recent example of international
cooperation under United Nations leadership to reduce
and prevent conflict. Canada works closely with the
United Nations and other partners in northern Uganda,
providing support for the Juba peace talks.
The Nairobi Summit and the signing of the Pact
on Security, Stability and Development in the Great
Lakes Region was also the culmination of more than

07-49195

S/PV.5735

three years of confidence-building and negotiation,
primarily between the 11 core countries of the region.
Implementation, however, remains precarious, owing
to the unresolved issue of the remaining armed forces
in the eastern part of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo. That requires both sustained international
attention and a sustained international military
presence. In this regard, Canada will continue to
support implementation of the conference process
through our co-chairmanship of the Group of Friends
of the Great Lakes Region.
Finally, we would like to highlight our support
for the initiative of the Southern African Development
Community to address the growing crisis in Zimbabwe.
Given the destabilizing effects Zimbabwe’s economic
and governance crisis could have on the region,
Canada believes that intensified regional diplomacy is
required on an urgent basis. We also urge the Security
Council to consider regular briefings on this steadily
deteriorating situation.
In closing, we would urge the Council to use all
of the conflict prevention tools at its disposal to
address emerging conflicts at a much earlier stage of
their development. Coordinated regional and
subregional action and, most critically, the provision of
timely and appropriate international support for such
action, are urgently required to sustain peace. We must
all do our part.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Namibia.
Mrs. Ithete (Namibia): My delegation joins those
who have spoken before us in congratulating you,
Mr. President, for assuming the presidency of the
Council and commends you for finding it befitting to
include in your busy schedule this important debate on
conflict prevention and resolution in Africa. The
concept paper on the prevention of armed conflict that
you have given us in preparation for this debate, which
in our view forms a good basis for our deliberations
here today, is equally commendable and we share many
of the sentiments expressed.
This debate no doubt gives us ample opportunity
to exchange views and devise ways on how best we can
enhance the capability of the African Union and of its
subregional organizations to address issues related to
conflict prevention and resolution in Africa.

07-49195

This debate has come at the right time, a time
when the number of conflicts in Africa has,
unfortunately, been increasing day by day, causing
untold hardships, misery and suffering to ordinary
citizens. About half of the world’s armed conflict and
some three quarters of the United Nations
peacekeepers are in Africa. As we speak, there are over
6 million displaced persons in the world,
approximately 3 million of whom are in Africa.
While we have always agreed that Africa must
take a leading role in alleviating the predisposing
factors causing conflict on the continent, we are
equally aware that the primary responsibility for the
maintenance of international peace and security lies
with this organ, the Security Council. Regional
organizations such as the African Union can play a
complementary and supporting role to assist the United
Nations. To this end, we appreciate the efforts being
made to strengthen the relationship between the United
Nations, the African Union and its subregional
organizations in promoting durable peace and
sustainable development in Africa.
These efforts, which should include, among other
things, comprehensive processes of disarmament,
demobilization,
repatriation,
reintegration
and
resettlement, should be of a long-term nature. It is not
enough to end the assistance given to conflict-engulfed
countries immediately after the closure of
peacekeeping missions, without taking into account
underlying factors that may cause the country to
relapse into the same conflict — a series of events that
has occurred before in many United Nations missions.
Democratically elected governments deserve to be
supported and strengthened in establishing their
judiciary systems, reforming their security sectors and
ensuring that their ex-combatants are fully integrated
into the socio-economic mainstream of society.
At the heart of most conflicts lie situations of
underdevelopment and the marginalization of whole
societies or sections thereof, because a hungry man is
always an angry man. It goes then without saying that
durable peace and conflict resolutions should be
carried out through social and economic development
and the equitable distribution of resources at all levels.
In this regard, we are hopeful that the Peacebuilding
Commission, if given adequate financial support, will
fill the gap by exerting and coordinating peacebuilding
and reconstruction efforts in countries emerging from
conflict.

31

S/PV.5735

Given that most conflicts in Africa affect many
countries within the subregion, efforts to solve them
should adopt regional and subregional approaches in
order to deal with, among other things, illegal crossborder activities, including the flow of illicit small
arms and light weapons, which fuel and exacerbate
such conflicts. The availability of such small arms and
light weapons and the failure of Member States to
agree in 2005 on a legally binding international
instrument to enable States to identify and trace these
weapons in a timely and reliable manner have not
helped the situation either. There is scant hope of
solving the deep and deadly problems that beset Africa
when arms are cheap and readily available.
While welcoming all endeavours undertaken to
resolve armed conflicts, we would like to underscore
that greater investment should be made in conflict
prevention, which we believe is cost-effective in
saving lives and financial resources. It is important that
we strive to establish an early warning system that will
enable us to detect and arrest situations quickly before
the real conflict starts.
In conclusion, we should all strive for peace to
prevail while learning to better manage and resolve
conflicts and, most importantly, prevent new ones from
breaking out. We all share the responsibility for one
another’s security — all nations, not just those in the
African Union. Only by working to make each other
secure can we hope to achieve security and lasting
peace in Africa or anywhere else in the world.
The President (spoke in French): I give the floor
to the representative of Argentina.
Mr. Argüello (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish):
Conflict prevention is a core responsibility of the
United Nations. The Security Council has a central role
in conflict prevention and in acting to resolve conflicts
that could not be avoided. Asking ourselves in this
forum if we are doing enough to address such a serious
and complex matter is a most important undertaking,
for it provides us with the opportunity to improve the
effectiveness of our action. In this regard, I thank and
congratulate the Congolese presidency for proposing
this debate, which will certainly add value to our
thinking and action.
Argentina has followed the subject with particular
interest, especially over the last two years, as a
non-permanent member of the Security Council. In line
with that responsibility, it has constructively and

32

actively participated in debates and discussions relating
to the prevention of armed conflict. The commitment
of Argentina to the establishment and maintenance of
peace, especially in Africa, is given concrete
expression in its current participation in four
peacebuilding missions. Our contribution to the present
debate is thus rooted in a deep sense that we are further
fulfilling that commitment.
Resolution 1625 (2005) aims at strengthening the
effectiveness of the role of the Security Council in the
prevention of armed conflicts, particularly in Africa, by
means of a wide range of actions. Coordinating these
actions with the work of the Secretariat and the
Economic and Social Council is the key to its
operationalization.
The Secretary-General, in his progress report on
the prevention of armed conflict (A/60/891), proposes
a culture of prevention based on three vectors or
dimensions and renders a clear and forceful evaluation
of the capabilities of the United Nations and its family
of organizations in the realm of conflict prevention. In
addition, the culture of prevention is also consolidated
as a shared value among Member States starting with
the 2005 World Summit.
In order to achieve prevention on any of these
three fronts, there is a need for a shared vision and
close coordination between the central players that
through their respective competencies work together in
each case. The Secretary-General therefore proposes a
methodology based on six categories of action that
require the coordinated work of the Security Council,
the General Assembly, the Economic and Social
Council, the different organizations of the United
Nations family and the regional organizations.
Similarly, the United Nations needs support in
order to elaborate a strategic vision of what the
Organization as a whole can achieve in preventing
conflict, and it is here that the African Union, which
acts on behalf of the United Nations and offers the
valuable resource of its proximity to and understanding
of the conflicts, plays a central role in prevention. The
Economic and Social Council, likewise, through its
analysis, contributes to an understanding of the context
and the assessment of the crisis risk. Both actors
constitute early warning and action resources for the
prevention of conflicts.
It is appropriate to ask ourselves whether or not
articulation of thought and action among so many

07-49195

S/PV.5735

valuable actors and the Security Council is effective
enough to guarantee the maximum possible degree of
prevention.
The centre of gravity in this debate must be the
institutionalization of the best relationship possible
between the Security Council and all entities
participating in prevention of armed conflict. This
institutionalization, we believe, must be oriented
towards defining roles, formalizing functions and
designing working methods — in short, aligning
resources for the most effective prevention.
We must set up processes for learning from the
valuable experiences that have come from the
establishment by the Security Council of the Integrated
Offices of the United Nations in Sierra Leone and
Burundi. We also look forward to the development of
the work of the Secretariat’s Mediation Support Unit
and the role of the Peacebuilding Commission. The
lessons learned must be transformed into agreements,
methods and programmes that lead to a formalization
of this model of action in order to disseminate it to
other countries and regions.
The Security Council, meanwhile, should renew
its vision of prevention and functionally transform
itself into the central node of an early warning and
action network for the prevention of armed conflict.
Relationships and functions must be specified, tried
and improved.

07-49195

We must blend a vision with activities and avoid
duplication of effort or loss of effectiveness due to a
lack of method or poor agreement in details. In this
sense, the African Union, as a central and close actor,
not only needs to be sure that it will have the financial
resources it needs for its preventive action, but also
that it will get the institutional resources, information
and uniform procedures for early warning and the
prevention of armed conflicts. Such resources must be
designed by this Council as the centre of the prevention
network.
This debate will allow us to identify the
weaknesses and strengths of the Security Council on
the issue of prevention of armed conflict. Each
improvement achieved at this level will have a
multiplying effect in the network. It is the start of a
path we need to follow in order to align all available
resources towards the objective of preventing armed
conflict. It is a shared task and a tough challenge, but it
is also a valuable opportunity to be more effective in
the fulfilment of one of the essential responsibilities of
the United Nations.
The President (spoke in French): We still have a
number of speakers on the list for this meeting. With
the agreement of members of the Council, I propose
suspending the meeting until 3 p.m.
The meeting was suspended at 1.15 p.m.

33
