General Assembly-Seventh Special Session

RESOLUTION ADOPTED ON THE REPORT OF THE AD flOC COMMITIEE
OF THE SEVENTH SPECIAL SESSION

to counteracting the adverse effects of inflationthereby sustaining real incomes-and with a view to
improving the terms of trade of the developing countries and in order to eliminate the economic imbalance between developed and developing countries.

3362 (S-VII). Development and international
economic co-operation

The General Assembly,
Determined to eliminate injustice and inequality
which afflict vast sections of humanity and to accelerate the development of developing countries,
Recalling the Declaration and the Programme of
Action on the Establishment of a New International
Economic Order, 10 as well as the Charter of Economic
Rights and Duties of States, 11 which lay down the foundations of the new international economic order.
Reaffirming the fundamental purposes of the abovementioned documents and the rights and duties of all
States to seek and participate in the solutions of the
problems afflicting the world, in particular the imperative need of redressing the economic imbalance between developed and developing countries,
Recalling further the International Development
Strategy for the Second United Nations Development
Decade, 12 which should be reviewed in the light of the
Programme of Action on the Establishment of a New
International Economic Order, and determined to implement the targets and policy measures contained in
the International Development Strategy,
Conscious that the accelerated development of developing countries would be a decisive element for the
promotion of world peace and security,
Recognizing that greater co-operation among States
in the fields of trade, industry, science and technology
as well as in other fields of economic activities, based
on the principles of the Declaration and the Programme
of Action on the Establishment of a New International
Economic Order and of the Charter of Economic Rights
and Duties of States, would also contribute to strengthening peace and security in the world,
Believing that the over-all objective of the new international economic order is to increase the capacity of
developing countries, individually and collectively, to
pursue their development,
Decides, to this end and in the context of the foregoing, to set in motion the following measures as the
basis and framework for the work of the competent
bodies and organizations of the United Nations system:

2. Concerted action should be taken to accelerate
the growth and diversification of the export trade of
developing countries in manufactures and semi-manufactures and in processed and semi-processed products in order to increase their share in world industrial output and world trade within the framework of
an expanding world economy.
3. An important aim of the fourth session of the
United Nations Conference on Trade and Development, in addition to work in progress elsewhere,
should be to reach decisions on the improvement of
market structures in the field of raw materials and
commodities of export interest to the developing
countries, including decisions with respect to an integrated programme and the applicability of elements
thereof. In this connexion, taking into account the
distinctive features of individual raw materials and
commodities, the decisions should bear on the following:
(a) Appropriate international stocking and other
forms of market arrangements for securing stable,
remunerative and equitable prices for commodities
of export interest to developing countries and promoting equilibrium between supply and demand, including, where possible, long-term multilateral commitments;
( b) Adequate international financing facilities for
such stocking and market arrangements;
( c) Where possible, promotion of long-term and
medium-term contracts;
(d) Substantial improvement of facilities for compensatory financing of export revenue fluctuations
through the widening and enlarging of the existing
facilities. Note has been taken of the various proposals regarding a comprehensive scheme for the
stabilization of export earnings of developing countries and for a development security facility as well
as specific measures for the benefit of the developing
countries most in need;
(e) Promotion of processing of raw materials in
producing developing countries and expansion and
diversification of their exports, particularly to developed countries;
(f) Effective opportunities to improve the share
of developing countries in transport, marketing and
distribution of their primary commodities and to
encourage measures of world significance for the
evolution of the infrastructure and secondary capacity of developing countries from the production of

J. INTERNATIONAL TRADE
1. Concerted efforts should be made in favour of
the developing countries towards expanding and
diversifying their trade, improving and diversifying
their productive capacity, improving their productivity and increasing their export earnings, with a view
10 Resolutions 3201

(S-VI) and 3202 (S-VI).
(XXIX).
12 Resolution 2626 (XXV).
11 Resolution 3281

3

4

General Assembly-Seventh Special Session

primary commodities to proc~ssing, _tr~nsport and
marketing, and to the production of fimshed manufactured goods, their transport, distrihution and exchange, including advanced financi:ll and exchange
institutions for the remunnative management of
trade transactions.
4. The Secretary-General of the United Nations
Conference on Trade and Development should present a report to the Conference at its fourth session
on the impact of an integrnt~d prowamme on _the
imports of developing countnes wh1c?_ are_ net 1_mporters of raw materials and commod1ties, mcludmg
those lacking in natural resources, and recommend
any remedial measures that may be necessary.
5. A number of options are open to the international community to preserve the purchasing power
of developing countries. These need to be further
studied on a priority basis. The Secretary-General of
the United Nations Conference on Trade and Development should continue to study dire~t and _indirect indexation schemes and other options with a
view to making concrete proposals before the Conference at its fourth session.
6. The Secretary-General of the United Nations
Conference on Trade and Development should prepare a preliminary study on the proportiqn between
prices of raw materials and commodities exported
by developing countries and the ~nal consume~ p~ic~,
particularly in developed countnes, and submit 1t, 1f
possible, to the Conference at its fourth session.
7. Developed countries should fully implement
agreed provisions on the principle of standstill as
regards imports from developing countries, and any
departure should be subjected to such measures as
consultations and multilateral surveillance and compensation, in accordance with internationally agreed
criteria and procedures.
8. Developed countries should take effective steps
within the framework of multilateral trade negotiations for the reduction or removal, where feasible
and appropriate, of non-tariff barriers affecting the
products of export interest to developing countries
on a differential and more favourable basis for developing countries. The generalized scheme of preferences should not terminate at the end of the period
of ten years originally envisaged and should be continuously improved throu~h wider coverage, deeper
cuts and other measures, bearing in mind the interests of those developing countries which enjoy special advantages and the need for finding ways and
means for protecting their interests.
9. Countervailing duties should be applied only
in conformity with internationally agreed obligations.
Developed countries should exercise maximum restraint within the framework of international obligations in the imposition of countervailing duties on
the imports of products from developing countries.
The multilateral trade negotiations under way should
take fully into account the particular interests of
developing countries with a view to providing them
differential and more favourable treatment in appropriate cases.
10. Restrictive business practices adversely affecting international trade, particularly that of developing countries, should be eliminated and efforts should
be made at the national and international levels with
the objective of negotiating a set of equitable principles and rules.

11. Special measures should be. undertak~n ~y
developed countries and by developmg countries Ill
a position to do so to assist in the structural transformation of the economy of the least developed,
land-locked and island developing countries.

12. Emergency measures as spelled out in section
X of General Assembly resolution 3202 (S-VI)
should be undertaken on a temporary basis to meet
the specific problems of the most scrious\y affected
cow1tries as defined in Assembly resolut10ns 3201
(S-Vl) and 3202 (S-VI) of 1 May 1974, with':mt
any detriment to the interests of the developmg
coLmtrics as a whole.
13. Further expansion of trade between the socialist countries of Eastern Europe and the developing countries should be intensified as is provided for
in resolutions 15 (II) of 25 March 1968 13 and 53
{Ill) of 19 May 1972 14 of the United Nations_ ~onference on Trade and Development. Additional
measures and appropriate orientation to achieve this
end are necessary.

11.

TRANSFER OF REAL RESOURCES FOR FINANCING
THE DEVELOPMENT OF DEVELOPING COUNTRIES
AND INTERNATIONAL MONETARY REFORMS

I. Concessional financial resources to developing
countries need to be increased substantially, their
terms and conditions ameliorated and their flow made
predictable, continuous and increasingly assured. so
as to facilitate the implementation by deve]opmg
countries of long-term programmes for econonuc and
social development. Financial assistance should, as a
general rule, be untied.
2. Developed countries confirm their ~ontinued
commitment in respect of the targets relatmg to the
transfer of resources, in particular the official development assistance target of_ 0. 7 per cent. of gross
national product, as agreed m the lnternat10nal Development Strategy for the Second United Nations
Development Decade, and adopt as their common
aim an effective increase in official development
assistance with a view to achieving these targets by
the end of the decade. Developed countries which
have not yet made a commitment in respect of these
targets undertake to make their best efforts to reach
these targets in the remaining part of this decade.
3. The establishment of a link between the special drawing rights and development assistance should
form part of the consideration by the International
Monetary Fund of the creation of new special drawing rights as and when they are created according to
the needs of international liquidity. Agreement should
be reached at an early date on the establishment of
a trust fund, to be financed partly through the International Monetary Fund gold sales and partly through
voluntary contributions and to be governed by an
appropriate body, for the benefit of developing countries. Consideration of other means of transfer of
real resources which are predictable, assured and continuous should be expedited in appropriate bodies.
13 Proceedings of the United Nations Conference on Trade
and Development, Second Session, vol. I and Corr. I and 3 and
Add.I and 2, Report and Annexes (United Nations publication, Sales No. E.68.ll.D.14), p. 32.
14 See Proceedings of the United Nations Conference on
Trade and Development, Third Session, vol. I, Report and
Annexes (United Nations publication, Sales No. E.73.II.D.4 ),
annex I.A.

5

4. Developed countries and international orga!1izations should enhance the real value and volume of
assistance to developing countries and ensure that
the developing countries obtain !he largest possible
share in the procurement of eqmpment, consultants
and consultaney services. Such assistance ~hould be
on softer terms and, as a general rule, untied.
5. In order to enlarge the pool of resources available for financing development, there is an urgent
need to increase substantially the capital of the World
Bank Group, in particular the resources of the International Development Association, to enable it to
make additional capital available to the poorest countries on highly concessional terms.
6. The resources of the development in,titutions
of the United Nations svstem, in particular the United
Nations Development Programme, should also be increased. The funds at the disposal of the regional
development banks should be augmented. These increases should be without prejudice to bilateral development assistance flows.
7. To the extent desirable, the World Bank
Group is invited to consider new ways of supI?lementing its financing with private management, skills,
technology and capital anJ also new approaches to
increase financing of development in developing
countries, in accordance with their national plans
and priorities.
8. The burden of debt on developing countries
is increasing to a point where the import capacity
as well as reserves have come under serious strain.
At its fourth session the United Nations Conference
on Trade and Development shall consider the need
for, and the possibility of, convening as soon as
possible a conference of major donor, creditor and
debtor countries to devise ways and means to mitigate this burden, taking into account the development needs of developing countries, with special
attention to the plight of the most seriously affected
countries as defined in General Assembly resolutions
3201 (S-VI) and 3202 (S-VI).
9. Developing countries should be granted increased access on favourable terms to the capital
markets of developed countries. To this end, the
joint Development Committee of the International
Monetary Fund and the International Bank for Reconstruction and Development should progress as
rapidly as possible in its work. Appropriate United
Nations bodies and other related intergovernmental
agencies should be invited to examine ways and
means of increasing the flow of public and private
resources to developing countries, including proposals made at the current session to provide investment in private and public enterprises in the developing countries. Consideration should be given to the
examination of an international investment trust and
to the expansion of the International Finance Corporation capital without prejudice to the increase in
resources of other intergovernmental financial and
development institutions and bilateral assistance
flows.
10. Developed and developing countries should
further co-operate through investment of financial
resources and supply of technology and equipment
to developing countries by developed countries and
by developing countries in a position to do so.
11. Developed countries, and developing countries in a position to do so, arc urged to make ade-

quate contributions to the United Nations Special
Fund with a view to an early implementation of a
programme of lending, prcfer;,bly in 1976.
12. Developed countries should improve terms
and condition; of their assistance so as to include
a preponderant grant clement for the least developed, land-iocked and island developing cour:tries.
13. In providing additional resources for assisting the mo~t sc:riously alkc'cd countries in helping
them to meet their ~erious balance-of-payments
deficits, all developed countries, and developing
countries in a po~ition to do so, and international
organizaticns :-uch as the lntcrn:,tional Bank for
R..:construction anJ Development and the International Monetary f'und, should undc;·take specific
measures in their favour, including those provided
in General Assembly resolutions 3201 (S-Vl) and
3202 (S-VI).
14. Special attention should be given by the international c01n,;,unity to the phenomena of natural
disasters which frequently affiict many parts of the
worh.J. with far-rea:hing devastating economic, social and ~tructural consequences, particularly in the
lca-.t developed countries. To this end, the General
Assembly at its thirtieth session, in considering
this problem, should examine and adopt appropriate
rncasures.
15·. The role of national reserve currencies should
b,• reduced and the special drawing rights should
become the central reserve asset of the international
monetary s:, stem in order to provide for greater intc.:·national control over the creation and equitable
distribution of liquiJity and in order to limit potential losses as a con,;equence of exchange rate fluctuations. Arrangements for gold should be consistent
with the agr<.:ed objective of reducing the role of gold
in the system and with equitable distribution of new
intern:itic,nal liquidity and should in particular take
into con-.idcration the needs of developing countries
for increased liquidi ly.
16. The process of decision-making should be
fair and responsive to change and should he most
specially responsive to the emcrgence of a new economic influence on the part of developing countries.
The participation of developing countries in the
decision-making process in the competent organs of
international finance and development institutions
should be adequately increased and made more effective without adversely affecting the broad geographic
representation of developing countries and in accordance with the existing and evolving rules.
17. The compensatory financing facility now
available through the International Monetary Fund
should be e\panded and liberalized. In this connexion, early consideration should be given by the
Fund and other appropriate United Nations bodies
to various proposals made at the current sessionincluding the examination of a new development
security facility--which would mitigate export earnings shortfalis of developing countries, with special
regard to the poorest countries, and thus provide
greater assistance to their continued economic development. Early consideration should also be given
by the Internaticnal Monetary Fund to proposals to
expand and liberalize its coverage of current transactions to include manufactures and services, to
ensure that, whenever possible. compensation for
export shortfalls t:t'.:es place at the same time they

General Assembly-Seventh Special Session

6

occur, to take into account, in determining the quantum of compensation, movements in import prices
and to lengthen the repayment period.
18. Drawing under the buffer stock financing facility of the International Monetary Fund should be
accorded treatment with respect to floating alongside
the gold tranche, similar to that under the compensatory financing facility, and the Fund should expedite
its study of the possibility of an amendment of the
Articles of Agreement, to be presented to the Interim
Committee, if possible at its next meeting, that would
permit the Fund to provide assistance directly to
internatiomil buffer stocks of primary products.

III.

SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY

1. Developed and developing countries should
co-operate in the establishment, strengthening and
development of the scientific and technological infrastructure of developing countries. Developed countries should also take appropriate measures, such as
contribution to the establishment of an industrial
technological information bank and consideration of
the possibility of regional and sectoral banks, in
order to make available a greater flow to developing
countries of information permitting the selection of
technologies, in particular advanced technologies.
Consideration should also be given to the establishment of an international centre for the exchange of
technological information for the sharing of research
findings relevant to developing countries. For the
above purposes institutional arrangements within the
United Nations system should be examined by the
General Assembly at its thirtieth session.
2. Developed countries should significantly expand their assistance to developing countries for
direct support to their science and technology programmes, as well as increase substantially the proportion of their research and development devoted
to specific problems of primary interest to developing
countries, and in the creation of suitable indigenous
technology, in accordance with feasible targets to be
agreed upon. The General Assembly invites the
Secretary-General to carry out a preliminary study
and to report to the Assembly at its thirty-first
session on the possibility of establishing, within
the framework of the United Nations system, an
international energy institute to assist all developing
countries in energy resources research and development.
3. All States should co-operate in evolving an
international code of conduct for the transfer of
technology, corresponding, in particular, to the special needs of the developing countries. Work on
such a code should therefore be continued within the
United Nat ions Conference on Trade and Development and concluded in time for decisions to be
reached at the fourth session of the Conference, including a decision on the legal character of such a
code with the objective of the adoption of a code
of conduct prior to the end of 1977. International
conventions on patents and trade marks should be
reviewed and revised to meet, in particular, the
special needs of the developing countries, in order
that these conventions may become more satisfactory
instruments for aiding developing countries in the
transfer and development of technology. National
patents systems should, without delay, be brought
into line with the international patent system in its
revised form.

4. Developed countries should facilitate the access of developing countries on favourable terms and
conditions, and on an urgent basis, to informatique,
to relevant information on advanced and other technologies suited to their specific needs as well as on
new uses of existing technology, new developments
and possibilities of adapting them to local needs.
Inasmuch as in market economies advanced technologies with respect to industrial production arc
most frequently developed by private institutions,
developed countries should facilitate and encourage
these institutions in providing effective technologies
in support of the priorities of developing countries .
5. Developed countries should give developing
countries the freest and fullest possible access to
technologies whose transfer is not subject to private
decision.
6. Developed countries should improve the transparency of the industrial property market in order
to facilitate the technological choices of developing
countries. In this respect, relevant organizations of
the United Nations system, with the collaboration of
developed countries, should undertake projects in the
fields of information, consultancy and training for
the benefit of developing countries.
7. A United Nations Conference on Science and
Technology for Development should be held in 1978
or J979 with the main objectives of strengthening
the technological capacity of developing countries to
enable them to apply science and technology to their
own development; adopting effective means for the
utilization of scientific and technological pokntials
in the solution of development problems of regional
and global significance, especially for the benefit of
developing countries; and providing instruments of
co-operation to developing countries in the utilization of science and technology for solving socioeconomic problems that cannot be solved by individual action, in accordance with national priorities,
taking into account the recommendations made by
the Intergovernmental Working Group of the Committee on Science and Technology for Development.
8. The United Nations system should play a major
role, with appropriate financing, in achieving the
above-stated objectives and in developing scientific
and technological co-operation between all States in
order to ensure the application of science and technology to development. The work of the relevant
United Nations bodies, in particular that of the
United Nations Conference on Trade and Development, the United Nations Industrial Development
Organization, the International Labour Organisation,
the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization, the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations, the World Intellectual
Property Organization and the United Nations Development Programme, to facilitate the transfer and
diffusion of technology should be given urgent priority. The Secretary-General of the United Nations
should take steps to ensure that the technology and
experience available within the United Nations system is widely dis~eminated and readily available to
the developing countries in need of it.
9. The World Health Organization and the competent organs of the United Nations system, in particular the United Nations Children's Fund. should
intensify the international effort aimed at improving
health conditions in developing countries by giving

Rc,-olution adopted on the report of the Ad lloc Committee

---------------

priority to prevention of disease and malnutrition
and by providing primary health services to the communities, including maternal and child health and
family welfare.
10. Since the outflow of qualified personnel from
developing to developed countries seriously hampers
the development of the former, there is an urgent
need to formulate national and international policies
to avoid the "brain drain" and to obviate its adverse
effects.
IV.

INDUSTRIALIZATION

1. The General Assembly endorses the Lima
Declaration and Plan of Action on Industrial Development Co-operation 15 and requests all Governments to take individually and/or collectively the
necessary measures and decisions required to implement effectively their undertakings in terms of the
Lima Declaration and Plan of Action.
2. Developed countries should facilitate the development of new policies and strengthen existing
policies, including labuur market policies, which
would encourage the redeployment of their industries which are less competitive internationally to
developing countries, thus leading to structural adjustments in the former and a higher degree of utilization of natural and human resources in the latter.
Such policies may take into account the economic
structure and the economic, social and security objectives of the developed countries concerned
and the need for such industries to move into more
viable lines of production or into other sectors of the
economy.
3. A system of consultations as provided for by
the Lima Plan of Action should be established at the
global, regional, interregional and sectoral levels
within the United Nations Industrial Development
Organization and within other appropriate international bodies, between developed and developing
countries and among developing countries themselves, in order to facilitate the achievement of the
goals set forth in the field of industrialization, including the redeployment of certain productive capacities existing in developed countries and the
creation of new industrial facilities in developing
countries. In this context, the United Nations Industrial Development Organization should serve as a
forum for negotiation of agreements in the field of
industry between developed and developing countries and among developing countries themselves, at
the request of the countries concerned.
4. The Executive Director of the United Nations
Industrial Development Organization should take
immediate action to ensure the readiness of that
organization to serve as a forum for consultations
and negotiation of agreements in the field of industry. In reporting to the next session of the Industrial
Development Board on actions taken in this respect,
the Executive Director should also include proposals
for the establishment of a system of consultations.
The Industrial Development Board is invited to draw
up, at an early date, the rules of procedure according
to which this system would operate.
5. To promote co-operation between developed
and developing countries, both should endeavour to
disseminate appropriate information about their priority areas for industrial co-operation and the form
16 See A/10112, chap. IV.

7

··-·--··

they would like such co-operation to take. The efforts
undertaken by the United Nat ions Conference on
Trade and Development on tripartite co-operation
between countries having different economic and social systems could lead to constructive proposals for
the industrialization of developing countries.
6. Developed countries should, whenever possible, encourage their enterprises to participate in investment projects within the framework of the development plans and programmes of the developing
countries which so desire; such participation should
be carried out in accordance with the laws and regulations of the developing countries concerned.
7. A joint study should be undertaken by all
Governments under the auspices of the United
Nations Industrial Development Organization, in
consultation with the Secretary-General of the United
Nations Conference on Trade and Development,
making full use of the knowledge, experience and
capacity existing in the United Nations system of
methods and mechanisms for diversified financial and
technical co-operation which are geared to the special and changing requirements of international industrial co-operation, as well as of a general set of
guidelines for bilateral industrial co-operation. A
progress report on this study should be submitted
to the General Assembly at its thirty-first session.
8. Special attention should be given to the particular problems in the industrialization of the least
developed, land-locked and island developing countries-in order to put at their disposal those technical and financial resources as well as critical goods
which need to be provided to them to enable them
to overcome their specific problems and to play their
due role in the world economy, warranted by their
human and material resources.
9. The General Assembly endorses the recommendation of the Second General Conference of the
United Nations Industrial Development Organization
to convert that organization into a specialized agency
and decides to establish a Committee on the Drafting
of a Constitution for the United Nations Industrial
Development Organization, which shall be an intergovernmental committee of the whole, including
States which participated in the Second General Conference, to meet in Vienna to draw up a constitution
for the United Nations Industrial Development Organization as a specialized agency, to be submitted
to a conference of plenipotentiaries to be convened
by the Secretary-General in the last quarter of 1976.
10. In view of the importance of the forthcoming
Tripartite World Conference on Employment, Income Distribution, Social Progress and the International Division of Labour, Governments should undertake adequate preparations and consultations.
V.

FOOD AND AGRICULTURE

1. The solution to world food problems lies primarily in rapidly increasing food production in the
developing countries. To this end, urgent and necessary changes in the pattern of world food production
should be introduced and trade policy measures
should be implemented, in order to obtain a notable
increase in agricultural production and the export
earnings of developing countries.
2. To achieve these objectives, it is essential that
developed countries, and developing countries in a

8

General Assembly-Seventh Special Session

position to do so, should substantially increase the
volume of assistance to developing countries for
agriculture and food production, and that developed
countries should effectively facilitate access to their
markets for food and agricultural products of export
interest to developing countries. both in raw :rnd
processed form, and adupt adjustment measures,
where necessary.
3. Developing countries should accord high priority to agricultural and fisheries development, increase investment accordingly and adopt policies
which give adequate im:,:ntivcs to agricultural producers. It is a responsibility of each State concerned,
in accordance with its sovereign j_udgement and development plans and policies, to pl'orr.iote interacti?n
between expansion of fcod productton and soc10cconomic reforms, with a view to achieving an integrated rural development. The further_ reduction _of
post-harvest food losses in dcvelopmg countnes
should be undertaken as a matter of priority, with
a view to reaching at least a 50 per cent reduction
by 1985. All countries and competent international
organizations should co-ol?erate ~nan~ial!y and t~chnically in the effort to achieve tlus obJect1ve. Particular attention should be given to improvement in the
systems of distribution of food-stuffs.
4. The Consultative Group on Food Production
and Investment in Developing Countries should
quickly identify developing countries having the potential for most rapid and efficient increase of food
production, as well as the potential f?r rapid a<?ricultural expansion in other developmg countncs,
especially the countries with food deficits. Such an
assessment would assist developed countries and the
competent international organizations to concentrate
resources for the rapid increase of agricultural production in the developing countries.
5. Developed countries should adopt policies
aimed at ensuring a stable supply and sufficient
quantity of fertilizers and other production inputs to
developing countries at reasonable prices. T~ey
should also provide assistance to, and promote mvestments in, developing countries to improve · the
efficiency of their fertilizer and other agricultural
input industries. Advantage should b_e taken o'. _the
mechanism provided by the Internat10nal Fertilizer
Supply Scheme.
6. In order to make additional resources available on concessional terms for agricultural development in developing countries, developed countries
and developing countries in a position to do so
should pledge, on a voluntary basis, substantial contributions to the proposed International _Fund for
Agricultural Development so as t? e~a~~e 1t to come
into being by the encl of 1975, with 1111tial resources
of SDR 1,000 million. Thereafter, additional resources should be provided to the Fund on a continuing basis.
7. In view of the significant impact of basic and
applied agricultural research on increasing the quantity and quality of food production, developed countries should support the expansion of the work of
the existing international agricultural research centres. Through their bilateral programmes they should
strengthen their links with these international research centres and with the national agricultural
research centres in developing countries. With respect to the improvement of the productivity and

competitiveness with synthetics of non-food agricultural and forestry products, research and technological assistance should be co-ordinated and financed
through an appropriate mechanism.
8. In view of the importance of food aid as a
transitional measure, all countries should accept both
the principle of a minimum food aid target and the
concept of forward planning of food aid. The target
for the 1975-1976 season should be 10 million tons
of food grains. They should also accept the prins.:!plc that food aid should be channelled on the basis
of objective assessment of requirements in the recipient countries. In this respect all count~·ics are
urged to participate in the Global Infor~at10n and
Farly Warning System on Food and Agnculture.
9. Developed countries should increase the grant
component of food aid, where food is not at present
provided as grants, and should accept mu_ltilateral
channelling of these resources at an expamlmg rate.
In providing food grains and financing on soft terms
to developing countries in need of such assistance,
developed countries and the World Food Pronramme should take due account of the interests of
tl1c food-exportiag developing countries and should
er~:rnrc that such assistance includes, wherever possible, purchases of food from the food-exporting developing countries.
10. Developed countries, and developing countries in a position to do so, should provide food
grains and financial assistance on most favourable
terms to the most seriously affected countries, to
enable them to meet their food and agricultural
development requirements within the constraints of
their balance-of-payments position. Donor countries
should also provide aid on soft terms, in cash and
in kind, through bilateral and multilateral channels,
to enable the most seriously affected countries to
obtain their estimated requiremcn'.s of about I million tons of plant nutrients during 1975-1976.
11. Developed countries should carry out both
their bilateral and multilateral food aid channelling
in accordance with the procedures of the Principles
of Surplus Disposal of the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations so as to avoid
causing undue fluctuations in market prices or t_he
disruption of commercial markets for exports of mterest to exporting developing countries.
12. All countries should subscribe to the International Undertaking on World Food Security. They
should build up and maintain world food-grain reserves, to be held nationally or regionally and strategically located in developed and developing, importing and exporting countries, large enough to
cover foreseeable major production shortfalls. Intensive work should be continued on a priority basis
in the World Food Council and other appropriate
forums in order to determine, inter alia, the size of
the required reserve, taking into account among
other things the proposal made at the current session that the components of wheat and rice in the
total reserve should be 30 million tons. The World
Food Council should report to the General Assembly on this matter at its thirty-first session. Developed countries should assist developing countries in
their efforts to build up and maintain their agreed
shares of such reserves. Pending the establishment
of the world food-grain reserve, developed countries
and developing countries in a position to do so

Resolution adopted ,,11 lhe report of thP Ad Hoe Co111mit1.-,·

should earmark stocks and/or funds to be placed at
the disposal of the World Food Programme as an
emergency reserve to strengthen the capacity of the
Programme to deal with crisis situations in developing countries. The aim should be a target of not less
than 500,000 tons.
13. Members of the General Assembly reaffirm
their full support for the resolutions of the World
Food Conference and call upon the World Food
Council to monitor the implementation of the provisions under section V of the present resolution and
to report to the General Assembly at its thirty-first
session.
VI. CO-OPERATION AMONG DEVELOPING COUNTRIES
1. Developed countries and the United Nations
system are urged to provide, as and when requested,
support and assistance to developing countries in
strengthening and enlarging their mutual co-operation
at subregional, regional and interregional levels. In
this regard, suitable institutional arrangements within
the United Nations development system should be
made and, when appropriate, strengthened, such as
those within the United Nations Conference on Trade
and Development, the United Nations Industrial
Development Organization and the United Naticns
Development Programme.
2. The Secretary-General, together with the relevant organizations of the United Nations system, is
requested to continue to provide support to ongoing
projects and activities, and to commission further
studies through institutions in developing countries,
which would take into account the material already
avaihblc within the United Nations system, including in particular the regional commissions and the
United Nations Conference on Trade and Development, ,:ml in accordance with existing subregional
and regional arrang2rnents. These further studies,
which should be submitted to the General Assembly
at its thirty-first session, should, as a first step, cover:
(a) Utilization of know-how, skills, natural resources, technology and funds available within developing countries for promotion of investments in
industry, agriculture, transport and communications;
( b) Trade liberalization measures including payments and clearing arrangements, covering primary
commodities, manufactured goods and services, such
as banking, shipping, insurance and reinsurance;
( c) Transfer of technology.
3. These studies on co-operation among developing countries, together with other initiatives, would
contribute to the evolution towards a system for the
economic development of developing countries.

VII.

RESTRUCTURING OF THE ECONOMIC AND SOCIAL
SECTORS OF THE UNITED NATIONS SYSTEM

1. With a view to initiating the process of restructuring the United Nations system so as to make it
more fully capable of dealing with problems of inter-

*

9

national econumic co-oper.ition and development in
a comprehensive and effective manner, in pursuance
of General Assembly resolutions 3172 (XXVIII) of
17 December 1973 and 3343 (XXIX) of 17 December 197 4, and to make it more responsive to the requirements of the provisions of the Declaration and
the Programme of Action on the Establishment of a
New International Economic Order as well as those
of the Charter of Economic Rights and Duties of
States, an Ad Hoe Committee on the Restructuring
of the Economic and Social Sectors of the United
Nations System, which shall be a committee of the
whole of the General Assembly open to the participation of all States, u; is hereby established to prepare
detailed action propusals. The Ad l-loc Committee
should start its work immediately and inform the
General Assembly at its thirtieth session on the progress made, and submit its report to the Assembly at
its thirty-first ses'.'ion, through the Economic and
Scicial Council at its resumed session. The Ad Hoe
Committee should take into account in its work,
inter alia, the relevant proposals and documentation
submitted in preparation for the seventh special session of the General Assembly pursuant to Assembly
resolution 3343 (XXIX) and other relevant decisions, including the report of the Group of Experts
on the Structure of the United Nations System entitled A New United Nations Structure for Global
Economic Co-operation, 17 the records of the relevant
deliberations of the Economic and Social Council, the
Trade and Development Board, the Governing Council of the United Nations Development Programme
and the seventh special sc~sion of the General Assembly, as well as the results of the forthcoming deliberations on institutional arrangements of the United
Nations Conference on Trade and Development at its
fourth session and of the Governing Council of the
United Nations Environment Programme at its fourth
session. All United Nations organs, including the
regional commissions, as well as the specialized
agencies and the International Atomic Energy
Agency, are invited to participate at the executive
level in the work of the Ad Hoe Committee and to
respond to requests that the Committee may make
to them for information, data or views.
2. The Economic and Social Council should
meanwhile continue the process of rationalization
and reform which it has undertaken in accordance
with Council resolution 1768 (LIV) of 18 May
1973 and General Assembly resolution 3341
(XXIX) of 17 December 1974, and should take
into full consideration those recommendations of the
Ad Hoe Committee that fall within the scope of these
resolutions, at the latest at its resumed sixty-first
session.
2349th plenary meeting
16 September 1975
16 It is the understanding of the General Assembly that the
"all States" formula will be applied in accordance with the
established practice of the General Assembly.
17
E/ AC.62/9 (United Nations publication, Sales No. E.75.

11.A.7) .

• •
