S/PRST/2014/3*

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
12 February 2014
Original: English

Statement by the President of the Security Council
At the 7109th meeting of the Security Council, held on 12 February 2014, in
connection with the Council’s consideration of the item entitled “ Protection of
civilians in armed conflict”, the President of the Security Council made the
following statement on behalf of the Council:
“The Security Council reaffirms its commitment regarding the protection
of civilians in armed conflict, and to the continuing and full implementation of
all its previous relevant resolutions including 1265 (1999), 1296 (2000), 1674
(2006), 1738 (2006), 1894 (2009), as well as all of its resolutions on Women,
Peace and Security, Children and Armed Conflict and Peaceke eping, and all
relevant statements of its President.
“The Security Council notes that this year marks the fifteenth
anniversary of the progressive consideration by the Security Council of the
protection of civilians in armed conflict as a thematic issue and acknowledges
the enduring need for the Security Council and Member States to strengthen
further the protection of civilians in armed conflict. The Security Council
remains committed to addressing the impact of armed conflict on civilians.
“The Security Council reaffirms its primary responsibility under the
Charter of the United Nations for the maintenance of international peace and
security and its commitment and readiness to strive for sustainable peace in all
situations under its consideration.
“The Security Council recalls that States bear the primary responsibility
to respect and ensure the human rights of their citizens, as well as all
individuals within their territory as provided for by relevant international law
and reaffirms the responsibility of each individual State to protect its
populations from genocide, war crimes, ethnic cleansing, and crimes against
humanity.
“The Security Council reaffirms that parties to armed conflict bear the
primary responsibility to take all feasible steps to ensure the protection of
affected civilians and urges parties to armed conflict to meet their basic needs,
and give attention to the specific needs of women and children, refugees,
internally displaced persons, as well as other civilians who may have spe cific
vulnerabilities including persons with disabilities and older persons.

* Reissued for technical reasons on 14 April 2015.

14-01143* (E)

140415

*1401143*

S/PRST/2014/3

“The Security Council reiterates its strong condemnation of all violations
of applicable international law and demands that parties to armed conflict
comply strictly with the obligations applicable to them under international
humanitarian, human rights and refugee law, as well as to implement all
relevant decisions of the Security Council.
“The Security Council stresses the need to end impunity for violations of
international humanitarian law and violations and abuses of human rights, and
reaffirms that those who have committed or are otherwise responsible for such
violations and abuses must be brought to justice.
“The Security Council recalls its determination to upgrade the strategic
oversight of peacekeeping operations mindful of the important role
peacekeeping operations play for the protection of civilians and reaffirms its
support to the efforts made by the Secretary-General to review peacekeeping
operations and to provide enhanced planning and support and renews its
encouragement to deepen these efforts, in partnership with troop and police
contributing countries and other relevant stakeholders.
“The Security Council reaffirms the need for peacekeeping missions with
protection of civilian mandates to ensure their implementation, and stresses
the importance of continued and further engagement by senior mission
leadership, with a view to ensuring that all mission components and all levels
of the chain of command are properly informed of and are involved in the
mission’s protection mandate and their relevant responsibilities. The Security
Council reiterates the need for strong leadership in peacekeeping missions, and
also encourages further coordination between UN and regio nal and
subregional institutions, as appropriate, on issues relating to the protection of
civilians in peacekeeping operations.
“The Security Council notes the report of the Secretary-General on the
protection of civilians of 22 November 2013 (S/2013/689) and the
recommendations made therein.
“The Security Council recognises the contribution of the updated Aide
Memoire for the consideration of issues pertaining to the protection of
civilians in armed conflict,* contained in the Annex to this statement, to the
protection of civilians, and as a practical tool that provides a basis for
improved analysis and diagnosis of key protection issues, and stresses the need
to continue its use on a more systematic and consistent basis.”

* The initial Aide Memoire was adopted on 15 March 2002 in S/PRST/2002/6.

2/80

14-01143

S/PRST/2014/3

Aide Memoire
For the consideration of issues pertaining to the protection of civilians in
armed conflict
Enhancing the protection of civilians in armed conflict is at the core of the
work of the United Nations Security Council for the maintenance of peace and
security. In order to facilitate the Council’s consideration of protection of civilians
concerns in a given context, including at the time of the establishment or renewal of
peacekeeping mandates, in June 2001, Council Members suggested that an Aide
Memoire, listing the relevant issues, be drafted in cooperation with the Council
(S/2001/614). On 15 March 2002, the Council adopted the Aide Memoire as a
practical guide for its consideration of protection of civilians issues and agreed to
review and update its contents periodically (S/PRST/2002/6). It was subsequently
updated twice and adopted as annex to Presidential Statement S/PRST/2003/27 on
15 December 2003, and Presidential Statement S/PRST/2010/25 of 22 November
2010.
This is the fifth edition of the Aide Memoire and is based on the Council’s
previous deliberations on the protection of civilians, including resolutions 1265
(1999), 1296 (2000), 1674 (2006), 1738 (2006) and 1894 (2009). It is the result of
consultation between the Security Council and the Office for the Coordination of
Humanitarian Affairs (OCHA), as well as between OCHA and concerned United
Nations departments and agencies, and other relevant humanitarian o rganizations.
The Aide Memoire is intended to facilitate the Security Council’s
consideration of issues relevant to the protection of civilians in armed conflict. To
this end, it highlights primary objectives for Security Council action; offers, on the
basis of the Security Council’s past practice, specific issues for consideration in
meeting those objectives; and provides, in the addendum, a selection of agreed
language from Security Council resolutions and presidential statements that refer to
such concerns.
Bearing in mind that each peacekeeping mandate has to be elaborated on a
case-by-case basis, the Aide Memoire is not intended as a blueprint for action. The
relevance and practicality of the various measures described has to be considered
and adapted to the specific conditions in each situation.
Most frequently civilians are caught in circumstances of dire need where a
peacekeeping operation has not been established. Such situations may require the
Council’s urgent attention. This Aide Memoire may, therefore, also provide
guidance in circumstances where the Council may wish to consider action outside
the scope of a peacekeeping operation.

14-01143

3/80

S/PRST/2014/3

I. General protection concerns pertaining to the
conflict-affected population
A.

Protection of, and assistance to, the conflict-affected population
Parties to armed conflict to take the necessary measures to protect and meet the
basic needs of the conflict-affected population.
Issues for consideration:
 Stress the responsibility of parties to armed conflict to respect, protect and
meet the basic needs of civilian populations within their effective control.
 Express concern at acts, threats or situations of violence against civilians,
condemn violations of applicable international humanitarian law as well as
human rights law violations and abuses, and call on all parties to immediately
cease such violations and abuses.
 Call for strict compliance by parties to armed conflict with applicable
international humanitarian law and human rights law, includin g with regard to:
▪ The prohibition against violence to life and person, in particular murder,
mutilation, cruel treatment and torture; enforced disappearances;
outrages upon personal dignity; and rape, sexual slavery, enforced
prostitution, forced pregnancy, enforced sterilization, and any other form
of sexual violence.
▪ The prohibition against arbitrary deprivation of liberty; corporal
punishment; collective punishment; and the passing of sentences and the
carrying out of executions without previous j udgement pronounced by a
regularly constituted court, affording all judicial guarantees which are
generally recognized as indispensable.
▪ The prohibition against taking of hostages.
▪ The prohibition against ordering the displacement of the civilian
population for reasons related to the conflict, unless the security of the
civilians involved or imperative military reasons so demand.
▪ The prohibition against the recruitment and use of children by parties to
armed conflict in violation of applicable international law.
▪ The prohibition against slavery and the slave trade in all their forms and
uncompensated or abusive forced labour.
▪ The prohibition against wilfully impeding relief supplies as provided for
under international humanitarian law.
▪ The prohibition of persecution on political, religious, racial or gender
grounds.
▪ The prohibition of any adverse distinction in the application of
international humanitarian law and human rights law based on race,
colour, sex, language, religion or belief, political or other opinion,
national or social origin, wealth, birth or other status.

4/80

14-01143

S/PRST/2014/3

▪ The obligation to respect and protect, to whichever party they belong, the
wounded and sick, to take all possible measures, particularly after an
engagement, to search for and collect the wounded and sick and to
provide, to the fullest extent practicable and with the least possible delay,
the medical care and attention required by their condition without
distinction on any grounds other than medical ones.
 Call on all parties to ensure access for relevant organizations, as applicable, to
all prisons and places of detention.
 Mandate United Nations peacekeeping and other relevant missions authorized
by the Security Council, where appropriate and on a case -by-case basis, to
impartially contribute to the protection of the civilian population, including
those under imminent threat of physical violence, within their zones of
operation. In doing so, request:
▪ That the protection of civilians is prioritized in decisi ons about the use of
available capacity and resources, including information and intelligence
resources, in the implementation of mandates.
▪ The development of clear guidelines/directives as to what missions can
do to protect civilians, including practical protection measures such as
intensified and systematic patrolling in potential volatile areas, joint
protection teams or early warning cells.
▪ Systematic coordination, between the civil and military components of
the mission and between the mission and humanitarian actors, in order to
consolidate expertise on the protection of civilians.
▪ That missions communicate with the civilian population to raise
awareness and understanding about their mandate and activities and to
collect reliable information on violations of international humanitarian
law and human rights violations and abuses perpetrated against civilians.
 Request that United Nations peacekeeping and other relevant missions develop
comprehensive protection strategies in consultation with U nited Nations
country teams and other relevant actors, and maximize the use of their
capacities for the implementation of these comprehensive protection strategies.
 Expressly authorize missions to use all necessary means to carry out their
protection mandates.
 Condemn wilful impediments to the implementation of United Nations
peacekeeping and other relevant missions’ mandates, in particular attacks
against their staff and bureaucratic hurdles, and call upon parties to conflict to
immediately cease interfering with the activities of these missions in the
implementation of their mandates. Request that reports of the Secretary General on country-specific situations include information on the protection of
civilians, including internally-displaced persons and refugees, and the
implementation of the Secretary-General’s Human Rights Due Diligence
Policy.
 Request missions to monitor, help investigate, and report publicly and to the
Security Council, on a regular basis, on the situation with regard to human
rights and international humanitarian law in host countries.

14-01143

5/80

S/PRST/2014/3

 Request that United Nations peacekeeping and other relevant missions develop
benchmarks and indicators of progress regarding the protection of civilians to
measure specific developments in the implementation of their protection
mandates.
 Request troop- and police-contributing countries to ensure the provision of
appropriate training to heighten the awareness and responsiveness to
protection concerns of their personnel participating in United Nations
peacekeeping and other relevant missions authorized by the Security Council
to protect civilians.
 Urge relevant regional and/or subregional bodies to develop and implement
policies, activities and advocacy for the benefit of civilians affected by armed
conflict.

B.

Displacement
Parties to armed conflict and other relevant actors refrain from, and take the
necessary measures to prevent and respond to, the displacement of the
civilian population.
Issues for consideration:
 Condemn, and call for the immediate cessation of, displacement in violation of
applicable international humanitarian law and human rights law.
 Call for strict compliance by parties to armed conflict with applicable
international humanitarian law, human rights law and refugee law, including
with regard to:
▪ The prohibition against deportation, forcible transfer or displacement of
the civilian population, in whole or in part, unless the security of the
civilians concerned or imperative military reasons so demand.
▪ The obligation, in case of displacement, to ensure to the greatest
practicable extent that the civilians concerned are received under
satisfactory conditions of shelter, hygiene, health, safety and nutrition
and that members of the same family are not separated and that basic
needs are met during displacement.
▪ The right to freedom of movement and to leave one’s country and seek
asylum.
▪ The right to non-refoulement under the Convention relating to the Status
of Refugees, the protection of which does not extend to any person with
respect to whom there are serious reasons for considering that she or he
has been guilty of acts contrary to the purposes and principles of the
United Nations.
 Underline the primary responsibility of States to respect and maintain the
security and civilian character of camps for refugees and internally displaced
persons, including disarming armed elements, separating combatants, curbing
the flow of small arms in camps and preventing recruitment by armed groups
in and around camps.

6/80

14-01143

S/PRST/2014/3

 Mandate peacekeeping and other relevant missions authorized by the Security
Council to take all feasible measures to ensure security in and around such
camps and for their inhabitants.
 Request that reports of the Secretary-General on country-specific situations
include the protection of displaced persons as a specific aspect of the report.
 Urge relevant regional and/or subregional bodies to develop and implement
policies, activities and advocacy for the benefit of internally displaced persons
and refugees.
 Consider applying targeted and graduated measures against parties to armed
conflict who commit violations of applicable international law related to
forced displacement.
Durable solutions for refugees and internally displaced persons, including safe,
voluntary and dignified return and reintegration.
Issues for consideration:
 Call for strict compliance by parties to armed conflict with applicable
international humanitarian law, refugee law and human rights law, including
with regard to:
▪ Respect for the right of refugees and displaced persons to voluntary
return in safety and dignity to their homes.
▪ Respect for the property rights of refugees and displaced persons,
without adverse distinction on the basis of gender, age or other statu s.
 Stress the importance of achieving durable solutions for refugees and
displaced persons, including voluntary, safe and dignified return, and of
ensuring their full participation in the planning and management of these
solutions.
 Call upon all parties concerned to create the conditions conducive to allowing
the voluntary, safe, dignified and sustainable return, local integration or
resettlement of refugees and displaced persons.
 Request United Nations Peacekeeping and other relevant missions to
contribute to the reestablishment of security conditions conducive to
voluntary, safe, dignified and sustainable returns, including through police
patrols in areas of return.
 Call upon all parties concerned to ensure non-discriminatory treatment of
returning refugees and internally displaced persons.
 Call upon all parties concerned to ensure the participation of refugees and
internally displaced persons and inclusion of their needs, including their right
to voluntary, safe and dignified return and reintegration, in all peace processes,
peace agreements and post-conflict recovery and reconstruction planning and
programmes.
 Encourage United Nations peacekeeping and other relevant missions
authorized by the Security Council, as appropriate and on a cas e-by-case basis,
to support domestic mechanisms for addressing housing, land and property
issues or their establishment by national authorities.

14-01143

7/80

S/PRST/2014/3

 Encourage United Nations peacekeeping and other relevant missions
authorized by the Security Council, as appropriate and on a case-by-case basis,
to prevent the illegal appropriation and confiscation of land and property
belonging to refugees and internally displaced persons and to ensure the
protection of returning refugees and internally displaced persons.

C.

Humanitarian access and safety and security of
humanitarian workers
Parties to armed conflict to agree to and facilitate relief operations that are
humanitarian and impartial in character and to allow and facilitate rapid and
unimpeded passage of relief consignments, equipment and personnel.
Issues for consideration:
 Condemn, and call for the immediate removal of, impediments of
humanitarian access in violation of applicable international humanitarian law.
 Condemn all cases of arbitrary denial of humanitarian access, and recall that
arbitrarily depriving civilians of objects indispensable to their survival,
including wilfully impeding relief supply and access, can constitute a violation
of international humanitarian law.
 Call for strict compliance by parties to armed conflict with applicable
international humanitarian law, including:
▪ The prohibition against using starvation of civilians as a method of
warfare by depriving them of objects indispensable to their survival,
including wilfully impeding relief supplies as provided for under
applicable international humanitarian law.
▪ Agreeing to relief actions which are humanitarian and impartial in
character and conducted without any adverse distinction.
 Call for strict compliance by parties to armed conflict and third States with
their obligations under applicable international humanitarian law to allow and
facilitate the rapid and unimpeded passage of relief consignments, equipment
and personnel subject to their right to prescribe technic al arrangements,
including search, under which such passage is permitted.
 Mandate United Nations peacekeeping and other relevant missions authorized
by the Security Council, where appropriate and as requested, to facilitate the
provision of humanitarian assistance.
 Consider applying targeted and graduated measures against parties to armed
conflict who are responsible for obstructing the delivery of humanitarian
assistance in violation of international humanitarian law, including by
participating in attacks against humanitarian actors and assets.

8/80

14-01143

S/PRST/2014/3

Parties to armed conflict to respect and protect humanitarian workers
and facilities.
Issues for consideration:
 Condemn, and call for the immediate cessation of, attacks deliberately
targeting humanitarian workers.
 Call for strict compliance by parties to armed conflict with applicable
international humanitarian law, including the duty to respect and protect relief
personnel and installations, material, units and vehicles involved in
humanitarian assistance.
 Mandate peacekeeping and other relevant missions authorized by the Security
Council to contribute, as requested and within capabilities, to the creation of
the necessary security conditions for the provision of humanitarian assistance.
 Encourage the Secretary-General to bring to the attention of the Security
Council situations in which humanitarian assistance is denied as a
consequence of violence directed against humanitarian personnel and
facilities.
 Request that States include key provisions of the Convention on the Safety of
United Nations and Associated Personnel and its Optional Protocol, such as
those regarding the prevention of attacks against members of United Nations
operations, the criminalization of such attacks and the prosecut ion or
extradition of offenders in future as well as, if necessary, in existing status -offorces, status-of-mission and host country agreements negotiated with the
United Nations.
Relevant international actors, including Donors and United Nations
humanitarian agencies, to increase humanitarian assistance and improve
the reach, quantity and quality of humanitarian aid.
Issues for consideration:
 Call upon Member States to contribute to Consolidated Appeal Processes.
 Consider adopting general exemptions to targeted economic and financial
sanctions adopted by the Security Council in order to facilitate the provision of
humanitarian assistance.
 Stress the need for all relevant actors to uphold and respect the humanitarian
principles of humanity, neutrality, impartiality and independence in order to
increase the reach and quality of humanitarian aid.

D.

Conduct of hostilities
Parties to armed conflict to take all feasible precautions to spare civilians from
the effects of hostilities.
Issues for consideration:
 Condemn, and call for the immediate cessation of, all acts of violence or
abuses committed against civilians in violation of applicable international
humanitarian law and human rights law.

14-01143

9/80

S/PRST/2014/3

 Call for strict compliance by parties to armed conflict with applicable
international humanitarian law, including the prohibitions against:
▪ Directing attacks against the civilian population or against individual
civilians not taking direct part in hostilities;
▪ Directing attacks against civilian objects;
▪ Launching an attack that is indiscriminate, i.e., of a nature to strike
military objectives and civilians or civilian objects without distinction;
▪ Launching an attack which may be expected to cause incidental loss of
life or injury to civilians or damage to civilian objects or a combination
thereof which would be excessive in relation to the concrete and direct
military advantage anticipated;
▪ Directing attacks against personnel, installations, material, units or
vehicles involved in a humanitarian assistance or peacekeeping mission
in accordance with the United Nations Charter, as long as they are
entitled to the protection given to civilians or civilian objects under
international humanitarian law;
▪ Utilizing the presence of a civilian or other protected person to render
certain points, areas or military forces immune from mil itary operations;
▪ Rape and other forms of sexual violence;
▪ Directing attacks against buildings dedicated to religion, education, art,
science or charitable purposes, historic monuments, hospitals and places
where the sick and wounded are collected, provided they are not military
objectives;
▪ Directing attacks against buildings, material, medical units and transport,
and personnel using the distinctive emblems of the Geneva Conventions
in conformity with international law;
▪ Destroying or seizing the property of the adversary unless required by
military necessity;
▪ Using starvation of civilians as a method of warfare by depriving them of
objects indispensable to their survival, including wilfully impeding relief
supplies as provided for under applicable international humanitarian law.
 Request regular reporting by United Nations peacekeeping and other relevant
missions authorized by the Security Council on concrete steps taken to ensure
the protection of the civilian population in the conduct of hostilities and on
measures to ensure accountability for violations of applicable international
humanitarian law.
 Request parties to conflict, including United Nations authorized missions with
a mandate to conduct or support offensive operations, to ad opt and implement
specific measures to mitigate the risk that harm be caused to civilians or
civilian objects as a consequence of hostilities in violation of international
humanitarian law.

10/80

14-01143

S/PRST/2014/3

E.

Small arms and light weapons, mines and explosive remnants
of war
Protection of the civilian population through the control of, and reduction in the
availability of, illicit small arms and light weapons.
Issues for consideration:
 Express concern at the detrimental impact of the proliferation of arms, in
particular small arms, on the security of civilians by fuelling armed conflict,
and request the mission to monitor the presence of arms among the civilian
population.
 Request States and regional and subregional organizations to adopt measures
to curb and reduce the illicit trafficking of small arms and light weapons such
as voluntary collection and destruction; effective stockpile management; arms
embargoes; sanctions; and legal measures against corporate actors, individuals
and entities involved in such activities.
 Urge States to consider signing and ratifying the Arms Trade Treaty as soon as
possible.
 Encourage strengthened practical cooperation between United Nations
peacekeeping and other relevant missions authorized by the Security Council
aimed at monitoring and preventing the cross-border movement of small arms
and light weapons.
 Mandate United Nations peacekeeping and other relevant missions authorized
by the Security Council to collect and dispose of or secure illicit and/or surplus
small arms and light weapons as well as surplus ammunition stockpiles.
 Consider imposing arms embargoes and other measures aimed at preventing
the sale or supply of arms and related materiel of all types to parties to armed
conflict that commit violations of applicable international law.
 Encourage strengthened practical cooperation among relevant sanctions
monitoring groups of the Security Council, peacekeeping and other relevant
missions authorized by the Security Council and States.
 Request the establishment of a baseline arms inventory as well as arms
marking and registration systems in situations where a United Nations arms
embargo coincides with disarmament, demobilization and reintegration efforts.
Protection of the civilian population through the marking, clearance, removal or
destruction of mines and explosive remnants of war (ERW), including cluster
munition remnants.
Issues for consideration:
 Call on parties to armed conflict, after the cessation of active hostilities and as
soon as feasible, to mark, clear, remove or destroy mines and ERW in affected
territories under their control, prioritizing areas affected by mines and ERW
which are assessed to pose serious humanitarian risk.
 Call on parties to armed conflict to record and retain information on the use of
mines and explosive ordnance or the abandonment of explosive ordnance, to

14-01143

11/80

S/PRST/2014/3

facilitate rapid marking and clearance, removal or destruction of mines and
ERW and risk education, and to provide the relevant information to the party
in control of, and civilian populations in, the territory.
 Call on parties to armed conflict to take all feasible precautions in the territory
under their control affected by mines and ERW to protect the civilian
population, in particular children, including issuing warnings, undertaking risk
education, marking, fencing and monitoring of territory affected by mines and
ERW.
 Call on parties to armed conflict to protect United Nations peacekeeping and
other relevant missions authorized by the Security Council, as well as
humanitarian organizations, from the effects of mines and ERW and to make
available information on the location of mines and ERW that they are aware of
in the territory where the missions/organizations are or will be operating.
 Call on parties to armed conflict, States and other relevant actors to provide
technical, financial, material or human resources assistance to facilitate the
marking, clearance, removal or destruction of mines and ERW.
 Call on parties to armed conflict, States and other relevant actors to provide
assistance for the care, rehabilitation and economic and social reintegration of
victims of ERW and their families and communities.

F.

Compliance, accountability and the rule of law
Compliance by parties to armed conflict with applicable international
humanitarian law and human rights law.
Issues for consideration:
 Call on parties to armed conflict to take appropriate measures to respect and
ensure respect for international humanitarian law and human rights la w,
including by:
▪ Enforcing appropriate military disciplinary measures and upholding the
principle of command responsibility.
▪ Training troops on applicable international humanitarian law and human
rights law.
▪ Vetting armed and security forces to ensure that personnel have a reliably
attested record of not having been involved in violations of international
humanitarian law or human rights law.
 Consider applying targeted and graduated measures against parties to armed
conflict that threaten peace, attack or obstruct the action of United Nations
Peacekeeping or other relevant mission, commit violations of applicable
international humanitarian law and human rights law.
 Stress that the support of United Nations peacekeeping and other relevant
missions to military operations led by national armed forces is strictly
conditioned on the compliance of those armed forces with international
humanitarian, human rights and refugee law and on joint planning of such
operations.

12/80

14-01143

S/PRST/2014/3

 Call upon United Nations peacekeeping and other relevant missions to
intercede with national armed forces if elements of the latter receiving support
from the mission are suspected of committing violations of international
humanitarian, human rights and refugee law and, if the situa tion persists, to
withdraw the mission’s support.
 Request the mission to provide military training, including in the area of
human rights, international humanitarian law, child protection and the
prevention of gender-based and sexual violence, to the armed forces.
Accountability for persons suspected of genocide, crimes against humanity, war
crimes or serious violations of human rights law.
Issues for consideration:
 Stress the importance of ending impunity for violations of applicable
international humanitarian law and human rights law as part of a
comprehensive approach to seeking sustainable peace, justice, truth and
national reconciliation.
 Call on States to comply with their obligations to investigate, search for,
prosecute or extradite persons suspected of committing genocide, war crimes,
crimes against humanity or other serious violations of international law,
including international humanitarian law, human rights law and refugee law,
irrespective of their status or political affiliation.
 Stress the need for the exclusion of, and reject any form of, or endorsement of,
amnesty for genocide, crimes against humanity, war crimes or other serious
violations of human rights in conflict resolution processes and ensure that no
such amnesty previously granted is a bar to prosecution before any United
Nations–created or –assisted court.
 Mandate United Nations peacekeeping and other relevant missions authorized
by the Security Council to promote, in cooperation with relevant States, the
establishment of effective arrangements for investigating and prosecuting
violations of international humanitarian law or other serious violations of
human rights law.
 Request the cooperation of States and United Nations peacekeeping and other
relevant missions authorized by the Security Council in the apprehension and
surrender of alleged perpetrators of genocide, crimes against humanity, war
crimes or other serious violations of human rights law.
 Stress the need for comprehensive, independent and impartial investigation,
consistent with international standards, into alleged human rights abuses and
violations, and violations of international humanitarian law.
 Consider the establishment of ad hoc judicial mechanisms and reparation
programs at the national or international level to investigate and prosecute war
crimes and serious violations of international humanitarian and human rights
law, and ensure the implementation of applicable provisions on the right to
reparations for violations of individual rights. Consider the referral of
situations involving genocide, crimes against humanity or war crimes to the
International Criminal Court.

14-01143

13/80

S/PRST/2014/3

Protection of civilians through the restoration and enforcement of the rule of
law, disarmament, demobilization and reintegration programmes, and security
sector reform.
Issues for consideration:
 Call upon States to ensure equal protection under the law and equal access to
justice for victims, including women and children, of violations of
international humanitarian law and human rights law and to take the necessary
measures to ensure the protection of victims and witnesses.
 Mandate United Nations peacekeeping and other relevant missions authorized
by the Security Council to support restoration of the rule of law, in cluding the
provision of assistance in monitoring, restructuring and reforming the justice
sector.
 Request the rapid deployment of qualified and well-trained international
civilian police, and justice and corrections experts as a component of United
Nations peacekeeping and other relevant missions authorized by the Security
Council.
 Call on States and regional and subregional organizations to provide technical
assistance for local police, judiciary and penitentiaries (e.g., mentoring,
legislative drafting).
 Stress the importance of permanently disarming, demobilizing and
reintegrating former combatants of national armed groups and disarming,
demobilizing, repatriating, resettling and reintegrating foreign armed groups,
and assisting the victims in conflict affected communities.
 Stress the importance of security sector reform and urge all international
partners to support the efforts to professionalize, and ensure the civilian
oversight of, the national security forces and the police, including thr ough
vetting for human rights violations and training on human rights, child
protection and sexual and gender based violence.
 Mandate United Nations peacekeeping and other relevant missions to provide
good offices, advice and support to host Governments for the design of
comprehensive disarmament, demobilization and reintegration programmes as
well as disarmament, demobilization, repatriation, resettlement and
reintegration programmes for combatants not suspected of war crimes or other
serious violations of human rights, and to provide support for the
implementation of these plans, in full compliance with the United Nations
Human Rights Due Diligence Policy.
Build confidence and enhance stability by promoting truth and
reconciliation mechanisms.
Issues for consideration:
 Mandate the establishment of appropriate, locally adapted mechanisms for
truth and reconciliation (e.g., technical assistance, funding and reintegration of
civilians within communities).
 Request, where appropriate, the establishment by the Secretary-General of
commissions of inquiry and similar measures with regard to situations

14/80

14-01143

S/PRST/2014/3

involving genocide, war crimes, crimes against humanity or serious violations
of human rights law.

G.

Media and information
Protection of journalists, other media professionals and associated personnel.
Issues for consideration:
 Condemn, and call for the immediate cessation of, attacks against journalists,
media professionals and associated personnel operating in situations of armed
conflict.
 Call for compliance by parties to armed conflict with applicable international
humanitarian law and respect for the civilian status of journalists, media
professionals and associated personnel as well as their equipment and
installations.
 Demand that States take all necessary steps to prosecute those responsible for
attacks against journalists, media professionals and associated personnel in
violation of applicable international humanitarian law.
Counter occurrences of speech used to incite violence.
Issues for consideration:
 Condemn, and call for the immediate cessation of, incitements to
discrimination, hostility, hatred and violence against civilians in situations of
armed conflict.
 Demand that States bring to justice individuals who incit e or otherwise cause
such violence.
 Impose targeted and graduated measures in response to media broadcasts
inciting genocide, crimes against humanity, war crimes or other serious
violations of human rights law.
 Mandate peacekeeping and other relevant missions authorized by the Security
Council to promote the establishment of media monitoring mechanisms to
ensure effective monitoring, reporting and documenting of any incidents,
origins and contents that incite “hate media”.
Promote and support accurate management of information on the conflict.
Issues for consideration:
 Urge parties to armed conflict to respect the professional independence of
journalists, media professionals and associated personnel.
 Encourage United Nations peacekeeping and other relevant missions
authorized by the Security Council to include a mass-media component that
can disseminate information about international humanitarian law and human
rights law while also giving objective information about the activities of the
United Nations.

14-01143

15/80

S/PRST/2014/3

 Request relevant actors to provide technical assistance to States in drafting and
enforcing anti-hate speech legislation.

II. Specific protection concerns arising from Security Council
discussions on children affected by armed conflict
Parties to armed conflict to take the necessary measures to meet the specific
protection, health, education and assistance needs of children.
Issues for consideration:
 Condemn, and call for the immediate cessation of, violations and abuses
committed against children in situations of armed conflict, including the
recruitment and use of children by parties to armed conflict in violation of
applicable international law; the killing or maiming of children; rape and other
forms of sexual violence against children; abduction of children; attacks
against schools or hospitals; and denial of humanitarian access for children.
 Call for strict compliance by parties to armed conflict with applicable
international humanitarian law and human rights law relatin g to children
affected by armed conflict.
 Call upon relevant parties to develop and implement concrete time -bound
action plans to halt recruitment and use of children and and other grave
violations committed against children in situations of armed confl ict, in close
collaboration with United Nations peacekeeping missions, United Nations
country teams and the Special Representative of the Secretary-General on
Children and Armed Conflict.
 Call upon all parties concerned to implement the recommendations of the
Security Council Working Group on Children and Armed Conflict.
 Call upon all parties to armed conflict to protect and consider as victims those
children who have been released or otherwise separated from armed forces and
armed groups, and emphasize the need to pay particular attention to the
protection, release and reintegration of all children associated with armed
forces and armed groups.
 Include specific provisions for the protection of children in the mandates of
United Nations peacekeeping and other relevant missions authorized by the
Security Council, in particular:
▪ Request the mission, in collaboration with relevant entities of the United
Nations Country Team, to establish and implement a country-level
monitoring and reporting mechanism on grave violations perpetrated
against children, pursuant to resolution 1612 (2005).
▪ Request the mission to support the host Government in promoting child
protection, and developing and implementing action plans to halt the
recruitment and use of children and other grave violations committed
against children in situations of armed conflict.

16/80

14-01143

S/PRST/2014/3

▪ Request the mission to support the host Government in taking into
account the specific needs of children in disarmament, demobilization
and reintegration processes.
▪ Request the appointment of child protection advisors within the mission.
 Request that reports of the Secretary-General on country-specific situations
include the protection of children as a specific aspect of the report.
 Call upon all parties concerned to ensure that the protection, rights and well being of children affected by armed conflict are specifically integrated into
peace processes, peace agreements and post-conflict recovery and
reconstruction planning and programmes, including measures for family
tracing and reunification, the rehabilitation and reintegration of separated
children, and the release and reintegration of children associated with armed
forces and groups.
 Urge States, United Nations entities, regional and subregional o rganizations
and other concerned parties to take appropriate measures to control illicit
subregional and cross-border activities harmful to children, as well as other
violations and abuses committed against children in situations of armed
conflict in violation of applicable international law.
 Urge relevant regional and/or subregional bodies to develop and implement
policies, activities and advocacy for the benefit of children affected by armed
conflict.
 Consider applying targeted and graduated measures against parties to armed
conflict that commit grave violations against children in situations of armed
conflict.

III. Specific protection concerns arising from Security Council
discussions on women affected by armed conflict
Parties to armed conflict and other relevant actors to refrain from, and take the
necessary measures to prevent and respond to, sexual violence.
Issues for consideration:
 Condemn, and call for the immediate cessation of, acts of sexual violence
committed in the context of, and associated with, armed conflict.
 Call for strict compliance by parties to armed conflict with the rules of
international humanitarian law and human rights law prohibiting rape, sexual
slavery, enforced prostitution, forced pregnancy, enforced ster ilization or any
other form of sexual violence.
 Call on parties to armed conflict to take appropriate measures to refrain from,
prevent and protect all persons from all forms of sexual violence, including
by:
▪ Issuing clear orders through chains of command prohibiting sexual
violence, enforcing appropriate military disciplinary measures in a timely
manner, and upholding the principle of command responsibility.

14-01143

17/80

S/PRST/2014/3

▪ Training troops on the categorical prohibition of all forms of sexual
violence.
▪ Debunking myths that fuel sexual violence.
▪ Vetting armed and security forces to ensure that personnel have a reliably
attested record of not having been involved in the perpetration of rape
and other forms of sexual violence.
▪ Evacuating to safety civilians under imminent threat of sexual violence.
▪ Making and implementing specific and time-bound commitments to
combat sexual violence, in accordance with resolution 2106 (2013).
 Request that reports of the Secretary-General on country-specific situations
include sexual violence as a specific aspect of the report, including, to the
extent possible, disaggregated data as to gender and age of victims; and
request the development of mission-specific strategies and plans of action for
preventing and responding to sexual violence, as part of a broader protection
of civilians strategy.
 Include specific provisions addressing sexual violence in situations of armed
conflict in the mandates of United Nations peacekeeping and other relevant
missions authorized by the Security Council, in particular:
▪ Request the mission, in collaboration with relevant entities of the United
Nations Country Team, to establish and implement country-level
monitoring, analysis and reporting arrangements on grave violations
perpetrated against children, pursuant to resolution 1960 (2010).
▪ Request the mission to support the host Government in addressing sexual
violence explicitly, in disarmament, demobilization and reintegration
processes, security sector reform processes and justice sector reform
initiatives, and in developing and implementing concrete and time -bound
action plans to combat conflict-related sexual violence.
 Request the appointment of women protection advisors within the mi ssion.
 Urge relevant regional and/or subregional bodies to develop and implement
policies, activities and advocacy for the benefit of civilians affected by sexual
violence.
 Request troop- and police-contributing countries to deploy higher numbers of
women peacekeepers or police, and to ensure the provision of appropriate
training to their personnel participating in United Nations peacekeeping and
other relevant missions on the protection of civilians, including women and
children, and the prevention of sexual violence in conflict and post-conflict
situations.
Parties to armed conflict to take the necessary measures to meet the specific
protection, health and assistance needs of women and girls.
Issues for consideration:
 Condemn, and call for the immediate cessation of, violations and abuses
committed against women and girls in situations of armed conflict.

18/80

14-01143

S/PRST/2014/3

 Call for strict compliance by parties to armed conflict with applicable
international humanitarian law and human rights law relating to th e protection
of women and girls affected by armed conflict.
 Call upon all parties concerned to ensure that the protection, rights and well being of women and girls affected by armed conflict are specifically integrated
into all peace processes, peace agreements and post-conflict recovery and
reconstruction planning and programmes.
 Call upon the host Government to develop and implement nationally-owned
multi-sectoral strategies for preventing and responding to sexual and genderbased violence.
 Include specific provisions for the protection of women and girls in the
mandates of United Nations peacekeeping and other relevant missions
authorized by the Security Council, requesting in particular the mission to
support the efforts of host Governments in developing and implementing
nationally-owned multi-sectoral strategies for preventing and responding to
sexual and gender-based violence.
 Request that reports of the Secretary-General on country-specific situations
include the protection of women and girls as a specific aspect of the report.
 Urge relevant regional and/or subregional bodies to develop and implement
policies, activities and advocacy for the benefit of women and girls affected by
armed conflict.
Equal participation and full involvement of women in the prevention and
resolution of armed conflict.
Issues for consideration:
 Urge States, United Nations entities, regional and subregional organizations
and other concerned parties to ensure increased representation of women at all
decision-making levels in national, regional and international institutions and
mechanisms for the prevention, management and resolution of conflict.
 Call on all actors involved in negotiating and implementing peace agreements
to adopt a gender perspective, including by considering:
▪ The needs of women and girls during repatriation and resettlement and
for rehabilitation, reintegration and post-conflict reconstruction.
▪ Measures that support local women’s peace initiatives and indigenous
processes for conflict resolution, and that involve women in the
implementation mechanisms of peace agreements.
▪ Measures that ensure the protection of, and respect for, the human rights
of women and girls, particularly as they relate to the constitution, the
electoral system, the police and the judiciary.
 Urge the Secretary-General and his Special Envoys to ensure the participation
of women in discussions pertinent to the prevention and resolution of conflict,
the maintenance of peace and security, and post-conflict peace-building, and
encourage all parties to such talks to facilitate the equal and full participation
of women at all decision-making levels.

14-01143

19/80

S/PRST/2014/3

 Ensure that Security Council missions take into account gender considerations
and the rights of women and girls, including through consultation with local
and international women’s groups.
 Urge troop- and police-contributing countries to expand the role, numbers and
contribution of women in United Nations operations, and especially among
military observers and civilian police.
Sexual exploitation and abuse (SEA).
Issues for consideration:
 Urge humanitarian and development organizations to take appropriate action
to prevent SEA by their personnel, including pre-deployment and in-theatre
awareness training and, in the case of United Nations actors, to promote and
ensure compliance, including by civilian staff of United Nations peacekeeping
and other relevant missions, with the Secretary-General’s Bulletin on special
measures
for
protection
from
sexual
exploitation
and
abuse
(ST/SGB/2003/13).
 Urge troop- and police-contributing countries to take appropriate action to
prevent SEA by their personnel, including pre-deployment and in-theater
awareness training to promote and ensure compliance with the Secreta ryGeneral’s Bulletin on special measures for protection from sexual exploitation
and abuse (ST/SGB/2003/13).
 Urge troop- and police-contributing countries to ensure full accountability in
cases of SEA involving their personnel and to report to the Sec retary-General
on action taken.

20/80

14-01143

14-01143

Addendum: Selection of agreed language
I. General protection concerns pertaining to the conflict-affected population
A. Protection of, and assistance to, the conflict-affected population
Express concern at
acts, threats or
situations of violence
against civilians, and
condemn violations
of applicable
international
humanitarian and
human rights law

S/RES/2122 (2013),
pp. 9

Underlining its particular concern at reports of the targeted violence against representatives of ethnic
and religious groups and increasing tensions between communities,

S/RES/2121 (2013),
pp. 8

Expresses deep concern over the increased localized conflicts, increas ed criminality and violence and
their effect on civilians, and particularly over the sharp increase in inter -tribal clashes and calls on all
parties urgently to put an end to such clashes and to pursue reconciliation and dialogue …

S/RES/2113 (2013),
op. 23

Expressing grave concern at the continuing human rights violations, including inter alia arbitrary
arrests and detentions, torture, and incidences of extrajudicial killings, as well as looting of property,
by armed groups and by national security institutions … as well as the inability of the authorities to
hold those responsible to account,

S/RES/2109 (2013),
pp. 9

Condemning strongly all abuses and violations of human rights and violations of international
humanitarian law, including those involving extrajudicial executions, arbitrary arrests and detentions,
and sexual and gender-based violence, forced amputations, as well as killing, maiming, recruitment
and use of children, attacks against schools and hospitals, forced displacements, and destruct ion of
cultural and historical heritage, committed in [the affected country] by any group or individuals, …
condemning strongly the reports of retaliatory attacks, including those based on ethnicity and those
allegedly perpetrated by members of the … Defen ce and Security Forces [of the affected country]
against civilians, and calling upon all parties to bring an end to such violations and abuses and to
comply with their obligations under applicable international law,

S/RES/2100 (2013),
pp. 9

Condemns all attacks against civilians in [the affected country], calls for the immediate cessation of
all acts of violence, including sexual and gender based violence, or abuses committed against
civilians, including women and children, and humanitarian personnel in violation of international
humanitarian law and human rights law, …

S/RES/2093 (2013),
op. 26

Demands that all groups in the [affected areas of the affected country] cease all abuses of human
rights and violations of international humanitarian law, including targeted attacks against the civilian
population, sexual violence, recruitments of child soldiers and forced displacements, and recalls in
this regard all its relevant resolutions … on Protection of civilians in armed conflicts;

S/RES/2071 (2012),
op. 5

Expressing its concern about the continuing precarious and volatile security …

S/RES/2000 (2011),
pp. 8

21/80

See also, for example,
S/RES/2113 (2013), pp.
14; S/RES/2109 (2013),
op. 20; S/RES/2088
(2013), op. 13;
S/PRST/2013/2 (2013),
par. 7; S/RES/2046
(2012), pp. 6, pp. 9 and
pp. 11; S/RES/2042
(2012), pp. 4;
S/RES/2040 (2012), op.
4; S/RES/2021 (2011),
pp. 11; S/RES/2009
(2011), pp. 4;
S/RES/1990 (2011), pp.
9; S/RES/1975 (2011),
pp. 9; S/RES/1925
(2010), pp. 11 and op. 18;
S/RES/1923 (2010), pp.
4; S/RES/1919 (2010),
pp. 12 and op. 4;
S/RES/1910 (2010), pp.
16 and op. 16;
S/RES/1906 (2009), pp. 6
and op. 10; S/RES/1828
(2008), op. 11;
S/RES/1674 (2006), op.
3, op. 5, op. 11 and op.
26; S/RES/1574 (2004),
op. 11; S/RES/1556
(2004), pp. 8;
S/RES/1493 (2003), op.
8; S/RES/1468 (2003),
op. 2; and S/RES/1296
(2000), op. 2 and op. 5.

S/PRST/2014/3

Reiterating its strong condemnation of all violations of international law committed against and/or
directly affecting civilians, including women and girls in armed conflict and post -conflict situations,
including those involving rape and other forms of sexual and gender -based violence, killing and
maiming, obstructions to humanitarian aid, and mass forced displacement,

14-01143

… reiterates its demand that all parties to armed conflict comply strictly with the obligations
applicable to them under international humanitarian, human rights law and refugee law, and stresses
the need for parties to take all required measures to avoid civilian casualties, respect and protect the
civilian population;

S/RES/2117 (2013),
op. 13

… calls for strict adherence by the [armed forces] to international humanitarian, human rights and
refugee laws and, in this context, recalls the importance of training in Human Rights, child p rotection
and sexual and gender-based violence to security and law enforcement agencies;

S/RES/2112 (2013).
op. 24

Recalling the Presidential Statement of 12 February 2013 that recognized that States bear the primary
responsibility to protect civilians as well as to respect and ensure the human rights of all individuals
within their territory and subject to their jurisdiction as provided for by relevant international law,
reaffirmed that parties to armed conflict bear the primary responsibility to take a ll feasible steps to
ensure the protection of civilians, urged parties to armed conflict to meet civilians’ basic needs …

S/RES/2109 (2013),
pp. 11

Re-emphasizing the importance of the … Government to be able to respond proportionately to threats
to the security of all citizens in [the affected country] and calling on the Government … to ensure that
its security forces remain committed to upholding human rights and applicable international law,

S/RES/2100 (2013),
op. 10

Emphasizes the importance of ensuring access for relevant organizations, as applicable, to all prisons and places of
detention in [the affected country], and calls for full respect for relevant international law including humanitarian law
and human rights law …

S/RES/2096 (2013),
op. 39

Underscores the primary responsibility of the Government of the [affected country] to maintain law
and order, promote security and protect the civilian population, including foreign nationals, with full
respect for the rule of law, human rights, and applicable international humanitarian law …

S/RES/2088 (2013),
op. 10

… reaffirming that all parties to armed conflict must take all feasible steps to ensure the protection of
affected civilians, especially women, children and displaced persons, calling for all parties to comply
with their obligations under international humanitarian and human rights law and for all appropriate
measures to be taken to ensure the protection of civilians, …

S/RES/2069 (2012),
pp. 24

… reaffirming that all parties should continue to take all feasible steps and to develop modalities to
ensure the protection of affected civilians, including children, women and members of religious and
ethnic minority groups, and should create conditions conducive to the voluntary, safe, digni fied, and
sustainable return of refugees and internally displaced persons or local integration of internally
displaced persons, …

S/RES/2061 (2012),
pp. 11

Calls upon the Government of [the affected country] to end prolonged, arbitrary detention, and
establish a safe, secure and humane prison system, drawing on advice and technical assistance from
and in cooperation with international partners, …

S/RES/2057 (2012),
op. 17

… further decides that [the UN-authorized international mission] shall act in compliance with
applicable international humanitarian and human rights law …

S/RES/2036 (2012),
op. 1

Calls upon the Government to ensure that the conditions of protection and detention of … detainees
are in line with international obligations, including with regard to access by relevant organizations
with a mandate to monitor detention centres, and fulfil their prosecutions and trials in accordance
with international obligations relating to due process and fair trial requirements.

S/RES/2000 (2011),
op. 11

See also, for example,
S/RES/2122 (2013),
pp.10; S/RES/2121
(2013), op.6; S/RES/2100
(2013), op. 24;
S/PRST/2013/2 (2013),
par. 4, 5, 6, and 18;
S/RES/2067 (2012), pp.
16; S/RES/2051 (2012),
op. 11; S/RES/1979
(2011), pp. 11;
S/RES/1975 (2011), pp.
9; S/RES/1964 (2010),
pp. 17; S/RES/1935
(2010), pp. 12 and op. 9;
S/RES/1906 (2009), pp. 3
and op. 11; S/RES/1892
(2009), op. 15;
S/RES/1890 (2009), pp.
15; S/RES/1883 (2009),
pp. 11; S/RES/1972
(2009), pp. 13;
S/RES/1861 (2009), pp.
4; S/RES/1860 (2009),
pp. 3 and pp. 4;
S/RES/1801 (2008), op.
13; S/RES/1794 (2007),
pp. 5 and op. 7;
S/RES/1790 (2007), pp.
18; S/RES/1776 (2007),
pp. 12; S/RES/1674
(2006), op. 6;
S/PRST/2004/46;
S/RES/1574 (2004), op.
11; S/RES/1564 (2004),
pp. 10; S/RES/1493
(2003), op. 8; and
S/RES/307 (1971), op. 3.

S/PRST/2014/3

22/80

Call for compliance
with applicable
international
humanitarian law
and human rights
law

14-01143

Role of United
Nations peacekeeping
and other relevant
missions and actors

S/RES/1973 (2011),
op. 3

Calls upon the States in the region to ensure that any military actions against armed groups are carried out in
accordance with international humanitarian, human rights and refugee law, and that they take appropriate measures to
protect civilians and reduce the impact of military actions upon the civilian population, including through regular
contacts with and early warning of the civilian population on potential attacks.

S/RES/1906 (2009),
op. 17

[S]tresses the responsibility of all parties and armed groups in [the affected country] to take appropriate steps to protect
the civilian population in the country, consistent with international humanitarian, human rights and refugee law, in
particular by avoiding any indiscriminate or excessive use of force in populated areas.

S/RES/1863 (2009),
op. 19

The Security Council recognises the needs of civilians under foreign occupation and stresses … in this regard, the
responsibilities of the occupying Power.

S/PRST/2009/1

… encouraging the efforts to ensure adequate human rights capacity and expertise within [the
Mission] to carry out its human rights promotion, protection, and monitoring activities

S/RES/2116 (2013),
pp. 11

… requests [the Mission] to continue to support local conflict resolution mechanisms, including with
civil society organizations and authorizes the … [Head of the relevant Mission] to conduct mediation
and reconciliation efforts involving [national] armed groups …

S/RES/2113 (2013),
op. 23

Urges the Government to take concrete and discernible steps to prevent and mitigate inter-communal
violence by seeking a broad national consensus on addressing effectively identity and land tenure
issues

S/RES/2112 (2013),
op. 18

Notes the priority of [the Mission]’ mandated tasks … for the protection of civilians and for the
achievement of an improved security environment, urges [the Mission] to deploy its assets
accordingly …

S/RES/2109 (2013),
op. 3

Underscores that [the Mission]’s protection of civilians mandate as set out in [relevant provision]
includes taking the necessary actions to protect civilians under imminent threat of physical violence,
irrespective of the source of such violence,

S/RES/2104 (2013),
op. 4

Requests that [the Mission] take fully into account the need to protect civilians and mitigate risk to
civilians, including, in particular, women, children and displaced persons and civilian objects in the
performance of its mandate as defined in [provisions mandating the Mission to provide active support
to national authorities in their actions against arm ed groups], where undertaken jointly with the
[national] Defence and Security Forces, in strict compliance with the Human Rights Due Diligence
Policy on United Nations Support to non-United Nations Security Forces (S/2013/110);

S/RES/2100 (2013),
op. 26

Authorizes [the Mission], through its civilian component, to contribute, in coordination with the
UNCT …, to the following tasks: (a) Monitor, report and follow-up on human rights violations and
abuses, and support the UN system in-country to ensure that any support provided by the United
Nations in [affected areas] shall be consistent with international humanitarian law and human rights
law and refugee law as applicable …

S/RES/2098 (2013),
op. 15

23/80

… urges [the Mission] to enhance its efforts to prevent civilian casualties;

S/RES/2093 (2013),
op. 9

… reaffirms that the protection of civilians must be given priority in decisions about the use of

S/RES/2053 (2012),

See also, for example,
S/RES/2121 (2013),
op.10; S/RES/2119
(2013), op.19;
S/RES/2075 (2012), op.
14; S/RES/2063 (2012),
op. 3; S/RES/2053
(2012), op. 24;
S/RES/2003 (2011), op. 3
and op. 21; S/RES/1935
(2010), op. 2;
S/RES/1925 (2010), op.
12 (a), (b) and (c), and op.
17; S/RES/1919 (2010),
op. 4; S/RES/1906
(2009), op. 5;
S/RES/1828 (2008), op.
7; S/RES/1794 (2007),
op. 2;
S/RES/1778 (2007), op.
1, op. 2 and op. 6;
S/RES/1769 (2007), op.
15; S/RES/1701 (2006),
op. 12; S/RES/1674
(2006), op. 16;
S/RES/1590 (2005),
op. 4; and S/RES/1565
(2004), op. 4.

S/PRST/2014/3

Demands that the authorities [of the affected country] comply with their obligations under
international law, including international humanitarian law, human rights and refugee law and take all
measures to protect civilians and meet their basic needs, and to ensure the rapid and unimpeded
passage of humanitarian assistance;

14-01143

op. 1

Decides that [the mission] shall have the following mandate: Protection and security - (g) Support for
efforts to promote and protect human rights – To contribute to the promotion and protection of human
rights in [the affected country], with special attention to grave violations and abuses committed
against children and women, notably sexual and gender-based violence, in close coordination with the
Independent Expert [on the situation of human rights in the affected country], … – To bring to the
attention of the Council all individuals identified as perpetrators of serious human rights violations
and to keep the Committee established pursuant to [relevant resolution] regularly informed of
developments in this regard.

S/RES/2000 (2011),
op. 7

Recalls its authorization and stresses its full support given to the [the mission], while impartially
implementing its mandate, to use all necessary means to carry out its mandate to protect civilian s
under imminent threat of physical violence, within its capabilities and its areas of deployment,
including to prevent the use of heavy weapons against the civilian population and requests the
Secretary-General to keep it urgently informed of measures tak en and efforts made in this regard.

S/RES/1975 (2011),
op. 6

Emphasizes that the protection of civilians must be given priority in decisions about the use of available capacity and
resources and authorizes [the mission] to use all necessary means, within the limits of its capacity and in the areas
where its units are deployed, to carry out its protection mandate …

S/RES/1925 (2010),
op. 11

Reaffirms its practice of ensuring that mandates of UN peacekeeping and other relevant missions include, where
appropriate and on a case-by-case basis, provisions regarding the protection of civilians, stresses that mandated
protection activities must be given priority in decisions about the use of available capacity and resources, including
information and intelligence resources, in the implementation of mandates; and recognizes, that the protection of
civilians when and as mandated requires a coordinated response from all relevant mission components.

S/RES/1894 (2009),
op. 19

Decides that [the peacekeeping mission] will have the mandate, within the limits of its capabilities and in its areas of
deployment, to assist [the affected State] in establishing a stable security environment … and, to that end, to:
Protection of civilians, humanitarian personnel and United Nations personnel and facilities (a) Ensure the protection
of civilians, including humanitarian personnel, under imminent threat of physical violence; (b) Contribute to the
improvement of the security conditions in which humanitarian assistance is provided, and assist in the voluntary return
of refugees and internally displaced persons; (c) Ensure the protection of United Nations personnel, facilities,
installations and equipment; (d) Ensure the security and freedom of movement of United Nations and associated
personnel; (e) Carry out joint patrols with the riot control units of the national police to improve security in the event of
civil disturbance.

S/RES/1756 (2007),
op. 2 (a), (b), (c), (d)
and (e)

Recognizes the increasingly valuable role that regional organizations and other intergovernmental institutions play in
the protection of civilians, and encourages the Secretary-General and the heads of regional and other
intergovernmental organizations to continue their efforts to strengthen their partnership in this regard.

S/RES/1674 (2006),
op. 24

Expressing concern at the continuing threats posed by the illicit transfer, des tabilizing accumulation
and misuse of small arms and light weapons to the safety and security of United Nations
peacekeepers and their effectiveness in implementing peacekeeping mandates …

S/RES/2117 (2013),
pp. 9

Expressing deep concern at the hindrances to [the Mission] in the implementation of its mandate,
including movement and access restrictions,

S/RES/2113 (2013),
pp. 15

S/PRST/2014/3

24/80

Condemn
impediments to, and
call for the facilitation
of, the
implementation of

available capacity and resources and encourages further the use of innovative measures implemented
by [the mission] in the protection of civilians;

See also, for example,
S/RES/2113 (2013), pp.
12 and op. 11;
S/RES/2109 (2013), pp.
14, op. 19 and op. 35;

14-01143

United Nations
Peacekeeping
Operations’
mandates

Protection strategies
and practical
protection measures

S/RES/2113 (2013),
op. 12

Demands that the Government … and all relevant parties cooperate fully in the deployment,
operations, and monitoring, verification, and reporting functions of [the Mission], in particular by
guaranteeing the safety, security and unrestricted freedom of movement of United Nations personnel,
as well as of associated personnel throughout the territory of the [affected countr y], further demands
that the Government refrain from placing restrictions on [the Mission’s] movements, and in this
regard strongly condemns all attacks on [the Mission’s] troops and staff including [specific attack],
… and demands that there be no recurrence of such attacks or impunity for the perpetrators;

S/RES/2109 (2013),
op. 10

Reiterating its call on all parties to cooperate fully with [the Mission], and its condemnation of any
and all attacks against peacekeepers, … and recalling its decision to extend sanctions measures
outlined in [relevant provisions of resolution prescribing sanctions] to individuals and entities who
plan, sponsor or participate in attacks against [the Mission’s] peacekeepers,

S/RES/2098 (2013),
pp. 26

… condemns the attacks, threats, acts of obstructions and violence perpetrated by [armed forces],
militias and mercenaries against United Nations personnel, obstructing them from protecting
civilians, monitoring and helping investigate human rights violations and abuses, stre sses that those
responsible for such crimes under international law must be held accountable and calls upon all
parties … to fully cooperate with the [relevant UN Mission] and cease interfering with [relevant UN
Mission]’s activities in implementation of its mandate

S/RES/1975 (2011),
op. 4

Underlines the need for [the Mission] to continue to make full use of its mandate and capabilities,
giving priority in decisions about the use of available capaci ty and resources to: (a) the protection of
civilians across [the affected area], including through the full implementation of its mission -wide
early warning strategy with associated early warning indicators; proactive military deployment and
increased patrols in areas at high risk of conflict; enhanced efforts to respond promptly and
effectively to threats of violence against civilians; securing, through increased police patrols, IDP
camps, adjacent areas and areas of return; and supporting the development and training of community
policing for IDP camps and areas of return; … and requests [the Mission] to maximize the use of its
capabilities, in cooperation with the United Nations country team and other international and non governmental actors, in the implementation of its mission-wide comprehensive strategy for the
achievement of these objectives;

S/RES/2113 (2013),
op. 4

Encourages [the Mission] to enhance its interaction with the civilian population to raise awareness
and understanding about its mandate and activities through a comprehensive public outreach

S/RES/2098 (2013),
op. 25

S/RES/2104 (2013), op.
14; S/RES/2076 (2012),
op. 14; S/RES/2035
(2012), op. 10.

See also, for example,
S/RES/2112 (2013), op. 6;
S/RES/2109 (2013), op. 3
and op. 5; S/RES/2003
(2011), op. 3; S/RES/1996
(2011), op. 3; S/RES/1935
(2010), op. 4; S/RES/1933
(2010), op. 16;
S/RES/1919 (2010), op. 6
and op. 10; S/RES/1906
(2009), op. 9; and
S/RES/1794 (2007),
op. 18.

S/PRST/2014/3

25/80

… expresses deep concern at increased restrictions and bureaucratic impediments placed by the
Government … upon [the Mission] movement and operations, particularly to areas of recent conflict;
calls on all parties in [the affected area] to remove all obstacles to [the Mission]’s full and proper
discharge of its mandate, including by ensuring its security and freedom of movement; and in this
regard, demands that the Government … comply with the Status of Forces Agreement fully and
without delay, particularly regarding the movement of patrols, flight and equipment clearances, the
removal of all obstacles to the use of [the Mission] aerial assets, and the timely provision of visas for
[the Mission] personnel and processing of its equipment at the port of entry to [the affected country];
… welcomes some progress made in the provision of such visas, but deplores continued delays,
which threaten seriously to undermine the ability of the mission to implem ent its mandate; demands
that the Government … respect the rights of [the Mission] personnel under the SOFA;

14-01143

The Security Council emphasises the importance of ensuring that peacekeeping missions with
protection of civilian mandates develop mission wide protection strategies for incorporation in the
overall mission implementation plans and contingency plans in consultation with the host
Government, local authorities, troop- and police-contributing countries, and other relevant actors. The
Council stresses the importance of ensuring the widest possible dissemination of tools created to
develop mission-wide strategies … The Council welcomes progress made by the Secretary General in
elaborating a conceptual framework, outlining resource and capability requirements, and developing
operational tools for the implementation of protection of civilian mandates …

S/PRST/2013/2
(2013), par. 22

Encourages [the mission] and the United Nations country team to reconfigure within their existing
capacities and reinforce their field presence, in order to enhance their coordinated s upport to the local
authorities throughout [the affected country], in areas where civilians are at greater risk, particularly
but not only in [the relevant areas of the affected country];

S/RES/2062 (2012),
op. 6

Decides that [the mission] shall have the following mandate: Protection and security (a) Protection of
civilians … - To revise the comprehensive strategy for the protection of civilians and to coordinate
with the United Nations protection of civilians strategy in liaison with the United Nations country
team, to take into account the new realities on the ground and the specific needs of vulnerable groups,
and to include measures to prevent gender-based violence pursuant to resolution 1960 (2010) and
resolution 1882 (2009). - To work closely with humanitarian agencies, particularly in relation to areas
of tensions and of return of displaced persons, to collect information on and identify potential threats
against the civilian population, as well as reliable information on violations of international
humanitarian and human rights law, bring them to the attention of the Ivorian authorities as
appropriate, and to take appropriate action in accordance with the United Nations system -wide
protection strategy in harmonization with [the mission’s] protection strategy.

S/RES/2000 (2011),
op. 7

Decides that [the mission] shall have the following mandate in this order of priority: Protection of civilians … (f)
Implement the United Nations system-wide protection strategy in the [affected country], operationalizing it with [the
mission]’s protection strategy built on best practices and extend useful protection measures, such as the Joint
Protection Teams, Community Liaison Interpreters, Joint Investigation Teams, Surveillance Centres and Women’s
Protection Advisers.

S/RES/1925 (2010),
op. 12

Requests the Secretary-General to ensure that all relevant peacekeeping missions with protection mandates
incorporate comprehensive protection strategies into the overall mission implementation plans and contingency plans
which include assessments of potential threats and options for crisis response and risk mitigation and establish
priorities, actions and clear roles and responsibilities under the leadership and coordination of the SRSG, with the full
involvement of all relevant actors and in consultation with United Nations Country teams.

S/RES/1894 (2009),
op. 24

[C]alls upon [the mission] to strengthen its conflict management capacity by completing as soon as possible its
integrated strategy to support local tribal conflict resolution mechanisms in order to maximize protection of civilians;
welcomes the development of a comprehensive strategy on the protection of civilians and encourages [the mission] to
continue and complete its work on the strategy in a timely manner; and calls again upon [the mission], consistent with
its current mandate and capabilities, to pro actively conduct patrols in areas at high risk of localized conflict.

S/RES/1870 (2009),
op. 15

S/PRST/2014/3

26/80

programme, and to collect reliable information on violations of international humanitarian law and
abuses of human rights perpetrated against civilians consistent with [ relevant provisions];

14-01143

Implementation of
the United Nations
Human Rights Due
Diligence Policy

Reporting

S/RES/2124 (2013),
op. 15

Takes note of the elaboration of the human rights due diligence policy, encourages [the Mission] to
implement it fully, and requests the Secretary-General to include progress made in implementing the
policy in his reports to the Council;

S/RES/2113 (2013),
op. 18

Recalling the Human Rights Due Diligence Policy on United Nations Support to non -United Nations
Security Forces as a tool to enhance compliance with international humanitarian, human rights and
refugee law, including to address sexual violence in armed conflict and post -conflict situations,

S/RES/2106 (2013),
pp. 12

Requests that [the Mission] take fully into account the need to protect civilians and mitigate risk to
civilians, including, in particular, women, children and displaced persons and civilian objects in the
performance of its mandate as defined in [provisions mandating the Mission to provide active support
to national authorities in their actions against armed groups], where undertak en jointly with the
[national] Defence and Security Forces, in strict compliance with the Human Rights Due Diligence
Policy on United Nations Support to non-United Nations Security Forces (S/2013/110);

S/RES/2100 (2013),
op. 26

Authorizes [the Mission], through its military component, in pursuit of the objectives described in
[relevant provision], to take all necessary measures to perform the following tasks, through its regular
forces and its Intervention Brigade as appropriate … (b) Neutralizing armed groups through the
Intervention Brigade In support of the authorities of [the affected country]: … carry out targeted
offensive operations … either unilaterally or jointly with the [national armed forces], … in strict
compliance with international law, including international humanitarian law and with the human
rights due diligence policy on UN-support to non-UN forces (HRDDP) …

S/RES/2098 (2013),
op. 12

Reiterates … that the support of [the mission] to [the] military operations against … armed groups is
strictly conditioned on [the] compliance [of the armed forces] with international humanitarian, human
rights and refugee law and on an effective joint planning of these operations, decides that [the
mission] military leadership shall confirm, prior to pro viding any support to such operations, that
sufficient joint planning has been undertaken, especially regarding the protection of the civilian
population, calls upon [the mission] to intercede with the [armed forces] command if elements of [a]
… unit receiving [the mission]’s support are suspected of having committed grave violations of such
laws, and if the situation persists, calls upon [the mission] to withdraw support from these … units.

S/RES/1906 (2009),
op. 22

… recognizing the importance of the ongoing monitoring and reporting to the United Nations
Security Council, including by [UN authorized international military force], of the situation of
civilians and in particular civilian casualties, and noting in this regard the work of the Civil ian
Casualties Mitigation Team [of the UN authorized international military force],

S/RES/2120 (2013),
pp. 24

Requests the Secretary-General to continue reporting to the Council every 90 days on … on progress
on the political track, the security and humanitarian situation, including in the IDP sites and refugee
camps, the actions of all parties with respect to … human rights, violations of international
humanitarian and human rights law, early recovery and on all restrictions and bureaucratic
impediments to [the Mission]’s freedom of movement …

S/RES/2113 (2013),
op. 14

See also, for example,
S/RES/2112 (2013), op.
23; S/RES/2109 (2013),
op. 16; S/RES/2098
(2013), op. 15

See also, for example,
S/RES/2104 (2013), op.
1; S/RES/2098 (2013),
op. 15 and op. 34;
S/RES/2091 (2013), op.
6; S/PRST/2013/2 (2013),
par. 22 and 24;
S/RES/2085 (2012), op.
18; S/RES/2062 (2012),

S/PRST/2014/3

27/80

Underlines that the [United Nations] support [to the armed forces of the host Government] outlined in
[relevant paragraph] of this resolution must be in full compliance with the United Nations Human
Rights and Due Diligence Policy (HRDDP), further underlines its expectation that the SecretaryGeneral will report on all [UN Mission] support to the [national armed forces] including on the
implementation of the HRDDP …

14-01143

S/RES/2109 (2013),
op. 16

Requests the Secretary-General to continue reporting to the Council every 90 days on progress made
towards implementing [the mission]’s mandate across [the affected region], including on progress
towards and obstacles to the implementation of the [mission ’s protection] strategy …, also including
an assessment of progress against the benchmarks and indicators set out in [relevant Secretary
General’s report] as well, the security and humanitarian situation, including in the IDP sites and
refugee camps, human rights, violations of international humanitarian and human rights law, and
early recovery and all parties compliance with their international obligations.

S/RES/2003 (2011),
op. 13

Decides that [the mission] shall have the following mandate: Protection and security … (g) Support
for efforts to promote and protect human rights … – To monitor, help investigate, and report publicly
and to the Council, on human rights and humanitarian law violations with a view to preventing
violations, developing a protecting environment and ending impunity, and, to this end, to strengthen
its human rights monitoring, investigation and reporting capacity, – To bring to the attention of the
Council all individuals identified as perpetrators of serious human rights violations and to keep the
Committee established pursuant to [relevant resolution] regularly informed of developments in this
regard.

S/RES/2000 (2011),
op. 7

… authorizes the mission to perform the following tasks; (b) Support the Government of [affected
country] in exercising its responsibilities for conflict prevention, mitigation, and resolution and
protect civilians through: (iii) Monitoring, investigating, verifying, and reporting regularly on human
rights and potential threats against the civilian population as well as actual and potential violations of
international humanitarian and human rights law, working as appropriate with the Office of the High
Commissioner for Human Rights, bringing these to the attention of the authorities as necessary, and
immediately reporting gross violations of human rights to the UN Security Council.

S/RES/1996 (2011),
op. 3

Requests the Panel of Experts [informing the sanction Committee] to … assess in its interim and final
reports … violations of international humanitarian or human rights law or other atrocities, including
sexual- and gender-based violence …

S/RES/1945 (2010),
op. 4

Requests further the Secretary-General to provide a full report on the situation in the [affected country] and on [the
mission]’s activities …, in order to prepare the strategic review …, and that this full report should include: (a) Specific
information on the challenges of [the mission]’s role in the protection of civilians, an assessment of existing protection
mechanisms …, and assessment of special measures for protection from sexual violence.

S/RES/1906 (2009),
op. 41

Recognizes the important role of the Secretary-General in providing timely information to the Security Council on
protection of civilians in armed conflict in particular through thematic and country specific reports and through
briefings.

S/RES/1894 (2009),
op. 31

Requests the Secretary-General to include in his reports to the Council on country-specific situations more
comprehensive and detailed information relating to the protection of civilians in armed conflict, including on
protection-related incidents and actions taken by parties to armed conflict to implement their obligations to respect and
protect the civilian population, including information specific to the protection needs of refugees, internally displaced
persons, women, children and other vulnerable groups.

S/RES/1894 (2009),
op. 32

op. 22; S/RES/2035
(2012), op. 8;
S/RES/1933 (2010),
op. 22; S/RES/1906
(2009), op. 40;
S/RES/1833 (2008), op.
6; S/RES/1794 (2007),
op. 7; S/RES/1790
(2007), op. 5;
S/RES/1674 (2006),
op. 25; and S/RES/1529
(2004), op. 9.

S/PRST/2014/3

28/80

Takes note of the elaboration of the human rights due diligence policy, encourages [the Mission] to
continue to fully implement it and requests the Secretary-General to include progress made in
implementing the policy in his reports to the Council;

14-01143

Protection
benchmarks

Relations and
complementarity
between the mission,
the UNCT and other
stakeholders

S/RES/2116 (2013),
op. 6

… The Council reaffirms its practice of requiring mission specific benchmarks, as and where
appropriate, to measure and review progress made in the implementation of peacekeeping mandates
and in this regard underlines the importance of clear mission specific benchmark s in the context of
mission transition.

S/PRST/2013/2
(2013), par. 24

Stresses the importance of achievable and realistic targets against which the progress of United Nations peacekeeping
operations can be measured; requests the Secretary-General to continue reporting to the Council every 90 days on
progress made towards implementing [the mission]’s mandate across [the affected region], including on progress
towards and obstacles to the implementation of the [protection] strategy …, also including an assessment of progress
against the benchmarks set out in … the report of the Secretary-General …

S/RES/1935 (2010),
op. 8

[S]tresses the importance of including indicators of progress regarding the protection of civilians in benchmarks for
relevant missions.

S/RES/1894 (2009),
op. 27

Notes also that, in this context, the Government of [the affected country] commits to work towards the achievement of
the following benchmarks related to the protection of civilians and humanitarian workers, in accordance with
international humanitarian law … (i) Voluntary return and resettlement in secure and sustainable conditions of
internally displaced persons; (ii) Demilitarization of refugee and internally displaced person camps as evidenced by a
decrease in arms, violence and human rights abuses; (iii) Improvement in the capacity of [national] authorities in [the
area affected by violence], including national law enforcement agencies, the judiciary and the prison system to provide
the necessary security for refugees, internally displaced persons, civilians and humanitarian workers with respect for
international human rights standards.

S/RES/1923 (2010),
op. 3

Requests the Government of [the affected country] and the Secretary-General to establish a joint Government …/UN
high-level Working Group to assess on a monthly basis the situation on the ground with respect to protection of
civilians, the measures adopted by the Government of [the affected country] … to progress towards meeting the
[protection] benchmarks …

S/RES/1923 (2010),
op. 4

Stressing the importance of continued to efforts to enhance effective working between [the Mission]’s
military, civilian and police components, and bet ween [the Mission] and humanitarian organizations
in [the affected region], in the implementation of its mandate,

S/RES/2113 (2013),
pp. 23

Requests the Secretary-General to conduct a review of [the Mission]’s mandate by undertaking an
analysis of the respective comparative advantages of [the Mission] and the UNCT, and further
requests the Secretary-General to report to the Council in his midterm report on its findings,
including a detailed report and accompanying matrix reflecting the current di vision of labour between
[the Mission] and the UNCT, and recommendations, … pursuant to this review with a view to transfer
to the UNCT those tasks where the UNCT has a comparative advantage or, where appropriate, to the
Government, and expresses its intention to keep the mandate of [the Mission] under review on the
basis of this report;

S/RES/2112 (2013),
op. 10

Reaffirms the inter-mission cooperation arrangements provided for in its [relevant resolution] and

S/RES/2066 (2012),

See also, for example,
S/RES/2119 (2013), op.3;
S/RES/2098 (2013),
op.11, S/RES/1925
(2010), op. 6.,
S/RES/1923 (2010), op. 2

See also, for example,
S/RES/2116 (2013),
op.13; S/RES/2109
(2013), op. 30;
S/RES/2098 (2013), op.
17 and op. 18;
S/PRST/2013/2 (2013),
par. 22 and 23;
S/RES/2063 (2012), op.
16; S/RES/2062 (2012),
op. 19; S/RES/1925
(2010), op. 16; and

S/PRST/2014/3

29/80

Emphasizes that future reconfigurations of [the Mission] should be determined on the basis of the
evolution of the situation on the ground and on the achievement of an improved capacity of the
Government … to effectively protect the population through the establishment of sustainable and
effective security forces and by reform of the justice sector, including courts and prisons, with a view
to progressively take over [the Mission]’s security role;

op. 13

Underscoring the need for coherent United Nations activities in [the affected country], which requires
clarity about roles, responsibilities, and collaboration between [the mission] and the United Nations
country team based on their comparative advantage, and noting the need for cooperation with other
relevant actors in the region, including the [relevant actors],

S/RES/2057 (2012),
pp. 6

Recalls that the protection of civilians requires a coordinated response from all relevant mission components and
encourages [the mission] to enhance interaction, under the authority of the Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral, between its civil and military components at all levels and humanitarian actors, in order to consolidate
expertise on the protection of civilians.

S/RES/1906 (2009),
op. 8

Encourages [the mission] to enhance its interaction with the civilian population to raise awareness and understanding
about its mandate and activities and to collect reliable information on violations of international humanitarian law and
human rights abuses perpetrated against civilians.

S/RES/1906 (2009),
op. 14

Requests the Secretary-General to ensure that technical support is provided, in pre-deployment and in theatre, to [the
mission]’s troop- and police-contributing countries to include guidance and training for military and police personnel
on the protection of civilians from imminent threat and appropriate responses, including on human rights, sexual
violence and gender issues.

S/RES/1906 (2009),
op. 13

Requests the Secretary-General, in consultation with relevant actors, to ensure that peacekeeping missions with
protection of civilians’ mandates, in keeping with the strategic plans that guide their deployment, conduct missionwide planning, pre-deployment training, and senior leadership training on the protection of civilians and requests troop
and police contributing countries to ensure the provision of appropriate training of their personnel participating in UN
peacekeeping and other relevant missions to heighten the awareness and responsiveness to protection concerns,
including training on HIV/AIDS and zero tolerance of sexual exploitation and abuse in UN peacekeeping missions.

S/RES/1894 (2009),
op. 23

Requests the Secretary-General to ensure that United Nations personnel involved in peacemaking, peacekeeping and
peace-building activities have appropriate training in international humanitarian, human rights and refugee law,
including child and gender-related provisions, negotiation and communication skills, cultural awareness and civilianmilitary coordination, and urges States and relevant international and regional organizations to ensure that appropriate
training is included in their programs for personnel involved in similar activities.

S/RES/1265 (1999),
op. 14

Expressing deep concern at the significant increase in population displacements this year and the
consequent increase in humanitarian assistance and protection needs, and at the fact that
approximately [figure] IDPs and refugees remain displaced, further expressing deep concern at the
deteriorating conditions for the internally displaced in [the affected area] as well as for new refugees
in neighbouring countries and [nationals of neighbouring country] who have fled [the affected area],
and at the situation of refugees and IDPs unable to reach camps, and therefore vulnerable to ongoing
violence or lacking humanitarian assistance, stressing the importance of continued international
support to address these needs, recognizing that some displaced will settle permanently in urban

S/RES/2113 (2013),
pp. 15

S/RES/1880 (2009),
op. 28.

See also, for example,
S/RES/1325 (2000), op.
6; and S/RES/1296
(2000), op. 19.

B. Displacement
Protection of refugees
and internally
displaced persons,
including prevention
from forced
displacement
14-01143

See also, for example,
S/RES/2111 (2013), pp. 6
and pp. 13; S/RES/2099
(2013), pp. 12;
S/RES/2098 (2013), pp.
12; S/RES/2076 (2012,
pp. 8; S/RES/2063
(2012), pp. 14;

S/PRST/2014/3

30/80

Training for
peacekeeping
personnel

calls upon the United Nations in [relevant counties], including all components of [relevant missions],
within their respective mandates, capabilities and areas of deployment, to enhance their inter -mission
cooperation for the stabilization of the border area, including through the development of a s hared,
strategic vision and plan, in support of the [relevant national] authorities;

14-01143

areas, but underlining the need to ensure security in areas of return,

Asylum and
non-refoulement

S/RES/2112 (2013),
pp. 6

… expressing its concern at the reports of violations of human rights, including extrajudicial killings ,
violence against women, children and journalists, arbitrary detention and pervasive sexual and
gender-based violence, particularly in camps for internally displaced persons …

S/RES/2102 (2013),
pp. 9

Expresses concern at the security situation in camps for internally displaced persons (IDPs) and
settlements, condemns all human rights violations and abuses, including sexual violence, committed
against IDPs by all parties, including armed groups and militias, and calls for the strengthening of
protection of IDP camps;

S/RES/2093 (2013),
op. 28

Recalls the relevant prohibition of the forced displacement of civilians in armed conflict, and stresses
the importance of fully complying with international humanitarian law and other applicable
international law in this context;

S/RES/2093 (2013),
op. 29

… strongly condemning all intimidation, threats and attacks committed against refugees and internally
displaced persons (IDP) in [the affected country] …

S/RES/2062 (2012),
pp. 7

Urges the international community to provide support and assistance to enable States to fulfil their responsibilities
regarding the protection of refugees and other persons protected under international humanitarian law.

S/RES/1674 (2006),
op. 13

Notes that the overwhelming majority of internally displaced persons and other vulnerable groups in situations of
armed conflict are civilians and, as such, are entitled to the protection afforded to civilians under existing international
humanitarian law.

S/RES/1296 (2000),
op. 3

The Security Council reaffirms the importance of the principle of non -refoulement, the right for
refugees to return voluntarily to [the affected country] and encourages countries neighbouring [the
affected country] to protect all people fleeing the violence in [the affected country], including [people
from a specific area in the region]. It urges all Member States, based on burden sharing principles, to
support these countries in assisting refugees and affected communities …

S/PRST/2013/15
(2013), par. 16

Acknowledges the cooperative policy of neighbouring States, including [list of relevant States] in
keeping their borders open for refugees … and encourages these States to continue this policy and
contribute to a stabilization of the situation wherever possible;

S/RES/2056 (2012),
op. 15

Recalling in addition the right to seek and enjoy asylum reflected in Article 14 of the Universal Declaration and the
non--refoulement obligation of States under the Convention relating to the Status of Refugees adopted on 28 July
1951, together with its Protocol adopted on 31 January 1967 (“the Refugees Convention and its Protocol”) and also
recalling that the protections afforded by the Refugees Convention and its Protocol shall not extend to any person with
respect to whom there are serious reasons for considering that he has been guilty of acts contrary to the purposes and
principles of the United Nations.

S/RES/1624 (2005),
pp. 7

The Security Council reaffirms the principle of non-refoulement of refugees, as provided for in relevant instruments of
international law, welcomes recent efforts of countries neighbouring [the affected State] to support the voluntary
repatriation of refugees in safety and dignity, and urges those host States to continue to provide international protection
to [those] refugees in need of it. It encourages the international community to provide the necessary assistance in this
regard.

S/PRST/2000/12

S/RES/1975 (2011), op.
10; S/RES/1944 (2010),
pp. 12; S/RES/1674
(2006), op. 12

S/PRST/2014/3

31/80

… strongly condemning all intimidation, threats and attacks committed against refugees, returnees
and internally displaced persons in [the affected country] …

14-01143

Durable solutions,
including safe,
voluntary and
dignified return

S/PRST/1995/49

… the Security Council calls upon all actors to take adequate and necessa ry measures to ensure
respect for the principles of refugee protection and obligations under refugee law, including the
civilian and humanitarian character of refugee camps.

S/PRST/2013/2
(2013), par. 20

Calls upon all parties to respect the civilian and humanitarian character of refugee camps and
internally displaced persons sites …

S/RES/2076 (2012),
op. 12

Encourages [the mission] and the United Nations country team to continue to assist the Government to prevent the
recruitment of refugees and children by armed groups and to maintain the civilian nature of refugee camps and
internally displaced person sites, in coordination with [national security forces] and the humanitarian community.

S/RES/1923 (2010),
op. 23

Calls upon all parties to armed conflicts to respect the civilian and humanitarian character of refugee camps and
settlements, and ensure the protection of all civilians inhabiting such camps, in particular women and girls, from all
forms of violence, including rape and other sexual violence, and to ensure full, unimpeded and secure humanitarian
access to them.

S/RES/1889 (2009),
op. 12

Emphasizing the need to respect international refugee law, preserve the civilian and humanitarian nature of the refugee
camps and internally displaced persons sites and prevent any recruitment of individuals, including children, which
might be carried out in or around the camps and sites by armed groups.

S/RES/1861 (2009),
pp. 13

Reaffirms the need to maintain the security and civilian character of refugee and internally displaced person camps,
stresses the primary responsibility of States in this regard, and encourages the Secretary-General where necessary and
in the context of existing peacekeeping operations and their respective mandates, to take all feasible measures to
ensure security in and around such camps and of their inhabitants.

S/RES/1674 (2006),
op. 14

Invites the Secretary-General to bring to its attention situations where refugees and internally displaced persons are
vulnerable to the threat of harassment or where their camps are vulnerable to infiltration by armed elements and where
such situations may constitute a threat to international peace and security, expresses, in this regard, its willingness to
consider such situations and, where necessary, adopt appropriate steps to help create a secure environment for civilians
endangered by conflicts, including by providing support to States concerned in this regard …

S/RES/1296 (2000),
op. 14

Notes that a range of measures by the international community are needed to share the burden borne by African States
hosting refugees and to support their efforts to ensure the security and civilian and humanitarian character of refugee
camps and settlements, including in the areas of law enforcement, disarmament of armed elements, curtailment of the
flow of arms in refugee camps and settlements, separation of refugees from other persons who do not qualify for
international protection afforded refugees or otherwise do not require international protection, and demobilization and
reintegration of former combatants.

S/RES/1208 (1998),
op. 6

Stresses the importance of achieving dignified and durable solutions for refugees and internally
displaced persons, and of ensuring their full participation in the planning and management of these
solutions, demands that all parties to the conflict in [the affected area] create the conditions
conducive to allowing the voluntary, informed, safe, dignified and sustainable return of refugees and

S/RES/2113 (2013),
op. 21

S/PRST/2014/3

32/80

Civilian character of
camps and
settlements of
refugees and
internally displaced
persons

The Security Council is particularly concerned at the withdrawal of refugee status from and the consequent ending of
assistance to many refugees from the [neighbouring State] … The decisions of the [affected State] in this regard may
lead to the involuntary return of tens of thousands of people to an area that is neither safe nor prepared to receive them.
The Council stresses the importance of the principle of non-refoulement set out in the 1951 Geneva Convention on the
Status of Refugees, to which [the affected State] is a party. The Council urges the [affected State] to continue to
provide asylum to all refugees regardless of their origin.

See also, for example,
S/RES/1834 (2008),
pp. 12; S/RES/1778
(2007), pp. 12 and op. 5;
S/RES/1325 (2000), op.
12; S/RES/1286 (2000),
op. 12; S/RES/1272
(1999), op. 12; and
S/PRST/1999/32.

See also, for example,
S/PRST/2013/2 (2013),
par. 19; S/RES/2063
(2012), op. 18;

14-01143

and reintegration

Housing, land and
property

internally displaced persons, or their local integration; … stresses the importance of the [relevant
mechanism] in verifying the extent to which these returns are voluntary and informed in nature and
expresses deep concern over some bureaucratic obstacles that undermine its effectiveness and
independence;
S/RES/2104 (2013),
pp. 26

… reaffirming that all parties … should create conditions conducive to the voluntary, safe, dignified,
and sustainable return of refugees and internally displaced persons or local integration of internally
displaced persons, welcoming commitments and encouraging continued efforts of the Government of
[the affected country] for the relief of internally displaced persons, refugees and returnees, and noting
the important role of the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees, based on its
mandate, in providing continued advice and support to the Government of [the affected country], in
coordination with [the mission] on these issue.

S/RES/2061 (2012),
pp. 11

Welcomes … the progress towards achieving dignified durable solutions for refugees living in
[neighboring country], and encourages a sustained effort to find solutions with regards to the residual
… refugee caseload [from the affected country], in compliance with relevant international law

S/RES/1959 (2010),
op. 14

Calls upon all parties concerned to ensure that all peace processes, peace agreements and post-conflict recovery and
reconstruction planning have regard for the special needs of women and children and include specific measures for the
protection of civilians including … (iii) the creation of conditions conducive to the voluntary, safe, dignified and
sustainable return of refugees and internally displaced persons …

S/RES/1674 (2006),
op. 11

Reaffirms the unacceptability of the demographic changes resulting from the conflict, reaffirms also the inalienable
rights of all refugees and internally displaced persons affected by the conflict, and stresses that they have the right to
return to their homes in secure and dignified conditions …

S/RES/1615 (2005),
op. 18

Welcomes the commitment of the parties to the right of all refugees and displaced persons freely to return to their
homes of origin or to other places of their choice … in safety … and stresses the importance of facilitating the return
or resettlement of refugees and displaced persons which should be gradual and orderly and carried out through
progressive, coordinated programs that address the need for local security, housing and jobs …

S/RES/1088 (1996),
op. 11

Urges the Government of [the affected country], with support from [the mission], to … address the
underlying causes of instability, in particular the impact of the return of displaced persons and
refugees and possible land-related social tensions;

S/RES/2053 (2012),
op. 20

Urges the signatories of the [peace agreement] to work towards a sustainable solution for the voluntary return,
reinstallation, reintegration and security of displaced persons, including by addressing land tenure issues, with the
support of the United Nations system, and to fulfil in this regard their commitments in accordance with the … Political
Agreement and their obligations under international law.

S/RES/1933 (2010),
op. 14

The Security Council is deeply concerned that in spite of its previous requests there has been little progress on the
issue of the return of [refugees from ethnic minority group] and urges [the Government] to adopt a comprehensive
approach in order to facilitate the return of refugees … to their homes of origin throughout [the affected State]. It
deplores the continued failure by [the affected State] to safeguard effectively their property rights, especially the
situation where many of those [ethnic minority refugees] who have returned to the former sectors have been unable to
regain possession of their properties. The Council calls upon [the affected State] to apply immediately proper

S/PRST/1996/48

S/PRST/2014/3

33/80

Concerned with the residual threat of landmines and explosive remnants of war in the [affected area],
which hinders the safe return of displaced persons to their homes and s afe migration,

S/RES/2001 (2011), pp.
11; S/RES/1959 (2010),
op. 14; S/RES/1923
(2010), pp. 7;
S/RES/1917 (2010), op.
38 and op. 39;
S/RES/1895 (2009), pp.
8; S/RES/1883 (2009),
pp. 11; S/RES/1826
(2008), op. 8;
S/RES/1812 (2008), op.
18; S/RES/1716 (2006),
op. 9; S/RES/1591
(2005), pp. 7;
S/RES/1564 (2004), op.
6; S/RES/1556 (2004),
pp. 19; S/RES/1545
(2004), pp. 13;
S/RES/1494 (2003), op.
15; S/RES/1272 (1999),
op. 12; and S/RES/1096
(1997), op. 8.

S/PRST/2014/3

34/80

procedures to the question of property rights and to stop all forms of discrimination against the [minority population]
in the provision of social benefits and reconstruction assistance.

Role of United
Nations peacekeeping
and other relevant
missions and actors

14-01143

Reaffirms its support for the established principles that all declarations and actions made under duress, particularly
those regarding land and ownership, are null and void, and that all displaced persons should be enabled to return in
peace to their former homes.

S/RES/941 (1994),
op. 3

Requests the [Government] to ensure the protection and well-being of all internally displaced
persons, including from sexual violence and exploitation, paying particular attention to ensuring that
the human rights of internally displaced persons in [the country] are respected in relation to
relocations, and to ensure a fully consultative process, providing prior notice and ensuring safe,
sanitary new sites that have basic services, as well as full, safe and unhindered access for
humanitarian organizations;

S/RES/2124 (2013),
op. 21

Underlines the need for [the Mission] to continue to make full use of its mandate and capabilities,
giving priority in decisions about the use of available capacity and resources to: (a) the protect ion of
civilians across [the affected area], including through … securing, through increased police patrols,
IDP camps, adjacent areas and areas of return; and supporting the development and training of
community policing for IDP camps and areas of return …

S/RES/2113 (2013),
op. 4

… demands that all parties to the conflict in [the affected area] create the conditions conducive to
allowing the voluntary, informed, safe, dignified and sustainable return of refugees and internally
displaced persons, or their local integration …

S/RES/2113 (2013),
op. 21

Calls upon the Governments of [relevant countries] to continue to enhance their cooperation,
particularly with respect to the border area, including … in developing and implementing a shared
border strategy to inter alia support … the voluntary return of refugees;

S/RES/2066 (2012),
op. 12

Encourages [the Mission] to continue assisting the Government … in providing adequate protection
to the civilian population, with particular attention to the needs of internally displaced persons and
other vulnerable groups, especially women and children, including through joint community policing
in the camps, along with strengthened mechanisms to address sexual and gender -based violence …

S/RES/2012 (2011),
op. 15

Decides that [the mission] shall have the following mandate in this order of priority: Protection of civilians (g) Support
the Government’s efforts, along with international partners and neighbouring countries, to create an environment
conducive to the voluntary, safe and dignified return of internally displaced persons and refugees, or voluntary local
integration or resettlement.

S/RES/1925 (2010),
op. 12 (g)

Decides to extend … the multidimensional presence in [the affected countries] intended to help create the security
conditions conducive to a voluntary, secure and sustainable return of refugees and displaced persons, inter alia, by
contributing to the protection of refugees, displaced persons and civilians in danger, by facilitating the provision of
humanitarian assistance in [the affected region] and by creating favourable conditions for the reconstruction and
economic and social development of those areas.

S/RES/1861 (2009),
op. 1

Decides that [the mission] shall have the following mandate in [the affected country], in liaison with the United
Nations country team … Security and protection of civilians (c) To liaise with the … Government [of the affected
country] and the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR) in support of their efforts
to relocate refugee camps which are in close proximity to the border, and to provide to UNHCR, on availability and
cost-reimbursable basis, logistical assistance for that purpose; … (e) To support the initiatives of national and local

S/RES/1861 (2009),
op. 6 (c) and (e)

See also, for example,
S/RES/2100 (2013), op.
16; S/RES/1812 (2008),
op. 18; S/RES/1778
(2007), op. 1;
S/RES/1756 (2007), op.
2; S/RES/1674 (2006),
op. 16; S/RES/1565
(2004), op. 5;
S/RES/1545 (2004), op. 5
and op. 13; S/RES/1509
(2003), op. 6;
S/RES/1419 (2002), op.
11; S/RES/1244 (1999),
op. 11; and S/RES/1145
(1997), op. 13.

14-01143

authorities in [the affected country] to resolve local tensions and promote local reconciliation efforts, in order to
enhance the environment for the return of internally displaced persons.

Targeted and
graduated measures
in response to
violations of
applicable
international law
related to forced
displacement

Acting under Chapter VII of the Charter of the United Nations … decides that [the peacekeeping mission] shall have
the following mandate: … (b) to monitor and report on the human rights situation, in cooperation with the Office of
the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights, including on the situation of returned refugees and
displaced persons.

S/RES/1542 (2004),
op. 7 (III) (b)

Recalls that the [opposition group] bears a particular responsibility to protect the returnees and to facilitate the return of
the remaining displaced population, and requests further measures to be undertaken [by United Nations agencies] to
create conditions conducive to the return of refugees and internally displaced persons, … to develop their skills and to
increase their self-reliance, with full respect for their inalienable right to return to their homes in secure and dignified
conditions.

S/RES/1494 (2003),
op. 15

Decides that the measures referred to in paragraph 3 above shall apply to the following individuals,
and, as appropriate, entities, as designated by the Committee: … (e) Individuals or entities operating
in [the affected country] and committing serious violations involving the targeting of children or
women in situations of armed conflict, including … forced displacement;

S/RES/2078 (2012),
op. 4

Encourages all States to submit to the Committee for inclusion on its list of designees, individuals …
[operating in the [affected country] and committing serious violations of international law involving
… forced displacement], as well as any entities owned or controlled, directly or indirectly, by the
submitted individuals or entities or individuals or entities ac ting on behalf of or at the direction of the
submitted entities;

S/RES/1952 (2010),
op. 21

C. Humanitarian access and safety and security of humanitarian workers
Condemn, and call
for the cessation of,
attacks against
humanitarian
workers and the
obstruction of the
delivery of
humanitarian aid

S/PRST/2013/15
(2013), par. 11

Expressing concern at the continuing threats posed by the illicit transfer, destabilizing accumulation
and misuse of small arms and light weapons … to the safety and security of humanitarian workers and
their effective provision of humanitarian assistance,

S/RES/2117 (2013),
pp.9

… expresses serious concern that access to populations in conflict -affected areas remains constrained,
deplores the increased restrictions on humanitarian access in [the affected area] resulting fr om
increased insecurity, attacks against humanitarian workers, denial of access by the parties to the
conflict and bureaucratic impediments imposed by the Government, … stressing the need for the
timely issuance of visas and travel permits for humanitarian organizations …

S/RES/2113 (2013),
op. 16

Notes with concern the continued high incidence of attacks against humanitarian workers, condemns
these attacks in the strongest terms, emphasizing that the attacks impede efforts to aid the people of
[the affected country], and underlines the need for all parties to ensure full, safe and unhindered access
of all humanitarian actors, including United Nations staff and associated personnel, and comply fully
with applicable international humanitarian law

S/RES/2096 (2013),
op. 29

Condemning all attacks against … humanitarian personnel, regardless of their perpetrators and
emphasizing that those responsible for such attacks must be brought to justice

S/RES/2053 (2012),
pp. 13

See also, for example,
S/RES/2109 (2013), pp.
13; S/RES/2063 (2012),
op. 14; S/RES/2041
(2011), pp. 14;
S/RES/2003 (2011), op.
15; S/RES/2002 (2011),
pp. 11; S/RES/1964
(2010), pp. 16;
S/RES/1935 (2010),
op. 10; S/RES/1917
(2010), pp. 15;
S/RES/1894 (2009), op.
16; S/RES/1840 (2008),
op. 16; S/RES/1828
(2008), pp. 12 and op. 8;
S/RES/1780 (2007), op.
13; S/RES/1769 (2007),

S/PRST/2014/3

35/80

The Security Council … condemns all cases of denial of humanitarian access, and recalls that
arbitrarily depriving civilians of objects indispensable to their survival, including wilfully impeding
relief supply and access, can constitute a violation of international humanitarian law.

14-01143

S/RES/2010 (2011),
pp. 14

Concerned at armed activities and banditry in [the affected countries] which threaten the security of the civilian
population, the conduct of humanitarian operations in those areas and the stability of those countries, and which result
in serious violations of human rights and international humanitarian law.

S/RES/1923 (2010),
pp. 4

Reiterating its serious concern at the worsening humanitarian situation in [the affected country], strongly condemning
the targeting and obstruction of the delivery of humanitarian aid by armed groups in [the affected country], which has
prevented the delivery of such aid in some areas, deploring the repeated attacks on humanitarian personnel, expressing
its condemnation in the strongest terms of all acts of violence or abuses committed against civilians and humanitarian
personnel, in violation of international humanitarian law and human rights law, and reaffirming the importance of the
fight against impunity.

S/RES/1910 (2010),
pp. 14

Condemns any attack against personnel or facilities from [the mission] and demands that no acts of intimidation or
violence be directed against the United Nations and associated personnel or facilities or other actors engaged in
humanitarian, development or peacekeeping work.

S/RES/1892 (2009),
op. 14

The Security Council calls on all parties to respect the UN guiding principles of humanitarian
emergency assistance and stresses the importance of such assistance being delive red on the basis of
need, devoid of any political prejudices and aims.

S/PRST/2013/15
(2013), par. 3

The Security Council also recalls that under international humanitarian law, the wounded and sick
must receive, to the fullest extent practicable, and with the least possible delay, medical care and
attention required by their condition and that medical and humanitarian personnel, facilities and
transport must be respected and protected. To this end, the Council urges free passage to all areas for
medical personnel and supplies, including surgical items and medicine.

S/PRST/2013/15
(2013), par. 10

Calls on parties to armed conflict … to comply with obligations under international humanitarian law
to respect and protect humanitarian personnel, facilities and relief consignments, and to take measures
to eradicate the negative impact of the illicit transfer, destabilizing accumulation and misuse of small
arms and light weapons on humanitarian actors, and take all required steps to facilitate the safe, rapid
and unimpeded passage of relief consignments, equipment and personnel;

S/RES/2117 (2013),
op.14

… calling on all parties to … urgently facilitate unhindered humanitarian access in accordance with
international law, including applicable international humanitarian law, and the guidin g principles of
humanitarian assistance …

S/RES/2113 (2013),
pp. 14

Requests the Secretary-General, through his Special Representative, to continue to direct the
operations of an integrated [Mission], coordinate all activities of the United Nations syst em in the
[affected country], and support a coherent international approach to a stable peace in [the affected
country], while respecting United Nations guiding principles of humanitarian assistance including
humanity, impartiality, neutrality, and independence;

S/RES/2109 (2013),
op. 2

Emphasizing the need for all parties to uphold and respect the humanitarian principles of humanity,
neutrality, impartiality and independence in order to ensure the continued provision of humanitarian
assistance, the safety of civilians receiving assistance and the security of humanitarian personnel
operating in [the affected country] and stressing the importance of humanitarian assistance being
delivered on the basis of need,

S/RES/2100 (2013),
pp. 8

pp. 13 and op. 14; and
S/RES/1265 (1999), op. 8
and op. 9.

See also, for example,
S/PRST/2013/2 (2013),
par. 13 and 14;
S/RES/2109 (2013), op.
13; S/RES/2076 (2012),
op. 11; S/RES/2075
(2012), op. 13;
S/RES/2063 (2012), pp.
12; S/RES/2053 (2012),
op. 26; S/RES/2047
(2012), op. 11;
S/RES/2032 (2011), op.
9; S/RES/2014 (2011),
op. 10; S/RES/2010
(2011), pp. 13;
S/RES/2003 (2011), op.
15; S/RES/1828 (2008),
op. 7; S/RES/1814
(2008), op. 12;
S/RES/1794 (2007), op.
17; S/RES/1778 (2007),
op. 17; S/RES/1769
(2007), op. 14;
S/RES/1674 (2006), op. 8
and op. 22; S/RES/1574
(2004), op.

S/PRST/2014/3

36/80

Call for compliance
with applicable
international
humanitarian law
and the observance
of humanitarian
principles

Strongly condemning the targeting, obstruction or prevention of the delivery of humanitarian aid in
[the affected country] by any parties, especially armed groups, and deploring any attacks on
humanitarian personnel,

14-01143

S/RES/2061 (2012),
pp. 12

Strongly urges [the affected country] and [armed groups] … to permit humanitarian access to the
affected population in the [affected areas], ensuring in accordance with applicable international law,
including applicable international humanitarian law, and guiding principles of emer gency
humanitarian assistance, the safe, unhindered and immediate access of United Nations and other
humanitarian personnel, as well as the delivery of supplies and equipment, in order to allow such
personnel to efficiently perform their task of assisting the conflict-affected civilian population;

S/RES/2046 (2012),
op. 4

Reaffirms the obligation of all parties to implement fully the rules and principles of international humanitarian law,
particularly those regarding the protection of humanitarian personnel, and furthermore requests all the parties involved
to provide humanitarian personnel with immediate, free and unimpeded access to all persons in need of assistance, in
accordance with applicable international law.

S/RES/1923 (2010),
op. 22

Calls for the unimpeded provision and distribution throughout [the affected territory] of humanitarian assistance,
including of food, fuel and medical treatment.

S/RES/1860 (2009),
op. 2

Welcomes the initiatives aimed at creating and opening humanitarian corridors and other mechanisms for the sustained
delivery of humanitarian aid.

S/RES/1860 (2009),
op. 3

Calls upon all parties concerned to ensure that all peace processes, peace agreements and post-conflict recovery and
reconstruction planning … include specific measures for the protection of civilians including … the facilitation of the
provision of humanitarian assistance …

S/RES/1674 (2006),
op. 11

Calls upon all Member States to ensure the free, unhindered and expeditious movement to [the affected State] of all
personnel, as well as equipment, provisions, supplies and other goods, including vehicles and spare parts, which are for
the exclusive and official use of [the peacekeeping operation].

S/RES/1590 (2005),
op. 8

Calls on [the affected State to facilitate] international relief for the humanitarian disaster by means of a moratorium on
all restrictions that might hinder the provision of humanitarian assistance and access to affected populations …

S/RES/1556 (2004),
op. 1

Underlines the importance of safe and unimpeded access of humanitarian personnel to civilians in armed conflicts, calls
upon the parties concerned, including neighboring States, to cooperate fully with the United Nations Humanitarian
Coordinator and United Nations agencies in providing such access, invites States and the Secretary-General to bring to
its attention information regarding the deliberate denial of such access in violation of international law, where such
denial may constitute a threat to international peace and security, and, in this regard, expresses its willingness to
consider such information and, when necessary, to adopt appropriate steps.

S/RES/1296 (2000),
op. 8

Expresses its intention, where appropriate, to call upon the parties to a conflict to make special arrangements to meet the
protection and assistance requirements of women, children and other vulnerable groups, including through the
promotion of “days of immunization” and other opportunities for the safe and unhindered delivery of basic necessary
services.

S/RES/1296 (2000),
op. 10

11;S/RES/1565 (2004),
op. 20 and op. 21;
S/RES/1545 (2004),
op. 12; S/RES/1533
(2004), op. 5;
S/RES/1509 (2003), pp. 6
and op. 8;
S/RES/1502 (2003),
op. 4; S/RES/1497
(2003), op. 11; and
S/RES/1493 (2003), op.
12.

37/80

S/PRST/2014/3

Urging all those concerned, as set forth in international humanitarian law, including the Geneva
Conventions and the Hague Regulations, to allow full unimpeded access by humanitarian personnel to
all people in need of assistance, and to make available, as far as possible, all necessary facilities for
their operations, and to promote the safety, security, and freedom of movement of humanitarian
personnel and United Nations and its associated personnel and their assets,

14-01143

Role of United
Nations
peacekeeping and
other relevant
missions and actors

The Security Council also urges all Member States to respond swiftly to the United Nations’
humanitarian appeals to meet the spiralling needs of people inside [the affected cou ntry], in particular
internally displaced persons, and … Refugees [from the affected country] in neighbouring countries,
and to ensure that all pledges are honoured in full. It further urges all Member States, in coordination
with international financial institutions and United Nations agencies, to increase their support to
address the increasing political, socio-economic and financial impact of the refugee crisis on hosting
countries.

S/PRST/2013/15
(2013), par. 17

Underscores the importance of humanitarian aid operations, condemns any politicization of
humanitarian assistance, or misuse or misappropriation, and calls upon Member States and the United
Nations to take all feasible steps to mitigate these aforementioned practices in [the affected country];

S/RES/2060 (2012),
op. 5

Expressing serious concern that the United Nations consolidated appeal for [the affected country] is
not fully funded, stressing the need for urgent mobilisation of resources to those in need and calling on
all Member States to contribute to current and future consolidated humanitarian appeals

S/RES/2010 (2011),
pp. 15

Expressing the importance of addressing humanitarian issues confronting the … people [of the
affected country] and stressing the need to continue to form a coo rdinated response and to provide
adequate resources to address these issues.

S/RES/2001 (2011),
pp. 10

Stressing the need to further improve the reach, quality and quantity of humanitarian aid, ensuring
efficient, effective and timely coordination and d elivery of humanitarian assistance, including through
enhanced coordination among the United Nations agencies, funds and programmes under the authority
of the Special Representative of the Secretary-General and between the United Nations and other
donors, especially where it is most needed, emphasizing in this regard the need for all, within the
framework of humanitarian assistance, of upholding and respecting the humanitarian principles, of
humanity, neutrality, impartiality and independence,

S/RES/1974 (2011),
pp. 19

Expressing its concern at the significant decline in humanitarian funding for [the affected country] and
calling on all Member States to contribute to current and future consolidated humanitarian appeals,

S/RES/1964 (2010),
pp. 18

[N]oting the importance of contingency planning.

S/RES/1933 (2010),
pp. 6

Stressing the ongoing importance of providing humanitarian and development assistance to the civilian populations
throughout [the affected country], encouraging comprehensive preparedness efforts by the United Nations … including
the need for increased humanitarian and development assistance … and the need for continued cooperation among the
[parties to the peace agreement], the United Nations and humanitarian organizations and urging donors to support
implementation of the [peace agreement] and to honour all pledges of financial and material support.

S/RES/1919 (2010),
pp. 13

Expressing its concern at the significant decline in humanitarian funding for [the affected country] and calling on all
Member States to contribute to current and future consolidated humanitarian appeals.

S/RES/1910 (2010),
pp. 15

The Security Council further urges the … authorities to ta ke immediate steps to facilitate the
expansion of humanitarian relief operations, and lift bureaucratic impediments and other obstacles,
including through: (a) expediting the approval of further domestic and international Non Governmental Organizations to engage in humanitarian relief activities; (b) easing and expediting the
procedures for the operationalization of further humanitarian hubs, the entry and movement of
humanitarian personnel and convoys by granting the necessary visas and permits in a predic table

S/PRST/2013/15
(2013), par. 13

S/PRST/2014/3

38/80

Humanitarian
assistance and
preparedness

See also, for example,
S/RES/2104 (2013), op.
14; S/RES/2093 (2013),
op. 1; S/RES/2086
(2013), op. 8;
S/RES/2073 (2012), op.

14-01143

manner, the importation of goods and equipment, such as communication tools, protective armoured
vehicles and medical and surgical equipment, needed for humanitarian operations; (c) promptly
facilitating safe and unhindered humanitarian access to people in need, through the most effective
ways, including across conflict lines and, where appropriate, across borders from neighbouring
countries in accordance with the UN guiding principles of humanitarian emergency assistance; and (d)
accelerating approval for the implementation of humanitarian projects, including those in the revised
… Humanitarian Assistance Response Plan.
S/PRST/2013/15
(2013), par. 14

Decides that the mandate of [the Mission] shall be the following: … (g) Support humanitarian
assistance – To facilitate, as necessary, unhindered humanitarian access and to help s trengthen the
delivery of humanitarian assistance to conflict-affected and vulnerable populations, notably by
contributing to enhancing security for its delivery …

S/RES/2112 (2013),
op. 6

… The Security Council recognizes the need for consistent engage ment by humanitarian agencies with
all parties to armed conflict for humanitarian purposes, including activities aimed at ensuring respect
for international humanitarian law. The Council stresses the need to ensure simplified and expedited
procedures for humanitarian personnel and goods in order to better deliver quick support to civilians
on the ground. The Council also underlines the importance of systematic monitoring and analysis of
constraints on humanitarian access.

S/PRST/2013/2
(2013), par. 17

Decides to authorize the deployment of an African-led International Support Mission in [the affected country] for an
initial period of one year, which shall take all necessary measures, in compliance with applicable international
humanitarian law and human rights law and in full respect of the sovereignty, territorial integrity and unity of [the
affected country] to carry out the following tasks: (e) To support the [national] authorities to create a secure
environment for the civilian-led delivery of humanitarian assistance …, as requested, within its capabilities and in close
coordination with humanitarian actors;

S/RES/2085 (2012),
op. 9

Expresses its intention to: (a) Call on parties to armed conflict to comply with the obligations applicable to them under
international humanitarian law to take all required steps to protect civilians and to facilitate the rapid and unimpeded
passage of relief consignments, equipment and personnel, (b) Mandate UN peacekeeping and other relevant missions,
where appropriate, to assist in creating conditions conducive to safe, timely and unimpeded humanitarian assistance.

S/RES/1894 (2009),
op. 15 (a) and (b)

Invites the Secretary-General to continue the systematic monitoring and analysis of constraints on humanitarian access,
to include as appropriate observations and recommendations in his briefings and country-specific reports to the
Council.

S/RES/1894 (2009),
op. 17

[U]nderlines, in particular, that [the mission] is authorized to take all necessary measures to provide security for key
infrastructure and to contribute, as may be requested and within its capabilities and existing mandate, to the creation of
the necessary security conditions for the provision of humanitarian assistance.

S/RES/1863 (2009),
op. 2

Acting under Chapter VII of the Charter of the United Nations, (a) Decides further that [the mission] shall be authorized

S/RES/1861 (2009),

S/PRST/2014/3

39/80

The Security Council also urges all parties to: … (b) immediately demilitarize medical facilities,
schools and water stations, refrain from targeting civilian objects, and agree on the modalities to
implement humanitarian pauses, as well as key routes to enable promptly — upon notification from
relief agencies — the safe and unhindered passage of humanitarian convoys along these routes to
access people in need; and (c) designate empowered interlocutors with the necessary authority to
discuss with humanitarian actors operational and policy issues.

1; S/RES/2000 (2011),
op. 7; S/RES/1999
(2011), op. 3;
S/RES/1933 (2010),
op. 16; S/RES/1894
(2009), op. 12 and op. 14;
S/RES/1778 (2007), op.
6; S/RES/1772 (2007),
op. 9(d); S/RES/1769
(2007), op. 15;
S/RES/1756 (2007), op.
2; S/RES/1701 (2006),
op. 12; S/RES/1674
(2006), op. 16;
S/RES/1590 (2005), op.
16; S/RES/1565 (2004),
op. 4 and op. 5;
S/RES/1542 (2004), op.
9; S/RES/1528 (2004),
op. 6; S/RES/1509
(2003), op. 3 (k);
S/RES/1502 (2003), op. 5
(a); and S/RES/1270
(1999), op. 14.

Targeted and
graduated measures
as a response to the
obstruction of the
delivery of
humanitarian aid
and to attacks
against
humanitarian
workers
14-01143

op. 7 (a) and (ii)

Reiterates its support for the contribution made by some States to protect the World Food Programme maritime
convoys, calls upon States and regional organizations, in close coordination with each other and as notified in advance
to the Secretary-General, and at the request of [the Government], to take action to protect shipping involved with the
transportation and delivery of humanitarian aid … and United Nations-authorized activities, calls upon [regional
peacekeeping mission] troop-contributing countries, as appropriate, to provide support to this end, and requests the
Secretary-General to provide his support to this effect.

S/RES/1814 (2008),
op. 11

Condemning all attacks against United Nations peacekeepers and humanitarian personnel, regardless of their
perpetrators, and emphasizing that those responsible for such attacks must be brought to justice.

S/RES/2053 (2012),
pp. 13

Emphasizing that there are existing prohibitions under international law against attacks knowingly and intentionally
directed against personnel involved in a humanitarian assistance or peacekeeping mission undertaken in accordance
with the Charter of the United Nations which in situations of armed conflicts constitute war crimes, and recalling the
need for States to end impunity for such criminal acts.

S/RES/1502 (2003),
pp. 5

Expresses its strong condemnation of all forms of violence, including, inter alia, murder, rape and sexual assault,
intimidation, armed robbery, abduction, hostage-taking, kidnapping, harassment and illegal arrest and detention to
which those participating in humanitarian operations are increasingly exposed, as well as attacks on humanitarian
convoys and acts of destruction and looting of their property; Urges States to ensure that crimes against such personnel
do not remain unpunished.

S/RES/1502 (2003),
op. 1 and op. 2

Expresses its determination to take appropriate steps in order to ensure the safety and security of humanitarian
personnel and United Nations and its associated personnel, including, inter alia, by: (a) Requesting the SecretaryGeneral to seek the inclusion of, and that host countries include, key provisions of the Convention on the Safety of
United Nations and Associated Personnel, among others, those regarding the prevention of attacks against members of
United Nations operations, the establishment of such attacks as crimes punishable by law and the prosecution or
extradition of offenders, in future as well as, if necessary, in existing status-of-forces, status-of-missions and host
country agreements negotiated between the United Nations and those countries, mindful of the importance of the timely
conclusion of such agreements.
Urges the Government … to respond to the … requests [from the Committee appointed to oversee the
implementation of the relevant sanctions regime] on … investigations conducted and accountability
measures undertaken for attacks against … humanitarian personnel; and the situation of civilian
populations in [specific areas], where the Panel of Experts, [the Mission] and humanitarian agencies
and personnel have been denied access, and measures taken to allow unimpeded and regular access for
humanitarian relief to these areas;
Decides that the provisions [relating to travel bans and freezing of assets and economic resources] shall apply to individuals
[and] entities, designated by the [Sanctions Committee]; (c) as obstructing the delivery of humanitarian assistance to [the
affected State], or access to, or distribution of, humanitarian assistance in [the affected State].

S/RES/1502 (2003),
op. 5 (a)

Expresses its determination to take appropriate steps in order to ensure the safety and security of humanitarian
personnel and United Nations and its associated personnel, including, inter alia, by: (b) Encouraging the SecretaryGeneral, in accordance with his prerogatives under the Charter of the United Nations, to bring to the attention of the
Security Council situations in which humanitarian assistance is denied as a consequence of violence directed against
humanitarian personnel and United Nations and its associated personnel.

S/RES/1502 (2003),
op. 5 (b)

S/RES/2091 (2013),
op. 11

S/RES/2002 (2011),
op. 1

S/PRST/2014/3

40/80

Accountability for
attacks against
humanitarian
workers

to take all necessary measures, within its capabilities and its area of operations …, to fulfil the following functions, in
liaison with the Government of [the affected country]: (ii) To facilitate the delivery of humanitarian aid and the free
movement of humanitarian personnel by helping to improve security in the area of operations.

See also, for example,
S/RES/1991 (2011), pp.
11; S/RES/1925 (2010),
pp. 14; S/RES/1674
(2006), op. 23; and
S/RES/1265 (1999), op.
10.

See also, for example,
S/RES/1894 (2009), op. 4
and op. 17; S/RES/1727
(2006), op. 12;
S/RES/1296 (2000), op.
5; and S/RES/1265
(1999), op. 10.

14-01143

Exceptions to United
Nations restrictive
measures on
humanitarian
grounds

Decides that until [date] and without prejudice to humanitarian assistanc e programmes conducted
elsewhere, the measures imposed by [paragraph of Security Council resolution prohibiting to make
available financial or economic resources to individuals listed by the relevant sanctions committee]
shall not apply to the payment of funds, other financial assets or economic resources necessary to
ensure the timely delivery of urgently needed humanitarian assistance in [the affected country], by the
United Nations, its specialized agencies or programmes, humanitarian organizations havin g observer
status with the United Nations General Assembly that provide humanitarian assistance, and their
implementing partners including bilaterally or multilaterally funded NGOs participating in the United
Nations Consolidated Appeal for [the affected country];

S/RES/2111 (2013),
op. 22

Decides further that the ban [on all flights in the airspace of the affected State] imposed by [relevant
paragraph] shall not apply to flights whose sole purpose is humanitarian, such as delivering or
facilitating the delivery of assistance, including medical supplies, food, humanitarian workers and
related assistance, or evacuating foreign nationals from the [affected State] …

S/RES/1973 (2011),
op. 7

D. Conduct of hostilities
Condemn, and call
for the cessation of,
violations of
applicable
international
humanitarian law
and human rights
law

S/RES/2109 (2013),
pp. 11

Remaining greatly concerned by … the persistent high leve ls of violence and abuses and violations of
international law, condemning in particular those involving the targeted attacks against civilians,
widespread sexual and gender-based violence, systematic recruitment and use of children by certain
parties to the conflict, the displacement of significant numbers of civilians, extrajudicial executions
and arbitrary arrests …

S/RES/2098 (2013),
pp. 16

Condemns in the strongest terms all attacks, including Improvised Explosive Device attacks, suicide
attacks, assassinations and abductions, targeting civilians and [national] and international forces …,
and condemns further the use by the [armed groups] of civilians as human shields;

S/RES/2096 (2013),
op. 28

Strongly condemns the continued violations of international humanitarian and human rights law,
including the recruitment and use of children, killing and maiming of civilians, including of children,
rape and sexual slavery and other forms of sexual and gender-based violence and abductions, and
targeting of ethnic minorities perpetrated by armed groups …

S/RES/2088 (2013),
op. 13

Expressing deep concern at the deteriorating security situation in some parts of [the affected area],
including ceasefire violations, attacks by rebel groups, aerial bombardment by the Government of [the
affected country], inter-tribal fighting, attacks on humanitarian personnel and peacekeepers, which
have restricted humanitarian access to conflict areas where vulnerable civilian populations reside, as
contained in the report in the Secretary-General, and the displacement of tens of thousands of
civilians, and calling on all parties to cease hostilities, including all acts of violence committed against
civilians, …
Condemns all violence and hostilities directed against civilians and all acts of terrorism.

S/RES/2003 (2011),
pp. 13

Demanding an end to attacks on civilians, from any quarter, including by aerial bombing, and the use of civilians as human
shields.

S/RES/1828 (2008),
pp. 13

S/RES/1860 (2009),
op. 5

See also, for example,
S/RES/2091 (2013), pp. 7
and pp. 8; S/RES/2069
(2012), pp. 21;
S/RES/2041 (2012), pp.
33; S/RES/2010 (2011),
op. 22; S/RES/1868
(2009), op. 12;
S/RES/1806 (2008), op.
12; S/RES/1674 (2006),
op. 26; S/RES/1574
(2004), op. 11;
S/RES/1493 (2003), op.
8; S/RES/1468 (2003),
op. 2; and S/RES/1296
(2000), op. 2 and op. 5.

S/PRST/2014/3

41/80

Recalling the Presidential Statement of 12 February 2013 that … condemned all violations of
international law against civilians, in particular the deliberate targeting of civilia ns, indiscriminate or
disproportionate attacks, and sexual and gender based violence.

14-01143

S/RES/1674 (2006),
op. 3

Underlines the importance of [the Mission] abiding by all requirements applicable to it under
international human rights and humanitarian law, further underlines in particular the need for [the
Mission] to ensure that any detainees in their custody, including disengaged combatants, are treated in
strict compliance with applicable obligations under international humanitarian law and human rights
law, including ensuring their humane treatment and further requests [the Mission] to allow appropriate
access to detainees by a neutral body, and to establish Standard Operating Procedures for the handover
of any detainees, including children, who come into their custody during a military operation;

S/RES/2124 (2013),
op. 12

The Security Council recalls that all obligations under international humanitarian law must be
respected in all circumstances. It recalls, in particular, the obligation to distinguish between civilian
populations and combatants, and the prohibition against indiscriminate attacks, and attacks against
civilians and civilian objects, as well as the prohibition on the use of chemical weapons and the
employment of weapons, projectiles and material and methods of warfare which are of a nature to
cause superfluous injury or unnecessary suffering. The Council urges all parties to immediately cease
and desist from all violations of international humanitarian law and violations and abuses of human
rights, and calls on all parties to fully respect their obligations under international humanitarian law
and to take all appropriate steps to protect civilians, including by desisting from attacks directed
against civilian objects, such as medical centres, schools and water stations, and also calls on all
parties to avoid establishing military positions in populated areas …

S/PRST/2013/15
(2013), par. 9

… reaffirming that all parties to armed conflict must take all feasible steps to ensure the protection of
civilians, calling for all parties to comply with their obligations under international law including
international humanitarian and human rights law and for all appropriate measures to be taken to ensure
the protection of civilians …

S/RES/2096 (2013),
op. 29

… stresses the responsibility of all parties in [the affected country] to comply with their obligations to
protect the civilian population from the effects of hostilities, in particular by avoiding any
indiscriminate attacks or excessive use of force, and underscores the need to end impunity, uphold
human rights and hold those who commit crimes accountable;

S/RES/2093 (2013),
op. 26

[S]tresses the responsibility of all parties and armed groups in [the affected State] to take appropriate steps to protect the
civilian population …, consistent with international humanitarian, human rights and refugee law, in particular by
avoiding any indiscriminate attacks on populated areas.

S/RES/1814 (2008),
op. 17

Affirming the importance for all parties, including foreign forces, promoting the maintenance of security and stability in
[the affected State] to act in accordance with international law, including relevant obligations under international
humanitarian law, human rights law and refugee law, and to cooperate with the relevant international organizations …
and underscoring that all parties, including foreign forces, should take all feasible steps to ensure the protection of
affected civilians.

S/RES/1790 (2007),
pp. 18

Demands that all parties concerned comply strictly with their obligations under international humanitarian, human
rights and refugee law, in particular those contained in the Hague Conventions of 1899 and 1907 and in the Geneva
Conventions of 1949 and their Additional Protocols of 1977, as well as the decisions of the Security Council.

S/RES/1674 (2006),
op. 6

S/PRST/2014/3

42/80

Call for compliance
with applicable
international
humanitarian law
and human rights
law

Recalls that deliberately targeting civilians and other protected persons as such in situations of armed conflict is a flagrant
violation of international humanitarian law, reiterates its condemnation in the strongest terms of such practices, and
demands that all parties immediately put an end to such practices.

See also, for example,;
S/RES/2085 (2012), op.
9; S/RES/1974 (2011),
pp. 23; S/RES/19674
(2010), op. 15;
S/RES/1806 (2008), op.
13; S/RES/1794 (2007),
op. 7; S/RES/1776
(2007), pp. 12;
S/RES/1574 (2004),
op. 11; S/RES/1564
(2004), pp. 10;
S/RES/1493 (2003), op.
8; and S/RES/1265
(1999), op. 4.

14-01143

Call for the adoption
of specific measures
to prevent civilian
harm

… noting the importance of conducting continuous reviews of tactics and procedures and after -action
reviews and investigations in cooperation with the … Government in cases where civilian casualties
have occurred and when the … Government finds these joint investiga tions appropriate, as well as
continuing cooperation with the [national security forces] towards the further institutionalization of
protection of civilians, especially women and girls,

S/RES/2120 (2013),
pp.26

Requests that [the Mission] take fully int o account the need to protect civilians and mitigate risk to
civilians, including, in particular, women, children and displaced persons and civilian objects in the
performance of its mandate as defined in [provisions mandating the Mission to provide active support
to national authorities in their actions against armed groups], where undertaken jointly with the
[national] Defence and Security Forces, in strict compliance with the Human Rights Due Diligence
Policy on United Nations Support to non-United Nations Security Forces (S/2013/110);

S/RES/2100 (2013),
op. 26

Authorizes [the Mission], through its military component, in pursuit of the objectives described in
[relevant provision], to take all necessary measures to perform the following tasks … (a) Prot ection of
civilians (i) … mitigate the risk to civilians before, during and after any military operation; … (b)
Neutralizing armed groups … : In support of the authorities of [the affected country], on the basis of
information collation and analysis, and taking full account of the need to protect civilians and mitigate
risk before, during and after any military operation, carry out targeted offensive operations … in strict
compliance with international law, including international humanitarian law and with the human rights
due diligence policy on UN-support to non-UN forces (HRDDP) …

S/RES/2098 (2013),
op.12

… urging [the international military force] and other international forces to continue to undertake
enhanced efforts to prevent civilian casualties, including the increased focus on protecting the
[National] population as a central element of the mission, and noting the importance of conducting
continuous reviews of tactics and procedures and after-action reviews and investigations in
cooperation with the [National] Government in cases where civilian casualties have occurred and
when the [National] Government finds these joint investigations appropriate, as well as continuing
cooperation with the [National security forces] towards the further institutio nalization of protection of
civilians,

S/RES/2069 (2012),
pp. 25

E. Small arms and light weapons, mines and explosive remnants of war
Condemn the
illicit trade in small
arms and light
weapons

S/RES/2117 (2013),
pp.10

Condemns the reported continuing violations of the measures contained in [resolutions prescribing
arms embargo], as modified in its subsequent resolutions, and recalls the mandate of the Committee,
as defined in [relevant provision of resolution prescribing sanctions], to examine and take appropriate
action on information regarding alleged violations or non -compliance with those measures;

S/RES/2095 (2013),
op. 12

See also, for example,
S/RES/2111 (2013), pp.
5; S/RES/2104 (2013),
pp. 25; S/RES/2063
(2012), op. 20;
S/RES/2040 (2012), pp.
9; S/RES/2021 (2011),
pp. 6; S/RES/2017
(2011), pp. 7;
S/RES/1944 (2010), pp.

S/PRST/2014/3

43/80

Recalling with grave concern that the illicit transfer, dest abilizing accumulation and misuse of small
arms and light weapons fuel armed conflicts and have a wide range of negative human rights,
humanitarian, development and socioeconomic consequences, in particular on the security of civilians
in armed conflict, including the disproportionate impact on violence perpetrated against women and
girls, and exacerbating sexual and gender-based violence and the recruitment and use of children by
parties to armed conflict in violation of applicable international law,

14-01143

S/RES/2085 (2012),
pp. 5

Condemning the continuing illicit flow of weapons within and into the [affected State] in violation of resolutions
[prescribing sanctions], declaring its determination to continue to monitor closely the implementation of the arms
embargo and other measures set out by its resolutions concerning the [affected State] …

S/RES/2078 (2012),
pp. 7

Notes that the excessive accumulation and destabilizing effect of small arms and light weapons pose a considerable
impediment to the provision of humanitarian assistance and have a potential to exacerbate and prolong conflicts,
endanger civilians and undermine security and the confidence required for a return to peace and stability …

S/RES/1894 (2009),
op. 29

Recognizes the deleterious impact of the proliferation of arms, in particular small arms, on the security of civilians,
including refugees and other vulnerable populations, particularly children, and, in this regard, recalls resolution 1209
(1998) of 19 November 1998 …

S/RES/1261 (1999),
op. 14

Reminds Member States of their obligation to fully and effectively comply with Council -mandated
arms embargoes and to take appropriate measures, including all legal and administrative means against
any activity that violates such arms embargoes, and including, in accord ance with relevant Council
resolutions, through cooperating with all relevant United Nations entities; by making available to
relevant sanctions committees all pertinent information on any alleged violations of arms embargoes;
by acting on credible information to prevent the supply, sale, transfer or export of small arms and light
weapons in contravention of Council mandated arms embargoes; by facilitating unhindered access by
relevant Council mandated personnel in accordance with Council mandates; and by a pplying relevant
international standards such as the International Tracing Instrument;

S/RES/2117 (2013),
op. 2

Urges States to consider signing and ratifying the Arms Trade Treaty as soon as possible and
encourages States, intergovernmental, regional and subregional organizations that are in a position to
do so to render assistance in capacity-building to enable States Parties to fulfil and implement the
Treaty’s obligations;

S/RES/2117 (2013),
op. 19

Encourages the Government of [the affected country] to enhance stockpile security, accountability and
management of arms and ammunition, with the assistance of international partn ers as necessary and
requested, and to urgently implement a national weapons marking program, in particular for state owned firearms, in line with the standards established by the Nairobi Protocol and the Regional Centre
on Small Arms;

S/RES/2078 (2012),
op. 12

Emphasizing the importance of full compliance with the prohibition on sales and supply of arms and
related materiel established by [relevant sanction resolution],

S/RES/2004 (2011),
pp. 8

Urges Members States, in accordance with the United Nations Programme of Action on Small Arms and Lights
Weapons to Prevent, Combat and Eradicate the Illicit Trade in Small Arms and Light Weapons, to take effective action
through, inter alia, conflict resolution and the development and implementation of national legislation, in a manner
which is consistent with existing responsibilities of States under relevant international law, to control the illicit trade of
small arms to parties in armed conflict that do not respect fully the relevant provisions of applicable international law
relating to the rights and protection of children in armed conflict …

S/RES/1460 (2003),
op. 7

Calls for effective international action to prevent the illegal flow of small arms into areas of conflict.

S/RES/1318 (2000),
op. VI

Stresses the importance of all Member States, and in particular States involved in manufacturing and marketing of

S/RES/1209 (1998),

12; S/RES/1919 (2010),
op. 15; S/RES/1296
(2000), op. 21;
S/RES/1265 (1999),
op. 17.

See also, for example,
S/RES/2079 (2012), op.
8; S/RES/1952 (2010),
pp. 7; S/RES/1937
(2010), pp. 6;
S/RES/1209 (1998),
op. 3.

S/PRST/2014/3

44/80

Call for compliance
with international
measures on small
arms and light
weapons

Remaining seriously concerned over … the continued proliferation of weapons from within and
outside the region that threaten peace, security, and stability of States in this region,

14-01143

Role of United
Nations
peacekeeping
missions and other
relevant actors in
preventing the illicit
trade in small arms
and light weapons

weapons, restricting arms transfers which could provoke or prolong armed conflicts or aggravate existing tensions or
armed conflicts …

op. 3

[S]tresses the need to implement the United Nations Program of Action to Prevent, Combat and Eradicate the Illicit
Trade in Small Arms and Light Weapons in All Its Aspects and the international instrument to enable States to identify
and trace, in a timely manner, illicit small arms and light weapons, in order to make real progress in preventing,
combating and eradicating the illicit trade in small arms and light weapons. In particular, States are encouraged to
strengthen physical security and stockpile management, destroy surplus and obsolete small arms and light weapons,
ensure all small arms and light weapons are marked at the time of manufacture and import, and strengthen export and
border controls and control brokering activities.

S/PRST/2007/24

Requests [the Mission] to continue to support the … authorities in their efforts to control the flow of
small arms, the development of a weapons registry, the revision of current laws on importation and
possession of arms, reform of the weapons permit system and the development and implementation of
a national community policing doctrine;

S/RES/2119 (2013),
op.24

… requests [the Mission] to … monitor whether any arms or related material are present in [the
affected area] in accordance with its mandate as set out in [relevant provision of SC resolution], and in
this context, to continue to cooperate with the Panel of Experts established by [relevant resolution];

S/RES/2113 (2013),
op. 23

Calls upon the … authorities of [the affected country], with the assistance of [the Mission], consistent
with [relevant provision], and international partners, to addr ess the issue of the proliferation and illicit
trafficking of small arms and light weapons in accordance with the ECOWAS Convention on Small
Arms and Light Weapons, Their Ammunition and Other Related Materials and the United Nations
Programme of Action on Small Arms and Light Weapons, in order to ensure the safe and effective
management, storage and security of their stockpiles of small arms and light weapons and the
collection and/or destruction of surplus, seized, unmarked or illicitly held weapons and fu rther stresses
the importance of the full implementation of its [relevant resolution];

S/RES/2100 (2013),
op. 28

Encourages the Government of [the affected country] to enhance stockpile security, accountability and
management of arms and ammunition, with the assistance of international partners as necessary and
requested, and to urgently implement a national weapons marking program, in particular for state owned firearms, in line with the standards established by the Nairobi Protocol and the Regional Cen tre
on Small Arms

S/RES/2078 (2012),
op. 12

… requests [the missions] to observe and report on any flow of personnel, arms, and related materiel
across the border with [relevant country]

S/RES/2057 (2012),
op. 6

See also, for example,
S/RES/2112 (2013), op.
6; S/RES/2098 (2013),
op. 12; S/RES/2095
(2013), op. 7 and op. 11;
S/RES/2070 (2013), op.
23; S/RES/2063 (2012),
op. 20; S/RES/2021
(2012), op. 11 and op. 16;
S/RES/1959 (2010), op.
9; S/RES/1946 (2010),
op. 12

S/PRST/2014/3

45/80

14-01143

S/RES/2000 (2011),
op. 7

Recognizes the detrimental impact of the proliferation of arms, in particular small arms, on the security of civilians by
fuelling armed conflict, encourages [the mission] to continue its efforts in providing assistance to the Government of [the
affected area] with regard to the civilian disarmament process, in particular by strengthening the capacity of local authorities
to deter inter-communal conflicts and by monitoring forced civilian disarmament initiatives in an effort to avert
disarmament operations that could exacerbate insecurity in [the affected area].

S/RES/1919 (2010),
op. 15

Acknowledging the important contribution of Council-mandated arms embargoes in countering the
illicit transfer of small arms and light weapons, mitigating the intensity of conflict and creating
conditions conducive to the peaceful resolution of situations that threaten or breach international peace
and security, and acknowledging also the contribution Council -mandated arms embargoes make in
supporting conflict prevention, post-conflict peacebuilding, disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration and security sector reform,

S/RES/2117 (2013),
pp.12

Decides … that the arms embargo shall not apply to the supplies of non -lethal equipment intended
solely to enable the [national] security forces to use only appropriate and proportionate force while
maintaining public order, as approved in advance by the Sanctions Committee;

S/RES/1946 (2010),
op. 5

Underlines that it is fully prepared to impose targeted measures against persons to be designated by
the [sanction] Committee … who are determined to be, among other things: … (f) Acting in violat ion
of the measures imposed by [paragraph providing for arms embargo];

S/RES/1946 (2010),
op. 6

Decides that all Member States shall immediately take the necessary measures to prevent the sale or supply to [the
affected State] by their nationals or from their territories or using their flag vessels or aircraft, of arms and related
materiel of all types, including weapons and ammunition, military vehicles and equipment, paramilitary equipment, and
spare parts for the aforementioned, and technical assistance, training, financial and other assistance, related to the
military activities or to the provision, manufacture, maintenance or use of these items, whether or not originating in
their territories.

S/RES/1907 (2009),
op. 5

Decides that all States shall take the measures as previously imposed by [the Security Council’s sanction resolutions on
certain illegal armed groups] and other individuals, groups, undertakings and entities associated with them …:
(c) Prevent the direct or indirect supply, sale, or transfer to these individuals, groups, undertakings and entities from
their territories or by their nationals outside their territories, or using their flag vessels or aircraft, of arms and related

S/RES/1904 (2009),
op. 1 (c)

S/PRST/2014/3

46/80

Targeted and
graduated measures
as a response to the
illicit trade in small
arms and light
weapons

Decides that [the mission] shall have the following mandate: Protection and security (c) Monitoring of
the arms embargo – To monitor the implementation of the [arms embargo] imposed by [relevant
provision], in cooperation with the Group of Experts established under [relevant resolution], inclu ding
by inspecting, as they deem it necessary and when appropriate without notice, all weapons,
ammunition and related materiel regardless of location, … – To collect, as appropriate, arms and any
related materiel brought into [the affected country] in vio lation of the [arms embargo] imposed by
[relevant provision], and to dispose of such arms and related materiel as appropriate. (d) Collection of
weapons – To continue to assist the national authorities, … in collecting, registering, securing and
disposing of weapons and in clearing explosive remnants of war, as appropriate, … – To support the
Government in coordination with other partners to develop and implement community weapons
collection programs, which should be linked to community violence reduction a nd reconciliation, – To
coordinate with the Government in ensuring that the collected weapons are not disseminated or re utilized outside a comprehensive national security strategy …

See also, for example,
S/RES/1521 (2003), op. 2
(a); and S/RES/1907
(2009), op. 12.

14-01143

materiel of all types including weapons and ammunition, military vehicles and equipment, paramilitary equipment, and
spare parts for the aforementioned, and technical advice, assistance, or training related to military activities.

International and
regional cooperation
in preventing the
illicit trade in small
arms and light
weapons

S/RES/1612 (2005),
op. 9

Expresses its intention to consider taking appropriate steps, in accordance with the Charter of the United Nations, to
address the linkages between armed conflict and terrorism, the illicit trade in precious minerals, the illicit trafficking in
small arms and light weapons, and other criminal activities, which can prolong armed conflict or intensify its impact on
civilian populations, including children.
Calls upon all Member States, in particular States of the region, acting nationally or through regional
organisations or arrangements, in order to ensure strict implementation of the arms embargo
established by [provision of the relevant resolution], to inspect in their territory, includ ing seaports
and airports, and on the high seas, vessels and aircraft bound to or from the [affected State], if the
State concerned has information that provides reasonable grounds to believe that the cargo contains
items the supply, sale, transfer or export of which is prohibited by [paragraph of the relevant
resolution] …, including the provision of armed mercenary personnel, calls upon all flag States of
such vessels and aircraft to cooperate with such inspections and authorises Member States to use all
measures commensurate to the specific circumstances to carry out such inspections

S/RES/1379 (2001),
op. 6

Encourages enhanced cooperation between all States, particularly those in the region, [the mission]
and the Group of Experts [informing the sanction Committee] and encourages further that all parties
and all States ensure cooperation with the Group of Experts [informing the sanction Committee] by
individuals and entities within their jurisdiction or under their control;

S/RES/1952 (2010),
op. 17

Urges further in this context that all parties [in the affected country] and all States, particularly those
in the region, ensure: – the safety of the members of the Group of Experts [informing the sanction
Committee]; – unhindered access by the Group of Experts [informing the sanction Committee], in
particular to persons, documents and sites in order for the Group of Experts to execute its mandate;

S/RES/1946 (2010),
op. 16

Urges all States, relevant United Nations bodies, the [regional organization] a nd other interested
parties, to cooperate fully with the Committee and the Panel of Experts [informing the sanction
Committee], in particular by supplying any information at their disposal on implementation of the
measures imposed by [resolutions imposing sanctions];

S/RES/1945 (2010),
op. 5

Requests the Governments of the [affected State] and of all States, particularly those in the region, the United Nations
Organization Mission in the [affected State] and the Group of Experts to cooperate intensively, including by exchanging
information regarding arms shipments, trading routes and strategic mines known to be controlled or used by armed
groups, flights from the … region to the [affected State] and from the [affected State] to the … region, the illegal
exploitation and trafficking in natural resources, and activities of individuals and entities designated by the [Sanction]
Committee pursuant to paragraph 4 of resolution 1857 (2008).

S/RES/1896 (2009),
op. 10

Further demands that all parties and all States ensure cooperation with the Group of Experts by individuals and entities
within their jurisdiction or under their control, and requests in this regard all States to identify a focal point to the
Committee in order to enhance cooperation and information sharing with the Group of Experts.

S/RES/1896 (2009),
op. 12

Calls upon the countries of the region to reinforce their cooperation with the Security Council’s Committee and with the

S/RES/1653 (2006),

S/RES/1973 (2011),
op. 13

S/PRST/2014/3

47/80

[R]eaffirms its intention to consider imposing, through country-specific resolutions, targeted and graduated measures,
such as, inter alia, a ban on the export and supply of small arms and light weapons and of other military equipment and
on military assistance, against parties to situations of armed conflict which are on the Security Council’s agenda and are
in violation of applicable international law relating to the rights and protection of children in armed conflict.

op. 16

Requests the Secretary-General to ensure that his [Special Representatives for neighbouring countries] coordinate the
activities of [their respective missions], share military information at their disposal, in particular concerning crossborder movements of armed elements and arms trafficking, and pool their logistic and administrative resources, to an
extent that does not affect the ability to carry out their respective mandates, in order to maximize efficiency and costeffectiveness.

S/RES/1545 (2004),
op. 20

Expressing also concern with the serious threat that anti -personnel mines, remnants of war and
Improvised Explosive Devices pose to the civilian population, and stressing the need to refrain from
the use of weapons and devices prohibited by international law,

S/RES/2096 (2013),
pp. 30

Notes, in this regard, that multidimensional peacekeeping missions may be mandated by the Security
Council, inter-alia, to: (d) Provide for rapid response in mine action as well as advisory services and
training tailored to needs of national authorities, upon request, with a view to enabling risk reduction,
victim assistance, demining and stockpile management and disposal;

S/RES/2086 (2013),
op. 8

Demands that the [relevant Governments] facilitate the deployment of the United Nations Mine A ction
Service to ensure [the relevant personnel] freedom of movement as well as the identification and
clearance of mines in [the affected area];

S/RES/2075 (2012),
op. 12

Demands that [the relevant countries] facilitate the deployment of the United Nat ions Mine Action
Service as well as the identification and clearance of mines in the [affected areas];

S/RES/2047 (2012),
op. 10

Noting the ratification of the Convention on Cluster Munitions by [the affected country],

S/RES/2011 (2011)
(pp. 22)

Welcomes the achievements to date in the implementation of the Mine Action Programme of [the affected country],
and encourages the Government of [the affected country], with the support of the United Nations and all the relevant
actors, to continue its efforts towards the removal of anti-personnel landmines, anti-tank landmines and explosive
remnants of war in order to reduce the threats posed to human life and peace and security in the country; and expresses
the need to provide assistance for the care, rehabilitation, and economic and social reintegration of victims, including
persons with disabilities.

S/RES/1917 (2010),
op. 19

[C]alls on parties to armed conflict to take all feasible precautions to protect the civilian population, including children,
from the effects of landmines and other explosive remnants of war, and in this regard, encourages the international
community to support country efforts in clearing landmines and other explosive remnants of war and to provide
assistance for the care, rehabilitation and economic and social reintegration of victims, including persons with
disabilities.

S/RES/1894 (2009),
op. 29

S/PRST/2014/3

48/80

Mine action and
explosive remnants
of war

Group of Experts … in enforcing the arms embargo in [the affected State] and to combat cross-border trafficking of
illicit small arms, light weapons and illicit natural resources as well as the movement of combatants, and reiterates its
demand that [States in the region] take measures to prevent the use of their respective territories in support of the
activities of armed groups present in the region.

See also, for example,
S/RES/2104 (2013), pp.
26; S/RES/1986 (2011),
pp. 15

14-01143

14-01143

Welcomes the continued contribution of [the peacekeeping mission] to operational de-mining …, encourages further
assistance in mine action by the United Nations to [the affected State] in support of both the continued development of
its national mine action capacity and emergency de-mining activities …, commends donor countries for supporting
these efforts through financial and in-kind contributions and encourages further international contributions, takes note
of the communication to [the affected State] and [the peacekeeping mission] of maps and information on the location of
mines and stresses the necessity to provide [the affected State] and [the peacekeeping mission] with any additional
maps and records on the location of mines.

S/RES/1525 (2004),
op. 9

The Security Council expresses deepest worry at the presence in very high numbers of unexploded ordnance in [the
region of the affected country], including cluster munitions. It deplores the death and injury of dozens of civilians, as
well as of several de-miners, caused by those munitions since the cessation of hostilities. It supports in this context the
Secretary-General’s request to [the party to the conflict] to provide to the United Nations detailed data on its use of
cluster munitions in [the territory of the affected State].

S/PRST/2007/12

F. Compliance, accountability and the rule of law
Dissemination of,
and training on,
international
humanitarian law
and human rights
law standards

S/RES/2112 (2013),
op. 24

Urges Member States, regional and international organizations to provide coordinated assistance,
expertise, training, including on human rights and international humanitarian l aw, and capacitybuilding support to the [National Defence and Security Forces], consistent with their domestic
requirements …

S/RES/2085 (2012),
op. 7

Encouraging the efforts to ensure adequate human rights presence, capacity, and expertise within [the
mission] to carry out human rights promotion, protection, and monitoring activities,

S/RES/2066 (2012),
pp. 9

… recalls the importance of training in Human Rights, child protection and sexual and gender -based
violence to security and law enforcement agencies;

S/RES/2062 (2012),
op. 17

Reiterates its call on States that have not already done so to consider signing, ratifying or acceding to the relevant
instruments of international humanitarian, human rights and refugee law, and to take appropriate legislative, judicial and
administrative measures to implement their obligations under these instruments.

S/RES/1894 (2009),
op. 5

Calls upon all parties concerned, (a) to ensure the widest possible dissemination of information about international
humanitarian, human rights and refugee law; (b) to provide training for public officials, members of armed forces and
armed groups, personnel associated to armed forces, civilian police and law enforcement personnel, and members of
the judicial and legal professions; and to raise awareness among civil society and the civilian population on relevant
international humanitarian, human rights and refugee law, as well as on the protection, special needs and human rights
of women and children in conflict situations, to achieve full and effective compliance; (d) to seek, where appropriate,
support from United Nations peacekeeping and other relevant missions, as well as United Nations Country Teams and
the International Committee of the Red Cross and, where appropriate, other members of the International Red Cross
and Red Crescent Movement, on training and awareness raising on international humanitarian, human rights and
refugee law.

S/RES/1894 (2009),
op. 7 (a), (b) and (d)

See also, for example,
S/RES/2053 (2012), pp.
12; S/RES/1265 (1999),
pp. 8 and op. 5.

S/PRST/2014/3

49/80

Welcomes the continued cooperation between, and the conduct of coordinated activities by [the
Mission] and the [armed forces] and calls for strict adherence by the [armed forces] to internat ional
humanitarian, human rights and refugee laws and, in this context, recalls the importance of training in
Human Rights, child protection and sexual and gender-based violence to security and law enforcement
agencies;

14-01143

Regrets that some individuals affiliated with the Government … and armed groups in [the affected
area] have continued to commit violence against civilians, impede the peace process, and disregard the
demands of the Council, expresses its intention to impose targeted sanctions against individuals and
entities that meet the listing criteria in [relevant provision of resolution prescribing sanctions],
[including being responsible for violations of international humanitarian or human rights law or other
atrocities], and encourages the Panel of Experts, in coordination with the Joint African Union/United
Nations Mediation, to provide to the Committee when appropriate the names of any individuals,
groups, or entities that meet the listing criteria;

S/RES/2091 (2013),
op. 7

Decides that the measures [travel ban and assets freeze] in [provisions of the relevant resolution] shall
apply to individuals, and that the [relevant provisions] of that resolution shall apply to entities,
designated by the Committee: … (d) as being political or military leader s recruiting or using children
in armed conflicts in [the affected country] in violation of applicable international law; (e) as being
responsible for violations of applicable international law in [the affected country] involving the
targeting of civilians including children and women in situations of armed conflict, including killing
and maiming, sexual and gender based violence, attacks on schools and hospitals and abduction and
forced displacement.

S/RES/2002 (2011),
op. 1

Underlines that it is fully prepared to impose targeted measures against persons to be designated by
the [sanction] Committee … who are determined to be, among other things: (a) A threat to the peace
and national reconciliation process in [the affected country], in particular by bloc king the
implementation of the peace process, as referred to in the [relevant Political Agreement]; (b) Attacking
or obstructing the action of [the Mission], of the [national armed forces] which support it and of the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General in [the affected country]; (c) Responsible for
obstacles to the freedom of movement of [the Mission] and of the … forces which support it; (d)
Responsible for serious violations of human rights and international humanitarian law committed in
[the affected country]; (e) Inciting publicly hatred and violence; (f) Acting in violation of the measures
imposed by [paragraphs imposing an arms embargo];

S/RES/1980 (2011),
op. 10

Decides that all Member States shall freeze without delay all funds, other financial assets and economic
resources which are on their territories, which are owned or controlled, directly or indirectly, by the
individuals or entities listed in [annex of the resolution imposing sanctions] or [designated by the sanction
Committee and involved in or complicit in ordering, controlling, or otherwise directing, the commission of
serious human rights abuses against persons in the [affected State], including by being involved in or
complicit in planning, commanding, ordering or conducting attacks, in violation of international law,
including aerial bombardments, on civilian populations and facilities; or by individuals or entities acting
on their behalf or individuals and entities acting for such individuals or on their behalf or at their
direction], and decides further that all Member States shall ensure that any funds, financial assets or
economic resources are prevented from being made available by their nationals or by any individuals or
entities within their territories, to or for the benefit of the individuals or entities listed in [annex of the
resolution imposing sanctions] or individuals designated by the Committee.

S/RES/1970 (2011),
op. 17

[A]ll States shall take the necessary measures to prevent the entry into or transit through their territories of all persons
designated by [the Sanctions Committee] …

S/RES/1807 (2008),
op. 9

See also, for example,
S/RES/2100 (2013), op.
6; S/RES/2035 (2012),
op. 9; S/RES/1988
(2011), op. 1;
S/RES/1975 (2011), op.
12; S/RES/1970 (2011),
op. 9; S/RES/1946
(2010), op. 6;
S/RES/1727 (2006),
op. 12.

S/PRST/2014/3

50/80

Promoting
compliance through
targeted and
graduated measures

14-01143

Accountability

S/RES/2121 (2013),
pp.5

… stressing the importance of investigating [alleged human rights abuses and violations of
international humanitarian law], including those that occurred throughout the … crisis, committed by
all parties, irrespective of their status or political affiliation, reaffirming that those responsible for such
violations must be held accountable and brought to justice irrespective of their political affiliation,
while respecting the rights of those in detention …, urging the Government to increase and expedite its
efforts to combat impunity,

S/RES/2112 (2013),
pp. 11

Expressing grave concern at … the inability of the authorities to hold those responsible [for human
rights violations] to account,

S/RES/2109 (2013),
pp. 9

… calling for all those responsible for violations of international humanitarian law or abuses of human
rights, as applicable, including those involving violence or abuses against children and acts of sexual
and gender based violence, to be swiftly apprehended, brought to justice and held accountable,

S/RES/2098 (2013),
pp. 19

Calling on the Government … to fulfil all its commitments, including … undertaking effective efforts
to ensure accountability for serious violations of international human rights and humanitarian law, by
whomsoever perpetrated,

S/RES/2091 (2013),
pp. 17

Recalling its resolutions reaffirming that there can be no peace without justice, and recalling the
importance that the Council attaches to ending impunity and to ensuring justice for crimes committed
in [the affected country/area] …

S/RES/2063 (2012),
pp. 5

Stresses that all those responsible for human rights violations and abuses must be held accountable,
and underlining the need for a comprehensive, independent and impartial investigation consistent with
international standards into alleged human rights abuses and violations, to prevent impunity an d
ensure full accountability;

S/RES/2051 (2012),
op. 7

Calls upon the authorities of the [affected country] to combat impunity and hold accountable all
perpetrators of human rights and international humanitarian law violations, including those committed
by illegal armed groups or elements of the [national] Security Forces.

S/RES/1996 (2011),
op. 13

… stressing that those responsible for or complicit in attacks targeting the civilian population,
including aerial and naval attacks, must be held to account,

S/RES/1973 (2011),
pp. 14

[U]rges the Government of the [affected country] to ensure the full implementation of its “zero-tolerance policy” with
respect to discipline and human rights violations, including sexual and gender-based violence, committed by elements
of the [armed forces] and further urges that all reports of such violations be thoroughly investigated, with the support of
[the mission], and that all those responsible be brought to justice through a robust and independent process.
Affirms its strong opposition to impunity for serious violations of international humanitarian law and human rights law
and emphasizes in this context the responsibility of States to comply with their relevant obligations to end impunity and
to thoroughly investigate and prosecute persons responsible for war crimes, genocide, crimes against humanity or other
serious violations of international humanitarian law in order to prevent violations, avoid their recurrence and seek
sustainable peace, justice, truth and reconciliation.

S/RES/1906 (2009),
op. 11

Reiterates its call upon the [national] authorities to put an end to impunity, including by bringing to justice without delay
perpetrators of grave violations of human rights and of international humanitarian law, and to take into account when

S/RES/1756 (2007),
op. 12

S/RES/1894 (2009),
op. 10

See also, for example,
S/RES/2113 (2013),
pp21; S/RES/2111
(2013), pp. 6;
S/RES/2102 (2013), op.
8; S/PRST/2013/2 (2013),
par. 8; S/RES/2078
(2012), pp. 10 and op. 19;
S/RES/2071 (2012), pp.
14; S/RES/2067 (2012),
pp. 17 and op. 15;
S/RES/2027 (2011), op.
10; S/RES/2000 (2011),
pp. 15; S/RES/1975
(2011), pp. 11;
S/RES/1959 (2010), op.
11S/RES/1952 (2010),
op. 12; S/RES/1906
(2009), op. 3;
S/RES/1902 (2009), pp.
11 and op. 18;
S/RES/1863 (2009), pp.
10; S/RES/1828 (2008),
pp. 8; S/RES/1826
(2008), pp. 9;
S/RES/1816 (2008),
op. 11; S/RES/1769
(2007), pp. 12;
S/RES/1674 (2006), op. 8
and op. 11; S/RES/1591
(2005), pp. 5;
S/RES/1577 (2004), op.
2; S/RES/1565 (2004),
op. 19; S/RES/1564
(2004), pp. 9 and op. 7;
S/RES/1556 (2004), pp.
10 and op. 6; S/RES/1479
(2003), op. 8;
S/RES/1468 (2003), op.
2; S/RES/1296 (2000),
op. 17; S/RES/1291

S/PRST/2014/3

51/80

Reiterating that all perpetrators of [violations of international humanitarian and human rights law
perpetrated in the affected country] must be held accountable and that some of those acts may amount to
crimes under the Rome Statute of the International Criminal Court (ICC), to which the [affected country]
is a State party, recalling in this regard the statement made by the Prosecutor o f the ICC on [date],

Establishment of
ad hoc judicial
mechanisms and
commissions of
inquiry

14-01143

Strongly condemns the acts of violence systematically perpetrated against civilians, including the massacres, as well as
other atrocities and violations of international humanitarian law and human rights, in particular, sexual violence against
women and girls, stresses the need to bring to justice those responsible, including those at the command level, and urges
all parties, including [the affected State], to take all necessary steps to prevent further violations of human rights and
international humanitarian law, in particular those committed against civilians.

S/RES/1493 (2003),
op. 8

Reaffirms that all parties to the conflict are bound to comply with their obligations under international humanitarian law
and in particular the Geneva Conventions of 12 August 1949, and that persons who commit or order the commission of
grave breaches of the Conventions are individually responsible in respect of such breaches.

S/RES/1193 (1998),
op. 12

Underscoring the importance of transitional justice mechanisms in promoting lasting reconciliation
among all the people of [the affected country], taking note of the draft law on the Truth and
Reconciliation Commission developed by the Government … and passed to Parliament on [date], and
recalling in this context the commitment of the Government … to establishing transitional justice
mechanisms consistent with the results of the … nati onal consultations, [relevant] Security Council
resolution … as well as the [relevant Agreement]

S/RES/2090 (2013),
pp. 8

Urges the [National] Government to pass legislation on transitional justice to support reconciliation
without further delay;

S/RES/2051 (2012),
op. 10

Expressing concern about the violent events of [date] and welcoming the Government …’s
establishment of a Special Independent Commission of Inquiry to investigate the events and determine
the facts and circumstances through independent and impartial proceedings that meet international
standards, in order to hold accountable those responsible,

S/RES/2025 (2011),
pp. 11

Calls upon all parties to fully cooperate with the independent international commission of inqu iry put
in place by the Human Rights Council [date] to investigate the facts and circumstances surrounding
the allegations of serious abuses and violations of human rights committed in [the affected country]
…, and requests the Secretary-General to transmit this report to the Security Council and other
relevant international bodies

S/RES/1975 (2011),
op. 8

Decides that all States shall cooperate fully with the [ad hoc judicial mechanism] … and that
consequently all States shall take any measures necessary under their domestic law to implement the
provisions of the … resolution [instituting the ad hoc judicial mechanism] and the Statute of the
Mechanism, including the obligation of States to comply with requests for assistance or orders issued
by the Mechanism pursuant to its Statute;

S/RES/1966 (2010),
op. 9

Recalls that accountability for … serious crimes must be ensured by taking measures at the national level, and by
enhancing international cooperation in support of national mechanisms, draws attention to the full range of justice and
reconciliation mechanisms to be considered, including national, international and “mixed” criminal courts and
tribunals, and truth and reconciliation commissions, as well as national reparation programs for victims and institutional
reforms; and underlines the Security Council’s role in ending impunity.

S/RES/1894 (2009),
op. 11

Requests that the Secretary-General rapidly establish an international commission of inquiry in order immediately to
investigate reports of violations of international humanitarian law and human rights law … by all parties, to determine
also whether or not acts of genocide have occurred, and to identify the perpetrators of such violations with a view to
ensuring that those responsible are held accountable, calls on all parties to cooperate fully with such a commission …

S/RES/1564 (2004),
op. 12

(2000), op. 15; and
S/RES/1289 (2000), op.
17.

See also, for example,
S/RES/2112 (2013), op.
16; S/RES/2097 (2013),
pp. 8; S/PRST/2013/2
(2013), par. 8 and 9;
S/RES/2027 (2011), op.
12; S/RES/2014 (2011),
pp. 7; S/RES/1948
(2010), op. 3;
S/RES/1902 (2009),
op. 17; S/RES/1888
(2009), pp. 8; and
S/RES/1674 (2006), op.
7.

S/PRST/2014/3

52/80

they select candidates for official positions, including key posts in the armed forces, national police and other security
services, the candidates’ past actions in terms of respect for international humanitarian law and human rights.

14-01143

Referral of
situations involving
genocide, crimes
against humanity or
war crimes to, and
cooperation with,
the International
Criminal Court

S/RES/1265 (1999),
op. 6

Decides hereby, having received the request of [the affected State], to establish an international tribunal for the sole
purpose of prosecuting persons responsible for genocide and other serious violations of international humanitarian law
committed in the territory [of the affected State] and citizens [of the affected State] responsible for genocide and other
such violations committed in the territory of neighboring States between [dates] ….

S/RES/955 (1994),
op. 1

Decides hereby to establish an international tribunal for the sole purpose of prosecuting persons responsible for serious
violations of international humanitarian law committed in the territory of [the affected State] between [dates] ….

S/RES/827 (1993),
op. 2

… encouraging the Government … to continue its close cooperation with the International Criminal
Court,

S/RES/2101 (2013),
pp. 16

Reiterating, in this regard, that all perpetrators of … acts [of violence in vio lation of IHL and human
rights law] must be held accountable and that some of such acts referred to in [relevant provision] may
amount to crimes under the Rome Statute and taking note that the … authorities of [the affected
country] referred the situation in [the affected country] since [date] to the International Criminal Court
on [date] and that the Prosecutor of the International Criminal Court opened, on [date], an
investigation into alleged crimes committed on the territory of [the affected country] si nce [date],

S/RES/2100 (2013),
pp. 10

The Security Council notes that the fight against impunity and accountability for the most serious
crimes of international concern has been strengthened through the work on and prosecution of these
crimes in the International Criminal Court, in accordance with the Rome Statute, in ad hoc and
“mixed” tribunals as well as specialized chambers in national tribunals. In this regard, the Security
Council reiterates its previous call on the importance of State cooperation with these courts and
tribunals in accordance with the states' respective obligations, and expresses its commitment to an
effective follow up of Council decisions in this regard. The Council intends to forcefully continue to
fight impunity and also draws attention to the full range of justice and reconciliation mechanisms,
including truth and reconciliation commissions, national reparation programmes and institutional and
legal reforms, including guarantees of non-recurrence. The Council reaffirms its readiness to adopt
appropriate measures aimed at those who violate international humanitarian law and human rights law.

S/PRST/2013/2
(2013), par. 9

Stresses the importance of the [affected] Government actively seeking to hold accountable those
responsible for war crimes and crimes against humanity in the country and of regional cooperation to
this end, including through its ongoing cooperation with the International Criminal Court and
encourages [the mission] to use its existing authority to assist the [aff ected] Government in this
regard;

S/RES/2078 (2012),
op. 19

Decides that the … authorities [of the affected country] shall cooperate fully with and provide any
necessary assistance to the Court and the Prosecutor pursuant to [resolution referring the si tuation to
the ICC] and, while recognizing that States not party to the Rome Statute have no obligation under the
Statute, urges all States and concerned regional and other international organizations to cooperate fully
with the Court and the Prosecutor;

S/RES/1970 (2011),
op. 5

See also, for example,
S/RES/2112 (2013), pp.
13; S/RES/2098 (2013),
pp. 20; S/RES/2095
(2013), pp. 6 and op. 4;
S/RES/1991 (2011), op.
19; S/RES/1970 (2011),
op. 4; S/RES/1906
(2009), pp. 10.

53/80

S/PRST/2014/3

Emphasizes the responsibility of States to end impunity and to prosecute those responsible for genocide, crimes against
humanity and serious violations of international humanitarian law, affirms the possibility, to this end, of using the
International Fact-Finding Commission established by Article 90 of the First Additional Protocol to the Geneva
Conventions …

14-01143

S/RES/1925 (2010),
pp. 12

Acting under Chapter VII of the Charter of the United Nations, Decides to refer the situation … to the Prosecutor of the
International Criminal Court; Decides that [the affected State] and all other parties to the conflict … shall cooperate
fully with and provide any necessary assistance to the Court and the Prosecutor pursuant to this resolution and, while
recognizing that States not party to the Rome Statute have no obligation under the Statute, urges all States and
concerned regional and other international organizations to cooperate fully; Invites the Court and [relevant regional
organizations] to discuss practical arrangements that will facilitate the work of the Prosecutor and of the Court,
including the possibility of conducting proceedings in the region, which would contribute to regional efforts in the fight
against impunity.

S/RES/1593 (2005),
op. 1-3

Expressing deep concern at the security situation in the [affected country], characterized by a total
breakdown in law and order, the absence of the rule of law and further expressing its grave concern
about the consequences of instability in the [affected country], on the … region and beyond, and
stressing in this regard the need to respond swiftly,

S/RES/2121 (2013),
pp.3

Stressing in this context the importance of further progress by the … Government in ending impunity
and strengthening judicial institutions, in the reconstruction and reform of the prison sector, and the
rule of law and respect for human rights within [the affected country], including for women and girls,
… and welcoming, in this regard, the National Police Plan and the objectives set therein for increased
training in human rights, including gender issues …

S/RES/2120 (2013),
pp.28

Reiterates the importance of the full, sequenced, timely and coordinated implementation of [national
justice programs], by all the relevant [national] institutions and other actors in view of accelerating the
establishment of a fair and transparent justice system, eliminating impunity and contributing to the
affirmation of the rule of law throughout the country;

S/RES/2041 (2012),
op. 37

Recognizing that strengthening national human rights institutions and respect for human rights, due
process, combating criminality and sexual and gender based violence, and putting an end to impunity
are essential to ensuring the rule of law and security in [the affected country],

S/RES/2012 (2011),
pp. 18

Calls upon the Government to take the necessary steps to re-establish and reinforce relevant
institutions, including the judiciary, police and corrections services, and further to ensure the effective
protection of human rights and accountability for all perpetrators of human rights violations and
abuses in [the affected country].

S/RES/2000 (2011),
op. 10

Welcomes the steps taken towards the reform of rule of law institutions, requests [the mission] to continue to provide
necessary support in this regard, and encourages the … authorities [of the affected country] to take full advantage of
that support, notably in modernizing key legislation and in the implementation of the justice reform plan, to take the
necessary steps, including nominations, that will allow superior judicial institutions to function adequately, and to
address the issue of prolonged pretrial detentions and prison overcrowding, with special regard to children.

S/RES/1892 (2009),
op. 15

[I]nvites [the affected State], with the assistance of the international community, to continue to work towards the
establishment of a fair and transparent justice system, including the reconstruction and reform of the correctional
system, in order to strengthen the rule of law throughout the country and eliminate impunity …

S/RES/1746 (2007),
op. 13

S/PRST/2014/3

54/80

Restoration of the
rule of law

Welcoming the commitments made by the Government of the [affected country] to hold accountable those responsible
for atrocities in the country, noting the cooperation of the Government of [the affected country] with the International
Criminal Court, and stressing the importance of actively seeking to hold accountable those responsible for war crimes
and crimes against humanity in the country and of regional cooperation to this end.

See also, for example,
S/RES/2116 (2013),
op.19; S/RES/2070
(2012), pp. 25;
S/RES/2067 (2012), op.
11; S/RES/2066 (2012),
op. 8 and op. 18;
S/RES/2012 (2011), pp.
21 and pp. 23;
S/RES/1917 (2010),
op. 33; S/RES/1906
(2009), op. 3;
S/RES/1896 (2009), pp.
11; S/RES/1892 (2009),
pp. 7 and pp. 9; and
S/RES/1868 (2009), pp.
15 and op. 23.

14-01143

Disarmament,
demobilization and
reintegration

Security sector
reform

S/RES/1702 (2006),
pp. 9

Calls upon all parties concerned to ensure that all peace processes, peace agreements and post-conflict recovery and
reconstruction planning … include specific measures for the protection of civilians including … (v) the reestablishment of the rule of law ….

S/RES/1674 (2006),
op. 11

Demands that [specific armed group] elements and all other armed groups lay down their arms
immediately and urges them to participate in disarmament, demobilization and reintegration
programmes (DDR) or disarmament, demobilization, repatriation, resettlement and reintegration
programmes (DDRRR);

S/RES/2121 (2013),
op.8

… urges the Government to implement expeditiously the disarmament and demobilization of [figure]
former combatants by the end of [year] and to complet e the process by [year] … and, in this regard,
emphasizes the need to develop solutions for the sustained social and economic integration of former
combatants, including former female combatants, and further encourages the UNCT to facilitate the
planning and implementation of programmes which support this process, in consultation with [the
Mission] and the Government and in close collaboration with all international partners;

S/RES/2112 (2013),
op. 11

Underlines the urgent need for continued progress in addressing the threat of foreign and national
armed groups, including through further progress in the DDRRR process, urges the international
community and donors to support the Government of [the affected country] and [the mission] in
DDRRR activities, calls upon the Government of [the affected country] and neighbouring States to
remain engaged in the process and urges the Government to make progress on the national programme
for disarmament, demobilization and reintegration (DDR) of residual [National] arm ed elements in
[affected areas], with the support of [the mission];

S/RES/2053 (2012),
op. 22

[S]tressing … the urgency of implementing comprehensive security sector reform and of achieving as appropriate the
disarmament, demobilization, reintegration (DDR) of [national] armed groups, and the disarmament, demobilization,
repatriation, resettlement and reintegration (DDRRR) of foreign armed groups for the long-term stabilization of the
[affected country], considering the need to create the security conditions for ensuring sustainable economic
development, and stressing the importance of the contribution made by international partners in these fields.

S/RES/1925 (2010),
pp. 4

[S]tressing the importance of permanently disarming, demobilizing, resettling or repatriating, as appropriate, and
reintegrating [national] and foreign armed groups for the long-term stabilization of the [affected country], and of the
contribution made by international partners in this field.

S/RES/1906 (2009),
pp. 3

[U]rges the … parties to make further progress to advance the reunification and disarmament processes, and
encourages the international donors to continue to provide their support to them, as appropriate.

S/RES/1880 (2009),
op. 13

Decides that until [date] the arms embargo on [country] shall not apply to deliveries of weapons or
military equipment or the provision of advice, assistance or training, intended solely for the
development of the Security Forces [the affected country], to provide secu rity for the … people [of the
affected country], except in relation to deliveries of the items set out in [annex to the resolution];

S/RES/2111 (2013),
op. 6

Reiterates the importance of increasing, in a comprehensive framework, the functionality, professionalism and
accountability of the [affected country’s] security sector through appropriate vetting procedures, training, mentoring,
equipping and empowerment efforts, for both women and men, in order to accelerate progress towards the goal of self-

S/RES/2096 (2013),
op. 24

See also, for example,
S/RES/2101 (2013), pp.
8; S/RES/2088 (2013),
op.12; S/RES/2062
(2012), pp. 6;
S/RES/2031 (2011), op.
7; S/RES/1991 (2011),
op. 15

See also, for example,
S/RES/2121 (2013),
op.17; S/RES/2120
(2013), pp.12;
S/RES/2112 (2013), pp. 9
and pp. 10; S/RES/2103
(2013), op. 9;

S/PRST/2014/3

55/80

Urging [the affected State] to undertake, in coordination with the international community, a comprehensive reform of
the police, judiciary and correctional systems, to protect and promote human rights and fundamental freedoms, and to
end impunity.

Underlining the importance of capacity-building of the Security Forces of the … Government … and
in this regard, reaffirming the importance of the re-establishment, training, equipping and retention of
[national] security forces, which is vital for the long -term stability and security of [the affected
country], expressing support for the ongoing … [international] capacity-building programmes, and
emphasizing the importance of increased coordinated, timely and sustained support from the
international community,

S/RES/2093 (2013),
pp. 6

Underscores the importance of security sector reform and urges all international partners, together
with [the Mission], to continue supporting [the affected country]’s efforts to professionalize and
enhance the capacity of the national security services and the police, in particular through vetting for
human rights violations, training on human rights and sexual and gender-based violence and
promoting strong civilian oversight and monitoring, with the view to consolidating security sector
governance;

S/RES/2090 (2013),
op. 11

Underlines the need for an overall [National] SSR strategy that focuses on the professionalization of
security sector institutions, including oversight bodies, and that helps to ensure coherence and
efficiency and avoid duplications or gaps, encourages at the same time the Government of [the
affected country], to engage in a new strategic partnership with [the mission] in the area of SSR in
order to identify the priorities of each component of the security sector and possible new approaches
for [the mission] to support [National] authorities in the area of SSR to build the capacit y of the
military, police, justice and other security institutions to consolidate [National] State authority, and
requests the Secretary- General to report on these priorities and approaches in an annex to his report in
[date of the report];

S/RES/2053 (2012),
op. 9

Stressing the importance of Security Sector Reform implementation, including effective and
responsible civilian control over the security forces, as a crucial element for long term stability in [the
affected country], as envisaged in [the relevant document] and underlining the responsibility of police
forces in [the affected country] to protect state institutions and the civilian population,

S/RES/2048 (2012),
pp. 12

We l c o m e s the resumption of training and promotions of recruits for t he … National Police,
stresses the necessity of accountability and a robust vetting process and underscores the vital
importance of maintaining and increasing the international community’s support for capacity -building
of the [national police], particularly through enhanced mentoring and training of specialized units;

S/RES/2012 (2011),
op. 10

Reiterates its call upon the … authorities [of the affected state], with the support of [the mission], to establish an
effective vetting mechanism, in accordance with international standards, for the [armed forces] and the national security
forces, to ensure the exclusion of those persons associated with violations of international humanitarian law and human
rights abuses and to trigger the judicial process against such persons where appropriate.

S/RES/1906 (2009),
op. 32

Calls on the … Government to develop … the legal and policy framework for the operation of its security forces including
governance, vetting and oversight mechanisms, ensuring respect for the rule of law and the protection of human rights.

S/RES/1872 (2009),
op. 10

S/RES/2093 (2013), pp.
12; S/RES/2076 (2012),
op. 17; S/RES/2069
(2012), pp. 12, op. 4 and
op. 6; S/RES/2031
(2011), op. 9;
S/RES/2030 (2011), op.
5; S/RES/2000 (2011),
pp. 9; S/RES/1991
(2011), op. 2;
S/RES/1974 (2010), pp.
22; S/RES/1959 (2010),
op. 8; S/RES/1949
(2010), pp. 7;
S/RES/1925 (2010), op.
5; S/RES/1906 (2009),
pp. 3. op. 3 and op. 4;
S/RES/1896 (2009),
pp. 10; and S/RES/1872
(2009), pp. 9.

S/PRST/2014/3

56/80

sufficient and ethnically balanced [affected country’s] security forces providing security and ensuring the rule of law
throughout the country, and stresses the importance of the long-term commitment by the international community,
beyond [year], to ensure a capable, professional and sustainable … national security force

14-01143

14-01143

Role of United
Nations
peacekeeping
missions and other
relevant actors in
restoring the rule of
law and promoting
accountability

S/RES/2121 (2013),
op. 10

Strongly urges the Government to ensure in the shortest possible timeframe that, irrespective of their
status or political affiliation, all those responsible for serious abuses of human rights and violations of
international humanitarian law, including those committed during and after … crisis in [the af fected
country], are brought to justice in accordance with its international obligations and that all detainees
receive clarity about their status in a transparent manner, and urges the Government to continue its
cooperation with the International Criminal Court;

S/RES/2112 (2013),
op. 15

… urges the [national] authorities to take all necessary measures to protect human rights, put an end to
impunity, initiate investigations to identify the perpetrators of such acts and bring them to justice and
take action to protect witnesses in order to ensure due process; urges them to take steps to mitigate the
climate of fear resulting from restrictions on freedom of expression and freedom of assembly;

S/RES/2103 (2013),
op. 6

Authorizes [the Mission], through its military component, in pursuit of the objectives described in
[relevant provision], to take all necessary measures to perform the following tasks, through its regular
forces and its Intervention Brigade as appropriate; - (d) Provision of support to national and
international judicial processes - Support and work with the Government … to arrest and bring to
justice those responsible for war crimes and crimes against humanity in the country, including through
cooperation with States of the region and the ICC;

S/RES/2098 (2013),
op. 12

Calls upon [the mission], where consistent with its authorities and responsibilities, to continue to
support national and international efforts to bring to justice perpetrators of grave abuses of human
rights and violations of international humanitarian law in [the affected country], irrespective of their
status or political affiliation;

S/RES/2062 (2012),
op. 13

Encourages the Government of [the affected country] to ratify and implement key international human
rights treaties and conventions, including those related to women and children, refugees, and
statelessness, and requests [the mission], with other United Nations actors, to advise and assist the
Government of [the affected country] in this regard;

S/RES/2057 (2012),
op. 13

Requests [the mission] to continue to provide interim law enforcement and ensure the maintenance of
public security in those districts and units in which the [national police] has yet to resume primary
policing responsibilities, and, following [national police’s] resumption of primary policing
responsibilities, to provide operational support to the [national police] …

S/RES/1969 (2011),
op. 8

Requests that [the mission] focuses on and supports the Government of [the affected country] in the
following areas: (a) Strengthening the independence, capacities and legal frameworks of key national
institutions, in particular judicial and parliamentary institutions, in line with international standards and
principles; … (c) Supporting efforts to fight impunity, particularly through the establishment of
transitional justice mechanisms …, and providing operational support to the functioning of these bodies

S/RES/1959 (2010),
op. 3

Decides that [the mission] shall have the following mandate in this order of priority: Protection of civilians (c) Support
the efforts of the Government of the [affected country] to ensure the protection of civilians from violations of
international humanitarian law and human rights abuses, including all forms of sexual and gender-based violence, to

S/RES/1925 (2010),
op. 12 (c), (d), (l),
(o) and (p)

See also, for example,
S/RES/2119 (2013),
op.14; S/RES/2109
(2013), op. 15 and op. 22;
S/RES/2102 (2013), op.
2; S/RES/2100 (2013),
op. 16 and op. 27;
S/RES/2095 (2013), op.
7; S/RES/2090 (2013),
op. 7; S/RES/2066
(2012), op. 8;
S/RES/2062 (2012), op.
13; S/RES/2027 (2011),
op. 9 and op. 11;
S/RES/1996 (2011), op. 3
and op. 18; S/RES/1936
(2010), pp. 7;
S/RES/1927 (2010), op.
6; S/RES/1923 (2010),
op. 8; S/RES/1906
(2009), op. 39;
S/RES/1892 (2009), op.
10; S/RES/1890 (2009),
op. 4; S/RES/1872
(2009), op. 9;
S/RES/1868 (2009), op.
4; S/RES/1756 (2007),
op. 3;
S/RES/1589 (2005),
op. 9; S/RES/1564
(2004), op. 9;
S/RES/1547 (2004),
op. 4; and S/RES/1528
(2004), op. 6.

S/PRST/2014/3

57/80

Decides that the mandate of [the Mission] shall be reinforced and updated as follows: Promotion and
protection of human rights: — To help strengthen the capacities of the judicial system, including
transitional justice mechanisms, and of the national human rights institutions and assist with national
reconciliation efforts;

S/PRST/2014/3

58/80

promote and protect human rights and to fight impunity, including through the implementation of the Government’s
“zero-tolerance policy” with respect to discipline and human rights and humanitarian law violations, committed by
elements of the security forces, in particular its newly integrated elements; (d) Support national and international efforts
to bring perpetrators to justice, including by establishing Prosecution Support Cells to assist the … military justice
authorities in prosecuting persons arrested by the [military forces]; Stabilization and peace consolidation (l) Taking fully
into account the leading role of the Government of the [affected country], support, in close cooperation with other
international partners, the efforts of the [national] authorities to strengthen and reform security and judicial institutions;
(o) Develop and implement, in close consultation with the [national] authorities …, a multi-year joint United Nations
justice support programme in order to develop the criminal justice chain, the police, the judiciary and prisons in
conflict-affected areas and a strategic programmatic support at the central level … (p) Support, in close cooperation
with other international partners, the efforts by the Government [of the affected country] to consolidate State authority
in the territory freed from armed groups through the deployment of trained [national police forces], and to develop rule
of law institutions and territorial administration …

Role of United
Nations
peacekeeping
missions and other
relevant actors in
disarmament,
demobilization and
reintegration
programmes and in
security sector
reforms
14-01143

Requests [the mission] to continue to contribute … to the promotion and protection of human rights in [the affected
country], with special attention to violence committed against children and women, to monitor and help investigate
human rights violations with a view to ending impunity …, and further requests the Secretary-General to continue to
include in his reports to the Security Council relevant information on progress in this area.

S/RES/1880 (2009),
op. 26

Decides that [the peacekeeping mission], consistent with its existing mandate … [will] assist with the restructuring and
maintenance of the rule of law, public safety and public order, will provide assistance and advice to the [national
authorities], in consultation with relevant actors, in monitoring, restructuring, reforming and strengthening of the justice
sector, including through technical assistance to review all relevant legislation, the provision of experts to serve as
professional resources, the rapid identification and implementation of mechanisms to address prison overcrowding and
prolonged pre-trial detention and the coordination and planning of these activities, and invites [the affected State] to
take full advantage of that assistance.

S/RES/1702 (2006),
op. 14

Underlines the importance of civilian police as a component of peacekeeping operations, recognizes the role of police
in assuring the safety and well-being of civilians and, in this regard, acknowledges the need to enhance the capacity of
the United Nations for the rapid deployment of qualified and well-trained civilian police.

S/RES/1265 (1999),
op. 15

Decides that the mandate of [the Mission] shall be the following: … (c) Disarmament, demobilization
and reintegration programme (DDR) and collection of weapons: – To assist the Government, in close
coordination with other bilateral and international partners, in implementing without further delay the
new national programme for the disarmament, demobilization and reintegration of former combatants
and dismantling of militias and self-defence groups, taking into account rights and needs o f the
distinct categories of persons to be disarmed, demobilized and reintegrated, including children and
women; – To support the registration and screening of former combatants and assist in assessing and
verifying the reliability of the listings of former combatants; – To support the disarmament and
repatriation of foreign armed elements, where relevant in cooperation with [Mission in neighbouring
country] and United Nations Country Teams in the region; – To assist the national authorities,
including [relevant institution], in collecting, registering, securing and disposing of weapons and in
clearing explosive remnants of war, as appropriate, in accordance with [relevant] resolution …; – To
coordinate with the Government in ensuring that the collected weap ons are not disseminated or

S/RES/2112 (2013),
op. 6

See also, for example,
S/RES/2121 (2013),
op.10; S/RES/2112
(2013), op. 8, op. 11 and
op. 12; S/RES/2109
(2013), op. 24;
S/RES/2100 (2013), op.
22 and op. 23;
S/RES/2085 (2012), op. 8
and op. 9; S/RES/2053
(2012), op. 8, op. 9, op.
10, op. 11 and op. 22;
S/RES/2040 (2012), op.

14-01143

re-utilized outside a comprehensive national security strategy … (d) Reconstitution and reform of
security institutions: – To assist the Government in implementing, without delay and in close
coordination with other international partners, its comprehensive national security strategy, – To
support the Government in providing effective, transparent and harmonized coordination of
assistance, including the promotion of a clear division of tasks and responsibilities, by internation al
partners to the security sector reform (SSR) process, – To advise the Government, as appropriate, on
security sector reform and the organization of the future National Army, to facilitate the provision of
training, within its current resources and as requested by the Government and in close coordination
with other international partners, in human rights, child protection and protection from sexual and
gender-based violence to the security and law enforcement institutions, as well as capacity -building
support by providing technical assistance, co-location and mentoring programmes for the police,
gendarmerie, justice and corrections officers and to contribute to restoring their presence throughout
[the affected country] and to offer support to the development of a sustainable vetting mechanism for
personnel that will be absorbed into security sector institutions,

6; S/RES/2030 (2011),
op. 6; S/RES/2027
(2011), op. 6;
S/RES/2012 (2011), op.
9; S/RES/2000 (2011),
op. 7 e) and f);
S/RES/1996 (2011), op.
3; S/RES/1991 (2011),
op. 11 and op. 12;
S/RES/1964 (2010), op.
6, op. 8, op. 11 and op.
12; S/RES/1880 (2009),
op. 27.
S/RES/2098 (2013),
op. 15

… urges all international partners, together with [the Mission], to continue supporting [the affected
country]’s efforts to professionalize and enhance the capacity of the national security services and the
police, in particular through vetting for human rights violations, training on human rights and sexual
and gender-based violence and promoting strong civilian oversight and monitoring, with the view to
consolidating security sector governance;

S/RES/2090 (2013),
op. 11

Urges the [National] Government to develop and implement expeditiously a national DDR
programme, with clear and strict eligibility criteria, new secure and transparent database, the creation
of a central authority to oversee all DDR aspects, and find solutions for sustained social and economic
integration of former combatants, further encourages the United Nations Country Team to facilitate
the planning and the implementation of programmes which support this process, in consultation with
the [National] Government and close collaboration with all international partners;

S/RES/2062 (2012),
op. 7

Reaffirms the importance that the Government of [the affected country] continues the review and
reform of the security sector in [the affected country], in particular the need to delineate between the
roles and responsibilities of [the national security forces of the affected country], to strengthen legal
frameworks, and to enhance civilian oversight and accountability mechanisms of both security
institutions, supports the efforts of the SRSG to promote Security Sector professionalization and
requests [the mission] to continue to support the Governmen t of [the affected country], as requested, in
its efforts in the country;

S/RES/2037 (2012),
op. 4

S/PRST/2014/3

59/80

Authorizes [the Mission], through its civilian component, to contribute, in coordination with the
UNCT …, to the following tasks: (d) Provide good offices, advice and support to the Government …
for the design of a single overarching DDR and DDRRR plan for foreign and [national] combatants
not suspected of genocide, war crimes, crimes against humanity or gross violations of human rights,
including members of the [national armed forces], and support, when appropriate, the implementation
of this plan; (f) Provide good offices, advice and support to the Government … for the reform of the
police, including by contributing, in compliance with the HRDDP, to the provision of training to
battalions of the … National Police;

S/RES/1991 (2011),
op.4

Encourages [the mission], consistent with its mandate, and within authorized levels of civilian police, to continue efforts
to assist the parties to the [peace agreement] in promoting the rule of law, restructuring the police and corrections
services throughout [the affected country], particularly in the [region of the affected country] due to lack of
development of the police services, and assisting in the training of civilian police and corrections officers.

S/RES/1919 (2010),
op. 17

Encourages [the mission] to work closely with the [national] Armed Forces … to reinvigorate the disarmament,
demobilization, and reintegration (DDR) process and to assist in voluntary disarmament and weapons collection and
destruction efforts in implementation of DDR … and to ensure the timely provisions of sustainable reintegration
programmes, which will help to promote continued and enhanced funding support from donors for the reintegration
phase, and to coordinate with local authorities and with the United Nations agencies programmes and funds, initiatives
that strengthen DDR with the creation of economic opportunities for reintegrated individuals and further urges donors
to respond to calls for assistance to the DDR process, in particular the reintegration phase, and calls on donors to honour
all obligations and pledges of assistance, and takes note in this context of the need to also assist the victims in conflictaffected communities.

S/RES/1919 (2010),
op. 18

Requests the Secretary-General to continue to assist the Government [of the affected country] in developing the
transitional security institutions, including the [national] police force, and the national security force, and to continue to
support the Government [of the affected country] in developing a national security strategy, which reflects respect for
the rule of law and the protection of human rights, including plans for disarmament, demobilization and reintegration
(DDR), justice and corrections capacities, as well as the legal and policy framework for the operation of its security
forces including governance, vetting and oversight mechanisms.

S/RES/1910 (2010),
op. 12

Further requests [the mission] to provide military training, including in the area of human rights, international
humanitarian law, child protection and the prevention of gender-based and sexual violence, to the [armed forces] …, as
part of broader international efforts to support security sector reform.

S/RES/1906 (2009),
op. 31

Requests [the mission] … to also continue to contribute … to assist the Government of [the affected country] in
restoring a civilian policing presence throughout [the affected country], and to advise the Government of [the affected
country] on the restructuring of the internal security services and in re-establishing the authority of the judiciary and the
rule of law throughout [the affected country].

S/RES/1880 (2009),
op. 27

S/PRST/2014/3

60/80

Reiterates that future reconfigurations of [the mission] should be determined on the basis of the
evolution of the situation on the ground and on the achi evement of the following objectives to be
pursued by the Government of the [affected country] and the United Nations Mission: … (b) An
improved capacity of the Government … to effectively protect the population through the
establishment of professional, accountable and sustainable security forces with a view to progressively
taking over [the mission]’s security role.

G. Media and information
Protection of
journalists

14-01143

Calls for full respect for and protection for all human rights and fundamental freedoms, including
those of human rights defenders, and of international humanitarian law throughout [the affected
country], welcomes the growth in … free media, but notes with concern the continued restrictions on
freedom of media, and attacks against journalists …

S/RES/2096 (2013),
op. 42

The Security Council expresses deep concern about acts of violence against journalists, media
professionals and associated personnel in armed conflict, in particular deliberate attacks in violation of

S/PRST/2013/2
(2013), par. 16

See also S/RES/1738
(2006), p.p. 11, o.p. 1 and
op. 2.

14-01143

international humanitarian law, and calls upon all parties to armed conflict to p ut an end to such
practice. The Security Council recalls in this regard that journalists, media professionals and
associated personnel engaged in dangerous professional missions in areas of armed conflict shall be
considered as civilians and shall be respected and protected as such, provided that they take no action
adversely affecting their status as civilians. The Security Council recalls its demand that all parties to
an armed conflict comply fully with the obligations applicable to them under internatio nal law related
to the protection of civilians in armed conflict, including journalists, media professionals and
associated personnel.
Recalls the obligation of the … Government … with respect to the protection of journalis ts, the
prevention of violence against them, and the fight against impunity for perpetrators of such acts;

S/RES/2093 (2013),
op. 30

Condemns the use of [national television channel] and other media to incite discrimination, hostility,
hatred and violence, including against [relevant UN Mission], as well as acts of intimidation and
violence against journalists, and calls for the lifting of all restrictions placed on the exercise of the
right of freedom of expression in [the affected country];

S/RES/1975 (2011),
op. 9

Further condemning acts of violence and intimidation committed by the authorities [of the affected
country] against journalists, media professionals and associated personnel and urging these authorities
to comply with their obligations under international humanitarian law as outlined in [relevant
resolution]

S/RES/1973 (2011),
pp. 6

Condemns intentional attacks against journalists, media professionals and associated personnel, as such, in situations of
armed conflict, and calls upon all parties to put an end to such practices.

S/RES/1738 (2006),
op. 1

Recalls … that journalists, media professionals and associated personnel engaged in dangerous professional missions in
areas of armed conflict shall be considered as civilians and shall be respected and protected as such, provided that they
take no action adversely affecting their status as civilians. This is without prejudice to the right of war correspondents
accredited to the armed forces to the status of prisoners of war provided for in article 4(A)(4) of the Third Geneva
Convention.

S/RES/1738 (2006),
op. 2

Recalls … that media equipment and installations constitute civilian objects, and in this respect shall not be the object of
attack or of reprisals, unless they are military objectives.

S/RES/1738 (2006),
op. 3

Urges States and all other parties to an armed conflict to do their utmost to prevent violations of international
humanitarian law against civilians, including journalists, media professionals and associated personnel.

S/RES/1738 (2006),
op. 6

S/PRST/2014/3

61/80

Accurate
management of
information on the
conflict

Decides that [affected States] shall take the following actions with immediate effect unless otherwise
specified below: (vi) Immediately cease hostile propaganda and inflammatory statemen ts in the media
…

S/RES/2046 (2012),
op. 1

Condemning unequivocally all provocative action and statements that constitute incitement to
discrimination, hostility, hatred and violence made by any party,

S/RES/1975 (2011),
pp. 8

Underlines that it is fully prepared to impose targeted measures against persons to be designated by the
[sanction] Committee … who are determined to be, among other things: … (e) Inciting publicly hatr ed
and violence …

S/RES/1946 (2010),
op. 6

Urges every [citizen of the affected State] to refrain from any call for hatred, intolerance and violence, notes with
interest that in his report … the Secretary-General encouraged the Security Council to impose targeted sanctions against
media actors who fan political tension and incite violence and reiterates that it is fully prepared to impose targeted
measures …, including among other things against persons who are determined to be a threat to the peace and national
reconciliation process in [the affected country] or to be publicly inciting hatred and violence.

S/RES/1933 (2010),
op. 10

Reaffirms its condemnation of all incitements to violence against civilians in situations of armed conflict, further
reaffirms the need to bring to justice, in accordance with applicable international law, individuals who incite such
violence, and indicates its willingness, when authorizing missions, to consider, where appropriate, steps in response to
media broadcast inciting genocide, crimes against humanity and serious violations of international humanitarian law.

S/RES/1738 (2006),
op. 4

Decides that all States shall take the necessary measures, for a period of twelve months, to prevent the entry into or
transit through their territories of all persons … who constitute a threat to the peace and national reconciliation process
in [the affected State], [including] any other person who incites publicly hatred and violence … provided that nothing in
this paragraph shall oblige a State to refuse entry into its territory to its own nationals.

S/RES/1572 (2004),
op. 9

Reaffirms its condemnation of all incitements to violence against civilians in situations of armed conflict, further
reaffirms the need to bring to justice individuals who incite or otherwise cause such violence, and indicates its
willingness, when authorizing missions, to consider, where appropriate, steps in response to media broadcasts inciting
genocide, crimes against humanity and serious violations of international humanitarian law.

S/RES/1296 (2000),
op. 17

Urges all parties involved in situations of armed conflict to respect the professional independence and rights of
journalists, media professionals and associated personnel as civilians.

S/RES/1738 (2006),
op. 8

Affirms that, where appropriate, United Nations peacekeeping missions should include a mass-media component that
can disseminate information about international humanitarian law and human rights law, including peace education and
children’s protection, while also giving objective information about the activities of the United Nations, and further
affirms that, where appropriate, regional peacekeeping operations should be encouraged to include such mass-media
components.

S/RES/1296 (2000),
op. 18

See also, for example,
S/RES/1962 (2010),
op. 12; S/RES/1727
(2006), op. 12.

S/PRST/2014/3

62/80

Countering
incitement to
violence

14-01143

14-01143

II. Specific protection concerns arising from Security Council discussions on children affected by armed conflict
Condemn, and call
for the cessation of,
violations against
children

S/RES/2120
(2013), pp.24

Demands that all parties immediately cease … violations and abuses against children in violation of
applicable international law such as their recruitment and use, killing and maiming, abduction and
attacks against schools and hospitals …

S/RES/2109
(2013), op. 14

Expresses its strong concern about the recruitment and use of children by [anti-government] forces in [the affected
country] as well as the killing and maiming of children as a result of the conflict, reiterates its strong condemnation of
the recruitment and use of child soldiers in violation of applicable international law and all other violations and abuses
committed against children in situations of armed conflict, in particular attacks against schools, education and
healthcare facilities, and the use of children in suicide attacks, calls for those responsible to be brought to justice …

S/RES/2096
(2013), op. 32

Noting with great concern the persistence of serious human rights abuses and humanitarian law
violations against civilians in [the affected area of the affected country], including … large scale
recruitment and use of child soldiers committed by [relevant armed groups],

S/RES/2078
(2012), pp. 9

Expressing its serious concern with the high number of civilian casualties in [ the affected country], in
particular … children casualties, the increasingly large majority of which are caused by [relevant
armed groups], condemning in the strongest terms the high number of attacks targeting schools,
including their burning and forced closure, their use by armed groups, and the intimidation, abduction
and killing of education personnel, particularly those attacks targeting girls’ education by armed
groups including [relevant armed groups] and welcoming, in this context, the listing of [relevant
armed groups] in the annex of the report of the Secretary-General on children and armed conflict in
[the affected country] pursuant to Security Council resolution 1998 (2011) …

S/RES/2069
(2012), pp. 24

Strongly condemns all violations of applicable international law involving the recruitment and use of children by
parties to armed conflict as well as their re-recruitment, killing and maiming, rape and other sexual violence,
abductions, attacks against schools or hospitals and denial of humanitarian access by parties to armed conflict and
demands that all relevant parties immediately put an end to such practices and take special measures to protect
children.

S/RES/2068
(2012), op. 2

Expressing deep concern about attacks as well as threats of attacks in contravention of applicable
international law against schools and/or hospitals, and protected persons in relation to them as well as
the closure of schools and hospitals in situations of armed conflict as a result of attacks and threats of
attacks, and calling upon all parties to armed conflict to immediately cease such attacks and threats.

S/RES/1998 (2011),
pp. 11

[S]trongly condemns continuing forms of discrimination and violence against women and girls, in particular violence
aimed at preventing girls from attending schools …

S/RES/1868
(2009), op. 29

See also, for example,
S/RES/2095 (2013), pp. 7;
S/RES/2068 (2012), pp. 7;
S/RES/2060 (2012), pp. 7;
S/RES/2057 (2012), op.
10; S/RES/2051 (2012),
op. 8; S/RES/2041 (2012),
op. 32; S/RES/2012
(2011), op. 16;
S/RES/1998 (2011), op. 1;
S/RES/1964 (2010), op.
16; S/RES/1944 (2010),
op. 14; S/RES/1892
(2009), op. 19;
S/RES/1882 (2009), op. 1;
S/RES/1840 (2008),
op. 21; S/RES/1806
(2008), op. 14;
S/RES/1780 (2007),
op. 17; S/RES/1539
(2004), op. 1; and
S/RES/1493 (2003), op.
13.

S/PRST/2014/3

63/80

Expressing its serious concern with the high number of civilian casualties in [the affected country], in
particular women and children, the increasingly large majority of which are caused by … armed
groups, condemning in the strongest terms the high number of a ttacks targeting schools, including
their burning and forced closure, their use by armed groups, and the intimidation, abduction and
killing of education personnel, particularly those attacks targeting girls’ education by armed groups …
and welcoming, in this context, the listing of [specific armed group] in the annex of the report of the
Secretary-General on children and armed conflict (S/2013/245) pursuant to Security Council
resolution 1998 (2011), condemning also the increased targeted killing of women and girls …

Accountability for
perpetrators of
grave violations
against children

14-01143

S/RES/1612
(2005), op. 1

Demands that all armed groups, including [list of relevant armed groups], prevent the recruitment a nd
use of children, calls on relevant armed groups in particular [relevant armed groups] to implement the
provisions of the action plans signed with the United Nations SRSG on Children and Armed Conflict
in [date] immediately, and furthermore demands that all parties protect and treat as victims those
children who have been released or otherwise separated from armed forces and armed groups; and
emphasizes the need to pay particular attention to the protection, release and reintegration of all
children associated with armed groups;

S/RES/2088
(2013), op. 14

… The Council calls upon all parties to armed conflict to put an end to [attacks against schools,
threats and attacks against teachers and other protected persons in relation to schools, and the use of
schools for military purposes] and to refrain from attacks against teachers and other protected persons
in relation to schools, provided that they take no action adversely affecting their status of civilians.

S/PRST/2013/2
(2013), PoC, par. 15

Calling on all parties to armed conflicts to comply strictly with the obligations applicable to them under international
law for the protection of children in armed conflict, including those contained in the Convention on the Rights of the
Child and its Optional Protocol on the involvement of Children in Armed Conflict, as well as the Geneva Conventions
of 12th August 1949 and their Additional Protocols of 1977.

S/RES/1998 (2011),
pp. 3

Recalling that international humanitarian law affords general protection to women and children as part
of the civilian population during armed con flicts and special protection due to the fact that they can be
placed particularly at risk,

S/RES/1960
(2010), pp. 10

[D]emands … that all armed groups … immediately stop recruiting and using children and release all children
associated with them.

S/RES/1794
(2007), op. 3

Calls upon all parties concerned to abide by the international obligations applicable to them relating to the protection of
children affected by armed conflict as well as the concrete commitments they have made to the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General for Children and Armed Conflict, to UNICEF and other United Nations agencies and to
cooperate fully with the United Nations peacekeeping missions and United Nations country teams … in the follow-up
and implementation of these commitments.

S/RES/1612
(2005), op. 15

[R]eiterates its call on parties to armed conflict [listed in the relevant Secretary-General’s report] that have not already
done so to prepare and implement, without further delay, concrete time-bound action plans to halt recruitment and use
of children in violation of applicable international law, and to address all violations and abuses against children in close
cooperation with the [Special Representative of the Secretary-General on Children and Armed Conflict], as well as
with UNICEF and the UN Country Task Forces on Monitoring and Reporting.

S/PRST/2008/6

The Security Council stresses further that the fight against impunity and to ensure accountability for genocide, crimes
against humanity, war crimes and other egregious crimes perpetrated against children has been strengthened through
the work on and prosecution of these crimes in the international criminal justice system, ad hoc and mixed tribunals as
well as specialized chambers in national tribunals. The Security Council highlights in this regard the contribution of the
International Criminal Court, in accordance with the principle of complementarity to national criminal jurisdictions as
set out in the Rome Statute, towards holding accountable those responsible for such crimes. In this regard, the Security
Council reiterates its call on the importance of State cooperation with these courts and tribunals in accordance with the
States’ respective obligations.

S/PRST/2013/8
(2013), par. 15

See also, for example,
S/RES/2088 (2013), pp.
11; S/RES/1998 (2011)
op. 4; S/RES/1923
(2010), op. 24;
S/RES/1906 (2009), op.
15; S/RES/1479 (2003),
op. 15; and S/RES/1296
(2000), op. 10.

S/RES/2098 (2013), pp.
19; S/RES/2067 (2012),
op. 18; S/RES/2062
(2012), pp. 8;
S/RES/1998 (2011), pp. 8
and op. 11;
S/PRST/2010/10

S/PRST/2014/3

64/80

Call for compliance
with applicable
international
humanitarian law
and human rights
law

Strongly condemns the recruitment and use of child soldiers by parties to armed conflict in violation of international
obligations applicable to them and all other violations and abuses committed against children in armed conflict.

14-01143

Role of United
Nations
peacekeeping and
other relevant
missions and actors

S/RES/2078
(2012), pp. 10

Stressing the need for alleged perpetrators of crimes against chi ldren in situations of armed conflict to
be brought to justice through national justice systems and, where applicable, international justice
mechanisms and mixed criminal courts and tribunals in order to end impunity,

S/RES/2068
(2012), pp. 10

Expresses deep concern that certain perpetrators persist in committing violations and abuses against
children in situations of armed conflict in open disregard of its resolutions on the matter, and in this
regard: (a) Calls upon Member States concerned to bring to justice those responsible for such
violations through national justice systems, and where applicable, international justice mechanisms;
(b) Reiterates its readiness to adopt targeted and graduated measures against persistent perpetrators,
taking into account relevant provisions of its resolutions 1539 (2004), 1612 (2005), 1882 (2009) and
1998 (2011);

S/RES/2068
(2012), op. 3

[C]alls upon concerned Member States to take decisive and immediate action against persistent perpetrators of
violations and abuses committed against children in situations of armed conflict, and further calls upon them to bring to
justice those responsible for such violations that are prohibited under applicable international law, including with
regard to recruitment and use of children, killing and maiming, rape and other sexual violence, attacks on schools
and/or hospitals, attacks or threats of attacks against protected persons in relation to schools and/or hospitals through
national justice systems, and, where applicable, international justice mechanisms and mixed criminal courts and
tribunals, with a view to ending impunity for those committing crimes against children.

S/RES/1998
(2011), op. 11

Demands that all armed groups, in particular [specific armed group] elements prevent the recruitment
and use of children, further demands that all parties protect and consider as victims those children
who have been released or otherwise separated from armed forces and armed groups, and emphasizes
the need to pay particular attention to the protection, release and reintegration of all children
associated with armed groups;

S/RES/2121
(2013), op.15

Demands furthermore that the parties to the conflict immediately cease all violations and abuses
against children and requests the Secretary-General to ensure (a) continued monitoring and reporting,
including as part of the reports referred to in [relevant paragraph] above, of the situation of c hildren
including through enhanced cooperation with child protection actors and (b) continued dialogue with
the parties to the conflict towards the development and implementation of time bound action plans to
end the recruitment and use of children and oth er violations of international humanitarian law and
human rights law committed against children;

S/RES/2113 (2013),
op. 26

… further requests the Secretary-General to strengthen child protection in United Nations system
activities in the [affected country] including through the continued deployment of child protection
advisors within [the Mission], and ensure continued monitoring and reporting of the situation of
children, and welcomes the work of the United Nations country task force on the monitoring a nd
reporting mechanism established in [month / year];

S/RES/2109
(2013), op. 17

The Security Council reaffirms the important role being played by child protection advisers in
peacekeeping, peacebuilding and political missions deployed in line with the C ouncil’s relevant
country-specific resolutions and in accordance with the Department of Peacekeeping Operations’

S/PRST/2013/8
(2013), par. 18

See also, for example,
S/RES/2068 (2012), pp. 4
and pp. 8; S/RES/2063
(2012), op. 22;
S/RES/2057 (2012), op.
12; S/RES/2003 (2011),
op. 23; S/RES/2000
(2011), op. 7;
S/RES/1998 (2011), op.
14; S/RES/1923 (2010),
op. 23; S/RES/1917
(2010), op. 22;
S/RES/1882 (2009),
op. 11 and 12;
S/RES/1828 (2008), op.
14; S/RES/1806 (2008),
op. 14; S/RES/1780
(2007), op. 17;
S/RES/1612 (2005),
op. 12 and op. 18;

S/PRST/2014/3

65/80

Calling for all perpetrators, including individuals responsible for violence against children and acts of
sexual violence, to be apprehended, brought to justice and held accountable for violations of
applicable international law,

14-01143

Decides that the mandate of [the Mission] shall be as follows: (d) To help build the capacity of the …
Government of [the affected country] to: … (ii) promote child protection and to implement the
relevant … Government action plans on children and armed conflict, including through the provision
of Child Protection Advisors; Decides that the mandate of [the Mission] shall be as follows: … (e) To
monitor, help investigate and report to the Council on, and help prevent: … (ii ) any violations or
abuses committed against children in [the affected country]; …

S/RES/2102
(2013), op. 2

… requests [the Mission] to ensure that child protection concerns are integrated into all operations
and strategic aspects of [the Mission]’s work …

S/RES/2098
(2013), op. 12

Recalls paragraph 16 of its resolution 1379 (2001) and requests the Secretary -General to also include
in the annexes to his reports on children and armed conflict those parties to armed conflict that
engage, in contravention of applicable international law; (a) in recurrent attacks on schools and/or
hospitals (b) in recurrent attacks or threats of attacks against protected persons in relation to schools
and/or hospitals in situations of armed conflict, bearing in mind all ot her violations and abuses
committed against children, and notes that the present paragraph will apply to situations in accordance
with the conditions set out in paragraph 16 of its resolution 1379 (2001).

S/RES/1998 (2011),
op. 3

… authorizes [the mission] to perform the following tasks … (v) Facilitating a protective environment
for children affected by armed conflict, through implementation of a monitoring and reporting
mechanism.

S/RES/1996 (2011),
op. 3

Encourages the [mission] to continue to share all relevant information with the Group of Experts
[informing the sanction Committee], especially information on the recruitment and use of children,
and on the targeting of women and children in situations of armed conflicts;

S/RES/1952
(2010), op. 13

Stresses the responsibility of the United Nations country-level task forces on monitoring and reporting and United
Nations country teams, consistent with their respective mandates, to ensure effective follow-up to Security Council
resolutions on children and armed conflict, to monitor and report progress to the Secretary-General in close
cooperation with his Special Representative for Children and Armed Conflict and ensure a coordinated response to
issues related to children and armed conflict.

S/RES/1882
(2009), op. 8

Requests the Secretary-General to include more systematically in his reports on children and armed conflict specific
information regarding the implementation of the [Security Council’s] Working Group [on Children And Armed
Conflict] recommendations.

S/RES/1882
(2009), op. 9

Reiterates its request to the Secretary-General to ensure that, in all his reports on country-specific situations, the matter
of children and armed conflict is included as a specific aspect of the report, and expresses its intention to give its full
attention to the information provided therein, including the implementation of relevant Security Council resolutions
and of the recommendations of its Working Group on Children and Armed Conflict, when dealing with those
situations on its agenda.

S/RES/1882
(2009), op. 10

Requests the Secretary-General to continue to take the necessary measures including, where applicable, to bring the
monitoring and reporting mechanism to its full capacity, to allow for prompt advocacy and effective response to all

S/RES/1882
(2009), op. 17

S/RES/1565 (2004),
op. 5(g); S/RES/1509
(2003), op. 3;
S/RES/1460 (2003), op.
15; S/RES/1296 (2000),
op. 9; and S/RES/1265
(1999), op. 13.

S/PRST/2014/3

66/80

(DPKO) Policy Directive on Mainstreaming the Protection Rights and Wellbeing of Children affected
by Armed Conflict and in this regard expresses its intention to further strengthen provisions for the
protection of children in all mandates of relevant United Nations peacekeeping, peacebuilding and
political missions, including through ensuring the consistent deployment of child protection advisors .

14-01143

violations and abuses committed against children and to ensure that information collected and communicated by the
mechanism is accurate, objective, reliable and verifiable.

Action plans and
specific, time-bound
commitments

S/RES/1612
(2005), op. 13

Urges all parties concerned, including Member States, United Nations entities and financial institutions, to support the
development and strengthening of the capacities of national institutions and local civil society networks for advocacy,
protection and rehabilitation of children affected by armed conflict to ensure the sustainability of local child-protection
initiatives.

S/RES/1612
(2005), op. 17

The Security Council reiterates the need for stronger focus by all parties concerned, including Governments and the
donor community, on the long-term effects of armed conflict on children and the impediments to their full
rehabilitation and reintegration into their families and communities, through, inter alia, addressing the need for
providing appropriate health care, enhancing their exchange of information about programmes and best practices, and
ensuring the availability of adequate resources, funding and technical assistance to support national strategies or action
plans in the area of child protection and welfare, and community-based programmes, bearing in mind the ‘Paris
principles to protect children from unlawful recruitment by armed forces or groups’, with a view to ensuring the longterm sustainability and success of their programmatic response to the release, rehabilitation and reintegration of all
children associated with armed forces and armed groups.

S/PRST/2008/28

Welcomes the [date] signing of an action plan by the [National] authorities and the United Nations to
eliminate the killing and maiming of children, noting that this is the first such action plan to be
signed, and calls upon the [National] authorities to vigorously implement both this action plan and the
[date] action plan on the recruitment and use of child soldiers …

S/RES/2067
(2012), op. 17

Requests the Secretary-General to ensure (a) continued monitoring and reporting, as part of the
reports referred to in [relevant paragraph] above, of the situation of children including close
cooperation with child protection actors and (b) continued dialogue with the parties to the conflict
towards the development and implementation of time bound action plans to end the recruitment and
use of child soldiers and other violations of international humanitarian law and human rights law
against children;

S/RES/2063
(2012), op. 22

Welcomes the signing of a new action plan to end child recruitment by the Government of [the
affected country], reaffirming the commitment to release all children from the [National security
force], acknowledges the measures taken by the Government of [the affected country] to implement
the new action plan, calls for the further implementation of this action plan, requests [the mission] to
advise and assist the Government of [the affected country] in this regard …

S/RES/2057
(2012), op. 12

Recalls the conclusions endorsed by the Security Council Working Group on Children and Armed
Conflict in [the affected country] …, calls on all parties to end grave violations and abuses committed
against children in [the affected country], urges the … Government to develop and implement a
concrete time-bound action plan to halt the recruitment and use of children, requests the Secretary -

S/RES/2010 (2011),
op. 24

See also, for example,
S/RES/2113 (2013), op.
26; S/RES/2098 (2013),
op. 22; S/RES/2093
(2013), op. 32;
S/RES/2088 (2013), op.
14; S/RES/2053 (2012),
pp. 11; S/RES/1991
(2011), op. 16;
S/RES/1974 (2010), op.
23; S/RES/1935 (2010),
op. 19; and S/RES/1612
(2005), op. 7;
S/RES/1882 (2009), op. 5
(a), (b), (c) and (d);
S/RES/1882 (2009), op.
13

S/PRST/2014/3

67/80

Welcomes recent initiatives by regional and sub-regional organizations and arrangements for the protection of children
affected by armed conflict, and encourages continued mainstreaming of child protection into their advocacy, policies
and programmes; development of peer review and monitoring and reporting mechanisms; establishment, within their
secretariats, of child-protection mechanisms; inclusion of child-protection staff and training in their peace and field
operations; sub- and inter-regional initiatives to end activities harmful to children in times of conflict, in particular
cross-border recruitment and abduction of children, illicit movement of small arms, and illicit trade in natural resources
through the development and implementation of guidelines on children and armed conflict …

While noting that some parties to armed conflict have responded to its call upon them to prepare and
implement concrete time-bound action plans to halt recruitment and use of children in violation of
applicable international law; (a) Reiterates its call on parties to armed conflict listed in the annexes of
the Secretary-General’s report on children and armed conflict that have not already done so to prepare
and implement, without further delay, action plans to halt recruitment and use of children and killing
and maiming of children, in violation of applicable international law, as well as rape and other sexual
violence against children; (b) Calls upon those parties that have existing action plans and have since
been listed for multiple violations to prepare and implement separate action plans, as appropriate, to
halt the killing and maiming of children, recurrent attacks on schools and/or hospitals, recurrent
attacks or threats of attacks against protected persons in relation to schools and/or hospitals, in
violation of applicable international law, as well as rape and other sexual violence against children;
(c) Calls upon those parties listed in the annexes of the Secretary-General’s report on children and
armed conflict that commit, in contravention of applicable international law, recurrent attacks on
schools and/or hospitals, recurrent attacks or threats of attacks aga inst protected persons in relation to
schools and/or hospitals, in situations of armed conflict, to prepare without delay, concrete time bound action plans to halt those violations and abuses; (d) Further calls upon all parties listed in the
annexes of the Secretary-General’s report on children and armed conflict, to address all other
violations and abuses committed against children and undertake specific commitments and measures
in this regard.

S/RES/1998 (2011),
op. 6

Calls upon the Government of the [affected country] and the [armed forces] to renew the action plan
(signed between the UN and the armed forces …) to end the recruitment and use of child soldiers that
expired in [date], and requests [the mission] to advise and assist the Government of the [affected
country] in this regard; further requests the Secretary-General to strengthen child protection in UN
system activities in the [affected country] and ensure continued monitoring and reporting of the
situation of children.

S/RES/1996 (2011),
op. 10

Decides that [the mission] shall have the following mandate …:
(e) Work closely with the Government to ensure the implementation of its commitments to address serious violations
against children, in particular the finalization of the Action Plan to release children present in the [armed forces] and to
prevent further recruitment, with the support of the Monitoring and Reporting Mechanism.

S/RES/1925
(2010), op. 12 (e)

Welcomes the adoption of an action plan by the [armed group] to release all children still associated with its forces by
the end of [the year] and, in order to achieve this goal, calls for a timely implementation of this action plan …

S/RES/1919
(2010), op. 19

In this context, encourages Member States to devise ways, in close consultations with the United Nations country-level
task force on monitoring and reporting and United Nations country teams, to facilitate the development and
implementation of time-bound action plans, and the review and monitoring by the United Nations country-level task
force of obligations and commitments relating to the protection of children in armed conflict.

S/RES/1882
(2009), op. 6

S/PRST/2014/3

68/80

General to continue his dialogue with the … Government in this regard, and reiterates its request to
the Secretary-General to strengthen the child protection component of [the Mi ssion] and to ensure
continued monitoring and reporting of the situation of children in [the affected country];

14-01143

14-01143

Disarmament,
Demobilisation and
Reintegration of
children

Training for
peacekeeping
personnel

Children and peace
processes

S/RES/2100
(2013), op. 16

Stresses that effective disarmament, demobilisation and reintegration programmes for children,
building on best practices identified by UNICEF and other relevant child protection actors, including
the International Labour Organization, are crucial for the well -being of all children who, in
contravention of applicable international law, have been recruited or used by armed forces and groups,
are a critical factor for durable peace and security, and urges national Governments and donors to
ensure that these community-based programmes receive timely, sustained and adequate resources and
funding.

S/RES/1998 (2011),
op. 18

[R]equests [the mission], consistent with its mandate and in coordination with the relevant parties, and with particular
emphasis on the protection, release and reintegration with their families of children recruited to and participating with
armed forces and armed groups, to increase its support for the National DDR Coordination Council and the … DDR
Commissions and to monitor the reintegration process.

S/RES/1919
(2010), op. 19

Further requests [the mission] to provide military training, including in the area of human rights, international
humanitarian law, child protection and the prevention of gender-based and sexual violence, to the [armed forces] … as
part of broader international efforts to support security sector reform.

S/RES/1906
(2009), op. 31

Reiterates the importance of compliance with relevant provisions of international humanitarian, human rights and
refugee law and of providing appropriate training in such law, including child and gender-related provisions, as well as
in negotiation and communications skills, cultural awareness, civil-military coordination and sensitivity in the
prevention of HIV/AIDS and other communicable diseases, to personnel involved in peacemaking, peacekeeping and
peace-building activities, requests the Secretary-General to disseminate appropriate guidance and to ensure that such
United Nations personnel have the appropriate training, and urges relevant Member States, as necessary and feasible,
to disseminate appropriate instructions and to ensure that appropriate training is included in their programs for
personnel involved in similar activities.

S/RES/1296
(2000), op. 19

The Security Council underlines the importance of engaging armed forces and armed groups on child protection
concerns during peace talks and calls upon Member States, United Nations entities and other parties concerned to
ensure that child protection provisions, including those relating to the release and reintegration of children formerly
associated with armed forces or armed groups, are integrated into all peace negotiations and peace agreements.

S/PRST/2013/8
(2013), par. 16

Calls upon Member States, United Nations entities, including the Peacebuilding Commission and other parties
concerned, to ensure that the protection, rights, well-being and empowerment of children affected by armed conflict
are integrated into all peace processes and that post-conflict recovery and reconstruction planning, programmes and
strategies prioritize issues concerning children affected by armed conflict.

S/RES/1998,
(2011), op. 19

Calls on all concerned parties to ensure that the protection of children is addressed in the implementation of the [peace
agreement], and requests the Secretary-General to ensure continued monitoring and reporting of the situation of
children and continued dialogue with parties to the conflict towards the preparations of time-bound action plans to end
recruitment and use of child soldiers and other violations against children.

S/RES/1769
(2007), op. 17

See also, for example,
S/RES/1265 (1999), op.
14.

See also, for example,
S/RES/1882 (2009), op.
15; S/RES/1826 (2008),
op. 6; S/RES/1674
(2006), op. 11; and
S/RES/1612 (2005), op.
14.

69/80

S/PRST/2014/3

Decides that the mandate of [the Mission] shall be the following: … (v) To assist the … authorities of
[the affected country] in developing and implementing programmes for the disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration (DDR) of former combatants and the dismantling of militias and
self-defence groups, consistent with the objectives of reconciliation and taking into account the
specific needs of demobilized children;

Expresses deep concern that certain perpetrators persist in committing violations and abuses against
children in situations of armed conflict in open disregard of its resolutions on the matter, and in this
regard: … (b) Reiterates its readiness to adopt targeted and graduated measures against persistent
perpetrators, taking into account relevant provisions of its resolutions 1539 (2004), 1612 (2005), 1882
(2009) and 1998 (2011);

S/RES/2068
(2012), op. 3

Decides that the measures [travel ban and assets freeze] in [provisions of the relevant resolution] shall
apply to individuals, and that the [relevant provisions] of that resolution shall apply to entities,
designated by the Committee: … (d) as being political or military leaders recruiting or usin g children
in armed conflicts in [the affected country] in violation of applicable international law; (e) as being
responsible for violations of applicable international law in [the affected country] involving the
targeting of civilians including children and women in situations of armed conflict, including killing
and maiming, sexual and gender based violence, attacks on schools and hospitals and abduction and
forced displacement.

S/RES/2002 (2011),
op. 1

Reiterates its determination to ensure respect for its resolutions on children and armed conflict, and in this regard: (a)
Welcomes the sustained activity and recommendations of its Working Group on Children and Armed Conflict as called
for in paragraph 8 of its resolution 1612 (2005), and invites it to continue reporting regularly to the Security Council;
(b) Requests enhanced communication between the Working Group and relevant Security Council Sanctions
Committees, including through the exchange of pertinent information on violations and abuses committed against
children in armed conflict; (c) Reaffirms its intention to take action against persistent perpetrators in line with
paragraph 9 of its resolution 1612 (2005).

S/RES/1882
(2009), op. 7

[R]equests the Secretary-General also to include in the annexes to his reports on children and armed conflict those
parties to armed conflict that engage, in contravention of applicable international law, in patterns of killing and
maiming of children and/or rape and other sexual violence against children, in situations of armed conflict, bearing in
mind all other violations and abuses against children, and notes that the present paragraph will apply to situations in
accordance with the conditions set out in paragraph 16 of its resolution 1379 (2001).

S/RES/1882
(2009), op. 3

See also, for example,
S/RES/2078 (2012), op.
4; S/RES/1998 (2011),
op. 9; S/RES/1807
(2008), op. 9;
S/RES/1807 (2008),
op. 11; S/RES/1807
(2008), op. 13 (b) and (e)

III. Specific protection concerns arising from Security Council discussions on women affected by armed conflict
Condemn, and call
for the cessation of,
violations against
women and girls

14-01143

Expressing deep concern at the full range of threats and human rights violations and abuses
experienced by women in armed conflict and post-conflict situations, recognizing that those women
and girls who are particularly vulnerable or disadvantaged may be specifically targeted or at increased
risk of violence, and recognizing in this regard that more must be done to ensure that transitional
justice measures address the full range of violations and abuses of women’s human rights, and the
differentiated impacts on women and girls of these violations and ab uses as well as forced
displacement, enforced disappearances, and destruction of civilian infrastructure,

S/RES/2122
(2013), pp. 7

Expressing its concern about the continued reports, including those reported by the Secretary -General
in [relevant report], of human rights abuses and violations of international humanitarian law,
including against women and children and the reports of increased incidents of sexual violence in
particular those attributed to armed men, stressing the importance of investigating such alleged

S/RES/2112 (2013),
pp. 11

See also, for example,
S/RES/1974 (2010), op.
36; S/RES/1960 (2010),
op. 3; S/RES/1917
(2010), op. 35;
S/RES/1820 (2008), pp.
8; and S/RES/1806
(2008), op. 28.

S/PRST/2014/3

70/80

Targeted and
graduated measures
in response to
violations of
applicable
international
humanitarian law
and human rights
law related to
children

14-01143

violations and abuses … committed by all parties, irrespective of their status or political affiliation,
reaffirming that those responsible for such violations must be held accountable and brought to justice
irrespective of their political affiliation, while respecting the rights of those in detention …, urging the
Government to increase and expedite its efforts to combat impunity,

71/80

S/RES/2096
(2013), op. 43

Strongly condemns the continued violations of international humanitarian and human rights law,
including … rape and sexual slavery and other forms of sexual and gender-based violence …
perpetrated by armed groups, and specifically [list of relevant armed groups] that threaten the
population as well as peace and stability of [the affected country] and the subregion …

S/RES/2088
(2013), op. 13

Recalling its resolutions 1325 (2000), 1820 (2008), 1888 (2009), 1889 (2009), and 1960 (2010) on
women, peace, and security, concerned about the high incidence of sexual and gender -based violence,
welcoming the continuing efforts of [the Mission] and the Government … to promote and protect the
rights of civilians, in particular women and children, and reaffirming the importance of appropriate
gender expertise and training in missions mandated by the Security Council

S/RES/2008 (2011),
pp. 15

Demands that all parties … immediately cease all forms of violence and human rights abuses against
the civilian population in [the affected country], in particular gender -based violence, including rape
and other forms of sexual abuse … with a view to specific and time-bound commitments to combat
sexual violence in accordance with resolution 1960 …

S/RES/1996 (2011),
op. 9

Strongly condemns all violations of applicable international law committed against women and girls in situations of
armed conflicts and post-conflict situations, demands all parties to conflicts to cease such acts with immediate effect,
and emphasizes the responsibility of all States to put an end to impunity and to prosecute those responsible for all
forms of violence committed against women and girls in armed conflicts, including rape and other sexual violence.

S/RES/1889
(2009), op. 3

Reiterating deep concern that, despite its repeated condemnation of violence against women and children including all
forms of sexual violence in situations of armed conflict, and despite its calls addressed to all parties to armed conflict
for the cessation of such acts with immediate effect, such acts continue to occur, and in some situations have become
systematic or widespread.

S/RES/1888
(2009), pp. 3

Calls on all parties to … issue clear orders regarding sexual violence, in line with its resolution 1960
(2010), calls on parties to the conflict to facilitate i mmediate access for victims of sexual violence to
available services, and encourage donors to support the increase of services to address the needs of
victims, and welcomes the commitments made to prevent and address sexual violence; including
[relevant document and date] between the United Nations and the Government of [the affected
country] and other parties to the conflict;

S/RES/2088
(2013), op. 15

Reiterating the necessity for all States and non-State parties to conflicts to comply fully with their
obligations under applicable international law, including the prohibition on all forms of sexual violence,

S/RES/1960
(2010), pp. 4

See also, for example,
S/RES/2121 (2013), op.
16; S/RES/2046 (2012),
op. 7; S/RES/2040
(2012), op. 3;
S/RES/1960 (2010), pp. 4
and pp. 10; S/RES/1889
(2009), op. 2; and

S/PRST/2014/3

Call for compliance
with applicable
international
humanitarian law
and human rights
law

Recognizes that despite progress achieved on gender equality, enhanced efforts, including on
measurable and action oriented objectives, are necessary to secure the rights of women and girls and
to ensure all women and girls in [the affected country] are protected from violence and abuse, enjoy
equal protection under the law and equal access to justice, strongly condemns discrimination and
violence against women and girls, in particular violence aimed at preventing girls from attending
schools, stresses the importance of implementing Security Council resolutions 1325 (2000), 1820
(2008), 1888 (2009), 1889 (2009) and 1960 (2010), notes the mainstreaming commitments introduced
therein, and of ensuring that women fleeing domestic violence are able to find safe and secure refuge;

14-01143

S/RES/1960
(2010), pp. 10

Calls upon all parties to armed conflict to respect fully international law applicable to the rights and protection of women
and girls, especially as civilians, in particular the obligations applicable to them under the Geneva Conventions
of 1949 and the Additional Protocols thereto of 1977, the Refugee Convention of 1951 and the Protocol thereto of 1967,
the Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination against Women of 1979 and the Optional Protocol
thereto of 1999 and the United Nations Convention on the Rights of the Child of 1989 and the two Optional Protocols
thereto of … 2000, and to bear in mind the relevant provisions of the Rome Statute of the International Criminal Court.

S/RES/1325
(2000), op. 9

Urges Member States, United Nations entities, intergovernmental, regional and subregional
organizations, to take further measures to facilitat e women’s full and meaningful participation in all
policymaking, planning and implementation processes to combat and eradicate the illicit transfer,
destabilizing accumulation and misuse of small arms and light weapons in all its aspects and calls
upon, in this regard, all those involved in the planning for disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration and justice and security sector reform efforts to take into account the particular needs of
women and children associated with armed forces and armed groups, with the participation of women,
and to provide for their full access to these programmes inter alia, through consultation with civil
society, including women’s organizations, as appropriate;

S/RES/2117 (2013),
op. 12

Emphasizing the important role of women in prevention and resolution of conflicts and in
peacebuilding, as recognized in resolutions 1325 (2000), 1820 (2008), 1888 (2009) and 1889 (2009),
welcoming the Mission’s work in this regard and underlining that a gender perspective must continue
to inform the implementation of relevant aspects of the mandate of [the Mission],

S/RES/2103
(2013), pp. 16

… recalls that women play a vital role in the peace process, as recognized in Security Council
resolution 1325 (2000) and related resolutions, therefore reiterates the need for the full, equal and
effective participation of women at all stages of peace processes and urges their involvement in the
development and implementation of post-conflict strategies in order to take account of their
perspectives and needs …;

S/RES/2096
(2013), op. 14

Welcoming the increased representation of women in Parliament, commending the [National]
authorities and underlining the need to increase their role in decision making with regard to conflict
prevention and resolution,

S/RES/2067
(2012), pp. 14

Reaffirms the vital role of women in the prevention and resolution of conflicts, peace negotiations,
peacebuilding, peacekeeping, humanitarian response, and post -conflict reconstruction, and stresses the
need for the United Nations and the African Union to work to ensure that w omen and gender
perspectives are fully integrated into all peace and security efforts undertaken by the two
organizations, including by building the necessary capacity;

S/RES/2033
(2012), op. 12

Urges Member States, international and regional organisations to take further measures to improve women’s
participation during all stages of peace processes, particularly in conflict resolution, post-conflict planning and
peacebuilding, including by enhancing their engagement in political and economic decision-making at early stages of
recovery processes, through inter alia promoting women’s leadership and capacity to engage in aid management and
planning, supporting women’s organizations, and countering negative societal attitudes about women’s capacity to
participate equally.

S/RES/1889
(2009), op. 1

S/RES/1888 (2009),
pp. 10 and pp. 6.

See also, for example,
S/RES/2122 (2013), pp.
13; S/RES/2112 (2013),
pp. 12; S/RES/2086
(2013), pp. 12;
S/RES/2067 (2012), op.
8; S/RES/2062 (2012),
pp. 13; S/RES/2061
(2012), pp. 9;
S/RES/2041 (2012), op.
14; S/RES/2009 (2011),
op. 3; S/RES/1935
(2010), op. 3;
S/RES/1889 (2009), op.
8; S/RES/1888 (2009),
pp. 13, pp. 14 and op. 16;
S/RES/1880 (2009),
pp 12; S/RES/1826
(2008), op. 6;
S/RES/1674 (2006), op.
11; and S/RES/1325
(2000), op. 1 and op. 15.

S/PRST/2014/3

72/80

Women and the
prevention and
resolution of conflict

Recalling that international humanitarian law affords general protection to women and children as part of the civilian
population during armed conflicts and special protection due to the fact that they can be placed particularly at risk.

14-01143

Condemn and call
for the cessation of
sexual violence

S/RES/1889
(2009), op. 10

Emphasizing the importance of addressing sexual violence issues from the outset of peace processes and mediation efforts,
in order to protect populations at risk and promote full stability, in particular in the areas of pre-ceasefire humanitarian
access and human rights agreements, ceasefires and ceasefire monitoring, Disarmament, Demobilization and Reintegration
(DDR), Security Sector Reform (SSR) arrangements, justice and reparations, post-conflict recovery and development.

S/RES/1888
(2009), pp. 12

Calls upon all concerned parties to ensure that the protection of women and children is addressed in the
implementation of the [peace agreement] as well as the post-conflict reconstruction and recovery phases, including
continued monitoring and reporting of the situation of women and children and that all reported abuses are investigated
and those responsible brought to justice.

S/RES/1880
(2009), op. 14

Urges the Secretary-General and his Special Envoys to invite women to participate in discussions pertinent to the
prevention and resolution of conflict, the maintenance of peace and security, and post-conflict peace building, and
encourages all parties to such talks to facilitate the equal and full participation of women at decision-making levels.

S/RES/1820
(2008), op. 12

Calls on all actors involved, when negotiating and implementing peace agreements, to adopt a gender perspective,
including, inter alia: (a) The special needs of women and girls during repatriation and resettlement and for
rehabilitation, reintegration and post-conflict reconstruction; (b) Measures that support local women’s peace initiatives
and indigenous processes for conflict resolution, and that involve women in all of the implementation mechanisms of
the peace agreements; (c) Measures that ensure the protection of and respect for human rights of women and girls,
particularly as they relate to the constitution, the electoral system, the police and the judiciary.

S/RES/1325
(2000), op. 8

Recognizing the significant challenges that remain across all sectors, including continuing problems
with violent crime, in particular the high rates of sexual and gender -based violence, especially
involving children, recalling its resolutions 1325 (2000), 1820 (2008), 1888 (2009), 1889 (2009),
1960 (2010) and 2106 (2013) on women, peace and security …

S/RES/2116 (2013),
pp. 14

Reiterates its demand for the complete cessation with immediate effect by all parties to armed conflict
of all acts of sexual violence and its call for these parties to make and i mplement specific time-bound
commitments to combat sexual violence, which should include, inter alia, issuance of clear orders
through chains of command prohibiting sexual violence and accountability for breaching these orders,
the prohibition of sexual violence in Codes of conduct, military and police field manuals or equivalent
and to make and implement specific commitments on timely investigation of alleged abuses; and
further calls upon all relevant parties to armed conflict to cooperate in the framewor k of such
commitments, with appropriate United Nations mission personnel who monitor their implementation,
and calls upon the parties to designate, as appropriate, a high -level representative responsible for
ensuring implementation of such commitments;

S/RES/2106
(2013), op.10

Expressing deep concern about reports of sexual violence during the conflict in [the affected country]
against women, men and children including in prison facilities and detention centres …

S/RES/2095
(2013), pp.7

See also, for example,
S/RES/2116 (2013),
op.10; S/RES/2112
(2013), op. 17;
S/RES/2109 (2013), op.
14; S/RES/2098 (2013),
pp. 19; S/RES/2066
(2012), pp. 10;
S/RES/2063 (2012), op.
21; S/RES/2062 (2012),
pp. 8; S/RES/2040
(2012), pp. 7;
S/RES/2035 (2012), pp.
8; S/RES/2010 (2011),
op. 25; S/RES/2009
(2011), pp. 5;

S/PRST/2014/3

73/80

Encourages Member States in post-conflict situations, in consultation with civil society, including women’s
organizations, to specify in detail women and girls’ needs and priorities and design concrete strategies, in accordance
with their legal systems, to address those needs and priorities, which cover inter alia support for greater physical
security and better socio-economic conditions, through education, income generating activities, access to basic
services, in particular health services, including sexual and reproductive health and reproductive rights and mental
health, gender-responsive law enforcement and access to justice, as well as enhancing capacity to engage in public
decision-making at all levels.

Role of United
Nations
peacekeeping and
other relevant
missions and actors

S/RES/2070
(2012), op.18

14-01143

Demands that all parties immediately cease all forms of violence and human rights abuses against the
civilian population in [the affected country], in parti cular gender-based violence, including rape and
other forms of sexual violence …

S/RES/2057
(2012), op.10

Condemns the persistence of reported human rights and humanitarian law violations against civilians
in different parts of the country, including numerous acts of sexual violence met with impunity, calls
upon all parties [in the affected country], with the continued support of [the mission], to ensure the
protection of civilians, especially women, children and displaced persons, stresses that the
perpetrators must be brought to justice and calls upon all parties to take appropriate measures to
refrain from, prevent and protect civilians from all forms of sexual violence …

S/RES/1962
(2010), op. 9

Demands that the parties to the conflict immediately take appropriate measures to protect civilians, including women
and children, from all forms of sexual violence, in line with resolution 1820 (2008).

S/RES/1935
(2010), op.18

Demands that all parties to armed conflict immediately take appropriate measures to protect civilians, including
women and children, from all forms of sexual violence, including measures such as, inter alia, enforcing appropriate
military disciplinary measures and upholding the principle of command responsibility, training troops on the
categorical prohibition of all forms of sexual violence against civilians, debunking myths that fuel sexual violence and
vetting candidates for national armies and security forces to ensure the exclusion of those associated with serious
violations of international humanitarian and human rights law, including sexual violence.

S/RES/1888
(2009), op.3

… welcoming the commitment by the Government … to develop and implement [the na tional]
Security Council Resolution 1325 (2000) … Action Plan and to identify further opportunities to
support the participation of women in the … peace and reconciliation process …, the presentation by
the Government … of its first progress report on the implementation of the Convention on the
Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination against Women, and efforts to continue to accelerate full
implementation of the National Action Plan for Women in [the affected country], to integrate its
benchmarks into the National Priority Programmes and to develop a strategy to implement fully the
Elimination of Violence Against Women law,

S/RES/2120
(2013), pp.25

Demands that the parties to the conflict immediately cease all acts of sexual violence, and make and
implement specific and time-bound commitments to combat such violence, in accordance with
resolution 2106 (2013); and requests [the Mission] to report on sexual and gender -based violence, as
well as to assess progress towards the elimination of sexual and gender -based violence, including
through the timely appointment of women protection advisers, and notes the inclusion of protection to
women and children from sexual violence and gender bas ed violence, as part of the mission-wide
Protection of Civilians strategy identified in [relevant paragraph] above, and requests the Secretary General to ensure that the relevant provisions of resolutions 1325 (2000), and associated resolutions
on women, peace and security, are implemented by [the Mission], including supporting the
participation of women during all stages of peace processes, particularly in conflict resolution, post conflict planning and peacebuilding, including women’s civil society organi zations, and through the
appointment of gender advisers, and to include information on this in his reporting to the Council;

S/RES/2113 (2013),
op. 25

S/RES/1960 (2010), pp.
3, op. 1 and op. 2;
S/RES/1944 (2010), pp.
12 and op. 14;
S/RES/1938 (2010), pp.
16.

See also, for example,
S/RES/2122 (2013), op.2
and op.5; S/RES/2116
(2013), op.10 and op.12;
S/RES/2109 (2013), op.
40; S/RES/2106 (2013),
op. 6, op. 7 and op. 12;
S/RES/2100 (2013), op.
16 and op. 25;
S/RES/2098 (2013), pp.
18 and op. 12 a) iii);
S/RES/2093 (2013), op.
14 and op. 27;
S/RES/2086 (2013), op. 8
and op. 12; S/RES/2066
(2012), op. 11;
S/RES/2037 (2012), op.
17; S/RES/2003 (2011),
op. 22; S/RES/1996
(2011), op. 24;
S/RES/1960 (2010), pp.

S/PRST/2014/3

74/80

Strongly condemns the … widespread rape and other sexual abuse of women and girls …

14-01143

S/RES/2112 (2013),
op. 6

Requests the Secretary-General and relevant United Nations entities to assist national authorities, with
the effective participation of women, in addressing sexual violence concerns explicitly in: (a)
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration processes, including, inter alia, by establishing
protection mechanisms for women and children in cantonment sites, as well as for civilians in close
proximity of cantonment sites and in communities of return, and by offering trauma and reintegration
support to women and children formerly associated with armed groups, as well as ex -combatants; (b)
security sector reform processes and arrangements, including through the provision of adequate
training for security personnel, encouraging the inclusion of more women in the security sector and
effective vetting processes in order to exclude from the security sector those who have perpetrated or
are responsible for acts of sexual violence; (c) justice sector reform initiatives, including through
legislative and policy reforms that address sexual violence; training in sexual and gender -based
violence of justice and security sector professionals and the inclusion of more women at professional
levels in these sectors; and judicial proceedings that take into account the distinct needs and
protection of witnesses as well as survivors of sexual violence in armed conflict and post-conflict
situations, and their family members;

S/RES/2106
(2013), op. 16

Decides that the mandate of [the Mission] shall be as follows: … (d) To help build the capacity of the
… Government of [the affected country] to: (i) promote respect for human rights and women’s
empowerment, including through the provision of Gender Advisers and Human Rights Advisers; …
(iii) prevent conflict-related sexual and gender-based violence, including through the provision of
Women’s Protection Advisors; … (e) To monitor, help investigate and report to the Council on, and
help prevent: … (iii) any violations or abuses committed against women, including all forms of sexual
and gender-based violence in armed conflict;

S/RES/2102
(2013), op. 2

… encourages all actors in the [National] Government, the international community and civil society
to renew their efforts to … to improve response to rape complaints and access to justice for the
victims of rape and other sexual crimes;

S/RES/2070
(2012), op. 18

Encourages the Secretary-General to include in his annual reports submitted pursuant to resolutions
1820 (2008) and 1888 (2009) detailed information on parties to armed conflict that are credibly
suspected of committing or being responsible for acts of rape or other forms of sexual violence, and to
list in an annex to these annual reports the parties that are credibly suspected of committing or being
responsible for patterns of rape and other forms of sexual violence in situations of armed conflict on

S/RES/1960
(2010), op. 3

5; S/RES/1945 (2010),
op. 4; S/RES/1944
(2010), op. 12;
S/RES/1906 (2009), op.
18; S/RES/1889 (2009),
pp. 14; S/RES/1888
(2009), op. 12;
S/RES/1828 (2008), op.
15;S/RES/1794 (2007),
op. 18; S/RES/1674
(2006), op. 19;
S/RES/1590 (2005),
op. 15; S/RES/1565
(2004), op. 5(g);
S/RES/1528 (2004), op. 6
(n); S/RES/1325 (2000),
op. 5 and op. 7; and
S/PRST/2007/40;
S/RES/1265 (1999), op.
13.

S/PRST/2014/3

75/80

Decides that the mandate of [the Mission] shall be the following: … (f) Support for compliance with
international humanitarian and human rights law: – To contribute to the promotion and protection of
human rights in [the affected country], with special attention to grave violations and abuses
committed against children and women, notably sexual- and gender-based violence, in close
coordination with the Independent Expert established under the [relevant] Human Rights Council’s
resolution …, – To support the efforts of the Government in combating sexual and gender based
violence, including through contributing to the development of a nationally owned multi-sectoral
strategy in cooperation with UN Action Against Sexual Violence in Conflict entities, – To provide
specific protection for women affected by armed conflict, including through the deployment of
Women Protection Advisors, to ensure gender expertise and training, as appropriate and within
existing resources, in accordance with [relevant] resolutions …

Requests the Secretary General to establish monitoring, analysis and reporting arrangements on
conflict-related sexual violence, including rape in situations of armed conflict and post -conflict and
other situations relevant to the implementation of resolution [on Women, Peace and Security], as
appropriate, and taking into account the specificity of each country, that ensure a coherent and
coordinated approach at the field-level, and encourages the Secretary-General to engage with United
Nations actors, national institutions, civil society organizations, health -care service providers, and
women’s groups to enhance data collection and analysis of incidents, trends, and patterns of rape and
other forms of sexual violence to assist the Council’s consideration of appropriate actions, including
targeted and graduated measures, while respecting fully the integrity and specificity of the monitoring
and reporting mechanism implemented under [resolutions on children and armed conflicts];

S/RES/1960
(2010), op. 8

Requests the Secretary-General to develop effective guidelines and strategies to enhance the ability of relevant UN
peacekeeping operations, consistent with their mandates, to protect civilians, including women and girls, from all
forms of sexual violence and to systematically include in his written reports to the Council on conflict situations his
observations concerning the protection of women and girls and recommendations in this regard.

S/RES/1820
(2008), op. 9

Requests the Secretary-General and relevant United Nations agencies, inter alia, through consultation with women and
women-led organizations as appropriate, to develop effective mechanisms for providing protection from violence,
including in particular sexual violence, to women and girls in and around UN managed refugee and internally
displaced persons camps, as well as in all disarmament, demobilization, and reintegration processes, and in justice and
security sector reform efforts assisted by the United Nations.

S/RES/1820
(2008), op. 10

Urges all parties concerned, including Member States, United Nations entities and financial institutions, to support the
development and strengthening of the capacities of national institutions, in particular of judicial and health systems,
and of local civil society networks in order to provide sustainable assistance to victims of sexual violence in armed
conflict and post-conflict situations.

S/RES/1820
(2008), op. 13

Urges appropriate regional and sub-regional bodies in particular to consider developing and implementing policies,
activities, and advocacy for the benefit of women and girls affected by sexual violence in armed conflict.

S/RES/1820
(2008), op. 14

Further urges the Secretary-General to seek to expand the role and contribution of women in United Nations fieldbased operations, and especially among military observers, civilian police, human rights and humanitarian personnel.

S/RES/1325
(2000), op. 4

S/PRST/2014/3

76/80

the Security Council agenda; expresses its intention to use this list as a basis for more focused United
Nations engagement with those parties, including, as appropriate, measures in accordance with the
procedures of the relevant sanctions committees;

14-01143

14-01143

Comprehensive
strategies and timebound
commitments

77/80

S/RES/2113 (2013),
op. 25

Reiterates its demand for the complete cessation with i mmediate effect by all parties to armed conflict
of all acts of sexual violence and its call for these parties to make and implement specific time -bound
commitments to combat sexual violence, which should include, inter alia, issuance of clear orders
through chains of command prohibiting sexual violence and accountability for breaching these orders,
the prohibition of sexual violence in Codes of conduct, military and police field manuals or equivalent
and to make and implement specific commitments on timely investigation of alleged abuses; and
further calls upon all relevant parties to armed conflict to cooperate in the framework of such
commitments, with appropriate United Nations mission personnel who monitor their implementation,
and calls upon the parties to designate, as appropriate, a high-level representative responsible for
ensuring implementation of such commitments;

S/RES/2106
(2013), op. 10

… emphasizes the importance of [the Mission] supporting the Government of [the affected country] in
developing and implementing a national strategy for preventing and responding to sexual and gender based violence;

S/RES/2102
(2013), op. 8

Decides that [the mission] shall have the following mandate: Protection and security (g) Support for
efforts to promote and protect human rights … – To support the efforts of the … Government [of the
affected country] in combating sexual and gender-based violence, including through contributing to
the development of a nationally owned multisectoral strategy in cooperati on with UN Action Against
Sexual Violence in Conflict entities, to appoint Women Protection Advisers and to ensure gender
expertise and training, as appropriate and from within existing resources, in accordance with
resolutions 1888 (2009), 1889 (2009) and 1960 (2011),

S/RES/2000 (2011),
op. 7

Calls upon parties to armed conflict to make and implement specific and time -bound commitments to
combat sexual violence, which should include, inter alia, issuance of clear orders through chains of
command prohibiting sexual violence and the prohibition of sexual violence in Codes of Conduct,
military field manuals, or equivalent; and further calls upon those parties to make and implement
specific commitments on timely investigation of alleged abuses in order to ho ld perpetrators
accountable;

S/RES/1960
(2010), op. 5

Requests the Secretary-General to track and monitor implementation of these commitments by parties
to armed conflict on the Security Council’s agenda that engage in patterns of rape and other sexual
violence, and regularly update the Council in relevant reports and briefings;

S/RES/1960
(2010), op. 6

… encourages troop- and police-contributing countries to provide all military and police personnel
with adequate training to carry out their responsibilities, and relevant United Nations entities to make
available appropriate guidance or training modules, including in particular the United Nations
predeployment scenario-based training on prevention of sexual and gender-based violence;

S/RES/2122
(2013), op.9

Reaffirms the importance of appropriate gender expertise and training in missions mandated by the
Security Council in accordance with resolutions 1325 (2000) 1820 (2008) and 2106 (2013) …

S/RES/2109
(2013), op. 40

See also, for example,
S/RES/2112 (2013), op.
6; S/RES/2109 (2013),
op. 14; S/RES/2088
(2013), op. 15;
S/RES/2065 (2012), pp.
9; S/RES/1996 (2011),
op. 9; S/RES/1889
(2009), op. 4;
S/RES/1885 (2009),
pp. 14; S/RES/1881
(2009), op. 14; and
S/RES/1880 (2009), op.
16.

See also, for example,
S/RES/2066 (2012), pp.
10; S/RES/1960 (2010),
op.15; S/RES/1898
(2009), op. 10;
S/RES/1325 (2000), op.

S/PRST/2014/3

Training for
peacekeeping
personnel

Demands that the parties to the conflict immediately cease all acts of sexual violence, and make and
implement specific and time-bound commitments to combat such violence, in accordance with
resolution 2106 (2013); … notes the inclusion of protection to women an d children from sexual
violence and gender based violence, as part of the mission -wide Protection of Civilians strategy
identified in [relevant paragraph] above …

14-01143

S/RES/2106
(2013), op. 14

… further requests the Secretary-General to continue to provide and deploy guidance on addressing
sexual violence for predeployment and inductive training of military and police personnel, and to
assist missions in developing situation-specific procedures to address sexual violence at the field level
and to ensure that technical support is provided to troop and police contributing countries in order to
include guidance for military and police personnel on addressing sexual violence in predeployment
and induction training;

S/RES/1960
(2010), op. 16

Requests the Secretary-General to ensure that technical support is provided, in pre-deployment and in theatre, to [the
mission’s] troop- and police-contributing countries to include guidance and training for military and police personnel
on the protection of civilians from imminent threat and appropriate responses, including on human rights, sexual
violence and gender issues.

S/RES/1906
(2009), op. 13

Requests the Secretary-General, in consultation with the Security Council, the Special Committee on Peacekeeping
Operations and its Working Group and relevant States, as appropriate, to develop and implement appropriate training
programs for all peacekeeping and humanitarian personnel deployed by the United Nations in the context of missions
as mandated by the Council to help them better prevent, recognize and respond to sexual violence and other forms of
violence against civilians.

S/RES/1820
(2008), op. 6

Encourages troop and police contributing countries, in consultation with the Secretary-General, to consider steps they
could take to heighten awareness and the responsiveness of their personnel participating in UN peacekeeping
operations to protect civilians, including women and children, and prevent sexual violence against women and girls in
conflict and post-conflict situations, including wherever possible the deployment of a higher percentage of women
peacekeepers or police.

S/RES/1820
(2008), op. 8

Urges existing sanctions committees, where within the scope of the relevant criteria for designation,
and consistent with resolution 1960 (2010) to apply targeted sanctions against those who perpetrate
and direct sexual violence in conflict; and reiterates its intention, when adopting or renewing targeted
sanctions in situations of armed conflict, to consider including, where appropriate, designation criteria
pertaining to acts of rape and other forms of serious sexual violence;

S/RES/2106
(2013), op. 13

Decides that the measures referred to in [relevant] paragraph … above [travel ban and assets freeze]
shall apply to the following individuals, and, as appropriate, entities, as designated by the Committee:
… (e) Individuals or entities operating in [the affected country] and committing serious violations
involving the targeting of … women in situations of armed conflict, including killing and maiming,
sexual violence, abduction, and forced displacement;

S/RES/2078
(2012), op. 4

All States shall take the necessary measures to prevent the entry into or transit through their territories of all persons
designated by [the Sanctions Committee] …

S/RES/1807
(2008), op. 9

Decides that all States shall, during the period of enforcement of the measures …, immediately freeze the funds, other
financial assets and economic resources which are on their territories from the date of adoption of this resolution,
which are owned or controlled, directly or indirectly, by persons or entities designated by [the Sanctions Committee],

S/RES/1807
(2008), op. 11

6; S/RES/1296 (2000),
op. 19; and S/RES/1265
(1999), op. 14.

See also, for example,
S/RES/1820 (2008), op.
5, and S/RES/1807
(2008), op. 13 (e)

S/PRST/2014/3

78/80

Targeted and
graduated measures
in response to
violations of
international
humanitarian law
and human rights
law related to
women

Recognizes the role of United Nations peacekeeping contingents i n preventing sexual violence, and,
in this respect, calls for all predeployment and in-mission training of troop- and police-contributing
country contingents to include training on sexual and gender-based violence, which also takes into
account the distinct needs of children; further encourages troop- and police-contributing countries to
increase the number of women recruited and deployed in peace operations;

14-01143

or that are held by entities owned or controlled, directly or indirectly, by them or by any persons or entities acting on
their behalf or at their direction …, and decides further that all States shall ensure that no funds, financial assets or
economic resources are made available by their nationals or by any persons within their territories, to or for the benefit
of such persons or entities.

Accountability for
the perpetrators of
sexual violence

S/RES/2121
(2013), op.16

Recalling the inclusion of a range of sexual violence offences in the Rome Statute of the International
Criminal Court (ICC) and the statutes of the ad hoc international criminal tribunals,

S/RES/2106
(2013), pp. 9

Notes that sexual violence can constitute a crime against humanity or a constitutive act with respect to
genocide; further recalls that rape and other forms of serious sexual violence in armed conflict are war
crimes; calls upon Member States to comply with their relevant obligations to continue t o fight
impunity by investigating and prosecuting those subject to their jurisdiction who are responsible for
such crimes; encourages Member States to include the full range of crimes of sexual violence in
national penal legislation to enable prosecutions for such acts; recognizes that effective investigation
and documentation of sexual violence in armed conflict is instrumental both in bringing perpetrators
to justice and ensuring access to justice for survivors;

S/RES/2106
(2013), op. 2

Reiterates its calls on the Government of [the affected country] to continue to combat sexual and
gender-based violence and, in coordination with [the mission], to continue to combat impunity for
perpetrators of such crimes and to provide redress, support, and protectio n to victims, including
through the strengthening of national police capacity in this area and by raising awareness of existing
national legislation on sexual violence;

S/RES/2066
(2012), op. 9

Expressing its concern about the continued reports of human rights abuses and violations of
international humanitarian law, including against women and children, including reports of increased
incidents of sexual violence in particular those attributed to armed men, stressing the importance to
investigate such alleged violations and abuses committed by all parties, irrespective of their status or
political affiliation, including those that occurred throughout the [relevant] crisis, including …
reaffirming that those responsible for such violations must be held accountable and noting [relevant
entity] commitments in this regard,

S/RES/2062
(2012), pp. 8

Reiterating the need for civilian and military leaders, consistent with the principle of command
responsibility … to combat impunity and enforce accountability, an d that inaction can send a message
that the incidence of sexual violence in conflicts is tolerated,

S/RES/1960
(2010), pp. 5

Recognizing the need for civilian and military leaders, consistent with the principle of command responsibility, to
demonstrate commitment and political will to prevent sexual violence and to combat impunity and enforce
accountability, and that inaction can send a message that the incidence of sexual violence in conflicts is tolerated.

S/RES/1888
(2009), pp. 11

Notes that rape and other forms of sexual violence can constitute a war crime, a crime against humanity, or a
constitutive act with respect to genocide, stresses the need for the exclusion of sexual violence crimes from amnesty
provisions in the context of conflict resolution processes, and calls upon Member States to comply with their

S/RES/1820
(2008), op. 4

See also, for example,
S/RES/2122 (2013),
op.12; S/RES/2106
(2013), op. 18;
S/RES/2078 (2012), pp.
10; S/RES/1902 (2009),
op. 19; S/RES/1591
(2005), pp. 10;
S/RES/1493 (2003), op.
8; and S/RES/1468
(2003), op. 2.

S/PRST/2014/3

79/80

Calls upon all parties to armed conflict in the [affected country], including [specific armed group]
elements to issue clear orders against sexual violence, and further calls upon those p arties to make and
implement specific commitments on timely investigation of alleged abuses in order to hold
perpetrators accountable, in line with its resolution 1960 (2010), and to facilitate immediate access for
victims of sexual violence to available services;

S/PRST/2014/3

80/80

obligations for prosecuting persons responsible for such acts, to ensure that all victims of sexual violence, particularly
women and girls, have equal protection under the law and equal access to justice, and stresses the importance of ending
impunity for such acts as part of a comprehensive approach to seeking sustainable peace, justice, truth, and national
reconciliation.

Sexual exploitation
and abuse

Condemning in particular sexual violence perpetrated by [militias and armed groups as well as elements of the national
armed and police forces] and other security and intelligence services, stressing the urgent need for the [the affected
State], in cooperation with [peacekeeping mission] and other relevant actors, to end such violence and bring the
perpetrators, as well as the senior commanders under whom they serve, to justice, and calling on Member States to
assist in this regard and to continue to provide medical, humanitarian and other assistance to victims.

S/RES/1794
(2007), pp. 14

Welcomes the efforts being undertaken by [the mission] to implement the Secretary -General’s zerotolerance policy on sexual exploitation and abuse and to ensure full compliance o f its personnel with
the United Nations code of conduct, requests the Secretary-General to continue to take all necessary
action in this regard and to keep the Security Council informed, and urges troop -contributing
countries to take preventive and disciplinary action to ensure that such acts are properly investigated
and punished in cases involving their personnel;

S/RES/2084
(2012), op. 4

Recalling its resolutions … on women, peace, and security, … recognizing the challenges that remain
in addressing the serious issues of gender-based violence and sexual exploitation and abuse, and
calling on Member States to increase support to the Government in its efforts,

S/RES/1938
(2010), pp. 16

Requests the Secretary-General to continue to fully investigate the allegations of sexual exploitation and abuse by
civilian and military personnel of [the mission], and to take the appropriate measures set out in the Secretary-General’s
bulletin on special measures for protection from sexual exploitation and sexual abuse.

S/RES/1906
(2009), op. 12

Requests the Secretary-General to continue and strengthen efforts to implement the policy of zero tolerance of sexual
exploitation and abuse in United Nations peacekeeping operations; and urges troop and police contributing countries to
take appropriate preventative action, including pre-deployment and in-theatre awareness training, and other action to
ensure full accountability in cases of such conduct involving their personnel.

S/RES/1820
(2008), op. 7

Requests the Secretary-General to take the necessary measures to achieve actual compliance in [the peacekeeping
mission] with the United Nations zero-tolerance policy on sexual exploitation and abuse, including the development of
strategies and appropriate mechanisms to prevent, identify and respond to all forms of misconduct, including sexual
exploitation and abuse, and the enhancement of training for personnel to prevent misconduct and ensure full
compliance with the United Nations code of conduct, and to further take all necessary action in accordance with the
Secretary-General’s Bulletin on special measures for protection from sexual exploitation and sexual abuse
(ST/SGB/2003/13) and to keep the Council informed, and urges troop-contributing countries to take appropriate
preventive action including the conduct of pre-deployment awareness training and … post-deployment awareness
training, and to take disciplinary action and other action to ensure full accountability in cases of such conduct involving
their personnel.

S/RES/1769
(2007), op. 16

See also, for example,
S/RES/2075 (2012), op.
15; S/RES/2070 (2012),
op. 19; S/RES/ 2064
(2011), op. 9;
S/RES/1996 (2011), op.
28; S/RES/1840 (2008),
op. 22; S/RES/1674
(2006), op. 20;
S/RES/1565 (2004),
op. 25; S/RES/1460
(2003), op. 10; and
S/RES/1436 (2002),
op. 15.

14-01143
