United Nations

S/PV.4049

Security Council

Provisional

Fifty-fourth Year

4049th Meeting
Wednesday, 29 September 1999, 11 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Kok . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Netherlands)

Members:

Argentina . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Petrella
Bahrain . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Al-Dosari
Brazil . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Fonseca
Canada . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Axworthy
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Qin Huasun
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Dejammet
Gabon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Ping
Gambia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Jobe
Malaysia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Kamal
Namibia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Andjaba
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Lavrov
Slovenia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Türk
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . . . . . . Mr. Hain
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Holbrooke

Agenda
The situation in Africa
Progress report on the implementation of the recommendations contained in the report on the causes of conflict
and the promotion of durable peace and sustainable development in Africa (S/1999/1008)

99-85950 (E)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of speeches
delivered in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records of the Security
Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They should be
incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the delegation
concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room C-178.

Security Council
Fifty-fourth year
The meeting was called to order at 11.20 a.m.
Representation by and welcome to Foreign Ministers
The President: At the outset of the meeting, I should
like to acknowledge the presence at the Council table of the
Ministers for Foreign Affairs of Canada, Gabon and the
Gambia, and of the Minister of State at the Foreign and
Commonwealth Office of the United Kingdom. I should
also like to acknowledge and welcome the presence of other
Ministers in the Council Chamber today. Their presence is
an affirmation of the importance of the subject matter to be
addressed.

4049th meeting
29 September 1999
Mr. Takasu (Japan), Mr. Dorda (Libyan Arab
Jamahiriya), Mr. Mpinganjira (Malawi), Mr. Snoussi
(Morocco), Mr. Simão (Mozambique), Ms. Johnson
(Norway), Mr. Siazon (Philippines), Mr. Gama
(Portugal), Mr. Lee See-young (Republic of Korea),
Mr. Iyamuremye (Rwanda), Mr. Baudin (Senegal),
Mr. Chlebo (Slovakia), Mr. Kumalo (South Africa),
Mr. Ismail (Sudan), Mr. Dlamini (Swaziland),
Mr. Koffigoh (Togo), Mr. Tarasyuk (Ukraine),
Mr. Samhan (United Arab Emirates), Mr. Kikwete
(United Republic of Tanzania), Mr. Pérez-Otermin
(Uruguay), Mr. Ba-Jammal (Yemen) and
Mr. Kasanda (Zambia) took the seats reserved for
them at the side of the Council Chamber.

Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.

Invitation to Mr. Salim Ahmed Salim,
Secretary-General of the Organization of African
Unity

The situation in Africa
Progress report on the implementation of the
recommendations contained in the report on the
causes of conflict and the promotion of durable
peace and sustainable development in Africa
(S/1999/1008)
The President: I should like to inform the Council
that I have received letters from the representatives of
Algeria, Australia, Belgium, Cuba, the Democratic Republic
of the Congo, Djibouti, Egypt, Finland, India, Indonesia,
Japan, the Libyan Arab Jamahiriya, Malawi, Morocco,
Mozambique, Norway, the Philippines, Portugal, the
Republic of Korea, Rwanda, Senegal, Slovakia, South
Africa, the Sudan, Swaziland, Togo, Ukraine, the United
Arab Emirates, the United Republic of Tanzania, Uruguay,
Yemen and Zambia, in which they request to be invited to
participate in the discussion of the item on the Council’s
agenda. In conformity with the usual practice, I propose,
with the consent of the Council, to invite those
representatives to participate in the discussion, without the
right to vote, in accordance with the relevant provisions of
the Charter and rule 37 of the Council’s provisional rules
of procedure.
There being no objection, it is so decided.
At the invitation of the President, Mr. Baali (Algeria),
Mr. Downer (Australia), Mr. Adam (Belgium),
Mr. Rodríguez Parrilla (Cuba), Mr. Ndombasi
(Democratic Republic of the Congo), Mr. Olhaye
(Djibouti), Mr. Aboul Gheit (Egypt), Ms. Korpi
(Finland), Ms. Raje (India), Mr. Wibisono (Indonesia),

2

The President: In accordance with the
understanding reached in the Council’s prior
consultations, I invite His Excellency Mr. Salim Ahmed
Salim, Secretary-General of the Organization of African
Unity, to take a seat at the Council table.
At the invitation of the President, Mr. Salim Ahmed
Salim, Secretary-General of the Organization of
African Unity, took a seat at the Council table.
The President: I propose that we adjourn this
meeting at 1.15 p.m. and resume at 3.15 p.m. This
afternoon’s meeting will be adjourned at 6.15 p.m. Since
we shall probably still have a considerable number of
speakers left at that time, I propose to resume our debates
tomorrow morning at 10 a.m. sharp. If I hear no
objection, I shall take it that this programme is agreed.
It is so decided.
The Security Council will now begin its
consideration of the item on its agenda. The Council is
meeting in accordance with the understanding reached in
its prior consultations.
Members of the Council have before them document
S/1999/1008, which contains the progress report of the
Secretary-General on the implementation of the
recommendations contained in the report on the causes of
conflict and the promotion of durable peace and
sustainable development in Africa.

Security Council
Fifty-fourth year
I call on the Secretary-General of the United Nations,
His Excellency Mr. Kofi Annan.
The Secretary-General: Nearly a year and a half ago
I submitted to the Security Council a report on one of the
most pressing challenges of our times: how to achieve
durable peace and sustainable development in Africa.
I have been encouraged by the lively response to the
report, within and outside the United Nations system. The
Security Council established a Working Group to review
the report’s peace and security aspects and has adopted a
number of significant resolutions and statements. The
General Assembly, too, has established a Working Group
to monitor implementation of the report’s recommendations.
Research and academic institutions, civil society groups and
individuals have joined the debate. But, then, a shortage of
proposals and ideas has never been the problem. The need
is for real results that bring positive change into people’s
lives.
My follow-up report is in the Council’s hands. Today
I would like to offer some general observations, in the hope
of assisting the Council as it considers the new report and
grapples with the crucial question of what more the Council
can do to enhance peace and security in the African region.
As befits a continent of such great human, cultural and
natural diversity, a snapshot of Africa on the eve of the
new millennium reveals a combination of accomplishments
and unresolved problems, of opportunities seized and
chances missed. There are places where the Governments
and rebel groups persist in spending money on weapons
they can ill afford for wars they should not fight. There are
places where whole economies have come to depend on the
perpetuation of war; where political power has been
attained by violent, undemocratic means; where poor
governance deprives people of basic needs; where silence
about AIDS exacerbates the epidemic; where corruption
thwarts economic growth; and where crushing debt burdens,
trade barriers and declining international aid make it
extremely hard for African nations to attract investment and
stave off marginalization from the global economy.
There are, in short, places where the widely held view
of Africa as a region in perpetual crisis is not just an
image, but an all-too-grim and painful reality. But there are
also places — more than is commonly recognized — where
we are witnessing dramatic changes for the better.

4049th meeting
29 September 1999
building up communications infrastructures and reforming
their legal and regulatory frameworks. Africa possesses
land and labour resources that foreign investors find
attractive. The United Nations Conference on Trade and
Development (UNCTAD) recently published a study
showing that investment in Africa brings a higher return
to American and Japanese companies than any other
region of the world.
Africans are also taking charge of their political
fortunes, and they are willing to acknowledge past
mistakes. A majority of Africans now live under
democratic systems. South Africa has just seen its second
peaceful and democratic presidential election, and
Mozambique will have its second presidential poll next
month. The return to civilian rule in Nigeria has
transformed that nation’s prospects. Both Liberia and
Mali have recently carried out the large-scale destruction
of small arms. Algeria is taking important steps to move
away from the civil strife that has paralysed its
development and caused so much suffering.
And at this year’s Organization of African Unity
(OAU) summit in Algiers, Africa’s leaders insisted — in
a welcome change from an earlier era — on the principle
that Governments which came to power through
unconstitutional means could no longer expect to be
received as equals in an assembly of elected heads of
State. I am sure that the day will come when the General
Assembly of the United Nations will follow Africa’s lead,
and apply similarly stringent standards to all its members.
But until Africa gets a handle on its conflicts such
progress will remain tenuous, even in nations far from the
fighting. Few African countries can match Angola’s
natural wealth, or, sadly, the poverty of its war-weary
people. Yet the parties there persist in fighting long past
the time when either should be placing faith in a military
solution.
The people of the Sudan have also suffered far too
much and far too long, yet there are few signs that their
ordeal will end any time soon. Ethiopia and Eritrea have
allowed their new enmities to shatter what had been a
very promising break with the past. We must ensure
access for humanitarian relief to victims of all these
crises. But this is no substitute for the political and
military engagement, both African and international,
needed to bring stability and to address the root causes of
these upheavals.

Many African nations are liberalizing trade and
exchange controls, privatizing moribund State industries,

3

Security Council
Fifty-fourth year
Sierra Leone provides an important example of
Africans taking the lead in conflict resolution. The
Economic Community of West African States sent
peacekeepers to Sierra Leone and patiently brokered the
Lomé Agreement bringing an end to the conflict there. The
agreement is far from perfect, but it responds to the real
desire for peace in that country and gives it a new lease of
life following some of the most stark and brutal human
rights violations the world has seen in recent years.
Another successful, albeit fragile, African-led
mediation effort has resulted in the signing of the Lusaka
peace agreement for the Democratic Republic of the Congo.
Last week, President Chiluba of Zambia provided the
Security Council with a comprehensive briefing on that
effort, which he carried out on behalf of the States of the
Southern African Development Community.
The parties to both of those agreements must now live
up to their commitments. The United Nations facilitated this
diplomatic work. Last week, I proposed to the Council the
deployment of an up-to-6,000-strong peacekeeping
operation to Sierra Leone. With the initial deployment of
liaison officers to the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
I am now studying further steps that could be taken to
encourage peace in that country.
I should also like to mention the situation in Somalia.
In my report to the Council last month, I stated that, as a
country without a central government, Somalia remained
unique. Yet anarchy does not reign in much of Somalia.
There are areas where the absence of law and order has
attracted criminals and subversives. A United Nations
Children’s Fund doctor was murdered recently, and
humanitarian agencies temporarily suspended their
operations. But there are also areas where ordinary Somalis,
tired of warlords and of the violence they breed, are
seeking reconciliation. Regions of relative stability and
coherent leadership are emerging in the north-west and the
north-east.
The international community is beginning to
acknowledge these gains. Indeed, they are examples for
other regions to follow, and if carefully nurtured they could
lead to broader national reconciliation.
Members of the Council will not be surprised to hear
me say that many Africans, remembering the failure to
intervene effectively in Rwanda to stop the genocide, at
times regard the Security Council as indifferent to the
continent’s plight. They are closely watching the Council’s

4

4049th meeting
29 September 1999
deliberations on the Democratic Republic of the Congo
and on Sierra Leone.
In recent weeks, Africans have seen the Council
approve a far-reaching operation for Kosovo and respond
to the violence in East Timor. They have listened while
many world leaders, as well as myself, have welcomed,
albeit cautiously, an evolving understanding of
sovereignty that allows the international community to
intervene more readily to halt massive and systematic
violations of human rights.
As members move closer to a decision on these
situations, I hope they will also keep the broadest possible
picture in view. Sierra Leone and the Democratic
Republic of the Congo need more than humanitarian
palliatives. Each crisis situation in the world is different
and must be decided on its own merits. But for the
United Nations and this Council in particular to retain
their credibility and the support of the world’s peoples,
the commitment to peacekeeping, humanitarian assistance
and other such action must be applied fairly and
consistently, irrespective of region or nation.
Whether we are speaking of peace and security
issues or of closely related questions such as social
development, environmental protection, human rights and
human resources, it is essential to think in terms of
partnerships with Africa: partnerships with the OAU, with
other regional and subregional organizations, with civil
society groups and individuals.
Those nations making good-faith efforts and
adopting enlightened policies deserve much greater
support than they are now getting. Where the international
community is committed to making a difference, it has
shown that significant transformation can be achieved.
There is no excuse for not doing what is reasonable
and doable. It is reasonable, for example, to provide more
resources for humanitarian assistance and post-conflict
peace-building. It is reasonable to act more rapidly and
more decisively on debt. It is reasonable to increase
official development assistance.
But what is reasonable and doable is far from a
question of money alone. Training, technology, political
engagement: there are many paths for partnership to
follow. The over-arching point is that, by combining
African efforts with those of the international community,
we can give the cause of peace and development in
Africa decisive new momentum.

Security Council
Fifty-fourth year
“Afro-pessimism” is a dead end. “Africa fatigue” is an
affront to the very idea of a responsible international
community. I said in my report last year that our work in
Africa was both a process and a shared partnership.
However imperfectly, Africans have provided many
important signs of their own yearning for peace, stability
and development and of their willingness to work for it.
The right kind of support now, carefully directed to those
best able to use it, could help Africans turn a corner and set
the stage for a brighter future. Let us seize this moment.
The President: I call now on the Secretary-General of
the Organization of African Unity, His Excellency
Mr. Salim Ahmed Salim.
Mr. Salim (Secretary-General of the Organization of
African Unity): I wish first of all to congratulate you, Sir,
on your assumption of the presidency of the Security
Council for the month of September, and to say how
honoured I am to address the Security Council once again
on behalf of the Organization of African Unity (OAU). The
initiative you have taken to convene this ministerial meeting
on the situation in Africa, on the eve of the year 2000, is a
welcome initiative and clear testimony to the continuing
interest of the Netherlands in Africa. I would also like to
express the appreciation of the OAU for the support that
your country, the Netherlands, has been extending and
continues to extend to Africa, particularly in the areas of
economic development and in our efforts at promoting
peace, security and stability in our continent.
This initiative happily coincides with the momentous
decisions taken by African leaders themselves at the Algiers
summit in July this year and subsequently at the summit
held in Sirte, Libya, in September, aimed at strengthening
Africa’s capacity to deal with continental and global
challenges. These decisions relate, inter alia, to Africa’s
resolve and its determined effort to make the year 2000 a
year of peace and stability in our continent.
Our objective and our determination is to move from
an era of conflict resolution to an era of security and
stability, and from an era of economic stagnation to one of
greater integration of African economies and of economic
development. In so doing, we shall start the process of
putting an end to the current plethora of conflicts that
continue to frustrate Africa’s aspirations and expectations,
and of creating better conditions for the well-being of
African peoples.
I see the present session as a follow-up: first, to the
Ministerial meeting of the Security Council on 25

4049th meeting
29 September 1999
September 1997 (S/PV.3819), which discussed the
situation in Africa and, second, to the discussions last
year of the Secretary-General's report on the causes of
conflict and the promotion of durable peace and
sustainable development in Africa (S/1998/318). This
present initiative therefore constitutes a manifestation of
the international community's continuing interest in Africa
and its concern over the conflicts which continue to cause
immense suffering for our people and destruction of life
and property, apart from its serious negative impact on
the socio-economic development of our continent.
Two years ago, when I addressed the Ministerial
meeting of the Security Council on the situation in Africa
I drew the Council's attention to the many problems
facing that continent and the challenges they posed —
and continue to pose — for our peoples and leaders. The
issues of democratization, good governance,
accountability, respect for human rights and the rule of
law continue to preoccupy African governments and
peoples. The very healthy and frank discussions that took
place in Algiers on these issues and in particular the
decision, effective from the next summit, not to accept
those who usurp power through the overthrow of
constitutionally elected governments in OAU, bear
witness to Africa's resolve and seriousness on these
issues.
As we revisit the situation in Africa since the time
of our last debate on this subject, I should like to pay a
well-deserved tribute to the Secretary-General of the
United Nations for his insightful progress report before us
today. We note, in that regard, the important role of the
Security Council, the General Assembly and the
Economic and Social Council, particularly their holistic
approach in the implementation of the important
recommendations in the report.
We at OAU also attach great importance to
enhanced cooperation between OAU and the United
Nations, convinced as we are that the partnership between
the two institutions is mutually reinforcing.
Since the last Ministerial meeting on the situation in
Africa, there have been significant developments in our
continued and collective efforts for the peaceful resolution
of the conflicts there. The signing of the Agreement on a
Ceasefire in the Democratic Republic of the Congo
(S/1999/815) and the Lomé Peace Agreement
(S/1999/777) on the peace process in Sierra Leone are
especially noteworthy. In this regard, we welcome the
recent proposal of the United Nations Secretary-General

5

Security Council
Fifty-fourth year
for the deployment of a 6,000-strong United Nations force
for Sierra Leone and the positive reaction to it by the
Security Council contained in the resolution currently under
consideration. We believe that sending such a force will
help stabilize the situation and assist in the implementation
of the Lomé Peace Agreement. It is also proper to
emphasize here the urgent need to provide the Government
and people of Sierra Leone with humanitarian assistance as
well as assistance for rehabilitation and reconstruction.
As we meet today, a number of conflicts remain a
source of grave concern to us: in Angola; in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo; and between Ethiopia and Eritrea.
We are concerned also by the crisis in the Comoros, the
fragile and fluid situation in the Republic of the Congo and
the situation in Burundi. In almost all these conflicts, it is
significant that it has been mainly Africans themselves who
have been in the forefront in finding solutions.
In the tragic and unfortunate conflict between Ethiopia
and Eritrea, Africa — through its continental
organization — has been seriously and deeply engaged in
finding a peaceful settlement. These efforts were carried out
by the High-Level Delegation of heads of State and
Government comprising the then Chairman of OAU,
President Blaise Compaore of Burkina Faso, President
Robert Mugabe of Zimbabwe and former President Hassan
Gouled Aptidon of Djibouti, as well as the new head of
State of that country, President Ismail Omar Guelleh,
together with the OAU Secretary-General. These efforts
continue to be pursued today by OAU and more particularly
by the current Chairman of OAU, President Abdelaziz
Bouteflika of Algeria, working closely with the SecretaryGeneral of OAU. Since the Algiers summit in July this
year, intensive consultations have been pursued with a view
to seeking an early solution to the conflict. OAU has
continued these efforts in close cooperation with the United
Nations and the Government of the United States of
America.
In the case of Liberia, Sierra Leone and GuineaBissau, it has again been Africa, more particularly the
heads of State and Government of the Economic
Community of West African States (ECOWAS), which has
worked assiduously towards the restoration of peace and the
restoration of constitutional order. Currently, Africa is
engaged in yet another effort to advance the cause of peace
in Burundi, under the auspices of the former President of
Tanzania, Mwalimu Julius Nyerere. Within the context of
the letter and spirit of the Algiers summit, we are
determined to do our utmost to promote efforts to put an
end to the bloody death and destruction taking place in

6

4049th meeting
29 September 1999
Angola essentially as a result of the intransigence of the
UNITA leadership. We also hope to intensify efforts to
resolve the conflicts in Somalia and southern Sudan.
The situation in the Comoros also continues to be of
serious concern. We have spared no effort in our common
resolve to restore peace, security and constitutional order
to the archipelago. OAU and the countries of the region
have explored all peaceful avenues for a lasting solution
to the crisis in that country. It was under OAU auspices
that the Addis Ababa and Antananarivo Agreements were
fostered. Regrettably, the Antananarivo Agreement —
which was welcomed by all people of goodwill as a
serious attempt to address the concerns of all the
inhabitants of the Comoros, particularly on the island of
Anjouan, while maintaining the unity and territorial
integrity of the country and the cohesion of its people —
was undermined by the intransigence of hard-line
elements within the Anjouanese party. Furthermore, the
military takeover in the Comoros has further complicated
the situation.
I wish to stress at this point that in all its peace
endeavours OAU has never found the United Nations
unwilling to help. Indeed, the United Nations has proved
to be our main partner for peace. I wish, therefore, to take
this opportunity to pay a tribute to the United Nations, its
Security Council and its Secretary-General for their
support and cooperation. Our appreciation also goes to
individual States Members of the United Nations which
are accompanying and supporting OAU in its efforts to
promote peace, security and stability in Africa. I wish
also to emphasize that OAU has endeavoured to work
closely with and to support the regional economic
communities in their collective efforts to resolve conflicts
there. OAU takes pride in the partnership we have
succeeded in building with the United Nations and the
regional economic communities in Africa, and we
definitely look forward to strengthening and consolidating
this partnership for peace, particularly as we prepare to
enter the new century.
I wish to take this opportunity also to stress the
importance of timely action by the international
community, the United Nations and its Security Council,
in particular, to support peace agreements promoted by
OAU or by the regional economic communities in
cooperation with OAU. In saying this, I have in mind our
experience in the past when critical time and opportunities
for peace were lost because of a lack of timely action by
the Council.

Security Council
Fifty-fourth year
The sad experience of United Nations inaction with
respect to the situation in the Republic of the Congo is still
very fresh in our mind. There is no doubt that the signing
of a peace agreement, even though significant by itself, is
but the beginning of a long and arduous path to peace,
strewn with dangers and alive with the potential for a
renewal of conflict if the components for a successful
peacemaking and peacekeeping process are not adequate,
timely and appropriate.
As we meet today, I must point out that serious
difficulties have been faced by OAU and the regional
economic communities — ECOWAS and the Southern
African Development Community (SADC) — involved in
the implementation of the Agreements for Sierra Leone and
the Democratic Republic of the Congo. These Agreements
have been duly signed by the parties concerned and what is
required is speedy action for their implementation. Yet the
required determination and resources are not forthcoming:
it is a fact that we lack the necessary and adequate
resources to ensure the full and successful implementation
of the Agreements which have so far been signed much less
those yet to be agreed by the parties to these conflicts.
I have already expressed our full support for some of
the proposals made by the Secretary-General in his recent
report on the situation in Sierra Leone, proposals aimed at
enhancing United Nations support for the implementation
of the Lomé Peace Agreement. I would now like to urge
the Security Council to also take speedy action with respect
to the implementation of the Lusaka Ceasefire Agreement
through the deployment of a peacekeeping force. I wish to
reiterate the call made by President Chiluba of Zambia in
his Council briefing on the Democratic Republic of the
Congo on 21 September and to appeal once again to this
body to ensure that Africa is provided with the muchneeded financial and logistical assistance for the successful
implementation of the Agreement signed. Such early action
by the Security Council is vital in view of the fragile peace
prevailing in the Democratic Republic of the Congo. I
believe that such determined action by the Security Council
is also consistent with its primary responsibility for the
maintenance of international peace and security.
In pleading for speedy action by the Security Council,
I emphasize the partnership for peace that I mentioned
earlier and that we are seeking to consolidate between our
universal body, our continental organization and our
regional economic communities. This partnership needs to
be based on a rational division of work and fair sharing of
the burden, bearing in mind the global responsibility

4049th meeting
29 September 1999
entrusted to the United Nations and its Security Council
for the maintenance of international peace and security.
As the Council deliberates on the situation in Africa,
I am confident that it will take into account the realities
in our continent and the steadfast efforts of African
countries in dealing with their problems as well as events
that impinge on the continent from outside.
The Abuja Treaty broke new ground in Africa’s
strategies for the greater integration of the economies of
its States. But in order for Africa to embark on this vital
course of integration it should be given a chance to assert
itself in this direction. As indicated by the numerous
appeals made by African leaders — not only at the fiftyfourth session of the General Assembly, on the eve of the
new millennium, but also at other forums — the
cancellation of debt in respect of African countries has
become all the more urgent. Likewise, in the very
progress report before us today, the Secretary-General has
argued that, despite the many pitfalls and impediments on
the continent, African countries have already embarked on
the much-required economic reforms.
Recently in Sirte, Libya, African leaders, among
other things, also decided to establish an African Union
in conformity with the ultimate objectives of the Charter
of our continental organization and the provisions of the
Treaty establishing the African Economic Community;
accelerate the process of implementing the Treaty; and
strengthen and consolidate the regional economic
communities as the pillars for achieving the objectives of
the African Economic Community to realize the
envisaged Union.
I am sure the Council members now realize that
African countries are clearly not shying away from their
responsibilities. While we recognize that some of our
problems are part of colonial legacies and injustices done
to our people, at the same time we remain mindful that
many of our problems are of our own making.
We believe that these serious and imaginative efforts
deployed by our people and our leaders in confronting
many of our problems and challenges deserve
international understanding and solidarity. We need an
element of fairness and objectivity in reviewing African
problems.
Africa, for example, has the misfortune of having
some 7 million refugees and more than double that
number of internally displaced persons. In their

7

Security Council
Fifty-fourth year

4049th meeting
29 September 1999

generosity, African countries have provided shelter and
support. Yet for Africans to be able to assist effectively
their brethren who have been forced to vote with their feet,
international support and solidarity — which unfortunately,
have been diminishing — are vital.

I would also like to welcome the presence here
among us of several Ministers for Foreign Affairs from
Africa and other friendly countries. Their presence attests
to the importance that the international community
attaches to Africa and its recovery.

I need not remind Council that in dealing with African
refugees, as compared to some others in other parts of the
world, the element of proportionality is lacking.

I would like, finally, to express our great joy at
seeing Mr. Salim Ahmed Salim, Secretary-General of the
OAU, taking part in this debate and having him share
with us his sound knowledge and consummate experience
of African affairs.

As I conclude, I would like to reiterate that Africa is
undertaking a process of reform and renewal. This process
is all-embracing — political, economic and social — and is,
in my view, an irreversible process. But for the process to
remain meaningful and sustainable, Africa needs the active
support of the international community. As we prepare to
enter a new century, and believing, as I believe all the
Council members do, in our collective humanity, I trust that
the Council and the international community at large will
respond positively and constructively to Africa’s own quiet
revolution.
The President: I thank the Secretary-General of the
Organization of African Unity for the kind words he
addressed to my Government.
The next speaker is the representative of Algeria, who
wishes to make a statement on behalf of the current
Chairman of the Organization of African Unity. I invite him
to take a seat at the Council table and to make his
statement.
Mr. Baali (Algeria) (spoke in French): It is indeed a
pleasant duty to submit to you, Sir, on my own behalf and
on behalf of the current Chairman of the Organization of
African Unity (OAU), Mr. Abdelaziz Bouteflika, whom I
have the honour of representing here, my heartfelt
congratulations on your assumption of the presidency of the
Security Council.
The convincing results that this body has achieved
under the direction of Ambassador Peter van Walsum
promise to make this debate on Africa, organized at the
initiative of your country, a great success.
I would like to pay a well-deserved tribute to your
predecessor, Ambassador Martin Andjaba of Namibia, for
the elegance and competence he showed in leading the
work of the Council during a month when the world
continued — the summer season notwithstanding — to be
rocked by crises, tensions and armed conflicts.

8

Two years ago the Security Council met at the
ministerial level to consider the possibility of international
action to promote peace and security on the African
continent. In so doing, the Council assessed for the first
time the scope of the challenges facing Africa. At the
same time, the Council showed its readiness to assist in
the struggle for peace and development on that continent,
which has been able to rid itself of colonialism but not to
rid itself entirely of the weight of colonialism’s heritage.
This heritage is quite often the source of conflicts that
tear the continent apart and of the poverty with which it
is afflicted.
Since then, the Secretary-General of our
organization, who has just presented to us a useful and
exhaustive report, has endeavoured, with his well-known
courage and tenacity, to gradually make Africa the focus
of United Nations concerns. His statement here before the
Council this morning is just another striking illustration of
this. But it is from Africa itself that the most powerful
message of hope has come.
Realizing that its salvation depended first and
foremost on its own efforts, Africa has, with unexpected
vigour and vitality, undertaken to get back on its feet. To
fully accomplish this, however, it needs the support of the
international community, and especially of the United
Nations, which Africa has greatly helped live up to its
original ideals. Indeed, in emerging on the scene of
history, African countries have been responsible for
priority being given by the United Nations to the major
redemptive projects that go by the names of
decolonization, development, disarmament and
democratization.
In establishing the OAU as a crucible for their
solidarity and a channel of their aspirations, the African
countries were able to preserve their independence in the
face of the demands of the prevailing bipolar structure of
international relations and, further, to find in the

Security Council
Fifty-fourth year
principles of non-alignment the tools for unity of action to
ensure for themselves a significant say in the course of
events within the United Nations, which had become the
object of great hopes.
Since then, the OAU has belied speculation on its
obsolescence and defied the challenges posed by internal
problems and external interference. The OAU thus
developed a faithful partnership with the United Nations in
its quest for peace and development, implementing a
doctrine whose soundness was amply confirmed by its
hard-won aloofness from the East-West confrontation and
by its emphasis on the North-South gap, which it had
constantly warned against.
The remarkable developments in the course of history,
with the victory of Africa and the United Nations over
colonialism and apartheid and the disappearance of
ideological confrontation in international relations, have
established conditions propitious for work on economic and
social development and for the building of democratic
political systems.
But the legacy of the twentieth century is as heavy as
it is uncertain. Considerable, swift and inadequately
controlled changes have exposed the restructuring of
international relations to the opposite phenomena of
fragmentation and globalization. The asymmetry between
Africa and the developed world has become structural in
relation both to the problems of peace, security and stability
and to economic development and integration. Africa
continues to suffer from a chronic deterioration in the terms
of trade, the external debt burden, heavy unemployment and
the effects of pandemics, as well as the many torments
brought on by human and natural evils.
It is a tragic demonstration of Africa’s isolation from
the rest of the world that our continent is the only region
where education is declining at a time when the developed
countries are moving at full speed into the information age
and waging a technological revolution that is having an
unimaginably positive impact on the quality of life in their
societies. Indeed, our continent is home to two thirds of the
least developed countries and to three quarters of those at
a low level of human development, and almost half of its
inhabitants live in absolute poverty.
With a continually declining level of official
development assistance; a suffocating debt burden; a still
meagre flow of direct foreign investment; a heavy
dependence on, and thus a significant vulnerability with
regard to the commodities that are often its sole exports; an

4049th meeting
29 September 1999
insignificant level of participation in world trade; and
among the lowest social development indicators, Africa
today is a continent afflicted by serious handicaps that
further hinder the development efforts it has made to
recover from the most unfavourable and adverse
conditions. In brief, Africa, striving and sacrificing to
reform itself and thus take its place in the management of
world affairs, is unjustly penalized and blocked in its
efforts to recover.
Nevertheless, in spite of the picture of suffering and
contrasts which the continent presents to the world; in
spite of the upheavals that wrack its civil societies; and in
spite of all the difficulties draining its capacity to steer its
own way through a troublesome environment, Africa has
taken the costly and demanding road of renewal that is so
necessary if it is to assume control of its own destiny and
to achieve a balanced world situation in the future.
This year, the OAU heads of State and Government,
meeting in Algiers, participated in unprecedented numbers
to make their thirty-fifth annual Summit a particularly
outstanding event. The Summit was also a milestone in
the fruition of major changes deeply affecting Africa,
which has come to learn that its renewal calls inescapably
for the satisfaction of the demands of democratization and
good governance, the promotion of social justice and free
economic enterprise, and the protection of all human and
national rights.
The Algiers Summit proved that all Africa has met,
assembled and set off, with a sense of responsibility and
realism, down the road to peace, unity and work — in a
word, to recovery. A new spirit calling for concord and
peace prevails from the North of our continent to the
South. Aware that only a peaceful, stable and unitary
Africa can hope to meet the challenge of recovery,
African leaders decided to strive with renewed vigour to
settle the conflicts that have cast their peoples into
mourning and wasted their precious resources. They
would do so by addressing the underlying causes of these
conflicts and establishing conditions for implementing
African solutions informed by African values.
Africa emerged from the Algiers Summit serene,
unified and strong. Africa has perceptively drawn lessons
from past failures and refined its vision and its quest for
future successes. Africa has undertaken to overcome
difficult problems within its borders and, beyond, to take
its place among the architects and beneficiaries of
collective security and globalization. In this regard, the
Algiers Declaration, which the thirty-fifth OAU Summit

9

Security Council
Fifty-fourth year
crafted as an expression of Africa’s determination and
expectations on the threshold of the twenty-first century,
illustrates a sound and ambitious concept of the universal
partnership for which the African countries are calling in
the enlightened self-interest of us all.
In this respect, the Declaration adopted by the heads
of State and Government in Sirte laid down new rules for
facilitating the evolution of Africa towards the unity which
the OAU charter set as its ultimate objective.
Africa has made its major priority the strengthening of
its capacity to prevent, manage and eliminate conflict,
inspired by the conviction that the loss of human lives and
the squandering of resources can never be justified by the
false claims and illusory solutions that underlie so many
internal and inter-African confrontations. Nevertheless,
Africa has resolutely endeavoured to eliminate these
counterproductive tensions and to shed the burdens of
fratricidal conflicts. To that end, the Algiers Summit, in a
very timely manner, worked to consolidate and expand the
doctrinal bases for African joint action, both enshrining
principles that have well served inter-African relations —
such as that of the inviolability of the borders that existed
at independence — and rejecting unconstitutional changes
in the political life of the States of the continent.
Against this background and in the light of the efforts
undertaken and results achieved to date in managing various
conflict situations, the Algiers Summit reiterated the
validity of the peace plans that the OAU has painstakingly
developed in consultation with the parties and supplied
operational resources to implement them more speedily.
Whether in the conflict between Eritrea and Ethiopia
or the situation in the Great Lakes region and in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, breakthroughs have
been achieved in the search for peaceful, just and lasting
solutions. The OAU, in cooperation with the United Nations
and with the goodwill which the Organization elicits in its
work for peace, will methodically pursue its activities,
which will intensify with the involvement of the
protagonists, whose active cooperation is indispensable to
a positive outcome.
The stabilization of the situation in Liberia and Sierra
Leone continues, with the praiseworthy assistance of the
Economic Community of West African States (ECOWAS)
member States, while the good offices of the OAU in the
Comoros are gaining ground, as Comorans rally around
democratically elected institutions to preserve the country's
national unity and territorial integrity.

10

4049th meeting
29 September 1999
In Angola, the OAU is firmly at the side of the
United Nations, which has quite rightly said that UNITA
is solely responsible for the continuation of the crisis.
Similarly, in Western Sahara the OAU is sparing no effort
to assist the United Nations to organize, in July 2000, the
referendum on self-determination for the Sahroui people,
in accordance with the peace plan and the Houston
agreements, accepted by both parties to the conflict and
endorsed by the Security Council.
Africa has thus taken control of its affairs, showing
its determination to put an end to conflicts that have
weakened it and to free itself to conduct the only battle
worth waging, that of development. It has in that way
shown everyone that it does not intend to remain a
continent that is taken for granted, and that no one should
henceforth doubt its capacity to rise again and take its
rightful place in the emerging new world order.
At the same time, Africa realizes that peace is a
long-term endeavour. It also knows that development is
another name for peace, and that as long as there is still
poverty and misery the work of peace will remain fragile
and the progress realized will be reversible.
Finally, it realizes that the way to eradicate the
causes of dissension and instability is to meet the
legitimate aspirations of its peoples, especially their
aspiration to live in democratic societies, free of injustice
and arbitrariness, with the rule of law well established,
and with their rights and freedoms respected, in full
harmony with their age-old values and heritage.
However, the Algiers summit did not just commit
itself to ending the tragic phase of conflict in Africa. It is
also intended to be a new point of departure for the
continent's economic development and its integration.
The Abuja Agreement, which created the African
Economic Community, is now being implemented, based
on regional and subregional regroupings whose interaction
and cooperation will gradually and in practical ways lead
to the final unification of the continent.
When they are completely free of the formidable
burdens imposed by inter-State and intra-State conflicts,
the African countries, which have been behind those of
the other continents, will also be able to devote
themselves fully to rebuilding their economies, meeting
the enormous needs of their populations and making their
contribution to the overall recovery of Africa. Indeed,
many of our countries that are committed to ambitious

Security Council
Fifty-fourth year
structural adjustment programmes, which are socially
costly, are now beginning to see the fruits of their efforts
and to renew economic growth.
However, in order to meet the challenge of recovery,
Africa, which can be self-reliant, must also be able to count
on the international community and its support. Africa
generally expects the rest of the world to accept it as a
partner equal in rights and duties and a credible and
responsible interlocutor — that is, a fully fledged
participant in the conduct of international affairs and the
restructuring of the world order.
This means that Africa must be an active party in
decision-making concerning major international issues
which involve the future of humankind, and therefore its
own future, be they issues of international peace and
security or economic cooperation and development.
From this standpoint, the OAU wishes to establish a
sound and fruitful relationship with the United Nations
going beyond existing schemes for cooperation and taking
the form of a new contract, comprehensive and ambitious,
covering all areas of common interest. Together we must
think about identifying the various areas where close
cooperation between the two Organizations is desirable, if
not necessary, and the ways of organizing it, building it and
implementing it.
One of the essential areas where obviously the OAU
and the United Nations can and must develop a special
relationship is that of peacekeeping, where, thanks to its
irreplaceable knowledge of African problems and its now
well recognized experience in this area, the OAU can help
to manage conflicts in cooperation with the United Nations.
The United Nations would also, in forms and circumstances
to be determined by common agreement, give not only
political support, but logistical, financial and training
support.
We regard it as essential in this respect that the United
Nations commit itself in Africa with the same weight and
determination as it has shown in other regions of the world,
as regards conflict prevention and settlement, peacekeeping
operations or assistance to refugees, since the international
community must extend a hand to all those who are
suffering and show generosity towards them, whatever
region of the world they come from, as suffering knows no
colour.
Another area where the OAU and the United Nations
must create new forms of cooperation is the humanitarian

4049th meeting
29 September 1999
sphere, a sensitive issue for all. If we are not careful, this
could lead to all kinds of excesses. It seems to me
essential that the two Organizations together define, in a
clear and transparent manner, rules for managing
humanitarian issues, so that, on the one hand,
humanitarian assistance is not used for political or media
purposes, and, on the other hand, is not conceived as an
alternative to the prevention or settlement of conflicts or
used as a pretext to violate the sovereignty of States or
even as a substitute for development assistance.
From this viewpoint, the right or duty to interfere,
which some now wish to make an international norm
applying everywhere, automatically and in all situations,
is a cause of major concern for our countries, because of
the risks of interference in the internal affairs of States
inherent in it and the unacceptable threats it brings to bear
on national sovereignty. It would be particularly
dangerous, under the pretext of exorcising painful
emotions or absolving the international community of its
past inaction or its inability now and in the future to
prevent or settle crises, to risk acting without the consent
of a State, or even against its desire, with excesses as
serious as regrettable endangering the collective security
system so painstakingly built around the Security Council.
The final area of importance where the United
Nations has a role to play, and responsibilities to assume,
with regard to Africa, is that of development, which
should be at the heart of the new relationship to be built
between the two Organizations.
There are rather contrasting results of the many
United Nations initiatives on Africa and the efforts made
by some of our partners, particularly through official
development assistance, alleviating the debt burden or
opening up markets to African exports. It is therefore
important to reformulate the relationship between the
OAU and the United Nations on a new basis and to open
up the way for the establishment of a genuine partnership
for the development of Africa.
In order to succeed, this partnership should take into
account, coherently and comprehensively, the issues of
investment, official development assistance, external debt,
trade and the negative effects of structural adjustment
programmes, and it should involve all the financial
institutions and agencies of the United Nations in a
concerted and coherent effort.
The developments and changes characterizing today's
world, which show quite clearly the interdependence

11

Security Council
Fifty-fourth year
among nations and which, paradoxically, also show that
Africa is clearly being left on the sidelines, require a
partnership of this nature and of this scope. This alone
would allay the fears that the international community will
go back on its consensus regarding the need for Africa's
economic recovery.
Similarly, at a time when world economic models are
converging in their orientation to the market and the
universal impact of global environmental factors intertwine
the objective of lasting sustainable development with that
of social development, the international community must be
sensitive to the urgent and imperative needs of Africa with
regard to the elimination of hunger, the eradication of
pandemics, especially AIDS, the alleviation of poverty, the
universal immunization of children and basic education for
all.
So it is that the objective of collective security of
States, associated with the new horizons opened up at the
end of the cold war and serious progress towards general
and complete disarmament — which should involve first
and foremost weapons of mass destruction — will be
expressed in the new terms of physical well-being and
quality of life for citizens.
Africa, which has declared itself to be a nuclearweapon-free zone, could serve well as an area for the
deployment of efforts to propagate a culture for the security
of peoples with the aim of cultivating the civil, political,
cultural, social and economic rights of Africans.
The debate on Africa is being held at a time like no
other, since it brings us together at the dawning of a new
era with so many challenges, promises and opportunities, an
era that, if only we wished it, could foster the birth of a
new ethic of international relations, based on universally
shared peace and prosperity. This new ethic would fully
restore the ideals and principles enshrined in the United
Nations Charter, while repudiating for ever the upheavals,
aberrations and torments of the twentieth century, which
has been especially trying for the human race.
Thus, it is important that the substantial results of our
Organization provide the impetus for a new beginning, with
even greater ambitions in terms of preventive diplomacy,
peaceful settlement of disputes among States, the
maintenance of peace and international security and
international cooperation for development.
It is also important that the acceleration of history,
which began to give some substance and consistency to the

12

4049th meeting
29 September 1999
idea of an “international community”, lead to a network
of renewed international relations, where the higher
interests of humankind be seen as indivisible and
encompass the political and security spheres as well as
the economic, financial and monetary spheres. It is also
important that globalization extend naturally its benefits
to the developing countries and not give rise in any way
to increased marginalization or exclusion.
From this point of view, Africa has value as a
challenging test of credibility for the professions of faith
over a future of solidarity that is qualitatively better for
all humankind. Africa must no longer be a vast area that
is prey to uncertainty, dire poverty, pandemics and
disorder. Africa is, in fact, the continent whose recovery
requires the greatest external support in order to mobilize
all of its energies to the maximum extent. Africa must, of
course, count on its own resources, but it is entitled to
expect special assistance from the international
community as a whole.
This means that now more than ever, the United
Nations has a unique mission to carry out and special
responsibilities to take on for the benefit of Africa. This
also means that the United Nations must resolutely put
Africa at the focus of the problem of building a peaceful
and harmonious world order for future generations.
Precisely at the end of a century that has seen
Africa, the cradle of humankind, go through a revival and
a rehabilitation after such a cruel history, Africans are
entitled to become active participants in the prodigious
promises of the third millennium. This would be the best
way to raise over the new era the banner of promoting
respect for the dignity of the human individual and of all
human beings.
The President: I thank the representative of Algeria
for his kind words addressed to the presidency.
Mr. Holbrooke (United States of America): I am
deeply honoured to speak before the Council today on
Africa, an area that I have pledged will be one of my
highest priorities as the United States Ambassador to the
United Nations. I thank Prime Minister Kok for his
leadership, and I appreciate all the hard work done by his
strong delegation to make this meeting possible. I
compliment the Secretary-General on his statement and
thank him for all of his efforts on these important issues.
His personal leadership — indeed, his personal advice to
me — his inspiration in these areas has been enduring,
and I look to him for so much in this area.

Security Council
Fifty-fourth year
We also appreciate the statements of the SecretaryGeneral of the Organization of African Unity (OAU) and
the representative of the Chair of the OAU. The
achievements of the OAU under Secretary-General Salim
Salim and the current Chairman in Algeria in promoting
peace and stability throughout the region are vital, and we
take note of these important efforts.
Because the list of speakers is long and the subject
vastly important, and much of what I will say has already
been said by previous speakers — and I am sure will be
repeated by others — and because the people in this room
need less than anyone else in the world to be reminded of
the importance of these issues, I would like to summarize
my remarks and submit the full remarks in written form in
order to enable more speakers to speak before lunch.
Throughout this decade, the United States, under the
personal leadership of President Clinton, has worked to
revitalize and energize American engagement in Africa. My
country is proud to have convened the first Security
Council ministerial meeting on Africa two years ago. Last
March, Secretary of State Albright hosted the first United
States-Africa ministerial meeting, bringing together leaders
of 50 African nations to discuss our common agenda. Next
month, she plans to make her third visit there as Secretary
of State. And, as many here know, because I have
discussed my plans in order to seek their advice, I plan to
make my first major trip in my present job to Africa in late
November or early December.
No longer the victims of colonialism or great-Power
competition, the people of Africa have a historic
opportunity to see that in the coming century, their lives
can be freer, safer and more secure. It is imperative that the
United Nations support and foster their ambitions. Towards
this end, our efforts should address a four-part agenda: first,
we must enhance Africa's security by helping it resolve and
prevent armed conflict; secondly, we must help Africa
grapple with such transnational threats as AIDS and
terrorism; thirdly, we must support Africa's ongoing
political transformation towards open societies and markets;
and fourthly, we must assist Africa's economic development
and address its humanitarian concerns.
Allow me to discuss this agenda in more detail and,
once again, summarize much of what I would otherwise
have said at greater length.
In Africa we have to work much harder to solve the
conflicts that threaten the continent’s future. In the
Democratic Republic of the Congo — a situation that has

4049th meeting
29 September 1999
involved at least eight countries and become the widest
inter-State war in African history — we support the
efforts now under way to implement the peace agreement
so painstakingly negotiated by President Chiluba of
Zambia. We will consider recommendations of United
Nations military liaison officers on how the United
Nations can further the peace process. We urge all
combatants to adhere to the signed ceasefire. And the
United Nations, in our view, needs a strong, experienced
special representative in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo as soon as possible to galvanize peace
implementation.
Similarly, in Sierra Leone, the United States has
been working actively with the Government, the various
rebel groups, the Economic Community of West African
States (ECOWAS) and the United Nations to implement
a peace agreement. We are anxious to begin disarmament
and demobilization in Sierra Leone while the ECOWAS
Monitoring Group (ECOMOG) still has a credible force
in the field. We need the United Nations to deploy the
full complement of authorized observers as soon as
possible and be ready to introduce a full peacekeeping
operation in December when the Nigerians plan to leave.
In Ethiopia and Eritrea, we must continue to work to
restore peace. Although both sides have committed
themselves to the OAU peace settlement, much work
remains to be done. What some consider two of the most
hopeful countries in Africa now illustrate the dramatic
impact of senseless war.
Our collective failure to prevent and contain such
conflicts is lamentable. The international community has
a responsibility — moral, humanitarian, strategic and
political — to do more. The United States for its part, has
started: through the President’s African crisis response
initiative it is enhancing Africa’s own peacekeeping
capacity. So far we have trained some 5,000 African
peacekeepers from six different countries through this
programme. As Secretary Albright explained last week,
the United States has developed procedures to halt United
States arms sales to regions of conflict not already
covered by United Nations arms embargoes. We
encourage other nations to establish and observe such
moratoriums.
We also believe that we must attack the economic
structures that fuel the illicit arms trade — the grey and
black markets in diamonds, precious metals and narcotics.
Next week, experts in the United States Government will
convene a conference to look specifically at the war

13

Security Council
Fifty-fourth year
economies in Angola, the Congo and Sierra Leone. These
are just some of the things we must do, but our
responsibilities must not obscure a fundamental reality: the
people and leaders of Africa must provide a basis for peace.
Let me be clear: where meaningful peace agreements
are in place, the United Nations should work hard to
implement them. Where an international presence is
required, the United Nations has a vital role to play. But we
must also press the people and leaders of Africa itself to
solve the problems on their own and, above all, to prevent
them before they begin or escalate.
In addition to the threat of instability, the United
Nations needs to continue to help Africa grapple with those
problems that lie outside the traditional realm of
international politics. The scourge of diseases like
HIV/AIDS stands out. The statistics, as everybody knows,
are truly staggering, and again I compliment the SecretaryGeneral on his personal efforts to heighten awareness of
this issue over the last few years. President Clinton is
currently seeking from Congress an additional $100 million
to fight AIDS worldwide. Senator Frist of Tennessee, the
Chairman of the subcommittee on African Affairs of the
Senate Committee on Foreign Relations, a Republican and
a surgeon, is personally seized of this issue and is working
hard and extensively to gain support for it and greater
awareness of it in the United States.
Terrorism continues to be a serious transnational threat
and one that we must all face together. The United States
has been providing anti-terrorism training to law
enforcement officers in eight African States.
Our third challenge is one we believe in strongly:
Africa must continue to develop open societies and open
markets. There can be no doubt that throughout this decade,
African democracy has made major — indeed in some
areas historic — strides. Today, more Africans live
democratically than ever before. Many Africans are tasting
freedom for the first time. This is illustrated in such places
as Mozambique and Namibia, and I think there was special
symbolism, and more than symbolism, in that only nine
years after United Nations peacekeepers helped Namibia to
independence, Ambassador Martin Adjaba so brilliantly led
the Security Council’s recent delegation to East Timor and
effected a potentially historic breakthrough towards peace.
These are but two examples that should give us all
hope. It is for reasons such as these that the United States
will continue to be a strong supporter of democratic forces

14

4049th meeting
29 September 1999
across the continent. We will work extensively with nongovernmental organizations to achieve this.
We must continue to work together to address the
economic and humanitarian problems that still exist in too
many countries in Africa. Clearly, there is an enormous
amount of work ahead of us. According to the United
Nations Development Programme (UNDP) Human
Development Report 1999, 42 African countries are in the
lowest third of the countries ranked; the 22 lowest-ranked
countries are all in sub-Saharan Africa. Urban
unemployment persists at rates of 20 to 30 per cent.
Landmines continue to cause deaths and casualties
throughout the continent. And Africa is also home to as
many as 3 million refugees and almost 8 million
displaced persons. As some representatives here may
know, I have spent my entire career working on refugee
issues. I intend to visit refugee camps on my forthcoming
trip. I know what needs to be done. I will work closely
with the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner
for Refugees and with our able Assistant Secretary of
State for Population, Refugees and Migration, Julia Taft,
to enhance our efforts in this area.
President Clinton has committed himself to working
with Congress to restore United States official
development assistance to Africa to the high levels of the
past. The Africa Growth and Opportunity Bill, now before
the United States Senate, would open United States
markets more broadly to African products and give
incentives to countries to reform and modernize their
economies.
We have also given our support to demining
programmes both through the United Nations and
bilaterally.
These efforts assist our work to ease Africa’s
transition into the global economy. Statism and
corruption — legacies of the colonial and immediate postcolonial periods — are hard habits to break, but Africans
are working hard to break them. It is incumbent upon all
of us to play a role in this process.
We all have an indispensable role to play in helping
Africa progress towards peace, prosperity and greater
freedom. Strides have been made, but an enormous
amount remains to be done. Throughout my tenure as the
United States Permanent Representative to the United
Nations, I pledge that, along with the United States
Government, I will work tirelessly to further the agenda
I have just outlined.

Security Council
Fifty-fourth year
The President: I thank the representative of the
United States for his kind words addressed to the
presidency.
Mr. Axworthy (Canada): I would like to thank the
delegation of the Netherlands for convening this meeting on
the situation in Africa and to you, personally, Mr. Prime
Minister, for adding your presence to this very important
debate. I should also like to thank the Secretary-General for
his very thoughtful report and the Secretary-General of the
Organization of African Unity (OAU), and the Ambassador
of Algeria representing the Chairman of OAU, President
Bouteflika, for their important contributions.
As we have heard in the reports that have just been
given here, Africans across the continent are seizing
opportunities to build vibrant and stable communities.
Democracy is resurgent; civil society is taking hold and
prospects for growth are promising. I think it would be fair
to say that the African renaissance is under way.
(spoke in French)
Economic and social development are, of course,
central to these processes. Canada’s commitment to
working with African people towards this end remains
intact. A third of Canada’s official development assistance
is allocated to Africa. Canada has forgiven all official
development assistance debt for the poorest African
countries. This year, we helped forge an international
mechanism to expand debt relief for the poorest countries.
We have given great priority to the battle against the
dangers that hit Africans particularly hard, including
HIV/AIDS. We firmly believe that the prosperity of Africa
depends on strong support for its sustainable development.
(spoke in English)
But the freedom from want is closely linked to the
freedom from fear. Societies cannot flourish in conditions
of violence and intimidation. Too many parts of the
continent remain caught in the vicious grip of armed
conflict, and the safety of Africans in these situations is
fragile. Africa’s people pay an especially high price in
terms of threats to their personal security. That is why, as
we have heard, Africans are working to confront these
threats to personal security directly.
On a continent where landmines kill and maim more
people than anywhere else, Africans played a leading role
in the campaign to ban anti-personnel landmines.

4049th meeting
29 September 1999
Many of the hundreds of millions of assault rifles
and other small arms now in circulation have found their
way to African battle zones. The countries of the
Economic Community of West African States (ECOWAS)
have had enough and have imposed a moratorium on the
arms flows into their region.
Africa’s children are the main victims of the
appalling wars that have ravaged Africa. More are drafted
into the service of violence as child soldiers than on any
other continent. This year, Mozambique gathered Africans
and others to take action on this front.
In particular, Africans recognize that the new war
economies that marry the brutality of warlords with the
avarice of mercenaries and arms dealers and certain
commercial interests exert a terrifying hold on many of
their communities.
Africans have categorically rejected the assumption
of power by force. The decision this year by the
Organization of African Unity (OAU) leaders in Algiers
is a milestone of enormous importance.
Clearly, Africans themselves have made the security
of people an impetus for action. The rest of us should
take care to listen and lend support — even if some
around this table do not share this agenda. Equal
attention, common action and collective resources to
advance Africa’s security needs are required. Anything
less, especially from the Security Council, is an
abdication of our shared obligations.
As we have heard this morning, preventing and
resolving conflict are a starting point. Africans are
striving to bring conflicts in Africa to an end: the OAU
in the Ethiopia-Eritrea conflict, the Southern African
Development Community (SADC) in Angola and the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and the Arusha
process in Burundi are all very important examples. Peace
is being established in Sierra Leone, largely as a result of
ECOWAS mediation and years of commitment by its
Monitoring Group (ECOMOG).
International support can bolster these efforts and
help build local capacity. That is behind Canada’s support
for Commonwealth efforts in Sierra Leone. At the
recently held Moncton Summit, Canada announced a
three-year training programme to strengthen peace and
security skills in countries of La Francophonie. We are
also contributing to strengthening the OAU, especially the
conflict management centre, and are committed to

15

Security Council
Fifty-fourth year
working for still closer consultation and cooperation
between the United Nations, the OAU and the subregional
organizations. We certainly welcome the presence here of
Secretary-General Salim Salim and Ministers speaking on
behalf of these organizations of Africa.
But making peace is not enough. Keeping, building
and consolidating peace are essential. Africans are
increasingly called on to serve as peacekeepers. Canadian
peacekeepers know first-hand the skill and bravery of their
African colleagues. To assist in this area we are helping
build on these talents with further training at the Pearson
Peacekeeping Centres in Nova Scotia and Montreal.
Where conflict has ended, there is a movement away
from a culture of war and towards societies at peace. These
efforts need help from other Governments, from civil
society and from the business community. Disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration of former combatants are
a primary challenge. The plight of war-affected children is
a particular concern. Building on Mali’s efforts on small
arms, for example, Canada and Ghana will host a
conference next year to map out an integrated approach to
these peace and security concerns in West Africa. Indeed,
much of Canada’s $30-million peace-building initiative is
focused on shoring up these and other efforts with projects
responding to local priorities and needs. Last week, my
Government announced a further contribution of $4.5
million for Sierra Leone to help civilians, particularly
children, who have been deeply affected by that conflict.
Controlling the marketplace of conflict which fuels
local African war machines is also vital in order to prevent
the suffering of individuals. Encouraging more responsible
business and government behaviour is a key. Such efforts
by Canada and others in the Wassenaar group to respect the
ECOWAS moratorium on arms flows is an important, and
I think necessary, demonstration of what must be done.
Business can contribute in other ways. If it wants to
harness Africa’s economic potential, it must join efforts to
remove landmines, which not only kill but also impede
access to resources.
I think that it is also very clear that the Security
Council has a responsibility to protect the security of
individual Africans. Contrary to what some suggest, the
Council has the authority and the mandate to take action
against those who profit from misery. It has the competence
to help establish sustainable peace and to intervene in the
face of massive suffering, and it should make full and
forceful use that mandate.

16

4049th meeting
29 September 1999
More resolute action to cut off the ways and means
for waging armed conflict and to ensure that these
sanctions work is vital. In Angola this is Canada’s
objective in proposing tougher measures to reduce
UNITA’s illegal diamond revenues, to limit its access to
the petroleum sources and to curtail its acquisition of
arms and ammunition — all of which make it possible for
UNITA to pursue this murderous war. I am confident that
if the will exists within the Council, these sanctions can
be made to encourage UNITA to return to the negotiating
table. If successful, the lessons learned here could well
have application in other conflict zones.
When there is peace to keep, there is no substitute
for collective Council action. This is no less true, and the
demand no less urgent, in Africa than elsewhere. We may
be faced with the need for robust, comprehensive peace
operations in the Democratic Republic of the Congo, and
possibly in Ethiopia and Eritrea. The risks and the costs
of these operations must be assumed by us all. Making
this solely or even primarily a local responsibility and
simply passing around the hat to see what might be
dropped into it is as shameful as it is inadequate.
In Sierra Leone, ECOMOG has shouldered the
burden long enough. Let us ensure that the mission this
Council agrees to implement peace is coloured blue —
United Nations-authorized, United Nations-managed,
United Nations-funded — and that the United Nations and
the remaining ECOMOG forces are as integrated as
possible.
The bitter experience of the individual Africans who
have suffered most — victims of genocide in Rwanda,
widespread starvation in Somalia, pervasive terror in
Sierra Leone, a generation-long slaughter in Angola,
slave-trading in the Sudan and a senseless war in Ethiopia
and Eritrea — should demand effective intervention by
the Council. Such is the responsibility of this body and no
other.
This humanitarian imperative has been applied, but
elsewhere — in Kosovo and in East Timor but not in
Africa — raising legitimate concern about how evenly
these initiatives are put into practice. The Council needs
to establish common criteria to trigger humanitarian
intervention, apply them consistently in consultations with
regional partners and overcome the reluctance of some to
commit their people and resources to help the victims of
war in far-off lands.

Security Council
Fifty-fourth year
The security of Africans should be a matter of concern
for us all. It is for Canadians. That is why Canada is
devoted to African development, the surest way to ensure
sustainable peace. That is why Canadians — judges, police,
teachers and humanitarian workers — serve in Africa. That
is why Canadians were willing to lead a multinational effort
in Zaire to protect the safety of a terrorized refugee
population and why today we continue to play a part in
African peacekeeping operations. Canada is the only
remaining non-African contributor to the United Nations
Mission in the Central African Republic. Prime Minister
Chrétien will reaffirm this commitment when he visits
Africa later this year.
(spoke in French)
As for the Council, much of its time is already
absorbed by African issues. The focus needs to be more on
both the quality and the effectiveness of the attention it
devotes to its African agenda. To this end, an approach to
Africa’s security challenges that takes human security
concerns fully into account makes sense.
(spoke in English)
The Secretary-General has provided us with an
insightful progress report on the causes of conflict in
Africa. The Secretary-General’s comments reinforce the
relevance of a human- centred agenda for Africa; his
recommendations underline the need for a comprehensive
approach. It falls to Africans, Council members and the
broader global community to take this agenda forward and
secure peace for the people of the African continent.
The President: I thank the Minister for Foreign
Affairs of Canada for the kind words he addressed to the
presidency.
Mr. Petrella (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish):
Mr. President, I should like once again to express our
gratitude for the tireless efforts deployed by your country
and delegation in the Security Council.
I should like to thank the Secretary-General for his
report on the causes of conflict and the promotion of
durable peace and sustainable development in Africa. I wish
also to thank you, Mr. President, for convening this open
debate on this important occasion.
We have listened with great interest to the statement
made by Ambassador Salim Ahmed Salim, the Secretary
General of the Organization of African Unity (OAU), and

4049th meeting
29 September 1999
to that of the Permanent Representative of Algeria,
Abdallah Baali, on behalf of the Chairman of the OAU.
The Secretary-General has again shown us the
correlation between peace and development, which is
essential if we wish to overcome the deep-seated causes
of the majority of the conflicts in Africa and elsewhere in
the world. The report also underlines the necessary
connection between efforts to achieve, maintain and
consolidate peace.
In the past two years, the United Nations, the OAU,
subregional organizations and various African leaders
have undertaken a series of initiatives aimed at resolving
the conflicts described in the report. In our view, a
comprehensive approach is necessary that would contain
the following elements.
First, the role of the Security Council in the
maintenance of peace is indispensable, and its authority
must be strengthened. In this context, the concept of
human security is essential.
Secondly, close cooperation between the Security
Council and African regional and subregional
organizations is imperative. This cooperation is
particularly relevant with regard to preventive and earlywarning mechanisms.
Thirdly, minimum conditions for development must
be created in order to overcome the causes of conflict and
to deal with their humanitarian consequences. For that
reason, we believe that cooperation is imperative between
the activities of the Council and of other bodies of the
United Nations system, in particular the Bretton Woods
institutions.
We must assess and give impetus to the efforts
undertaken by the large majority of African countries to
consolidate their democracies, promote human rights,
reform their economies, attract investments and improve
the standard of living of their peoples. The declaration
approved last July in Algiers at the OAU Summit is clear
evidence of this.
We are witnessing a positive trend in the resolution
of conflicts. Complex questions such as those related to
the Democratic Republic of the Congo and Sierra Leone
have taken once again the path of negotiation at the
urging of regional leaders and with the support of the
Security Council. That support must be renewed with a

17

Security Council
Fifty-fourth year
significant United Nations presence in the field in order to
maintain and consolidate the hard-won peace.
In the case of the Central African Republic, we note
with satisfaction that on 19 September last, presidential
elections were held that international observers found both
peaceful and fair. The United Nations Mission in the
Central African Republic certainly played a key role in the
holding of those elections.
In the Western Sahara, with the cooperation of
Morocco and the Frente POLISARIO, the United Nations
Mission for the Referendum in Western Sahara
(MINURSO) continues to work to hold a referendum on
self-determination in conditions of freedom, transparency
and impartiality.
In the case of Eritrea and Ethiopia, we hope that peace
is at hand.
All of these steps towards peace must be supported by
the Security Council.
Argentina has participated in and encouraged the
process of decolonization in Africa since its inception.
Today my country is gratified at the consolidation of the
rule of the law and the opening of African economies. To
our mutual benefit, we have increased our commercial and
technological exchanges and strengthened our political and
cultural relations.
At the multilateral level, Argentina, together with
interested African countries, promoted the creation of a
nuclear-weapon-free zone in the South Atlantic. In October
1998, the Fifth Meeting of the Member States of the Zone
of Peace and Cooperation of the South Atlantic, held in
Buenos Aires, brought together 21 African countries and
three Latin America countries.
The Plan of Action adopted at that meeting is designed
to implement the objectives of the Zone relating to the
peaceful solution of disputes, the promotion of democracy
and human rights, the fight against drug trafficking,
cooperation for development, humanitarian assistance and
the protection of living resources.
Argentina, to the extent of its ability, has been, and
will continue to be, present in Africa in the context of
peacekeeping operations and in humanitarian assistance
efforts, either directly or through the “White Helmets”. We
are also working on a set of cooperation programmes in the
fields of agriculture and livestock, computer science, State

18

4049th meeting
29 September 1999
reform and privatization, all of which are mutually
beneficial. We reiterate our offer to provide training
through our Peacekeeping Academy in Buenos Aires.
Finally, I should like to reiterate once again our
desire actively to participate in United Nations efforts in
Africa and to cooperate fully in the initiatives and
recommendations of the Secretary-General.
The President: I thank the representative of
Argentina for the kind words he addressed to the
presidency.
Mr. Ping (Gabon) (spoke in French): Sir, your
presence here during this debate on Africa attests to the
importance that you personally and your country attach to
issues relating to our continent. My delegation appreciates
this very much and would like most warmly to
congratulate you.
Two years ago the Security Council, meeting in this
very Chamber at Foreign Minister level, requested the
Secretary-General to submit to it a report on the causes of
conflict in Africa, ways to prevent it and the promotion
of durable peace and sustainable development there. In
response to that request, the Secretary-General submitted
to the Security Council on 13 April 1998 a report of very
high quality in terms of both the accuracy of its diagnosis
and the remedies it proposed.
Having considered the report, the Security Council,
within the context of its mandate, developed a series of
concrete proposals relating to support for regional and
subregional initiatives in the areas of conflict prevention
and the maintenance of peace; the establishment of an
international mechanism to assist host Governments in
maintaining the security and neutrality of refugee camps;
the strengthening of Africa’s peacekeeping capabilities;
the strengthening of the effectiveness of arms sanctions
regimes imposed by the Security Council; the urgent
resolution of the problem of illicit arms flows; and the
enhancement of the Council’s ability to monitor activities
authorized by it but carried out by Member States or a
coalition of States.
With regard to conflict prevention, management and
resolution, Africa has endeavoured to equip itself with the
appropriate mechanisms at the regional and subregional
level. The Secretary-General of the Organization of
African Unity, Mr. Salim Ahmed Salim, who spoke
earlier, emphasized the action that has been taken at the
continent level in Africa.

Security Council
Fifty-fourth year
In Central Africa, a supreme council on peace and
security has been established in addition to the earlywarning system and the adoption of a non-aggression pact.
Peacekeeping exercises are also planned for the year 2000
in Gabon. All of these initiatives are contributing to a
strengthening of confidence-building measures between the
States of the subregion. In this connection, I should like to
thank the Secretary-General and the Governments of some
Member States represented here today for their support.
The favourable response with which the United
Nations system and other governmental and nongovernmental organizations greeted the report of the
Secretary-General on the causes of conflict and the
promotion of durable peace and sustainable development in
Africa led us to believe that the international community
would, in a meaningful way, join in the activities
undertaken by Africa to resolve conflicts, consolidate
democracy and ensure economic and social development.
But with regard to conflict situations in Africa the Security
Council is procrastinating, while in other parts of the world
it is taking prompt action on a humanitarian basis.
However, peace agreements are in force in various
places, and I have high hopes that the United Nations
missions being planned to help with the implementation of
the Lomé Agreement for Sierra Leone and the Lusaka
accords for the Democratic Republic of the Congo will be
deployed as soon as possible.
The activities undertaken by Africa demonstrate that
it is more than ever determined to combat the crises that
are impeding its efforts to ensure the well-being of its
peoples. The assistance of the international community is
essential if it is to achieve that end.
The President: I thank the Minister of State, Minister
for Foreign Affairs, Cooperation and Francophonie of
Gabon for the kind words he addressed to my Government.
Mr. Lavrov (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian):
Like other members of the Security Council, we are pleased
to welcome you, Sir, to preside over the Council at this
special meeting on Africa — a meeting in which many
States Members of the United Nations are participating,
including some that are represented at ministerial level. We
consider this meeting to be not merely a contribution to
resolving the problems of Africa, but a worthy conclusion
to the Netherlands presidency of this body during the month
of September.

4049th meeting
29 September 1999
The Security Council is constantly focusing its
attention on the problems of Africa, and this is an
adequate reflection of the concern of the international
community with regard to the situation in the African
continent. In the year since the previous meeting of the
Security Council on the situation in Africa, developments
on that continent continue to be multidimensional and
deserving of serious analysis. This was reaffirmed by the
statements made by the Secretary-General of the United
Nations, by the Secretary-General of the Organization of
African Unity (OAU) and by the representative of
Algeria, on behalf of the Chairman of the Organization of
African Unity.
We note with satisfaction that, thanks to the peaceful
initiatives of interested States and the diplomatic efforts
of the United Nations and regional organizations,
important, positive changes have taken place in the
political settlement of the most serious conflicts, such as
those in Sierra Leone and the Democratic Republic of the
Congo. On the other hand, unfortunately, in spite of the
long and intensive months of effort by the international
community, in particular the OAU, the prospects for a
resolution of the dispute between Ethiopia and Eritrea are
not good. We are also greatly concerned about the
smouldering hot bed of war in Angola, where conflict has
once again broken out through the fault of UNITA.
Particular concern has been expressed about the threat of
internal conflicts spilling over into armed inter-State
clashes.
We agree with the concerns expressed in the report
of the Secretary-General of 25 September 1999 on the
progress of the implementation of the recommendations
contained in his report of 13 April 1998 on the causes of
conflict and the promotion of durable peace and
sustainable development in Africa. In this connection, we
believe that it is important for the provisions of the
Charter to be actively implemented in encouraging
regional organizations to take a more active initiative in
preventive diplomacy and the peaceful settlement of
disputes. This would mean strengthening regional
peacekeeping operations, with the support of the Security
Council; the implementation by regional structures of
peacekeeping operations through the use of force is
admissible only with the clear sanction of the Security
Council, pursuant to Chapter VIII of the Charter. This
immutable rule also pertains to the activities of coalition
forces formed on an ad hoc basis. Without a durable
settlement of conflicts, the countries of Africa will not be
able to take the path of sustainable and dynamic growth

19

Security Council
Fifty-fourth year
or eliminate poverty; nor will the full integration of those
countries into the world economy be encouraged.
A key role in strengthening peace and security on the
continent is rightly to be played by the Organization of
African Unity. The efforts of that pan-African forum in
preventing and settling conflicts and ensuring sustainable
development and prosperity for the entire continent should
be greatly appreciated. We believe that the two most recent
OAU summits have made a substantial contribution to that
end. We would like to emphasize the role of the OAU in
resolving serious humanitarian problems and the useful
results of its activities in the area of regional integration
and in making progress towards African economic unity.
One of the key components in the strategy of
strengthening peace in Africa should be the establishment
of an effective Africa-wide system geared to the prevention
and settlement of conflicts as well as to a comprehensive
resolution of the problems involved in the task of postconflict recovery. The OAU has great potential in this area.
In this regard, we also greatly value the activities of such
subregional organizations as the Economic Community of
West African States (ECOWAS), the Southern African
Development Community (SADC) and the
Inter-Governmental Authority on Drought and Development
(IGADD).
African efforts must be fully backed by the authority
and capabilities of the United Nations. Here we are
speaking not of replacing African efforts, but of
complementary cooperation and assistance from the United
Nations and from other organizations and countries in the
establishment of pan-African peacekeeping machinery.
The Russian Federation notes with great satisfaction
the growing role played by African States in world affairs,
and the contribution of those States to international
economic integration and to strengthening the global
security system. We welcome the adoption by those
countries of reforms intended to strengthen the democratic
foundations of political life.
Russia intends to assist in solving the problems of the
African continent.
The President: I thank the representative of the
Russian Federation for the kind words he addressed to the
presidency.
Mr. Hain (United Kingdom): I would like to thank
the Netherlands for its initiative in convening this important

20

4049th meeting
29 September 1999
debate, and also to thank the Secretary-General for his
introduction and for his report on the causes of conflict
and the promotion of durable peace and sustainable
development in Africa (S/1998/318), in which he set out
the benchmarks in this area. His progress report 18
months on (S/1999/1008) makes clear the enormous
challenges that we continue to face. Today, his leadership
shows the way forward.
As a son of Africa, I am especially delighted to be
presenting to the Council our new British Government
policy on Africa. I was actually born in Nairobi and
brought up in Pretoria. My parents fought for freedom in
South Africa, and I carried on fighting for that freedom
as a leader of the British anti-apartheid movement after
they had been imprisoned and then forced to leave, when
we went to London.
Now, after centuries of slavery, economic
exploitation and colonial and neo-colonial behaviour that
have left Africa the poorer, I am determined to build a
new partnership between the African continent of my
birth and my adopted homeland of Britain. Certainly,
Africans must take responsibility today for endemic
corruption, for human rights abuses and for ubiquitous
violence, as the representatives of the Organization of
African Unity (OAU) said this morning.
But Africa still suffers from international policy
neglect. After manipulation by both sides through proxy
wars and client States during the cold war, at the end of
the cold war both West and East virtually turned their
backs. No longer an arena for surrogate battles between
the big Powers, Africa was callously sidelined as
strategically unimportant. Yet, common humanitarianism
aside, the success of Africa is vital to Western interests.
That success would create a much safer, more
environmentally sustainable world; it would reduce aid
budgets and, indeed, the United Nations budget; it would
open up new markets; and it would remove havens for the
terrorism that will otherwise increasingly threaten the rest
of the world.
At the General Assembly last week I was privileged
to discuss with senior members of the United States and
French Governments the need to put Africa high among
the world’s policy priorities.
Britain will support African Governments that stand
up for democracy and human rights. We will help those
Governments that want to reform and modernize their
economies. We will support just African solutions to

Security Council
Fifty-fourth year
African problems. We will work with those African leaders
who commit themselves to freeing their peoples from
poverty. And we will work with the people of Africa who
are making their continent a better place.
But Britain will not support corrupt Governments. We
will not subsidize economic mismanagement. We will not
fund repression or bankroll dictatorship. Those evils have
failed Africa, and we do not wish to back failure. I want to
endorse the vision of President Thabo Mbeki of South
Africa: of an African renaissance to help ensure the
realization of his identification of the century ahead of us
as the Africa century.
The cornerstone of our policy is to work actively and
closely with the United Nations as a friend of Africa. We
will continue to work within the Security Council to
support the resolution of conflicts. Where United Nations
action can stop war or build peace, Britain will back it to
the hilt. We have done so in Sierra Leone; there, we need
to deploy a United Nations peacekeeping force as soon as
possible, because the situation remains fragile. I hope that
the Council will give rapid backing to the SecretaryGeneral’s proposals.
In the Democratic Republic of the Congo we need to
sustain the Lusaka Ceasefire Agreement. We welcome the
deployment of United Nations observers to the region, and
we look forward to further recommendations from the
Secretary-General in due course.
We applaud the success of the United Nations in
facilitating peaceful elections in the Central African
Republic and in helping to consolidate stability and promote
democratization there.
The Council has rightly backed OAU proposals for
ending the conflict between Ethiopia and Eritrea. It is time
for both sides to accept them without further delay or
conditions.
We also support Ambassador Fowler’s work in the
Angola sanctions committee. We must continue to clamp
down on the illegal trade in diamonds, and much more
needs to be done to address the challenge posed by the war
in Angola.
There are other massive challenges facing Africans
today. First, Africa has more than half of all war-related
deaths worldwide. We have got to prevent wars from
starting. That means tackling the root causes of conflict:
oppression, injustice and poverty. After cuts under our

4049th meeting
29 September 1999
Conservative predecessors, our Labour Government has
increased Britain’s aid budget and has also promoted
international debt relief. We also fund security reform to
improve the quality, supervision, training and democratic
accountability of African armies and police forces, which
too often have been responsible for arbitrary and brutal
exercise of force. For example, we are providing help to
reshape Nigeria’s military as a bulwark of democracy
rather than as an alternative to democracy. We are also
helping to track down the billions of dollars stolen from
the Nigerian people by the Abacha junta.
Guns are another of Africa’s curses. That is why the
British Government will not supply defence material
where this could start, sustain or stoke internal oppression
or external aggression, and why we are backing the West
African Moratorium on the Import, Export and
Manufacturing of Small Arms. We must stop the illegal
trade in diamonds and other precious commodities which
pay for the small arms, and all too often the mercenaries,
which sustain conflicts.
I want to see the United Nations engaged earlier and
more actively in peacekeeping and conflict prevention, as
the Secretary-General proposed last week. We will back
African regional organizations in their own roles as
peacekeepers and peacemakers.
We also need to take action to tackle the problem of
AIDS. Every day, around 5,500 Africans die of AIDS.
More money has to be found to help. And money can
indeed help, as the well funded, well thought-out
prevention response in Uganda has shown.
Another challenge is to lift the debt burden which is
crushing Africa. We have led the international community
in pushing for faster, deeper, wider debt relief. But our
support is conditional: debt relief will work only where
African Governments are themselves committed to
tackling poverty and to implementing the modern
economic policies necessary to encourage growth. Where
they are, we will back them to the hilt and support them
in international financial institutions.
The challenge for Africa is not just to be attractive
to traders and foreign investors, but to offer opportunities
more attractive than anywhere else in the world.
Globalization can be an opportunity rather than a threat.
New multinational trade negotiations are due to take place
next year; I hope that African countries will actively

21

Security Council
Fifty-fourth year
engage with the World Trade Organization and the key
international players and help set the terms of the debate.
We will support that.
Clean government means extra foreign investment.
Human rights are not just a moral imperative: where they
are respected, economies can flourish. Human rights make
humans rich. Good governance means good international
relations. More reform means more international
development aid. With a renaissance based on such
principles, and with tangible support from the European
Union, the United States and the rest of the industrially
advanced world, Africa could have a bright future. Britain
will work through the United Nations to help achieve it.
The President: I thank the Minister of State at the
Foreign and Commonwealth Office of the United Kingdom
for the kind words he addressed to the presidency.
The meeting was suspended at 1.20 p.m.

22

4049th meeting
29 September 1999
