S/PV.8528

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-fourth year

8528th meeting

Monday, 20 May 2019, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Djani. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Indonesia)

Members:

Belgium. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Côte d’Ivoire . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Dominican Republic. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Equatorial Guinea. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Germany . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kuwait. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Peru. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Poland . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
South Africa . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Pecsteen de Buytswerve
Mr. Yao Shaojun
Mr. Ipo
Mr. Singer Weisinger
Mr. Ndong Mba
Mr. Michon
Mr. Heusgen
Mr. Alotaibi
Mr. Meza-Cuadra
Ms. Wronecka
Mr. Kuzmin
Mr. Davies
Mr. Allen
Mr. Cohen

Agenda
Briefings by Chairs of subsidiary bodies of the Security Council

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

19-14548 (E)
*1914548*

S/PV.8528

Briefings by Chairs of subsidiary bodies of the Security Council

The meeting was called to order at 10.05 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Briefings by Chairs of subsidiary bodies of the
Security Council
The President: The Security Council will now
begin its consideration of the item on its agenda.
At the outset, I will make a joint statement on behalf
of the Committees established pursuant to resolutions
1267 (1999), 1989 (2011) and 2253 (2015), 1373 (2001)
and 1540 (2004). Following this joint statement, the
Council will hear briefings by the Chairs of those
three Committees.
On behalf of the Security Council Committee
pursuant to resolutions 1267 (1999), 1989 (2011) and
2253 (2015) concerning the Islamic State in Iraq and
the Levant (ISIL/Da’esh), Al-Qaida, and associated
individuals, groups, undertakings and entities;
the Committee established pursuant to resolution
1373 (2001) concerning counter-terrorism; and the
Committee established pursuant to resolution 1540
(2004), I have the honour to brief the Security Council
on the cooperation among the three Committees and
their respective Groups of Experts.
The Committees and their Groups of Experts share
a common understanding of the seriousness of the threat
posed by terrorism and the challenges presented by
terrorists and their organizations. This was reiterated in
the eighth report of the Secretary-General (S/2019/103)
on the threat posed by ISIL (Da’esh) to international
peace and security and the range of United Nations
efforts in support of Member States in countering
the threat, prepared by the prepared by the CounterTerrorism Committee Executive Directorate (CTED)
and the Analytical Support and Sanctions Monitoring
Team, in collaboration with the United Nations Office
of Counter-Terrorism and other United Nations entities
and international organizations.
The Committees and their Groups of Experts also
share an understanding that despite its progressive
military defeat ISIL remains a global organization
with centralized leadership, which continues to
resource and instruct its affiliates within its reduced
ability. Returning and relocating for foreign terrorist
fighters poses a potential threat and requires tailored
2/24

20/05/2019

prosecution, rehabilitation and reintegration methods
that are consistent with international law and take into
account gender and age considerations.
Against this background, the Committees continue
to raise awareness among Member States of their
obligations with regard to effectively implementing
relevant Security Council resolutions, to cooperate
on joint visits and to hold joint committee meetings.
Their Groups of Experts have continued to enhance
their cooperation with international, regional and
subregional organizations and United Nation bodies,
including within the framework of the newlyestablished United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism
Coordination Compact.
The Committees also continue to augment
information-sharing through joint briefings such as
today’s meeting. Since the last joint briefing to the
Council on 3 October 2018 (see S/PV.8364), the 1267
Committee and the Counter-Terrorism Committee
(CTC) conducted two joint informal meetings — in
December 2018 and in February 2019 — to hear briefings
by the United States Department of State and the
Federal Security Service of the Russian Federation. On
26 April 2019, the CTC and the Committees established
pursuant to 1267 (1999) and 1988 (2011) co-organized
a special meeting on the nexus between international
terrorism and transnational organized crime. The
meeting provided an opportunity to address regional
specificities, strategies, responses and lessons learned
in addressing the Committees’ linkages as well as the
challenges to strengthening domestic, regional and
international cooperation in this field. The Groups
of Experts of the three Committees maintain regular
contact and continue to share relevant information
where appropriate, discuss matters of common
concern, coordinate action and exchange analysis on
particular issues. The Monitoring Team and CTED
continue to conduct quarterly meetings for coordination
and information exchange.
As requested by the Council in resolution 2396
(2017), on returning and relocating foreign terrorist
fighters, in February 2019 the CTC held an open
briefing on the Madrid Guiding Principles on foreign
terrorists fights, adopted by the CTC in December
2018. The briefing, which was also attended by the
Monitoring Team, was aimed at raising awareness and
strengthening the understanding of the 17 additional
good practices to assist Member States in their efforts
19-14548

20/05/2019

Briefings by Chairs of subsidiary bodies of the Security Council

to respond to the evolving phenomenon of foreign
terrorist fighters.
As an example of that cooperation, I would like
to highlight the support that the Monitoring Team
and the 1540 Group of Experts jointly provided to
Zimbabwe for the organization of a workshop held
from 10 to 12 October 2018 in Harare. Attended by
representatives of the Government, as well as the
private sector, the workshop contributed to raising
awareness of ISIL (Da’esh) and Al-Qaida sanctions and
provided a platform for discussions on the obligations
contained in resolutions 1267 (1999) and 1540 (2004)
for Member States; the distinctions among resolutions
1267 (1999), 1373 (2001) and 1540 (2004); the global
threat assessment and terrorism financing risk in the
eastern and southern Africa region; Financial Action
Task Force (FATF) recommendation 6; and other
important topics.
From 29 to 31 October 2018, the Monitoring
Team participated in a CTED-assessment visit to
the Republic of Mali to monitor and facilitate the
implementation of the relevant Security Council
resolutions and follow up on the progress made by
Mali in implementing the Committee’s 2006 and
2009 visit recommendations. The three Committees
believe that such coordinated activities are important
for strengthening their dialogue with Member States
in order to ensure the implementation of the relevant
United Nations resolutions. The Groups of Experts
of the three Committees plan to continue organizing
similar events in 2019.
The adoption on 28 March of resolution 2462
(2019), on countering the financing of terrorism, laid
the groundwork to further enhance coordination among
our Committees. I would like to particularly welcome
the role that the resolution assigns to CTED and the
Monitoring Team in providing consultation to the
Office of Counter-Terrorism and other stakeholders,
especially on how to enhance coordination with the
aim of delivering integrated technical assistance
on counter-terrorist financing measures, including
assistance that will improve the capacity of Member
States to implement that resolution.
The resolution requests that the CTC and the 1267
Committee hold, within 12 months, a joint special
meeting on terrorist financing threats and trends,
as well as on the implementation of the provisions
of the resolution. It also requests that CTED and the

S/PV. 8528

Monitoring Team prepare, ahead of the joint special
meeting, a report on actions taken by Member States to
disrupt terrorist financing.
Resolution 2462 (2019) comes at a critical
time, and by setting new tasks for the CTC and the
1267 Committee it will help to further enhance our
cooperation. The Committees, through their Groups
of Experts, remain engaged with relevant international
and regional organizations to explore ways to further
strengthen interaction to complement efforts in the
implementation of our mandates.
The Groups of Experts continued to interact with
the Financial Action Task Force, including its regional
bodies: the Middle East and North Africa Financial
Action Task Force, the Eastern and Southern Africa
Anti-Money Laundering Group, the Asia/Pacific Group
on Money Laundering, the Financial Action Task Force
of Latin America, the Eurasian Group on Combating
Money Laundering and Financing of Terrorism and
the Inter-Governmental Task Force against MoneyLaundering in Central Africa. In February, the Experts
attended the FATF plenary and working groups
meetings in Paris to discuss the efforts deployed by
the FATF to monitor and take action against terrorist
financing and countries’ progress in addressing their
deficiencies in countering the financing of terrorism
and strategic anti-money-laundering.
In the reporting period, the expert groups continued
to participate in platforms of common interest offered
by regional organizations, such as the Eurasian Group
on Combating Money Laundering and Financing
of Terrorism, the Organization for Security and
Cooperation in Europe, the Inter-American Committee
against Terrorism, INTERPOL, the Anti-Terrorism
Centre of the Commonwealth of Independent States,
the Regional Anti-Terrorist Structure of the Shanghai
Cooperation Organization and others. CTED recently
signed a memorandum of understanding with the
Regional Anti-Terrorist Structure of the Shanghai
Cooperation Organization aimed at enhancing the
strategic framework of cooperation between the
two entities.
The three Committees and the expert groups also
continued to use the platforms for interaction provided
by Member States. From 7 to 8 November 2018, the
experts of the Committees and CTED attended the
17th Meeting of Heads of Special Services, Security
Agencies and Law-Enforcement Organizations, held in

19-145483/24

S/PV.8528

Briefings by Chairs of subsidiary bodies of the Security Council

Moscow and organized by the Federal Security Service
of the Russian Federation.
The three Committees will continue to strengthen
cooperation and effective coordination, where relevant
and possible, with the support of CTED, the Monitoring
Team and the 1540 Group of Experts, and will continue
to provide guidance and direction to their expert groups
in enhancing their collaboration and cooperation in
the light of the requirements of the relevant Security
Council resolutions.
The three Committees and their expert groups will
continue to strive to ensure the effective implementation
of specific counter-terrorism measures in the areas
of sanctions, the financing of terrorism, border
management and non-proliferation, among others, in
regions and Member States of common interest, and
in full compliance with international law, including
international human rights law, international refugee
law and international humanitarian law. Only through
strong collaboration and targeted efforts can we achieve
concrete results in our fight against terrorism.
I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.
I shall now provide a briefing in my capacity as
Chair of the Security Council Committee established
pursuant to Security Council resolutions 1267
(1999), 1989 (2011) and 2253 (2015) concerning ISIL
(Da’esh), Al-Qaida and associated individuals, groups,
undertakings and entities.
On behalf of the Committee established pursuant to
Security Council resolutions 1267 (1999), 1989 (2011)
and 2253 (2015) concerning ISIL (Da’esh), Al-Qaida
and associated individuals, groups, undertakings
and entities, I would like to give a brief overview of
developments in the work of the Committee since the
joint Council briefing in October 2018 (see S/PV.8364).
This briefing will also satisfy the requirement of
resolution 2368 (2017) to report to the Security
Council at least once per year on the overall work of
the Committee. I shall focus mainly on the following
elements: first, the evolving threat to international
peace and security posed by the Islamic State in Iraq and
the Levant/Da’esh, Al-Qaida and affiliates; secondly,
the response from the Committee; and thirdly, the
Committee’s engagement with Member States.
On the evolving threat to international peace
and security posed by ISIL (Da’esh), Al-Qaida and
4/24

20/05/2019

affiliates, in its latest, twenty-third report (S/2019/50),
the Analytical Support and Sanctions Monitoring Team
assesses that ISIL and its affiliates continue to pose
the main and best-resourced international terrorist
threat, while Al-Qaida remains resilient and active in
many regions and retains the ambition to project itself
more internationally.
Despite a substantial reduction in the number of
global attacks, ISIL continues to evolve into a global
covert network, a process that is more advanced in Iraq
than in the Syrian Arab Republic. In Iraq, ISIL has
already started to organize cells at the provincial level,
and there is currently a net flow of ISIL fighters from
the Syrian Arab Republic to reinforce the emerging
network in Iraq. If the objective to survive and resurge
in the core area is achieved, ISIL may be expected to
revive its focus on external terrorist operations, but
for now the ISIL core lacks the strength to conduct
coordinated international attacks.
Meanwhile, Al-Qaida remains active in many
regions and there is a concomitant risk of Al-Qaida
growing stronger by taking advantage of the lull in ISIL
strategic terrorist activity and staging a major attack
of its own. The Monitoring Team further reported that
there is a possibility that ISIL foreign terrorist fighters
will choose to join Al-Qaida affiliates in regions where
they are the dominant brand.
Following the military defeat of ISIL, the
Monitoring Team updated the Committee to the effect
that the evolving threat continued to be substantially
as anticipated in the twenty-third report, with the issue
of detainees and refugees in north-eastern Syria an
increasingly urgent concern.
Regarding the Committee’s response, the evolving
threat is also reflected in the Council’s adoption of
a new resolution, which has expanded the work of
the Committee and the Monitoring Team. Through
resolution 2462 (2019), adopted in March, the Council
reiterated the obligation of Member States to prevent
and suppress the financing of terrorist acts to ensure
that any person who participates in the financing of
terrorist acts is brought to justice and that terrorist acts
are established as serious criminal offences in domestic
laws and regulations. The Council further requested the
1267 (1999) and the Counter-Terrorism Committees to
hold a joint special meeting on the terrorist financing
threats within 12 months and their expert bodies to
19-14548

20/05/2019

Briefings by Chairs of subsidiary bodies of the Security Council

S/PV. 8528

prepare, ahead of that meeting, a report on actions
taken by Member States to disrupt terrorist financing.

information-gathering period and two cases are in the
decision period.

Under the resolution, it is crucial that Member
States engage with and provide updated information to
the Committee and the Monitoring Team on the evolving
nature of the threat, listed individuals and entities and
the status of implementation and enforcement of the
sanctions measures. Such information is fundamental
to the operation of the regime.

Regarding the Committee’s engagement with
Member States, I hope that, in accordance with the its
rules of procedure, all Member States will continue their
engagement with the work of the Committee and the
Monitoring Team, as that is essential for maintaining an
up-to-date and dynamic sanctions list and fundamental
to the efficacy of the sanctions mechanism.

To enhance the full and effective implementation
of the sanctions, the Committee also undertakes visits
to selected countries. In that context, the Chair visited
Uzbekistan, from 31 October to 1 November 2018,
to participate in the sixth International Conference
on Combating Terrorism — Cooperation without
Boundaries, organized by the Regional Anti-Terrorist
Structure of the Shanghai Cooperation Organization.
The Chair was accompanied by representatives of the
Monitoring Team and the United Nations Secretariat.

In that regard, I would like to note that the
Committee is in the process of conducting its annual
review for 2018, which considers if names on the list,
especially those that have not been reviewed in three
or more years, remain pertinent and addresses cases
where sufficient identifiers do not exist, individuals are
deceased or entities are defunct. I thank the Member
States that have provided information, as it has proved
challenging to obtain responses from all relevant
Member States.

On 7 to 8 November 2018, the Chair, accompanied
by the experts of the Monitoring Team, visited Moscow,
Russian Federation, to participate in the seventeenth
Meeting of Heads of Special Services, Security
Agencies and Law-Enforcement Organizations,
attended by representatives of 68 countries and 10
international organizations. The Chair and the experts
used this opportunity to raise awareness regarding the
1267 and 1988 sanctions regimes and advocated for
their active use by Member States. On the margins of
the event, the Monitoring Team conducted a series of
bilateral meetings with national delegations.
The Committee continuously strives to ensure
that its sanctions list is as updated and accurate as
possible in order to facilitate the implementation of
the sanctions measures. Since the last joint briefing
in October 2018 (see S/PV. 8364), three individuals
and two entities have been listed and five individuals
and one entity have been delisted. The Committee
approved amendments to the existing entries of eight
individuals on its sanctions list. The Secretariat has
also implemented technical amendments to 81 list
entries prepared by the Monitoring Team based on the
2017 annual review process.
Since the last joint briefing to the Security Council,
the Committee has considered two comprehensive
reports presented by the Ombudsperson. Currently,
six requests for delisting are pending with the
Office of the Ombudsperson; four cases are in the

In addition to the regular reviews, the Monitoring
Team updates list entries based on information
provided by Member States. We encourage Member
States to keep the Team informed, as the Council and
international community can target their response
effectively only if they have up-to-date information. I
also urge those Member States that have not done so to
submit the implementation reports mandated under the
relevant resolutions.
As the Monitoring Team keeps the Committee
apprised of the evolving threat posed by ISIL, Al-Qaida
and their affiliates, the Committee will also work closely
with key actors, including the other relevant Security
Council sanctions committees. As Chair, I would like
to thank all Member States for their cooperation with
the Committee, its Monitoring Team and the Office of
the Ombudsperson.
I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.
I now give the floor to Ambassador Gustavo
Meza-Cuadra of Peru, in his capacity as Chair of the
Committee established pursuant to resolution 1373
(2001) concerning counter-terrorism.
Mr. Meza-Cuadra (Peru): I thank you,
Mr. President, for this opportunity to brief the Security
Council on the state of the overall work of the CounterTerrorism Committee and its Executive Directorate

19-145485/24

S/PV.8528

Briefings by Chairs of subsidiary bodies of the Security Council

(CTED) since the last report (see S/PV.8364), in
accordance with paragraph 12 of resolution 2395 (2017).
Terrorist groups, including the Islamic State in Iraq
and the Levant (ISIL), Al-Qaida and their affiliates,
still pose a significant challenge to Member States
and a grave threat to international peace and security.
Terrorist groups are also tending to shift their focus
towards more localized narratives, marked by a greater
focus on local or national issues. Our major concerns
are further exacerbated not only by the activities of the
foreign terrorist fighters who remain in the conflict zones
but also by returning and relocating foreign terrorist
fighters and their family members and the potential risk
posed by the forthcoming release of imprisoned foreign
terrorist fighters, including frustrated travellers. Other
forms of violent extremism conducive to terrorism
have also evolved to include individuals or groups that
commit violence motivated by racism, intolerance,
misogyny, anti-Semitism or Islamophobia.
Member States continue to face complex challenges
in responding to the threat of terrorism and I wish to
briefly highlight a few of those.
First, the past six months have seen an escalation of
violence against soft targets and places of worship, not
limited to any one denomination or faith, including in
Burkina Faso, Mali, the Niger, New Zealand, Sri Lanka
and the United States.
Secondly, the evolving threat posed by terrorists
and by foreign terrorist fighter returnees, relocators
and their family members is a further major challenge,
which requires a holistic approach in the light of the
relevant Security Council resolutions, including
enhanced use of international tools and measures to
detect and prevent their travel and to stop them from
committing crimes.
Thirdly, terrorist groups, including ISIL and its
affiliates, as well as lone actors, have consistently
demonstrated their intent and ability to exploit
new technologies.
Finally, States are increasingly concerned about the
use of improvised explosive devices in terrorist attacks
around the world.
To support Member States in overcoming the
challenges that I have mentioned above, the Committee
has been undertaking several activities with the
support of CTED. The assessment of the performance
and implementation efforts of Member States continues
6/24

20/05/2019

to be the central task of the Committee and CTED,
pursuant to the relevant Council resolutions. Such
assessment visits have enabled the Committee to engage
in in-depth dialogue with visited States, identifying
progress, strengths, gaps, technical assistance needs
and effective practices in the various implementation
measures under the relevant Security Council
resolutions and have provided such States with a road
map for the implementation of those recommendations.
In February, the Committee adopted a list of
country visits for 2019. Since our last joint briefing,
CTED has conducted five assessment visits on behalf
of the Counter-Terrorism Committee and we have
received consent from a further 10 Member States to
receive visits this year.
In my capacity as Chair of the Committee, I
encourage Member States that have not yet done so
to consider providing their consent. I would also like
to recall that the Committee and CTED have been
working closely with the visited Member States to
encourage them to share their respective assessments
with other partners within the United Nations system
and beyond. Since our previous joint briefing, we have
received approval from Switzerland to share its entire
assessment, including on steps taken to implement the
Committee’s visit recommendations, not only with
our partners but also with interested Member States
upon request.
The Committee continues to undertake review
and stocktaking of Member States’ implementation
efforts through its assessment tools — the overview
of implementation assessment and the detailed
implementation survey — which help CTED monitor
and promote the implementation by Member States
of all the relevant resolutions, based on its working
method of thoroughness, consistency, transparency and
even-handedness.
Among other activities, in my capacity as a Chair, I
have participated in high-level consultations with Spain
and NATO to identify possible areas of cooperation in
areas of common interest. The Committee organized an
open briefing on the connection between terrorism and
organized crime in October 2018 and, more recently,
a joint special meeting to exchange views on the
regional aspects of that issue. In February 2019, CTED
issued a report entitled Identifying and Exploring the
Nexus between Human Trafficking, Terrorism and
Terrorism Financing, on the correlation of those three
19-14548

20/05/2019

Briefings by Chairs of subsidiary bodies of the Security Council

elements. CTED will continue to devote its attention
to the organized crime and terrorism linkages in its
engagement with Member States, including in the
context of the country visits conducted on behalf of
the Committee.
The Committee welcomes the adoption of resolution
2462 (2019) — the first Security Council resolution
to focus on preventing and suppressing terrorism
financing — and highlights the adoption of the 2018
addendum to the 2015 Madrid Guiding Principles on
foreign terrorist fighters, which provides guidance to
Member States on effective responses to the evolving
foreign terrorist fighter phenomenon. The CTC and
CTED are working closely with Member States to
promote their effective implementation.
I also wish to give a few examples of our
collaborative efforts to support Member States in
countering the continued threat posed by ISIL. CTED
has been working with other United Nations entities,
including the United Nations Office on Drugs and
Crime (UNODC) and the Office of Counter-Terrorism
(UNOCT), to finalize guidelines to facilitate the use
and admissibility as evidence of information preserved,
collected and shared by the military. CTED has also
actively promoted the United Nations compendium
of recommended practices for the responsible use
and sharing of biometrics in counter-terrorism. As
terrorists also continue to exploit the Internet and
social media, CTED continues to promote publicprivate partnerships to support Member States and
the technology industry. It has also been providing
strategic support for the design of follow-up actions
by the Emergency Task Force on Burkina Faso, in line
with the Committee’s recommendations.
CTED, together with UNOCT, INTERPOL and
Global Counter-Terrorism Coordination Compact
entities, has drafted the compendium of good practices
on the protection of critical infrastructure, pursuant
to resolution 2341 (2017). The Executive Directorate
is also one of the core partners in the United Nations
Countering Terrorist Travel Programme, which was
launched on 7 May in the presence of the SecretaryGeneral. The Programme aims to build Member States’
capacities to implement advance passenger information
and passenger name record systems in accordance with
resolution 2396 (2017). In the area of digital evidence,
CTED, together with the International Association of
Prosecutors and UNODC, launched the Practical Guide

S/PV. 8528

for Requesting Electronic Evidence across Borders in
February 2019.
Through its dialogue with Member States and its
relationships with, inter alia, academia and think tanks,
including members of its global research network and
international, regional and subregional organizations,
CTED has continued to analyse emerging threats,
trends and developments. In all our activities, respect
for human rights is of course essential to effectively
countering the terrorism threat. In that regard, the
Committee continues to take careful account of human
rights and rule-of-law issues relevant to counterterrorism, in accordance with the relevant Security
Council resolutions. The Committee also continues to
stress the need to promote whole-of-society approaches
to countering terrorism and violent extremism that is
conducive to terrorism, including by encouraging the
participation of civil society organizations, women’s
groups, youth, religious leaders and other actors
concerned. One area in which that is crucial is in
countering terrorist narratives in accordance with the
guidelines set out in resolution 2354 (2017).
The Committee continues to integrate gender
as a cross-cutting issue throughout its activities, in
accordance with resolutions 2242 (2015) and 2395
(2017) and other relevant Security Council resolutions.
As the Council is aware, cooperation with, and among,
international and regional organizations and among the
relevant United Nations entities is essential. Pursuant
to resolution 2349 (2017), CTED recently took part in
a joint high-level mission of the United Nations and
the European Union to Chad to support Member States
and relevant subregional and regional organizations in
the Lake Chad basin region to address the effects of
violence perpetrated by Boko Haram and the Islamic
State’s West African Province.
Where needed, we have continued to support
Member States’ capacities to address new threats and
challenges, in close cooperation with our partners,
including UNOCT, and we shall continue to work with
our implementing partners to deliver as one United
Nations to match the needs and recommendations set
forth in our visit reports with the appropriate technical
assistance. Technical assistance should of course not
be considered as an alternative to Member States’
fulfilment of their own obligations under international
law and the Charter of the United Nations.

19-145487/24

S/PV.8528

Briefings by Chairs of subsidiary bodies of the Security Council

In conclusion, I wish to reaffirm the determination
of the Committee to develop and implement
comprehensive responses to the evolving threat of
terrorism, in close cooperation with its implementing
partners and the relevant stakeholders.
The President: I thank Mr. Meza-Cuadra for
his briefing.
I shall now provide a briefing in my capacity
as Chair of the Committee established pursuant to
resolution 1540 (2004).
On behalf of the Committee established pursuant
to resolution 1540 (2004), I am pleased to report on
the progress made since our previous briefing, in
October 2018 (see S/PV.8364). We fully endorse the
joint statement delivered on behalf of the Committees
established pursuant to resolutions 1267 (1999), 1989
(2011) and 2253 (2015) concerning the Islamic State in
Iraq and the Levant (Da’esh), Al-Qaida and associated
individuals, groups, undertakings and entities, as
well as of the Counter-Terrorism Committee and the
1540 Committee.
While the mandates of the three Committees differ,
there are important areas of complementarity. The
focus of the 1540 Committee remains the prevention
of the proliferation of nuclear, chemical and biological
weapons, their means of delivery and related materials
to non-State actors, particularly for terrorist purposes.
It is widely recognized that the use of nuclear, chemical
or biological weapons, including for terrorist purposes,
could have devastating and potentially catastrophic
consequences. The readiness of non-State groups and
individuals with extreme or apocalyptic views to use
extreme violence in various parts of the world remains
a matter of serious concern. In that context, no State is
exempt from the task of making every effort to prevent
such proliferation.
The obligations under resolution 1540 (2004),
which are designed precisely for those purposes,
involve a wide range of activities that go together with
the requisite adoption and enforcement of measures
to prohibit non-State actors from manufacturing,
acquiring, possessing, transporting, transferring or
using nuclear, chemical and biological weapons and
their means of delivery. Among those are domestic
controls over nuclear, chemical and biological weapons
and related materials, including measures to account for
and secure such items, appropriate effective physical
protection measures, effective border controls and law
8/24

20/05/2019

enforcement efforts, appropriate effective national
export and trans-shipment controls and controls on
providing funds and services related to exports, such as
financing and transporting.
The full and effective implementation of those
obligations requires continuous attention. The
Committee will continue to undertake a number of
activities this year to promote the full and effective
implementation of the resolution and to assist States,
upon request, in strengthening national capacity. We
will also intensify our engagement with international
organizations whose mandates are directly related to
resolution 1540 (2004).
The Committee will continue to enhance
information-sharing, coordination on visits to
countries, within their respective mandates, technical
assistance and other issues of relevance to the 1540
Committee; the Security Council Committee pursuant
to resolutions 1267 (1999), 1989 (2011) and 2253
(2015) concerning Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant
(Da’esh), Al-Qaida and associated individuals, groups,
undertakings and entities; and the Security Council
Committee established pursuant to resolution 1373
(2001), concerning counter-terrorism, as appropriate.
In conclusion, I would like to highlight that the
spirit of cooperation and dialogue with Member States
continues to inform the 1540 Committee’s activities.
I thank members for the opportunity to make this
statement to the Security Council.
I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.
I shall now give the floor to those members of the
Council who wish to make statements.
Mr. Cohen (United States of America): I thank
the Chairs of the Security Council Committee
pursuant to resolutions 1267 (1999), 1989 (2011) and
2253 (2015), concerning Islamic State in Iraq and the
Levant (Da’esh), Al-Qaida and associated individuals,
groups, undertakings and entities; the Security
Council Committee established pursuant to resolution
1373 (2001), concerning counter-terrorism; and the
Security Council Committee established pursuant to
resolution 1540 (2004) for their strong cooperation.
Those Committees play a crucial and complementary
role in assessing and countering global threats and are
invaluable in our fight against terrorism.
19-14548

20/05/2019

Briefings by Chairs of subsidiary bodies of the Security Council

The Islamic State in Iraq and Sham (ISIS) and
Al-Qaida are dynamic organizations, evolving with the
pressure the international community brings to bear on
them. The 1267 Committee must continue to keep up
its pace to adapt to the evolving threat. We are pleased
that, this month, the 1267 Committee designated
Masood Azhar Alvi, leader of Jaish-e-Mohammed, and
ISIL-Khorasan, a dangerous ISIS affiliate operating
in Afghanistan and Pakistan, for United Nations
sanctions. Azhar’s listing shows that the international
community can and will hold terrorists accountable
for their actions. The designation of ISIS-Khorasan
demonstrates the Committee’s commitment to
ensuring that ISIS affiliates do not take up the mantle
of a diminished ISIS core. In that vein, it is important
that the Committee designate other ISIS affiliates
who seek to replicate the destruction wrought in Iraq
and Syria in new corners of the world. We commend
our Security Council colleagues for supporting those
important designations.
The threat of weapons of mass destruction (WMD)
proliferation is a growing concern, and the work of the
Security Council Committee established pursuant to
resolution 1540 (2004) is more important than it has ever
been. We have all seen the devastating consequences of
chemical weapons use by State and non-State actors in
Syria and Salisbury. We cannot allow the international
norm against the use of such dangerous weapons to
break down. The possibility of WMD proliferation is
real. We must all work together to stop that, through the
work of the 1540 Committee and beyond.
The Counter-Terrorism Committee (CTC) has
examined issues we consider critical over the past year.
In February, the CTC presented its Addendum to the
Madrid Guiding Principles, which provides Member
States practical tools to address the threat of returning
and relocating foreign terrorist fighters. We also look
forward to working with the CTC and Member States
to implement resolution 2462 (2019) to counter the
financing of terrorism.
Finally, the United States was happy to welcome the
Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive Directorate
(CTED) to New York, Minneapolis, and Washington,
D.C., this month as part of our assessment visit. We look
forward to reviewing the results of the CTED visit and
encourage other Member States to work with CTED on
visits of their own.

S/PV. 8528

The three Committees and other relevant parts
of the United Nations system, including the United
Nations Office of Counter-Terrorism, should work
closely together and take a whole-of-United Nations
approach to counter-terrorism. We still see many gaps
and considerable overlap.
In conclusion, we will continue to promote regular
and continued engagement to better understand the
intentions and capabilities of terrorists. We urge the
three Committees to continue sharing notes on how the
United Nations can help to build State capacity to counter
terrorist threats and advance our common security.
Mr. Ipo (Côte d’Ivoire) (spoke in French): My
delegation welcomes the holding of this briefing
on the consideration of the joint reports of the three
subsidiary bodies of the Security Council responsible
for combating terrorism and non-proliferation. We
congratulate the Chairs of the Security Council
Committee pursuant to resolutions 1267 (1999), 1989
(2011) and 2253 (2015), concerning Islamic State in
Iraq and the Levant (Da’esh), Al-Qaida and associated
individuals, groups, undertakings and entities; the
Security Council Committee established pursuant to
resolution 1373 (2001), concerning counter-terrorism;
and the Security Council Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1540 (2004) for their detailed
briefings on their activities.
Terrorism and the proliferation of weapons of
mass destruction are more than ever challenges to
international peace and security. The increase in, and
sophistication of, terrorist attacks is compounded by
the stated will of terrorist groups to access weapons of
mass destruction. The strengthening of collective tools
for the control of weapons of mass destruction, the fight
against terrorism and the excessive ease of mobility of
terrorists now seems to be an absolute priority that must
be placed at the heart of the international community’s
security priorities.
An assessment of the threat indicates that there is a
trend in mobility and recycling of thousands of foreign
terrorist fighters from the Islamic State in Iraq and
the Levant and affiliated groups into new hotbeds of
tensions, where they continue to radicalize and adopt
new strategies for spreading terror.
In the face of that change, both in geography and
typology, and the risks associated with the proliferation
of weapons of mass destruction, the joint efforts of
the three subsidiary bodies of the Security Council

19-145489/24

S/PV.8528

Briefings by Chairs of subsidiary bodies of the Security Council

20/05/2019

in the implementation of their mandates is cause for
optimism, despite the scale of the challenges. My
delegation therefore appreciates the efforts of the
various Committees and the groups of experts who
assist them in their respective missions to assess the
terrorist threat and provide Member States with the
necessary support to fulfil their obligations. Côte
d’Ivoire welcomes the dynamic cooperation among
those bodies, including their determination to adopt a
more coordinated approach in the fight against terrorism
and the proliferation of weapons of mass destruction.

in the context of consolidating the international
non-proliferation architecture.

In that respect, my delegation notes with
satisfaction the joint visits to Member States, the joint
meetings and the awareness-raising activities aimed at
strengthening the national mechanisms for combating
terrorism and assessing threats and needs for technical
assistance. The preparation of a compendium of good
practices for the protection of critical infrastructure
and the programme of assistance to Member States in
the implementation of advance passenger information
and passenger name record systems for the collection
of passenger information are also the result of the
excellent cooperation among United Nations entities
and should be welcomed.

In conclusion, I would like to reiterate my country’s
unwavering support and readiness to cooperate with the
counter-terrorism bodies, the members of the Groups
of Experts and the Counter-Terrorism Committee
Executive Directorate.

Despite the considerable results achieved, many
challenges remain, as we noted earlier. Those challenges
include the return and reintegration of foreign terrorist
fighters. That exercise is difficult at best and requires
a better sharing of information between States. To that
end, we encourage the continuation of information
sessions and regional meetings, which are sources of
valuable information for Member States in their efforts
to combat terrorism and the proliferation of small arms
and weapons of mass destruction.
My delegation also welcomes the adoption, in
December 2018 and March 2019, of two instruments
that enhance the normative framework for combating
terrorism, namely, the Addendum to the Madrid
Guiding Principles on foreign terrorist fighters and
resolution 2462 (2019), on the financing of terrorism.
We consider that more sustained attention should
be paid in particular to measures to ban biological,
chemical and bacteriological weapons, financing and
proliferation networks and national export controls
and trans-shipment of such weapons. My country
therefore intends to actively contribute to the work
of the 2020 Review Conference of the Parties to the
Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons,
10/24

To be effective over time, our joint action
must integrate strategies to prevent radicalization
and violent extremism, through policies aimed at
eradicating poverty and unemployment among young
people, which are among the underlying causes.
Emphasis should also be placed on combating the
financing of terrorism and the illegal use of the
Internet, communication technologies and social media
for criminal purposes.

Mr. Ndong Mba (Equatorial Guinea) (spoke in
Spanish): I would like to express our most sincere
congratulations and appreciation to Ambassador MezaCuadra and Ambassador Djani, as well as their respective
teams, for their informative briefings and excellent
work as Committee Chairs, as they strive to implement
the mandates of the Committee established pursuant to
resolution 1373 (2001), concerning counter-terrorism,
the Committee pursuant to resolutions 1267 (1999),
1989 (2011) and 2253 (2015), concerning Islamic State in
Iraq and the Levant (Da’esh), Al-Qaida and associated
individuals, groups, undertakings and entities, and the
Committee established pursuant to resolution 1540
(2004), concerning the non-proliferation of weapons of
weapons of mass destruction, respectively.
I take this opportunity to reiterate, as we have
been doing, that the Republic of Equatorial Guinea
strongly and categorically opposes terrorism and the
proliferation of weapons of mass destruction, which are
serious threats to international peace and security. In
that regard, today’s briefing is an excellent opportunity
to jointly address those very important cross-cutting
issues, as finding solutions for and eradicating them
fall within the mandate of the Security Council.
We note with deep concern the impact of the flow
of foreign terrorist combatants, their return to their
countries of nationality or origin and the growing nexus
between transnational organized crime and terrorism.
Through the excellent work of the 1373 CounterTerrorism Committee and its Executive Directorate
and the 1267 Committee, concerning Islamic State
in Iraq and the Levant (Da’esh) and Al-Qaida, and
19-14548

20/05/2019

Briefings by Chairs of subsidiary bodies of the Security Council

its Analytical Support and Sanctions Monitoring
Team, we have been able to build on the work of the
1373 Committee and its Executive Directorate. We
remain abreast of new global challenges resulting from
changes in methodologies, capabilities and impact
with regard to exploiting people, natural resources and
new technologies in order to finance and conduct their
criminal activities. In that regard, we recognize the
recent focus on preventing and combating the financing
of terrorism through resolution 2462 (2019) — a French
initiative co-sponsored by Equatorial Guinea — to
ensure that the response of the United Nations, regional
and subregional organizations and States to terrorist
threats is more effective and efficient.
The work of the 1267 Committee has also
reinforced the message regarding the importance of
curbing the financing of terrorism to prevent attacks
by Da’esh, Al-Qaida and affiliated groups. That is
why it is necessary to invest in preventing the criminal
exploitation of new financial technologies, such as
cryptocurrency and mobile payment services. As
Ms. Mercy Buku, an expert in anti-money-laundering
and countering the financing of terrorism, recalled
two months ago in the Chamber (see S/PV.8496), those
new technologies used to transfer capital could be the
most effective contribution to global efforts of financial
inclusion to ensure that the 1.7 billion people in need
are lifted out of poverty in the regions of the world most
affected by terrorism and conflicts. In that regard, we
encourage the work of the 1373 and 1267 Committees
to continue to take that issue into account and to
support the work of States in not suppressing financial
inclusion. That should be achieved by implementing
measures to combat the financing of terrorism through
the regulation and facilitation of services that contribute
to sustainable development.
Resolution 1540 (2004) is the first international
instrument that has comprehensively addressed the very
complex issue of the possible use of nuclear, biological,
chemical and radiological weapons by terrorist groups.
Therefore, the work of the 1540 Committee in ensuring
its implementation of its mandate is an important basis
for the non-proliferation of nuclear weapons and for
mobilizing international cooperation for the nuclear
disarmament of State and non-State actors. The Republic
of Equatorial Guinea believes that Africa should go
even further by implementing nuclear non-proliferation
in its geographical area, thereby complementing the
principles of the Treaty of Pelindaba with a total ban on

S/PV. 8528

the direct or indirect supply and marketing of mineral
resources from African soil, specifically uranium and
plutonium, for the production, use, manufacture or
research of weapons of mass destruction, as well as
military activities.
Recent events lead us to believe that there is a
serious global risk of a resumption of the arms race, due
not only to clashes caused by disagreements stemming
from the balance of power but also by the ambition of new
States to possess such weapons as a deterrent strategy,
which creates worldwide concern and insecurity. Given
that scenario, the Security Council must not tolerate
rhetoric that threatens the principles of the Charter of
the United Nations and human existence and must act
firmly as the helm and defender of international peace
and security. We must strive to make this world a place
of renewed peace and order among States. We must
strive to ensure an environment conducive to social,
political and economic progress. We must also strive to
ensure a secure environment for all.
The Republic of Equatorial Guinea supports the
States Members of the United Nations in their efforts
to mitigate and prevent conflicts within their borders
and among themselves. We encourage the Committee
to continue working with States to promote educational
programmes that contribute to disarmament,
non-proliferation and public awareness, in collaboration
with international organizations and various sectors
of society.
Today’s briefings remind us that the threats of
terrorism and the proliferation of weapons of mass
destruction have changed, but they have not diminished.
We must be able to improve our collective efforts and
anticipate events in order to counteract and eliminate
those threats and lessen their impact on the most
vulnerable, in particular children, women, refugees,
displaced persons, the elderly, persons with disabilities,
members of minority groups and others. The Republic
of Equatorial Guinea remains firmly committed to
implementing Security Council resolutions to ensure
that such important work is conducted. For those
reasons, and in conclusion, we would like to make the
following recommendations.
First, we need to be innovative in our collective
response in order to be able to face new threats and, at
the same time, do so in a way that does not hinder the
sustainable development of countries and communities.
In that regard, we commend the role played by the

19-1454811/24

S/PV.8528

Briefings by Chairs of subsidiary bodies of the Security Council

three Committees and their Groups of Experts for
their growing and increasingly robust collaboration, as
well as for their cooperation with other United Nations
entities, such as the Office for Disarmament Affairs
and the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime, as
well as INTERPOL and others. We also acknowledge
their collective efforts and encourage them to continue
bolstering their cooperation with other international
and regional organizations, particularly with the
African Union.
Secondly, we deem it important to cooperate with the
private sector, civil society and other sectors to ensure
that efforts in these areas are more effective, always
with full respect for the sovereignty of States and their
laws. We also reiterate that the most effective method of
preventing and countering the proliferation of weapons
of mass destruction, terrorism, violent extremism and
conflicts is to invest in sustainable development.
Thirdly, we acknowledge the efforts of the three
Committees in ensuring the implementation of their
mandates and in supporting States in that regard. This
will require improving transparency in the Committee’s
discussions. We therefore commend the efforts being
made to increase accountability through ensuring
the participation of States in debates and informative
briefings and facilitating the participation of interested
Member States in informal meetings, particularly when
their interests could be affected by the inclusion of
persons or organizations on the sanctions list.
Finally, we urge the Committees to further bolster
such initiatives.
Mr. Davies (South Africa): It is with deep regret that
we must once again begin our remarks by expressing
South Africa’s condolences on this occasion to the
people of Burkina Faso, who recently suffered an attack
at a place of worship. This attack comes only weeks after
the devastating attacks in New Zealand and Sri Lanka
claimed so many innocent lives, and, of course, we also
condemn the terrible attack that took place in Egypt on
Sunday. The frequency of these barbaric, cowardly acts
of terror lends even more urgency to our joint efforts to
eradicate violent extremism and terrorism.
We thank the Chairs of the Committees that
have briefed the Security Council today for their
informative briefings and capable stewardship of these
important Committees.
12/24

20/05/2019

While the African continent has taken significant
steps towards addressing many of the peace, security,
governance and development challenges that we face,
terrorism and violent extremism continue to present a
serious threat to our joint efforts to uplift the continent
and its peoples.
The two most recent bulletins of the African Centre
for the Study and Research of Terrorism, which is an
African Union research institution, provide alarming
statistics on the nature of terrorism in Africa. The
Centre finds that from mid-March to mid-April,
Africa suffered 140 terrorist attacks, which claimed a
staggering 841 lives.
We are also deeply concerned at reports of the
spread of Islamic State in Iraq and the Sham affiliates
throughout the African continent, as the remnants of
the self-declared caliphate seek new areas of operation
and recruitment in the wake of its territorial defeat in
Iraq and Syria. We cannot allow these groups to exploit
our peoples in spreading their poisonous, extremist and
murderous ideologies.
South Africa unequivocally condemns all acts
of terrorism, in whatever form, for whatever reason
and wherever they may occur. We firmly believe
that the fight against terrorism must be led by the
United Nations, as the most widely representative and
appropriate international structure for coordinating
action against this global challenge, which threatens
us all.
South Africa also places great emphasis on the
need to address violent extremism and terrorism
holistically, beginning with addressing the conditions
that influence vulnerable people, particularly youth,
to become radicalized and involved with terrorist
organizations. Addressing the root causes of terrorism
and violent extremism should be imperative in our fight
against this scourge.
We also urge States to refrain from the use of
unilateral coercive measures in their counter-terrorism
measures and to take all measures to protect civilians
as well as to ensure that counter-terrorism efforts
do not have a negative impact on the provision of
humanitarian aid and medical assistance in conflict
situations. All counter-terrorism measures must also
accord with international law and respect international
human rights.
19-14548

20/05/2019

Briefings by Chairs of subsidiary bodies of the Security Council

We welcome the format of this joint briefing, which
fulfils one of the core aims of the United Nations Office
of Counter-Terrorism under the capable leadership of
Under-Secretary-General Vladimir Voronkov, which
is to foster a “one UN” approach in addressing these
common challenges.
South Africa fully supports this approach and
encourages the identification of complementary
mandates and aims among the complex architecture of
the United Nations that can allow us to break down silos
and merge our efforts towards greater gains. We also
welcome the continuing work of the Counter-Terrorism
Committee and its Executive Directorate in promoting
cooperation in the implementation of the Global
Counter-Terrorism Strategy and the relevant Security
Council resolutions. We also value the work being done
in providing technical assistance to those States that
request it so as to facilitate Member States’ compliance
with the relevant decisions of the Security Council.
South Africa remains of the view that in
implementing our counter-terrorism obligations under
the various Security Council resolutions, we should
take into account the need for a Member-State-driven
agenda. Accordingly, we recognize that it is up to
each State to contextualize the threat in accordance
with local conditions, keeping in mind also regional
and international dynamics. In countering these very
threats, it is critical that all our counter-measures be
relative to the threat being faced and that Member
States do not adopt a one-size-fits-all approach but,
rather, deal with threats on an individual basis.
Turning now to the 1540 Committee, allow me to
state that resolution 1540 (2004) remains one of the
most critical instruments in preventing non-State actors
from developing, acquiring, manufacturing, possessing,
transporting, transferring or using nuclear, chemical or
biological weapons and their means of delivery. In this
sense, it is evident that there are important links between
this Committee and its resolution and the counterterrorism efforts of the United Nations in ensuring that
terrorist organizations never have access to the types of
materials covered by resolution 1540 (2004).
To that end, South Africa welcomes the significant
progress made towards the effective implementation of
resolution 1540 (2004), and we renew our commitment
to working with the other members of the Committee to
address the challenges that remain, not least in terms of
national implementation and assistance.

S/PV. 8528

Furthermore, while dealing with the challenges of
weapons of mass destruction, it is imperative that no
unwarranted restrictions be imposed on the inalienable
right of Member States, particularly developing
countries, to use any related materials, equipment and
technologies for peaceful purposes. In that context,
the opportunities provided by nuclear technologies,
for example, in the implementation of the Sustainable
Development Goals, particularly in the areas of food
security, public-health technologies and clean energy,
cannot be overlooked.
South Africa’s experience with the implementation
of resolution 1540 (2004) has demonstrated that
financial and technical assistance is critically needed
to ensure that developing countries are able to fully
implement the resolution, especially on the continent,
where greatest attention is still devoted to issues of
poverty, unemployment and underdevelopment. We
therefore call upon Member States in a position to do
so to, upon request, offer assistance to those in need.
We must always bear in mind that the full and effective
implementation of resolution 1540 (2004) will be
realized only through the strengthening of the weakest
among us.
Mr. Singer Weisinger (Dominican Republic)
(spoke in Spanish): Our deepest thanks go to our
colleagues and friends Dian Djani of Indonesia, Chair
of the Security Council Committee established pursuant
to resolutions 1267 (1999), 1989 (2011) and 2253 (2015),
concerning the Islamic State, Da’esh, Al-Qaida and
associated individuals, undertakings and entities, and
the Security Council Committee established pursuant
to resolution 1540 (2004), on the non-proliferation
of weapons of mass destruction; and Gustavo MezaCuadra, Ambassador of Peru, Chair of the Security
Council Committee established pursuant to resolution
1373 (2001) concerning counter-terrorism, for their
briefings. I also acknowledge the exemplary work done
by both in leading their respective Committees with the
commitment, neutrality and efficiency that the issues
under consideration require.
The report attests to the fact that these terrorist
groups, as well as weapons of mass destruction,
remain two of the main threats to international peace
and security. On the one hand, the Islamic State in
Iraq and the Levant (ISIL) and its affiliates continue
to represent the main international terrorist threat,
with access to abundant resources, while, on the other,
Al-Qaida remains resilient and active in many regions,

19-1454813/24

S/PV.8528

Briefings by Chairs of subsidiary bodies of the Security Council

with the aggravating factor of its intention to further
expand internationally.
As we have stressed in the past, the current
transformation of ISIL into a covert global network;
the activities of its affiliates at the regional level, as
we have seen in Iraq; and the problem presented by
the return and relocation of foreign terrorist fighters,
including movements between terrorist groups as a
result of their persistent nature and the development
of policies and actions to combat them, requires that
cooperation among States be deepened in order to
strengthen global action.
We applaud the joint efforts of the Committees, and
of the Analytical Support and Sanctions Monitoring
Team pursuant to resolutions 1526 (2004) and 2253
(2015) concerning ISIL (Da’esh), Al-Qaida and the
Taliban and associated individuals and entities, in
preventing and combating terrorism, and we encourage
them to continue working to develop regulations and
actions for that purpose, just as we urge States to
comply with Security Council resolutions and other
international norms. We also need parallel actions
such as strengthening the implementation of the
recommendations of the Financial Action Task Force
and providing support at the national level for the work
of the financial intelligence units.
An example of the important collaboration
between these Committees was the Council’s adoption
in March of resolution 2462 (2019), on combating
terrorism financing, which reaffirms Member States’
obligation to prevent and suppress the financing of
terrorist acts by strictly enforcing their laws and
ensuring appropriate criminalization of those acts,
including by establishing serious criminal offences
in their national laws and regulations. The resolution
also instructs the 1267 and 1373 Committees to hold
a joint meeting every 12 months on new threats and
trends in terrorist financing. We therefore encourage
Member States to commit to providing updated
information to the Committee and the Monitoring
Team on the listed threats, persons and entities and the
status of the implementation of sanctions measures,
which is essential for the sanctions regime to function
effectively. We also emphasize the important role played
by investigations of the underlying causes that produce
these terrorist groups, enable them to survive over
time, and help them change and adapt their activities
and financing methods.
14/24

20/05/2019

Another example I want to point to is the joint
special meeting in March of the 1267 and 1373 counterterrorism Committees on the links between terrorism
and international organized crime, which was a
concrete effort to understand the changing nature of
these groups, including the very worrying causes that
create or fuel radicalization and violent extremism
among young people, women and children. In that
regard, we also want to acknowledge the work of the
Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive Directorate
and the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime in
the areas of research, intelligence and implementation.
We want to highlight the hard work that the
1540 Committee and its Group of Experts are doing to
ensure the implementation of resolution 1540 (2004)
through activities, technical assistance and cooperation,
and we commend the progress and commitments made
by the great majority of States with respect to its
implementation. The full and effective implementation
of resolution 1540 (2004) as the cornerstone of the
regime for the non-proliferation of weapons of mass
destruction, as well as for preventing non-State actors,
especially terrorist groups, from accessing such
weapons and their delivery systems, is something we
consider extremely important. The Dominican Republic
and Panama recently conducted a peer review exercise
with a view to sharing experiences and good practices
for implementing the resolution, analysing aspects such
as national and international legislation, strategic trade,
safe transportation and risk management in chemical,
biological, radiological, nuclear and explosive
emergencies. We urge other States to do the same. Our
peer review took place in the Dominican Republic from
26 to 29 March, and in Panama from 9 to 12 April, with
the participation of officials from associated institutions.
We are very grateful to the Group of Experts of the
1540 Committee, the experts from the Inter-American
Committee against Terrorism of the Organization of
American States, and the Government of Canada, for
their support and assistance in planning and executing
the exercise. The authorities of both nations agreed to
prepare a final report on the peer review, which will be
presented to the 1540 Committee soon.
Mr. Yao Shaojun (China) (spoke in Chinese):
China would like to thank you, Mr. President, and
Mr. Meza-Cuadra for this morning’s briefings. The
Committee established pursuant to resolutions 1267
(1999), 1989 (2011) and 2253 (2015) concerning ISIL
(Da’esh), Al-Qaida and the Taliban and associated
19-14548

20/05/2019

Briefings by Chairs of subsidiary bodies of the Security Council

individuals, groups, undertakings and entities, the
Committee established pursuant to resolution 1373
(2001) concerning counter-terrorism and the Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1540 (2004), under
the leadership of these two Ambassadors, have been
working actively. China commends both of you, and
your teams, for your efforts.
Terrorism and the proliferation of weapons of
mass destruction and their means of delivery pose a
serious threat to international peace and security. The
international community must improve its cooperation
and take comprehensive steps to effectively address
these issues. We would like to make the following
comments on the various Committees’ work.
First, the 1267 Committee represents an important
counter-terrorism sanctions mechanism of the
United Nations and its Security Council. It plays
a significant role in assessing terrorist threats and
strengthening sanctions measures. China supports the
1267 Committee in working under Council mandates,
communicating closely with the countries concerned
and fostering cooperation with regional and subregional
counter-terrorism mechanisms, with a view to making
greater contributions to international counter-terrorism
efforts. We hope that in its work, such as listing
exemptions and de-listing, it will abide strictly by the
relevant Council resolutions and the norms guiding
it, uphold the principles of objectivity, impartiality
and professionalism, and base its efforts on solid
evidence and consensus among the relevant parties so
as to safeguard the authority and effectiveness of the
sanctions mechanism.
Secondly, in accordance with the mandates of
Council resolutions, the Counter-Terrorism Committee
(CTC) has been working hard to promote the
implementation of counter-terrorism resolutions and
raise awareness about them, keep track of new threats
and trends in terrorism and provide technical assistance
to the countries concerned. It has therefore played
an important role in international counter-terrorism
efforts. China supports the CTC’s continuation of its
work, including through joint meetings and visits
designed to improve information-sharing and enhance
coordination and cooperation with other relevant
United Nations agencies. We hope that the CTC will
further increase its dialogue with Member States, help
them to build their counter-terrorism capacity and
cooperate with international, regional and subregional
organizations to jointly address such new challenges as

S/PV. 8528

the use of the Internet and new technologies to incite,
plan, finance and carry out terrorist activities.
Thirdly, the 1540 Committee is an important
component of the international non-proliferation
regime. It plays a significant role in raising awareness
about non-proliferation and building Member States’
capacity in that regard. The priority for its next phase is
to advance the comprehensive review of resolution 1540
(2004) scheduled for 2021 in a balanced and orderly
manner. China supports the Committee’s continued
work in a spirit of cooperation and dialogue and based
on mandates from Council resolutions aimed at fully
and effectively implementing the resolution. In order
to respond effectively to proliferation threats from
non-State actors, all parties must work earnestly to
safeguard the authority, universality and effectiveness
of the international non-proliferation regime, uphold
the principle that national Governments bear the
primary responsibility for non-proliferation and
deepen international cooperation in that regard, with
special attention to developing countries’ needs for
international assistance.
China is opposed to terrorism in all its forms and
manifestations and to the proliferation of weapons of
mass destruction and their means of delivery. We stand
firm in seriously implementing Council resolutions
and supporting the work of the Council’s subsidiary
bodies. We support the joint thematic activities of
the various Committees and hope that their Groups
of Experts will enhance coordination, fully leverage
their own advantages, keep improving their work and
professionalism and pay more attention to the views
of Member States. China will continue to work with
the international community to actively promote
international counter-terrorism cooperation and
improve the international non-proliferation regime so
as to jointly maintain world peace and stability.
Mr. Kuzmin (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We attach great importance to our regular
meetings with the Chairs of the three Security Council
Committees with mandates in counter-terrorism, the
Committee established pursuant to resolutions 1267
(1999), 1989 (2011) and 2253 (2015) concerning ISIL
(Da’esh), Al-Qaida and the Taliban and associated
individuals, groups, undertakings and entities, the
Committee established pursuant to resolution 1373
(2001) concerning counter-terrorism and the Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1540 (2004). We
share your positive assessments of the cooperation

19-1454815/24

S/PV.8528

Briefings by Chairs of subsidiary bodies of the Security Council

among these subsidiary organs, Mr. President, including
in the areas of exchanging information, preparing
analytical documents and organizing joint meetings
and monitoring missions.
The Council’s specialized bodies face the difficult
challenge of adapting to the rapidly changing conditions
on the counter-terrorism front. The subsidiary bodies’
experts agree that the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant
(ISIL), Al-Qaida and their affiliated organizations are
now trying to expand their presence into States that were
previously fortunate where security was concerned.
And yet it is extremely difficult to determine exactly
where the next flare-up of terror will be.
In the circumstances, the Counter-Terrorism
Committee (CTC) should devote every effort to
monitoring the implementation of the relevant
resolutions in all key regions. We call on States that are
on the Committee’s current list for assessment visits to
take a constructive approach to coordinating those visits
with the CTC leadership and the Counter-Terrorism
Committee Executive Directorate (CTED). We have
noted CTED’s efforts to analyse new trends in the
area of counter-terrorism. We believe it is essential to
continue studying the problem of cooperation between
terrorist organizations and international crime. By
exploiting the potential of criminal groups, terrorists
can significantly expand their subversive capabilities
on a transnational scale. In that connection, we believe
that the efforts of Peru’s chairmanship to develop this
subject in the Committee are especially critical.
In the CTC we traditionally highlight the
importance of paying close attention to modern
digital technologies, and particularly the problem of
their unlawful use by terrorists for radicalizing and
recruiting new supporters. Resolutions 1624 (2005)
and 2354 (2017) should continue to form the basis for
those efforts. We urge all States to thoroughly study
the Council’s new requirements in resolution 2462
(2019), on combating the various forms of support for
terrorists. Acting in accordance with Chapter VII of
the Charter of the United Nations, the Council called in
particular on all States to criminalize the full spectrum
of criminal acts related to illicit trafficking in small
arms and light weapons. The verification of national
legislation and law enforcement practice in this area
now comes under the CTC’s purview.
Against that backdrop, I would like to once again
caution our colleagues on the Committee and its
16/24

20/05/2019

Executive Directorate’s experts about getting too caught
up in the secondary elements of the CTC’s mandate.
Attempts to fill its agenda with human rights issues and
replace counter-terrorism with the infamous concept
of the prevention of violent extremism distract States
from fulfilling their primary obligations in the area.
On the positive side, I would like to take this
opportunity to especially thank and congratulate
Ms. Michèle Coninsx, Executive Director of CTED,
for her contribution to strengthening the Committee’s
cooperation with the specialized organizations. We
welcome the signing of a memorandum of understanding
between CTED and the Shanghai Cooperation
Organization’s Regional Anti-Terrorist Structure and
stand ready to assist in its implementation, if necessary.
In our view, the task of effectively implementing the
Council’s resolutions on the counter-terrorism sanctions
regime in relation to ISIL and Al-Qaida is absolutely
crucial. We note the work of the Committee pursuant
to resolutions 1267 (1999) 1989 (2011) and 2253 (2015)
concerning ISIL (Da’esh) Al-Qaida and associated
individuals groups undertakings and entities, which has
established itself as one of the Council’s most effective
counter-terrorism mechanisms. Given ISIL’s growing
presence in Afghanistan and the possibility of fighters
spreading further into the countries of Central Asia,
extending the Council’s counter-terrorism sanctions
regime to individuals and organizations linked to ISIL’s
Afghan wing is a priority. Despite the limited losses
they have sustained in the north, it is those groups that
remain one of the key factors in the destabilization of
the situation in Afghanistan. ISIL’s activity there is
also being driven in part by foreign terrorist fighters
who have gained combat experience in Syria and Iraq.
The high number of terrorist attacks involving the use
of suicide bombers indicates that the group has major
human resources. In that connection, we underscore
the importance of continuing to focus on the problem
of foreign terrorist fighters, including in the context of
adding to the counter-terrorism sanctions lists.
We support the effective work of the 1267
Committee’s Analytical Support and Sanctions
Monitoring Team, whose reports are an important
support to the Committee’s work, and we encourage
Member States to work closely with its experts.
However, we also trust that the Monitoring Team’s
reports will be as objective as possible and rely only on
verified sources of information. While we consider the
Monitoring Team’s country visits an important factor in
19-14548

20/05/2019

Briefings by Chairs of subsidiary bodies of the Security Council

this work, we hope that it will focus on trips to countries
that are dealing directly with a terrorist presence.
Resolution 1540 (2004) is a key universal, legally
binding instrument in the area of the non-proliferation
of weapons of mass destruction (WMDs), which
requires all countries to take effective measures to
prevent WMDs and any related materials, as well as
their means of delivery, from falling into the hands of
non-State actors. Combating the proliferation of WMDs
is one of Russia’s military and political priorities.
As with any other pressing issue, it requires the joint
coordinated efforts of every State, without exception.
We are interested in finding common positions with
our partners in order to advance the non-proliferation
agenda as quickly as possible, especially since the
problems in this area unfortunately continue to worsen.
On the whole, we are pleased with the progress in the
resolution’s implementation and with the international
community’s recognition of its importance. We
commend the efforts of the 1540 Committee under
Indonesia’s chairmanship, and of its Group of Experts.
We note its organization of courses for national focal
points, country visits for formulating voluntary national
action plans, the provision of assistance to countries that
need it, the maintenance of contacts with the relevant
international, regional and subregional organizations
and so forth. However, a great deal remains to be done
to achieve the core objective, which is every country’s
full implementation of the resolution.
In the light of the continuing activity in the
Middle East of ISIL and other terrorist groups that
have mastered the technology for producing chemical
weapons and making active use of it, the importance of
working collectively to prevent the horrific problem of
chemical terrorism is only increasing. But we have to
act quickly, especially considering that as the situation
regarding a settlement in Syria continues to improve,
the terrorists there, including those who have practical
experience with chemical weapons, will try to hide in
third countries. In that regard, we would like to remind
the Council of the Russian Federation’s initiative to
develop and adopt a convention on combating acts of
chemical and biological terrorism.
Mr. Michon (France) (spoke in French): I would
like to thank you, Mr. President, as well as Ambassador
Meza-Cuadra, for your commitment as Chairs of the
Committees established pursuant to resolution 1373
(2001) concerning counter-terrorism, resolutions 1267

S/PV. 8528

(1999), 1989 (2011) and 2253 (2015) concerning the
Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (Da’esh), Al-Qaida
and associated individuals, groups, undertakings and
entities, and resolution 1540 (2004). Terrorism and
nuclear proliferation are some of the most serious
threats to international peace and security today. I
would therefore like to touch briefly on the activities of
each of the Committees.
I would first like to discuss the 1267 Committee,
responsible for sanctions against Da’esh and Al-Qaida.
While Da’esh has suffered some important military
defeats in the Middle East, it continues to pose a
complex threat and its barbaric ideology still inspires
radicalized individuals to move from words to deeds.
In some parts of the world, particularly in Afghanistan,
Da’esh, through local franchises, has been the cause of
particularly deadly attacks. The end of its territorial
hold does not therefore mean the end of the terrorist
threat posed by Da’esh.
Al-Qaida also remains very active in some regions
such as the Sahel or the Arabian peninsula. In this
context, France attaches great importance to the
1267 Committee continuing to fulfil its two essential
missions. The first is the analysis of the terrorist threat,
through the reports of the Analytical Support and
Sanctions Monitoring Team, which is very valuable
for Member States. In this regard, France encourages
all States to cooperate actively with the Group of
Experts in order to enrich its analyses. The second
mission is the implementation and rigorous monitoring
of the sanctions list, the largest in volume among all
United Nations sanctions regimes. If the regime is
to remain credible and effective, it is essential that
it be fully implemented by States, as required by
Council resolutions, and that its procedures respect
the fundamental freedoms of listed individuals. France
therefore reiterates its full support for the Office of the
Ombudsperson and encourages all States to continue to
cooperate actively with it.
My second point concerns the 1373 Committee
on counter-terrorism, which also fulfils at least
two major functions. The first of these functions
is the Committee on Counter-Terrorism’s core
activity, namely, implementation assessments. The
assessment visits of the Counter-Terrorism Committee
Executive Directorate (CTED) are a unique tool for
a comprehensive audit of national counter-terrorism
measures and for making the best recommendations,
including those concerning the technical assistance

19-1454817/24

S/PV.8528

Briefings by Chairs of subsidiary bodies of the Security Council

needs of States. We encourage all States to accept the
visits of the CTED and to fully implement the Security
Council resolutions on the fight against terrorism,
including the most recent one adopted by the Council
less than two months ago, in resolution 2462 (2019), on
the fight against terrorist financing.
The second and equally important function of the
CTC is to be a laboratory of ideas. In this context, with
the valuable support of the CTED and its network,
the Committee makes it possible to raise States’
awareness of the emerging challenges that characterize
an ever-changing terrorist threat. Special meetings
of the Committee, such as the one we will soon have
on vulnerable targets, are an excellent way to reflect
together on specific issues. France therefore encourages
the continuation of the joint meetings of the CTC and
the 1267 Committee, as we did on 26 April last, in order
to compare the threat analysis and the assessment of the
implementation of Council resolutions.
Finally, I would like to say a few words on the
efforts made in the 1540 Committee. The risk of
radiological, biological, chemical and nuclear materials
and delivery systems falling into the hands of terrorists
is real. We know this, and we have seen it in Syria and
Iraq. In addition, there are major suspicions about the
state of Syrian chemical stockpiles, which increases the
possibility that, with the potential existence of residual
capabilities on Syrian territory, there is a risk that
terrorists may get their hands on these weapons.
We are also particularly concerned about the
transfer to the Middle East of goods and technology
for the development of weapons and means of delivery
capable of carrying weapons of mass destruction.
In this worrying context, it is important to adapt
our action to the evolution of the threat. Progress in
the implementation of resolution 1540 (2004) and its
aftermath is tangible, both at national and regional
levels. Today, the vast majority of States Members of the
United Nations have adopted measures incorporating
the provisions of the resolution into national law.
Whether it concerns the security of sensitive materials
and goods, the strengthening of border controls or even,
where necessary, the establishment of export-control
mechanisms, States ensure that such sensitive materials
and goods do not fall into the hands of terrorists.
But we must go further: the 2020 deadline for
reviewing the implementation of resolution 1540
(2004) should encourage us to intensify our efforts.
18/24

20/05/2019

This includes strengthening the logic of coordination,
assistance and interaction that underlies our action, for
it is only through greater cooperation that we will be
able to better prevent the risk of acquisition of weapons
of mass destruction by non-State actors. France is fully
involved in this regard, in this forum, as Coordinator
of the Working Group on Assistance, at the General
Assembly, at the European Union and in the context of
its presidency of the Group of Seven.
Mr. Alotaibi (Kuwait) (spoke in Arabic): I would
like to begin by thanking you, Mr. President, for
convening today’s meeting and for the three briefings
you delivered at the beginning of our work, which have
clarified the great burdens and responsibilities that
you shoulder in addition to the responsibilities of the
presidency this month. We also thank his Excellency
Ambassador Gustavo Meza-Cuadra for his briefing and
applaud the cooperation among the three Chairs of the
Committees established pursuant to resolutions 1373
(2001), 1267 (1999) and 1540 (2004). We also applaud
the cooperation between them and the Groups of Experts
of those Committees, the Counter-terrorism Executive
Directorate (CTED) and the Analytical Support and
Sanctions Monitoring Team of 1267 Committee.
The three Committees on counter-terrorism and
their Groups of Experts are among the most important
tools available to the Security Council in countering the
phenomenon of terrorism. That can be done by looking
for the best ways and means to defeat this hateful
scourge, which poses a serious threat to international
peace and security. The close cooperation between the
Committees and the Member States, in compliance
with the relevant Council resolutions on counterterrorism, has allowed the international community
to achieve several successes against terrorism,
represented by joint visits, workshops, joint briefings
such as those of today’s meeting, as well as cooperation
with international organizations, the exchange of
information and other practical measures.
With regard to the threats posed by terrorist groups,
despite the victories achieved by the international
community against the so-called the Islamic State in
Iraq and the Levant (ISIL) (Da’esh) and Al-Qaida, these
entities continue to pose a threat to international peace
and security, as the President said. Da’esh continues to
evolve through establishing a covert global network in
Iraq and Syria that aims to continue terrorist attacks
and undermine all the successes achieved through
the cooperation and solidarity of the international
19-14548

20/05/2019

Briefings by Chairs of subsidiary bodies of the Security Council

community. This requires each of us to multiply our
efforts and cooperation if we want to preserve our gains.
In this regard, we thank the Chair of the Committee
pursuant to resolutions 1267 (1999) 1989 (2011) and
2253 (2015) concerning ISIL (Da’esh) Al-Qaida and
associated individuals groups undertakings and entities
and the Chair of the Counter-terrorism Committee for
the efforts made by the two Committees, which include
visits to Member States, comprehensive assessments
and analyses of emerging issues, and identifying the
trends and developments that accompany efforts made
by Member States to counter terrorism. These efforts
will support Member States and United Nations entities
in undertaking the necessary measures, in accordance
with international law, in order to mutually benefit
Member States and the other subsidiary bodies.
We commend the role of CTED in assisting Member
States in implementing Security Council resolutions
and in cooperating with international organizations.
We particularly mention the assistance provided to
Member States in implementing the advanced passenger
information system and the passenger name record
system through cooperation with the International
Civil Aviation Organization. This work comes pursuant
to Security Council resolutions 2178 (2014), 2396
(2017) and in accordance with domestic laws as well as
international human rights law.
With regard to the activities of the Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1540 (2004), we
hope that the briefing delivered by the President of
the Security Council will lead to greater conviction
on the part of the Member States with respect to the
need to promote efforts for the optimal implementation
of resolution 1540 (2004) with the aim of fully
implementing its provisions and achieving universality
in this process.
Our objective is to operationalize the mechanisms
of the Committee on all levels — national, regional
and international — which has become an integral
part of international efforts aimed at attaining
non-proliferation. This is extremely important in
achieving international peace and security.
I would like to note four issues that you mentioned
in your briefing, Mr. President: the need to highlight
the sectors that require the greatest attention in the light
of new proliferation threats; national plans relevant to
resolution 1540 (2004); the country and regional visits
of the Committee and its Groups of Experts; and the

S/PV. 8528

importance of taking the specific circumstances of
States into consideration in implementing measures to
counter proliferation.
On more than one occasion, Kuwait has expressed
its concern with respect to the challenges faced in
the world today by the non-proliferation regime for
weapons of mass destruction. The proliferation of those
weapons and the increased possibility of their falling
into the hands of non-State actors cause great concern,
especially given the growing threats posed by terrorism
and the increase of conflicts and instability in our
contemporary world.
In that context, the possibility of non-State actors
acquiring, developing, using and trafficking in weapons
of mass destruction will increase, threatening serious
and unpredictable consequences. One of our main tasks,
therefore, is to correctly assess the evolving nature of
the threat posed by proliferation and rapid advances in
science and technology, while responding in a timely
manner by taking preventive and proactive measures.
In conclusion, we reiterate the importance of
reaching universality in that vital process. We cannot
wait until those weapons are used by non-State
actors. Prevention is better than cure. We should
like to emphasize in this regard that Kuwait remains
steadfastly committed to and actively participates in the
implementation of the Security Council resolutions that
are relevant to anti-terrorism and the non-proliferation
of weapons of mass destruction.
Ms. Wronecka (Poland): At the outset, I would
like to thank you, Mr. President, and Ambassador
Gustavo Meza-Cuadra for your informative briefings
and tireless work and active leadership in the three
Committees. The close cooperation and engagement of
the Committees are an excellent example of the use of
subsidiary bodies in highlighting the effectiveness of
the Security Council as the organ entrusted with the
maintenance of international peace and security.
Let me also commend the ongoing cooperation
among the respective expert bodies of the three
Committees: the Analytical Support and Sanctions
Monitoring Team, the Counter-Terrorism Executive
Directorate (CTED) and the Group of Experts of the
Committee established pursuant to resolution 1540
(2004). Their mutual understanding of the importance
of information-sharing, cooperation in matters
of common concern and outreach to regional and
subregional organizations is highly appreciated.

19-1454819/24

S/PV.8528

Briefings by Chairs of subsidiary bodies of the Security Council

This year, the 1540 Committee has started the
preparatory work for the upcoming comprehensive
review of the implementation of resolution 1540 (2004),
which will be completed in 2021. The review will have
two major objectives: to evaluate the implementation
of resolution 1540 (2004), with a view to increasing
its effectiveness, and to analyse the work of the
Committee and recommend any necessary changes.
Based on resolution 2325 (2016), we ought to remember
that recommendations should take into account the
evolving nature of risks of proliferation and the rapid
advances in science, technology and commerce in the
context of non-proliferation. While the use of weapons
of mass destruction and their means of delivery by
terrorists continue to pose a real threat, non-State
actors are becoming more creative in weaponizing
new technologies.
Obligations under resolution 1540 (2004) are not a
one-time task. We call on all States to fully implement
resolution 1540 (2004) by taking national and
international measures to strengthen their capacities
in countering threats posed by the terrorists acquiring
weapons of mass destruction.
Secondly, Poland welcomes the achievements
of the Committee pursuant to resolutions 1267
(1999) 1989 (2011) and 2253 (2015) concerning ISIL
(Da’esh) Al-Qaida and associated individuals groups
undertakings and entities. Despite the defeat of Da’esh
in Iraq and the liberation of the last remaining territory
occupied by Da’esh in Syria, the Islamic State in Iraq
and the Levant still poses a significant challenge to
international peace and security. Al-Qaida is relatively
strong in many parts of the world and poses long-term
danger to stability and sustainable development.
In that regard, it is a matter of the highest
importance to keep the sanctions list updated and to
stay focused on the current threat. Having said that, I
would like to underline a significant achievement made
by all Security Council member States that enabled the
listing of a person responsible for a deadly terrorist
attack in the State of Jammu and Kashmir. We welcome
the progress achieved and encourage all States to work
together to hold perpetrators, organizers and sponsors
of acts of terrorism accountable.
Lastly, I would like to express our appreciation for
the work of the Counter-Terrorism Committee. Thanks
to its efforts, last year we adopted the addendum to the
Madrid Guiding Principles. Now it is up to Member
20/24

20/05/2019

States to make the best use of them and come up with
country-tailored responses to tackle the threat posed
by foreign terrorist fighters. The special meetings of
the Committee, such as the recent one on the nexus
between international terrorism and transnational
organized crime, are an excellent tool for States to
address those linkages and foster actions aimed at the
phenomenon of foreign terrorist fighters. They are also
a unique platform to galvanize discussion.
With the adoption of resolution 2462 (2019), on
countering the financing of terrorism, Poland hopes that
the CTC, together with CTED, will play a coordinating
role in the dialogue with Member States in terms of the
implementation of its provisions.
To conclude, let me stress that aside from States’
efforts in countering terrorism, we should not
underestimate the effectiveness of engaging with the
private sector and civil society organizations. Without
mutual trust among all relevant actors, our undertakings
will be futile.
Mr. Allen (United Kingdom): I thank the Chairs of
the Committees for their briefings and the experts who
make that work possible, especially in the Analytical
Support and Sanctions Monitoring Team, the CounterTerrorism Executive Directorate (CTED) and the Group
of Experts of the Committee established pursuant to
resolution 1540 (2004).
While Da’esh has lost territorial control, it remains
a threat to international peace and security and a covert
network capable of continued destruction. As we have
heard, while its core may be regrouping or developing
plans for successor organizations, Al-Qaeda may take
advantage of a perceived lull to perpetrate attacks and
reassert itself. We therefore continue to encourage
States and United Nations colleagues to work on the
implementation of resolution 2396 (2017) to address
returning or relocating foreign terrorist fighters, and
we welcome the launch of the United Nations project
on advanced passenger information and passenger
name records systems to counter terrorist travel. We
continue to endorse the call for a global standard of
passenger names record data, which is a key pillar for
its implementation.
We have witnessed terrorist attacks motivated by
a range of ideologies, including extreme right-wing
terrorism, and we welcome the increased attention that
the Counter-Terrorism Committee has given to that
issue. The United Kingdom will continue to be an active
19-14548

20/05/2019

Briefings by Chairs of subsidiary bodies of the Security Council

and global supporter of counter-terrorism sanctions as a
key tool to combat terrorism from Da’esh, Al-Qaida and
their affiliates, within the high legal evidence threshold
set by the United Kingdom’s courts. We welcome the
1540 Committee’s closer engagement with international
organizations and acknowledge the positive impact
that outreach efforts have on assisting Member States’
capacity to strengthen national measures and meet their
treaty obligations.
Let me make three points on the work of the
Committees and our collective efforts to address
terrorism and the spread of weapons of mass destruction
to non-State actors: on responsiveness, on transparency
and on impact.
Regarding responsiveness, we must ensure that
our efforts can respond to evolving dynamics. We
therefore welcome the efforts of the Committees to
engage Member States to actively strengthen their
counter-terrorism capacities and highlight emerging
trends, such as attacks on soft targets and houses of
worship and emerging technologies. With the adoption
of resolution 2462 (2019) on combating terrorist
financing, we also took note of the concerns regarding
the potential negative impacts of counter-terrorism
on humanitarian action. That is a complex issue but it
remains important to better understand the potential
consequences for humanitarian actors, who are called
on to provide critical assistance in the most difficult
and dangerous places. We look forward to a briefing
on this topic in the Counter-Terrorism Committee later
this week and opportunities to follow up.
The Committees must also respond to new updates
and information. In that vein, we are pleased to hear
about the efforts of the Monitoring Team to gather
updated information on the threat and to continually
refine and update the sanctions list and delisting
activities. It is key that those remain as current as
possible in order to be effective. I would like to
reinforce the United Kingdom’s support for the 1540
Committee’s preparations to review implementation
ahead of the 2020 comprehensive review and renewal
of the resolution.
With regard to transparency, just as no Member
State can counter terrorism alone, no single United
Nations entity can address the spectrum of challenges
and needs that arise alone. We therefore welcome efforts
to undertake improved delivery of United Nations
counter-terrorism assistance through the United Nations

S/PV. 8528

Global Compact and greater cooperation among the
Committees. However, at the same time, there should
be no confusion about the respective mandates and
roles of each entity.
We have been pleased to see greater alignment of
the activity of the Office of Counter-Terrorism with
CTED recommendations. We encourage continued
cooperation to reduce any duplication, while meeting
Member State needs in a timely manner. Key to that is
the sharing of CTED reports, wherever possible, and
we are pleased to hear that Switzerland has decided to
share its assessment report — the first country to do
so in line with resolution 2395 (2017). We understand
the importance of confidentiality regarding sensitive
information but we welcome the move, which improves
the delivery of United Nations technical assistance and
clarifies the purpose and process for those States that
still remain unclear about the CTED assessments.
Concerning impact, we must ensure that all our
efforts here translate into a concrete impact on the
ground. To that end, we hope that the next time we
gather for this briefing we can learn in some more detail
about the outcomes and impact of several of the visits
and initiative that have been highlighted today and
discuss how Committee members can enhance them.
Mr. Pecsteen de Buytswerve (Belgium) (spoke in
French): I would first like to thank you, Mr. President,
for your briefing as Chair of the Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1267 (1999) concerning
Al-Qaida and the Taliban and associated individuals
and entities and the Committee established pursuant to
resolution 1540 (2004). I also thank Ambassador MezaCuadra for his briefing as Chair of the Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1373 (2001)
concerning counter-terrorism.
We welcome the good cooperation among the
Committees, which is reflected in the joint visits,
joint meetings and exchanges of views. We also
welcome the collaboration between the CounterTerrorism Committee Executive Directorate (CTED)
and the Monitoring Team, as well as their quarterly
coordination meetings. Such cooperation among the
three Committees can indeed strengthen the One United
Nations approach towards Member States and ensure
better implementation of the relevant resolutions.
We share the assessment of the three Committees:
the terrorist threat from Da’esh has not disappeared
but has evolved. Indeed, the destruction of Da’esh as

19-1454821/24

S/PV.8528

Briefings by Chairs of subsidiary bodies of the Security Council

a terrorist organization with a territorial base does
not mean the end of the threat it represents. Da’esh
continues to act as an international spoiler through its
influence on individuals and groups around the world.
We saw that once again in the 21 April attacks in Sri
Lanka, with more than 250 regrettable deaths. And that
is without forgetting that Al-Qaida and its affiliated
groups are also maintaining their position, in particular
in the Sahel. We must therefore remain vigilant, and
we therefore strongly encourage the work carried out
by the three Committees in recent months. In that
regard, we welcome the open briefing on the addendum
to the Madrid Guiding Principles. We believe it to be
an important first step towards the implementation
of that addendum, making it possible to strengthen
Member States’ understanding and knowledge of the
Principles and thereby promoting the implementation
of resolution 2396 (2017).
CTED, the 1267 Monitoring Team and the Expert
Group of the 1540 Committee have a crucial role as
international entities in the fight against terrorism.
We are committed to giving our full support to
their respective mandates. We welcome the fact that
resolution 2462 (2019), adopted in March, requests
CTED and the Monitoring Team to prepare a report
on actions taken by Member States in the fight against
terrorist financing.
Belgium welcomes the fact that the threat stemming
from the entire spectrum of violent extremism,
including extreme right-wing terrorism, is now on the
Security Council’s agenda. The increasing polarization
within and between our countries strengthens the
growth of such phenomena, which seem to encourage
individual actions. In addition, we face growing
internationalization in terms of financial and tactical
support. However, we recognize that in particular
the issue of the extreme right remains difficult.
Member States have very different approaches and the
phenomenon is complicated to define and demarcate.
We encourage CTED to continue to study and to
define the phenomenon and to report on that to the
1373 Committee.
Belgium also appreciated and supported the 26 April
joint meeting of the 1988, 1267 and 1373 Committees on
the link between terrorism and organized crime. With
regard to that link, Belgium supports the holding of the
debate and advocates a better exchange of information
and good practices.
22/24

20/05/2019

Belgium also welcomes the work of the 1267
Committee’s Ombudsperson and reiterates its full
support for his work. The establishment of the Office of
the Ombudsperson in 2009 was an important step towards
improving transparency and strengthening respect for
the procedural safeguards necessary for effective and
legitimate sanctions in the 1267 Committee.
In conclusion, aware that the terrorist threat has
not diminished and that terrorists seem to be constantly
adapting to the new realities, let us remain vigilant and
pursue international cooperation in the fight against
terrorism. Belgium will continue to support the work
of the 1267, 1373 and 1540 Committees and its support
structures. We remain committed to multilateral efforts
to combat the global terrorist threat.
Mr. Heusgen (Germany): I would first like to
thank you, Mr. President, and Mr. Meza-Cuadra for
your briefings on your work. From our own experience,
we know humanitarianow cumbersome that sometimes
is and we are grateful for your efforts. However, I
would like to echo what our United Kingdom colleague
said earlier in not only thanking the Chairs but also
the experts, who do a tremendous amount of work. I
believe they need our support and, where necessary, our
protection. With regard to the different Committees, let
me start with the Committee established pursuant to
resolution 1267 (1999) concerning Al-Qaida and the
Taliban and associated individuals and entities. I think
that it was a good omen for the work of the Committee
that we were able to list Mohammed Masood Azhar
Alvi earlier. It was difficult for some, but I believe that
it was very important that we were able to overcome
those obstacles.
Concerning the 1267 Committee’s list, which is
perhaps the longest of people proscribed, we believe
that it is very important that the listing system remain
credible. There must therefore always be a balance
among listing, designations and delistings. The rule of
law has to be an integral of part of the listing procedures,
and we continue to support a strong role to be played
by the Office of the Ombudsperson, which my French
colleague mentioned and highlighted earlier.
With regard to the Committee established pursuant
to resolution 1373 (2001), let me make four points.
First, we all remember the horrendous attack in
Christchurch, which showed that not all extremist
terrorist groups assert that, with regard to what they
do, their ideology rests within a religious context. That
19-14548

20/05/2019

Briefings by Chairs of subsidiary bodies of the Security Council

does not make them any less dangerous. In the Council
and the Counter-Terrorism Committee, we have only
started to explore the international component of
far-right extremist terrorists and their cross-border
networks. I believe that both require the increased
attention of the Security Council. We believe that we
need to study whether far-right extremist terrorists are
interconnected across international borders and whether
that connection poses a threat to international peace
and security. We would appreciate it if the CounterTerrorism Committee Executive Directorate could
make an assessment on the international dimension
of that. A first discussion on that issue will take place
within the Counter-Terrorism Committee later this
year, and we look forward to its findings.
Secondly, we have to look more closely at the
effects of counter-terrorism measures on the work
of principled, impartial and neutral humanitarian
actors. In New York, there has been discussion on the
issue. A lot of analysis with regard to their effect on
humanitarian law and humanitarian actors is available,
and we need to make sure that the knowledge we
have is being translated into Security Council action.
We have to ensure that our resolutions do not impede
humanitarian action, but help us to help innocent
civilians and children in need. We appreciate the fact
that the Counter-Terrorism Committee will discuss
those matters later this week.
Thirdly, Germany is active within the Group of
Like-Minded States on Targeted Sanctions, and we
are convinced that we need to respect international
standards of due process and human rights when
countering terrorism. Only if we employ fairness and
transparency will we be able to prevent young people
from falling into the trap of violent extremist and
terrorist propaganda. For Governments, it is therefore
paramount to act humanely and within the realm of the
law. It is not only our moral duty; it is also the most
effective way to counter the terrorists’ lies.
Lastly, drone strikes by terrorists are no longer only
a topic for science fiction, but a real threat. That is why
Germany and the United States have presented at the
Global Counter-Terrorism Forum (GCTF) an initiative
to counter the threat by using unmanned aerial vehicles.
As a next step, we intend to create a document on good
practices to be presented at the GCTF ministerial
meeting in New York in September.

S/PV. 8528

Concerning the Committee established pursuant to
resolution 1540 (2004), I should like to make a couple
of points.
First, in order to guarantee the full and effective
implementation of resolution 1540 (2004), it is very
important that we provide assistance to States that
require such support. The process of matching requests
for assistance with offers from States or international,
regional or subregional organizations is therefore
absolutely vital and needs constant updating and refining.
We particularly welcome the intensified cooperation of
the Committee and the Panel of Experts with United
Nations Office for Disarmament Affairs (UNODA)
regional centres and international organizations, such
as the Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical
Weapons, the United Nations Office on Drugs and
Crime, the World Customs Organization and the
International Atomic Energy Agency.
With regard to partnerships among Government,
States and industry, which is an issue key in connection
with the implementation of resolution 1540 (2004),
Germany has been actively involved in promoting
intensified cooperation. We host the biannual global
Wiesbaden conferences, which serve as a platform for
exchange among regulators, industry, international
organizations and academia. Since 2016, those global
conferences have been complemented by regional
Wiesbaden conferences, held in South Korea, Mexico
and India and looked at regional specificities. The next
regional conference for southern Africa — the first in
Africa — will take place in Zambia late this month.
In that context, I would like to thank the Panel of
Experts, UNODA and the Government of Zambia for
their excellent cooperation in making that conference
possible. The Wiesbaden process raises awareness,
furthers the exchange of information and effective
practices, and promotes private-sector engagement at
the first line of defence.
The President: I shall now make a statement in my
capacity as representative of Indonesia.
In my national capacity, I would like to once again
express my delegation’s appreciation to the Analytical
Support and Sanctions Monitoring Team established
pursuant to paragraph 7 of resolutions 1526 (2004); the
Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive Directorate;
the Group of Experts of the Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1540 (2004); and the Office of
the Ombudsperson for carrying out their activities

19-1454823/24

S/PV.8528

Briefings by Chairs of subsidiary bodies of the Security Council

in accordance with their respective mandates; and to
the secretariats for their dedication in supporting the
Chairs in their daily work.
We must acknowledge that there have been
encouraging developments in advancing our common
goals with regard to the three Committees’ mandates,
but we are far from done. We share concerns that,
although the threat has been transformed, it has not
diminished. We believe that the continued collaboration
and unity of the Committee are a prerequisite for the
further development of our future work. We need
the Committee to be united more than ever before.
Therefore, I would like once again to commend the

24/24

20/05/2019

members of the Committee for their efforts over the
past few months to preserve its credibility and sanctity.
Indonesia, based on procedural rules of the
Committees, will continue to facilitate consultations
and find common ground to bridge various views in
order to ensure the effective functioning of the regimes.
I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.
There are no more names inscribed on the list
of speakers.
The meeting rose at 12.10 p.m.

19-14548
