S/2018/359

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
17 April 2018
Original: English

Report of the Secretary-General pursuant to
Security Council resolution 2367 (2017)
I. Introduction
1.
The present report is submitted pursuant to Security Council resolution 2367
(2017), in which the Secretary-General was requested to report every three months
on progress made towards fulfilling the mandate of the United Nations Assistance
Mission for Iraq (UNAMI). The report covers key developments relating to Iraq and
provides an update on the activities of the United Nations in Iraq since my previous
report, which was issued on 17 January 2018 (S/2018/42), and the briefing of my
Special Representative for Iraq to the Security Council on 20 February 2018.

II. Summary of key political developments
A.

Political situation
2.
During the reporting period, preparations for the upcoming Council of
Representatives (the parliament) elections, discussions over the federal budget and
the rapprochement between Baghdad and Erbil dominated the political agenda. On
21 January, the Federal Supreme Court issued a decision stating that parliamentary
elections must be held 45 days before the conclusion of the preceding electoral term,
in conformity with article 56 (2) of the Constitution of Iraq. Following this ruling, on
22 January, the Council of Representatives endorsed a previous decision of the
Council of Ministers to hold the parliamentary elections on 12 May. This decision
was subsequently ratified by the President, Fuad Masum.
3.
During the same session, the Council of Representatives voted on several
amendments to the Council of Representatives Election Law (45/2013). These
amendments stipulate that the Government should ensure a safe environment for
holding the elections, facilitate the return of internally displaced persons to their areas
of origin and enable them to vote for their constituency of origin, regardless of their
location of displacement. The Ministries of Defence and the Interior should ensure
security during the elections. Political parties contesting the elections should not have
armed elements under their control. A special voting process would be undertaken for
members of the Iraqi security forces.
4.
The Council of Representatives also amended eligibility criteria for candidates,
introducing the requirement that candidates should hold a bachelor’s degree,
excepting 20 per cent of candidates of each political entity, who may hold a high

18-05477 (E)

190418

*1805477*

S/2018/359

school certificate or equivalent. One additional seat was allocated to the Faili Kurdish
component in Wassit Governorate, increasing the total number of parliamentary seats
from 328 to 329.
5.
In his weekly press conferences on 20 and 27 February, the Prime Minister,
Haider al-Abadi, indicated that the Council of Ministers had agreed on measures to
facilitate the return of displaced persons and to ensure that the elections were held in a
secure environment and in a transparent manner. On 27 February, the Council of
Ministers established a ministerial committee responsible for monitoring the
implementation of these measures, comprised of the Minister of Defence, Irfan
al-Hayali; the Minister of Higher Education, Faryad Rawandozi; the Minister of
Culture, Abdul Razzaq al-Issa; and the Minister of Water Resources, Hassan al-Janabi.
6.
On 20 February, Mr. Al-Abadi requested the international community to send
election observers in order to promote the integrity of the process. On 28 February,
the Independent High Electoral Commission announced that the election campaigning
period would start on 10 April and last until the day before the elections.
7.
On 27 February, the Council of Ministers determined that the Provincial Council
elections would be held on 22 December 2018. The Parliament has approved the
decision, which has yet to be ratified by the President. On 3 March, member s of
parliament from Kirkuk reached a breakthrough agreement on amendments to the
Law on Provincial and District Council Elections (Law No. 36 of 2008, as amended),
which was subsequently adopted by the Parliament. Kirkuk will now be able to
participate in provincial elections for the first time since 2005. UNAMI offered its
good offices and intensive facilitation throughout the drafting of the amendments to
the Law.
8.
At the same time, the Kirkuk Provincial Council remained inoperative and no
formal meetings were convened. Individual Council members, as well as other
interlocutors, repeatedly shared with UNAMI their concern that the failure of the
Provincial Council to reconvene had a negative effect on both governance and
security. Notably, tensions flared over returns of Sunni Arabs to the Dibis and Daquq
districts of the Governorate. This also revived land disputes, with a number of
plaintiffs seeking to settle them in court.
9.
On 3 March, the Council of Representatives adopted the 2018 Federal Budget
Law, with 187 out of 328 members of parliament attending. Mr. Al -Abadi
subsequently congratulated the Iraqi people on the adoption of the budget law, which
will enter into force retroactively from 1 January 2018. All Kurdish parliamentary
blocs boycotted the vote, owing mainly to dissatisfaction over the size of the
Kurdistan Region budget share and the sovereign (federal) expenditures. In the
budget, total revenue is estimated at $77.5 billion and expenditure at $88 billion. The
planned deficit is about $7.5 billion lower than last year. Many measures are
introduced in the budget to curb operational expenditures and increase non -oil
revenues, including sales taxes, and fees for public utilities such as water and
electricity. Although the President, citing a number of legal, financial and formal
irregularities, returned the budget for revisions to the Council of Representatives, the
Speaker, Salim al-Jubouri, maintained on 14 March that the budget had been adopted
in line with the Constitution. He explained that those who objected to the provisions
of the budget law could file a complaint with the Federal Supreme Court, but had no
right under the Constitution to reject the law. On 29 March, the President, Fuad
Masum, instructed his office to complete the necessary procedures to publish the
budget law in the Official Gazette. Mr. Masum asserted that his decision to endorse
the budget law was in the interest of the public, to protect civil rights and the
international commitments of Iraq, and to facilitate the wo rk of state institutions
across the country.
2/15

18-05477

S/2018/359

10. On 5 March, the Council of Representatives adopted the law on the Iraqi
National Oil Company Law, which established a fully State-owned company directly
linked to the Council of Ministers. The company aims to achieve a better utilization
of oil and gas resources and will be active in the areas of exploration, development,
production, marketing and related activities. A percentage, not exceeding 90 per cent,
of the company’s profits will flow into the national budget. The law annuls the Law
Establishing the National Oil Company of 1967.
11. On 8 March, Mr. Al-Abadi issued a set of regulations to adjust the status of
popular mobilization forces fighters, based on the Popular Mobilization Commission
Law of November 2016. The regulations specify military ranks and minimum
eligibility criteria, set salaries and allowances on a par with those applicable to
Ministry of Defense staff and extend the scope of the Military Penal Law, the Civil
Service Law, and a number of other laws to Popular Mobilization Commission
employees.
12. A date for the next regional election in the Kurdistan Region has yet to be set,
following the formal request of the Prime Minister of the Kurdistan Regional
Government, Nechirvan Barzani, in December 2017. On 28 February, the Kurdistan
Regional Parliament adopted a reform bill, focusing on civil servants ’ salaries and
pensions. Prior to the ratification of the bill and following public demonstrations
against it, the main parties backing the bill agreed to reopen it for revision, on
4 March. Discussions in the regional Parliament over possible amendments continue
but, to date, remain inconclusive.
13. The Patriotic Union of Kurdistan continued to discuss the convening of a party
congress to elect its new leadership, after the death of its founder, Jalal Talabani, in
October 2017. On 17 March, its leadership council convened in Sulaymaniyah to
announce an interim party politburo. In preparation for the parliamentary elections of
12 May, the Movement for Change (Gorran), the Kurdistan Islamic Group and the
Coalition for Democracy and Justice, led by the former Prime Minister of the
Kurdistan Regional Government, Barham Saleh, formed an electoral alliance in the
disputed areas. These three parties, as well as the Kurdistan Democratic Party and the
Patriotic Union of Kurdistan, are running on separate lists in the Kurdistan Region.
The Kurdistan Democratic Party is boycotting the elections in Kirkuk. Shaswar
Abdulwahid, a prominent Sulaymaniyah-based businessman who last year organized
a “No for now” campaign prior to the referendum of 25 September, founded the New
Generation Movement, which intends to field candidates for office countrywide.

B.

Relations between Baghdad and Erbil
14. Discussions continued between the federal Government and the Kurdistan
Regional Government to address outstanding differences, notably the re -opening of
Erbil and Sulaymaniyah airports to international traffic, as well as the allocation of
federal funding for civil servants in the Kurdistan Region. Since January 2018,
Mr. Al-Abadi and Mr. Barzani have met in Baghdad, Davos and Munich and
maintained regular contacts through different channels to resolve their differences.
15. On 4 February, a joint committee of the federal and regional governments
completed an initial audit of the number of civil servants in the Kurdistan Region
ministries, with the exception of the Ministry of Peshmerga Affairs and the Ministry
of the Interior. The secondary audit of the payroll of regi onal departments was
completed for the Kurdistan Region Ministry of Health and Ministry of Education;
auditing of the remaining ministries continues. At the end of February, Mr. Al-Abadi
reiterated his expectation that agreement over civil servant salaries would be reached
soon. On 19 March, the Kurdistan Region Ministry of Finance and the Economy

18-05477

3/15

S/2018/359

announced that the federal Government had released 317 billion Iraqi dinars for the
partial payment of Kurdistan Region civil servants. Subsequently, on 28 March, the
Kurdistan Regional Government published a statement detailing amendments made
to the civil servant salary saving system, which would not apply to civil servants
earning less than 400,000 Iraqi dinars.
16. On 21 February, a spokesperson of the Kurdistan Region Ministry of
Endowment and Religious Affairs reported that agreement had been reached to
resume flights between the Kurdistan Region and Saudi Arabia, exclusively for
Umrah passengers, and, on 7 and 8 March, such flights operated from Erbil and
Sulaymaniyah international airports. On 13 March, Mr. Al-Abadi issued an executive
decree allowing the resumption of international flights to Erbil and Sulaymaniyah
airports, placing them under the authority of the federal Government. On 19 March,
international flights to both airports resumed.
17. The federal Government reiterated that it must maintain ultimate control over
all exports of natural resources from Iraq, notably oil and gas. Negotiations continued
over the use of the Kurdistan Region oil pipeline to export oil from Kirkuk
governorate. On 27 February, Mr. Al-Abadi indicated that these negotiations included
Turkey.

C.

Security
18. Pockets of Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL) elements continued to
carry out asymmetric attacks across the country. On 18 February, alleged ISIL fighters
attacked a popular mobilization forces unit in Hawijah district, Kirkuk Governorate,
killing a number of popular mobilization forces fighters. The following day, Iraqi
federal police and the popular mobilization forces launched a security operation in
the district, aiming at clearing the area of ISIL fighters. Mr. Al -Abadi ordered the
opening of an investigation into the attack. On 11 March, a number of civilians,
including a pregnant woman and two children, were killed at a disguised ISIL
checkpoint along the Baghdad-Kirkuk road. A further five of these irregular
checkpoints were set up along the road between 19 and 22 March, at which eight
civilians and three militia members were killed. Seven other civilians and eight
members of the Iraqi security forces who were abducted during the incidents
concerned are still missing.
19. On 13 March, the commander of the 57th Brigade of the Iraqi Special
Operations Forces was killed at a checkpoint near Samarra, Salah al-Din Governorate.
Mr. Al-Abadi subsequently clarified that the commander had been shot by
“undisciplined elements”, adding that he had ordered an investigation. Local media
reported shortly afterwards that six suspects had been arrested.
20. Armed opposition groups continued to be active in the Hamrin Mountains, on
the border between Kirkuk and Salah al-Din governorates and in western Anbar
Governorate. On 6 March, the Iraqi security forces announced the start of a clearance
operation in the desert near the Iraqi-Jordanian border. On 24 March, clearance
operations were launched in Diyala Governorate in response to increased activities
by armed opposition groups south of the Hamrin Mountains, close to the border with
Salah al-Din Governorate.
21. Baghdad continues to experience attacks with improvised explosive devices,
including vehicle bombs, targeting the Iraqi security forces and civilians. A total of
52 such attacks occurred between 20 February and 25 March, killing 20 persons,
including 17 civilians. To improve the security situation in Basra Governorate, the
federal Government launched a law enforcement operation there on 21 February. The
operation, expected to run for two months, is aimed at targeting criminals and disarm

4/15

18-05477

S/2018/359

tribes in the north of the Governorate. It has reportedly already resulted in the arrest
of several individuals and the seizure of illegal weapons.
22. In a parallel development, Iraqi security forces entered Sinjar district in Ninawa
Governorate, taking control over the area on 25 March, following reports that fighters
from the Kurdistan Workers’ Party (PKK) had withdrawn from the area. On 26 March,
the Prime Minister of Iraq, Mr. Al-Abadi, and the Prime Minister of Turkey, Binali
Yıldırım, discussed the situation in Sinjar by telephone. Mr. Yıldırım indicated that
Turkey would not engage in military action in Sinjar without the approval of the
Government of Iraq.

D.

Regional and international developments
23. Following the Kuwait International Conference for the Reconstru ction of Iraq,
generously hosted by Kuwait in Kuwait City, from 12 to 14 February, the Government
of Iraq has continued to strengthen its relations with neighbouring countries and other
international partners, on the basis of mutual political, economic and security
interests.
24. From 16 to 18 February, Mr. Al-Abadi participated in the fifty-fourth Munich
Security Conference. In his speech, he called on the world to unite against terrorism,
highlighted the triumph of Iraq over ISIL and warned that remnants of ISIL were still
active in the region. He vowed that Iraq would continue to enhance its relations with
its neighbours on the basis of mutual interests and respect for national sovereignty.
Mr. Al-Abadi expressed his appreciation for the support offered in Kuwait, which he
interpreted as confidence in the Government of Iraq. In addition, he pledged to clamp
down on corruption in a bid to restore investor confidence.
25. In the margins of the conference, the Prime Minister met, inter alios, the
Chancellor of Germany, Angela Merkel; the Prime Minister of France, Édouard
Philippe; the Prime Minister of Turkey, Binali Yıldırım; the Secretary -General of the
North Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO), Jens Stoltenberg, the Secretary -General
of the League of Arab States, Ahmed Aboul Gheit; the Prime Minister of the
Netherlands, Mark Rutte, with whom he discussed the situation in Iraq and bilateral
cooperation on security, trade and development.
26. The Prime Minister of the Kurdistan Regional Government, Nechirvan Barzani,
also attended the Munich Security Conference and met, inter alios, the Federal
Minister of Defence of Germany, Ursula von der Leyen, the Foreign Minister of the
Islamic Republic of Iran, Mohammad Javad Zarif, the Minister of Foreign Affairs and
International Cooperation of Italy, Angelino Alfano, the Deputy Prime Minister and
Minister of the Interior of Kuwait, Khaled Al-Jarrah Al-Sabah, the Minister of
Foreign Affairs of Norway, Marie Eriksen Søreide, the Minister for Defence of
Sweden, Peter Hultqvist, and the Minister of State for the Middle East of the United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, Alistair Burt. In meetings, the
delegation of the Kurdistan Region expressed strong willingness to peacefully resolve
tensions with Baghdad and noted that the Constitution should be the basis for
resolving all differences between the Kurdistan Regional Government and the federal
Government.
27. On 18 February, the President, Mr. Masum, and the Vice-President, Nour
al-Maliki, separately received the senior adviser for international affairs to the
Supreme Leader of the Islamic Republic of Iran, Ayatollah Ali Khamenei, Ali Akbar
Velayati, with whom they discussed bilateral relations. On 19 February, the Minister
of the Interior of Iraq, Qassim al-Araji, visited Amman, where he discussed bilateral
trade and the Turaybil border crossing with the Prime Minister of Jordan, Hani
al-Mulki. On 20 February, Mr. Masum and Mr. Abadi separately received the

18-05477

5/15

S/2018/359

President of Lebanon, Michel Aoun, with whom they discussed bilateral economic
and trade relations. On 25 and 26 February, the Speaker of the Council of
Representatives, Salim al-Jubouri, visited Doha, where he discussed regional
developments and the reconstruction of liberated areas with the Emir of Qatar, S heikh
Tamim bin Hamad Al-Thani, and senior government officials.
28. From 26 to 28 February, the Minister for Foreign Affairs of Iraq, Ibrahim
Abdulkarim Al-Jafari, visited Moscow, where he and the Deputy Prime Minister of
the Russian Federation, Dimitry Rogozin, co-chaired the seventh meeting of the IraqiRussian Intergovernmental Commission on Trade, Economic, Research and
Technological Cooperation. Upon arrival, Mr. Al-Jafari was received by the Foreign
Minister of the Russian Federation, Sergey Lavrov, who reaffirmed the support of his
Government for the efforts of the Government of Iraq to build national accord and
respect for the interests of all ethnic, religious and political groups.
29. On 3 March, the Speaker, Mr. Al-Jubouri, visited Kuwait, where he met Emir
Sheikh Sabah Al-Ahmed Al-Jaber Al-Sabah and the Speaker of the parliament of
Kuwait, Marzouq Al-Ghanim, to discuss bilateral relations. On 5 March, Mr. Al-Abadi
held a telephone conversation with King Salman Bin Abdulaziz Al -Saud of Saudi
Arabia, during which they discussed bilateral relations and the work of the Iraqi -Saudi
Coordination Council for promoting bilateral trade and investment. On 5 and 6 March,
the Minister of Industry, Mines and Trade of the Islamic Republic of Iran, Mohammad
Shariatmadari, visited Baghdad, where he met, consecutively, the Ministers of Housing
and Reconstruction, Electricity and Health. On 6 March, Mr. Masum received the
President of the International Committee of the Red Cross, Peter Maurer, to discuss
continued assistance to internally displaced persons and the search for missing persons.
On 7 March, Mr. Al-Abadi received the First Vice-President of the Islamic Republic of
Iran, Eshaq Jahangiri, to discuss bilateral ties and coordination. On 15 March, the
Speaker, Mr. Al-Jubouri, visited Ankara, where he met the President of Turkey, Recep
Tayyip Erdoğan, and discussed strengthening bilateral ties, as well as the counter terrorism operations of Iraq.
30. On 20 February, Mr. Al-Abadi reaffirmed that Iraq continued to seek
international support in the fields of military training, logistics and intelligence
gathering. On 21 and 22 February, he met Assistant Secretary of Defence for
International Security Affairs of the United States of America, Robert Karem, to
discuss collaboration in the fight against terrorism. On 1 March, the Minister of
Defence of Iraq, Irfan al-Hayali, received the Chief of the General Staff of Turkey,
Hulusi Akar, to discuss counter-terrorism cooperation. On 5 March, Mr. Al-Abadi
received the Secretary-General of NATO, Jens Stoltenberg, with whom he discussed
countering violent extremism. On 15 March, Mr. Al-Abadi received a telephone call
from the Vice-President of the United States, Mike Pence, during which they
discussed the upcoming Council of Representatives elections, as well as BaghdadErbil relations.

III. Update on the activities of the Mission and the
United Nations country team
A.

Political activities
31. In anticipation of the Council of Representatives elections on 12 May, my
Special Representative for Iraq and Deputy Special Representative for Political
Affairs and Electoral Assistance engaged intensively with members of the
Independent High Electoral Commission, government officials, members of
parliament, representatives of political parties, women’s groups, civil society

6/15

18-05477

S/2018/359

organizations and religious and community leaders. My Special Representative
applauded the steady progress made by the Independent Hi gh Electoral Commission
in election preparations and commended the commitment of the Commissioners. He
underlined the importance of holding elections in an inclusive, participatory,
transparent and secure way with broad participation, including women and youth, and
confirmed the continued support and assistance of UNAMI for the Independent High
Electoral Commission in preparing the elections, with full respect for the sovereignty,
Constitution and laws of Iraq. He reiterated the need to ensure that new voti ng and
result management technologies were correctly deployed and fully explained to
stakeholders, to enhance confidence in their credibility, and underpinned by an audit
of the system and its software by a respectable international company. UNAMI
assistance with the electoral process also included facilitating development of a
political parties’ electoral code of honour, at the initiative of Iraqi political parties.
32. My Deputy Special Representative for Political Affairs and Electoral Assistance
visited several camps for the displaced in Kirkuk and Baghdad governorates to
advocate the inclusion of internally displaced persons and other vulnerable groups in
the upcoming elections. My Deputy Special Representative highlighted the
importance of the participation of displaced persons, encouraging them to exercise
their right to choose their parliamentary representatives. She underlined the need for
measures to be put in place to ensure that first-time voters and vulnerable groups are
enabled to register for and vote in the elections. Following the advocacy by UNAMI,
the Independent High Electoral Commission decided on 21 February to allow
displaced persons living in camps to vote via conditional absentee balloting.
33. My Deputy Special Representative also engaged with Turkmen, Arab and
Kurdish representatives from Kirkuk to resolve outstanding issues in the Governorate,
notably mediating discussion which led to agreement to hold Provincial Council
elections in Kirkuk simultaneously with those in other governo rates.
34. From 21 to 24 January, my Assistant Secretary-General for Political Affairs,
Miroslav Jenča, visited Iraq, which included a visit to Mosul. During his visit, he met
with the senior leadership of the Government of Iraq, Members of the Council of
Representatives and representatives of civil society, as well as the diplomatic
community. He reiterated the continued and dedicated support of the United Nations
for the promotion of a united and inclusive Iraq, national reconciliation, transitional
justice and accountability, as well as strengthened regional cooperation and
partnership.
35. While commending the Government of Iraq for its tremendous efforts to
eliminate ISIL, my Special Representative urged the Government to continue its
coordination with international partners and the United Nations in the fight against
terrorism. During his visit on 6 and 7 March, the Under-Secretary-General of the
Office of Counter-Terrorism, Vladimir Voronkov, underlined the importance of
comprehensive counter-terrorism efforts in line with the four pillars of the United
Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy and relevant Security Council
resolutions.
36. My Special Representative continued his engagement with key stakeholders in
Baghdad and the Kurdistan Region. He welcomed the readiness for discussion, which
had led to positive developments in relations between the two sides, including the
re-opening of Erbil and Sulaymaniyah airports to international flights on 19 March
and payment of civil servant salaries. He urged leaders to continue their dialogue in
a spirit of genuine partnership to resolve outstanding issues, underlining the
importance of stability and the harmonious coexistence of all Iraqi components.
37. My Special Representative also continued to pursue his efforts with the Iraqi
leadership and regional countries in support of national reconciliation, calling for
18-05477

7/15

S/2018/359

continued momentum and a genuine national political reconciliation dialogue that
would pave the way for smooth government formation after the e lections. He also
called on Iraq to address the impact of ISIL on the Iraqi people, including combating
extremist ideologies and promoting moderation and tolerance.
38. My Special Representative welcomed the announcement made by the Director
General of the Organisation for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons, Ahmet
Üzümcü, of the completion of destruction of the country’s chemical weapons
remnants. He characterized the destruction of chemical weapons remnants as a
notable achievement, which would help Iraq fulfil its obligations under the
Convention on the Prohibition of the Development, Production, Stockpiling and Use
of Chemical Weapons and on their Destruction.

B.

Electoral assistance
39. The Independent High Electoral Commission continued its preparations for the
Council of Representatives elections of 12 May. On 20 February, the Commission ran
a ballot lottery to determine the number and order by which the 88 political entities
contesting the elections would appear on the ballot paper. The Commissi on has also
submitted the list of nearly 7,000 candidates for vetting to the Supreme National
Commission for Accountability and Justice, the Directorate of Criminal Records and
the Ministries of Defence, the Interior and Education. Once this vetting proces s is
completed, the Independent High Electoral Commission will finalize the list of
candidates and proceed with printing of the ballot papers. Preparations for out -ofcountry voting are ongoing in 19 countries in which significant numbers of eligible
Iraqi voters reside. The Commission has reported that, as at 18 March, 6,181,418
million voter cards had been distributed, that is, 44.33 per cent of the total.
40. UNAMI continued to provide targeted technical assistance and advisory support
on various aspects of electoral preparations. Technical advisories were shared with
the Commission on measures to facilitate the voting of internally displaced persons.
UNAMI also engaged with the Commission on the technologies being deployed for
the elections. From 27 February to 1 March, the Commission organized a technical
integration meeting that included the signing of an agreement between the
Commission and its two technology providers on the interoperability of the
technological devices for voter verification and election results management. UNAMI
attended the meetings in an advisory capacity. UNAMI has continued to encourage
the Commission to undertake a simulation process, now scheduled for 14 April, to
test the performance of the devices and software systems to be u sed for the elections.
It is a significant undertaking, involving 56,000 locations in Iraq.
41. From 3 to 12 March, a United Nations electoral needs assessment mission was
deployed to Iraq to determine progress in the preparations for the elections, follo wing
up on an initial visit in November 2017. The delegation met with various
interlocutors, including Independent High Electoral Commission officials, members
of parliament, representatives of political parties, civil society organizations, the
media and United Nations entities, as well as international partners engaged in the
Council of Representatives elections.
42. In the absence of a firm date for the Kurdistan Region parliamentary,
presidential and Provincial Council elections, its Independent High El ectoral
Commission focused efforts on evaluating the voter registry. On 25 February, its
representatives met the Board of Commissioners in Baghdad to discuss arrangements
on the sharing of the voter registry.

8/15

18-05477

S/2018/359

C.

Human rights and rule of law developments and activities
43. Armed conflict, terrorism and acts of violence continued to take a heavy toll on
civilians. From 20 February to 31 March 2018, 16 civilians were killed and 139
wounded, primarily by explosions in Baghdad. By comparison, from 20 December
2017 to 18 February 2018, 69 civilians were killed and 327 wounded. The leading
cause of civilian casualties remains the use of improvised explosive devices. For
example, on 20 February, in western Mosul, an improvised explosive device
detonated inside the house of a family which had just returned home from
displacement, killing two.
44. The remnants of ISIL continued to focus attacks on members of the Iraqi police,
Iraqi security forces and the popular mobilization forces in Ninawa and Kirkuk
governorates. For example, on 24 February, ISIL fighters killed two police officers
and wounded another at their checkpoint in the Khabbaz oil field, Yaychi subdistrict,
south-west of the city of Kirkuk. Civilians also continued to be targeted by unknown
gunmen in Mosul district: on 21 February, in eastern Mosul, gunmen stopped the car
of the local mukhtar and shot him dead. The perpetrators are suspected of being
affiliated with ISIL.
45. As at 29 March, the Department of Yazidi Affairs in the Ministry of Endowment
and Religious Affairs in the Kurdistan Regional Government reported that 3,154
Yazidis (1,471 women and 1,683 men) remained in ISIL captivity.
46. Iraqi courts continued to issue death sentences for terrorism-related crimes. To
date in 2018, the Supreme Judicial Council has publicly announced the imposition of
22 death sentences for terrorism-related crimes, including against 1 German woman,
1 Syrian man, 1 man of unknown nationality and 16 Turkish women. The Gover nment
of Iraq has not responded to a request by UNAMI for information on terrorism-related
indictments, convictions and death penalty sentences and on where and when
executions have been carried out.
47. The bodies of civilians continued to be recovered fr om the rubble in Mosul. As
at 28 March, the civilian defence corps has recovered a total of 1,842 bodies of
civilians, of which 3 were found in eastern Mosul. From 25 to 27 March, the civilian
defence corps recovered the bodies of 47 civilians, including 11 women and 7
children, from underneath the rubble in western Mosul.
48. UNAMI continued to advocate accountability in the context of human rights
violations and abuses committed during the ongoing armed conflict, in particular for
international crimes that may amount to war crimes, crimes against humanity and,
possibly, genocide. Following an Iraqi-led process supported by the Mission, a
proposed draft law on the creation of a specialized court for international crimes was
delivered by the Mission to Iraqi institutions, parliamentarians and civil society
actors, for their consideration.
49. Mass graves continued to be discovered in areas previously under ISIL control.
For example, on 21 February, in Qayyarah subdistrict, Mosul district, Ninawa
governorate, local police discovered a mass grave containing the bodies of 76 persons
who may have been victims of ISIL.
50. The Mission also continued to advocate the appropriate protection of mass
graves, with the aim of collecting, securing and preserving evidence. In preparation
for the arrival of an independent investigative team, currently being established
pursuant to Security Council resolution 2379 (2017) to support the efforts of Iraq to
hold ISIL accountable for its crimes committed in Iraq, UNAMI has compiled a
compendium of mass graves in Iraq (to date) and shared it with Iraqi authorities,
including the Mass Graves Department in the Martyrs Foundation, and other key

18-05477

9/15

S/2018/359

stakeholders such as the Independent High Commission for Human Rights. Since
June 2014, the Mission has recorded the discovery of 117 mass graves resulting from
the conflict with ISIL. The estimated number of victims buried in these graves, as
reported to UNAMI, is between 6,006 and 12,505.
51. On 5 March, my Special Representative on Sexual Violence in Conflict, Pramila
Patten, concluded an eight-day visit to Iraq, during which she heard first-hand
accounts of survivors of sexual violence perpetrated by ISIL. During discussion with
Iraqi officials on questions of justice and accountability, she stressed the importance
of ensuring that alleged perpetrators are held accountable not only for the crime of
terrorism but for the full extent of the crimes of sexual violence perpetrated on Iraqi
women and children, including abduction, rape, sexual slavery and forced marriages.
She noted that her Office stands ready, together with the soon -to-be-established
investigative team, as requested in Security Council resolution 2379 (2017), to work
directly with Iraqi judges, investigators and prosecutors. The Special Representative,
together with the Minister of Labour and Social Affairs, inaugurated the Baghdad
premises of the first shelter outside the Kurdistan Region for women survivors of
sexual and gender-based violence. The shelter is a joint initiative of the Ministry of
Labour and Social Affairs and the United Nations Population Fund.
52. On 7 and 8 March, the Government of Iraq organized a two -day conference to
mark International Women’s Day, at which it circulated a draft report on the
implementation of the Iraqi National Action Plan on Security Council resolution 1325
(2000). The conference was organized by the Higher National Committee for the
Advancement of Iraqi Women and the Directorate for Empowering Iraqi Women, both
under the Council of Ministers, in conjunction with the national team on Security
Council resolution 1325 under the auspices of Mr. Al-Abadi. The aim of the
conference was to solicit views from local communities, civil society organizations
and internally displaced women in order to further develop the draft implementation
report before its planned submission to the Security Council later this year.
53. The Task Force on Children and Armed Conflict, co-chaired by UNAMI and the
United Nations Children's Fund (UNICEF), received reports of 13 incidents of
violations against children, affecting 22 children. Of those incidents, 10 were veri fied,
affecting 19 children (all boys). In Ninawa Governorate, five boys were verified to
have been recruited and used by armed actors, while in Ninawa, Kirkuk and Salah al-Din governorates four boys were killed and 10 others injured by various types of
explosive material. In Ninawa Governorate, a school was used for military purposes.
54. On 7 March, the Minister of Labour and Social Affairs, accompanied by
representatives of the Ministry of Justice and the Ministry of Foreign Affairs met a
United Nations delegation from the Office of my Special Representative for Children
and Armed Conflict, the Department of Political Affairs, UNICEF and UNAMI. The
Minister of Labour and Social Affairs, who also chairs the newly established high level inter-ministerial committee on monitoring and reporting, confirmed the
Government’s willingness to address both alleged and verified grave violations
against children in situations of armed conflict, through establishing and enhancing
protective and preventive measures. The delegation also met the National Security
Adviser, Mahmoud al-Bayati, in his capacity as designated focal point for the country
task force on monitoring and reporting, to discuss next steps for the development of
an action plan to address the recruitment and use of children by the popular
mobilization forces, which were listed as a non-State armed group in the 2016 annual
report of the Secretary-General on children and armed conflict (A/72/361–
S/2017/821).

10/15

18-05477

S/2018/359

D.

Humanitarian assistance, stabilization and development
55. The humanitarian crisis in Iraq has entered a new phase, with thousands of
displaced persons returning to their areas of origin. Retaken areas are being cleared
of explosive hazards and rubble, and major efforts are under way to restore electricity,
water and sewage networks, re-establish the Government’s social protection
mechanisms, including the public distribution system, jump -start local economies and
open schools and health centres.
56. On 6 March, the Government of Iraq, the United Nations and humanitarian
partners jointly launched their humanitarian plans for 2018, based on an estimation
that 8.7 million people across Iraq will require some form of humanitarian assistance.
Humanitarian partners are committed to providing assistance to highly vulnerable
Iraqis in the hardest-hit areas and ensuring that they receive the protection that they
require and to which they are entitled under international humanitarian law.
Humanitarian partners will target 3.4 million vulnerable people with assistance in
2018, for which $569 million is required. This is a significant reduction from 2017,
when 6.2 million people were targeted, reflecting the evolving nature of need of the
crisis-affected population and the growing capacity and reach of national institutions,
as well as the expanding role of development actors.
57. By the end of February, there were 2.3 million remaining displaced, while 3.5
million returned to their homes and communities. Many displacement camps are
being consolidated and decommissioned, and governorate returns committees —
comprised of Government, non-governmental organizations and United Nations
representatives — are in the process of being established to ensure that returns are
voluntary, safe and dignified. Despite all the efforts in place, there are still reports of
forced and premature returns in Baghdad, Anbar and Salah al-Din governorates and
of obstructed returns and re-displacement of people back to camps in Anbar
Governorate. There are limited alternatives for those displaced families unable to
return owing to individual circumstances, vulnerabilities or security concerns.
Humanitarian partners continue to advocate with authorities to prevent forced and
premature returns and to pursue viable alternatives for displaced families unable to
return.
58. The registration of humanitarian international non-governmental organizations
remains a slow and cumbersome process. Negotiations are ongoing to streamline the
procedures, and obstacles are being identified and raised with the authorities. In the
meantime, the Government has facilitated the approval of more than 1,000 fast-track
visas for international humanitarian staff without valid entry documentation. Efforts
continue to enable the provision of humanitarian assistance to those people in need
with the fewest bureaucratic impediments possible.
59. The United Nations Development Programme (UNDP) Funding Facility for
Stabilization continued to safeguard against the resurgence of violence and
extremism, facilitate returns and lay the groundwork for reconstruction and recovery.
This was achieved through repairing public infrastructure, providing grants to small
businesses and women-headed households, boosting the capacity of local government
and providing short-term employment through public works schemes in areas directly
impacted by ISIL. Over 2,000 projects are either completed, under way or being
designed in the 31 liberated towns and districts within which UNDP has been asked
to work. This includes the key areas of Anbar, Ninawa, Salah al -Din, Diyala and
Kirkuk governorates.
60. In Anbar governorate, repairs to the Japanese Bridge were completed in March,
connecting over 30,000 commuters and commercial traffic to western Anbar. In
Ninawa Governorate, electricity was restored to the new water treatment plant in west

18-05477

11/15

S/2018/359

Mosul, providing clean drinking water for nearly 500,000 people. In the Ninawa
Plains, work was done to restore health services, notably the completion of the first
phase of the rehabilitation of Hamdaniyah Hospital in February. Prior to the conflict,
roughly 1,000 patients visited the hospital daily for outpatient services, reaching
approximately 500,000 people.
61. In support of the major efforts being made by the Government of Iraq to stabilize
newly liberated areas through the Funding Facility for Stabilization, my Deputy
Special Representative for Humanitarian Affairs worked closely with the Iraqi
security forces, government and parliamentary representatives, civil society and
stabilization teams to identify areas critical to consolidate military gains and where
violent extremism is likely to emerge. During the reporting period, UNDP and the
Government of Iraq agreed that the priority for the Funding Facility in 2018 will be
to support the rigorous interventions of the Government in five key strategic areas:
Mosul, western Ninawa, the Baiji-Hadar corridor, the broader Hawijah district and
western Anbar.
62. On 14 March, Mr. Al-Abadi, with assistance from UNDP, at his request,
convened a conference of leaders from all minority communities in the Ninawa
Plains. In preparation for the conference, the National Reconciliation Commission
held a series of meetings and round tables with each group in order to better
understand their demands. Prime Minister Abadi gave the keynote speech and the
Government announced initiatives that it will pursue in the area.
63. The clearance of explosive hazards in the old city of Mosul continued. UNMAS
located over 800 explosive hazards at one site alone during the reporting period, and
over 27,000 have been removed from western Mosul since mid-2017, reducing the
threat for returning civilians. In the al-Maidan neighbourhood in western Mosul,
UNMAS cleared 491 explosive hazards. Over 100 suicide belts were removed from
decaying corpses in February, and UNMAS anticipates that more will be found in the
rubble.
64. UNMAS has established a presence in Kirkuk in anticipation of survey and
clearance operations in Hawijah and surrounding areas and has been shown a
stockpile of over 12,000 explosive items collected by the local authorities. These
could pose a threat to nearby civilians if the local authorities are not provided with
support to destroy the items. Following efforts by the Government of Iraq, the
international community and UNMAS, two non-governmental mine action
organizations received registration from the federal Government and will become
operational once their accreditation is completed.
65. Following the Kuwait International Conference for the Reconstruction of Iraq,
meetings were held between the World Bank Group and the United Nations to
continue formalization of the Iraq Reconstruction and Development Financing
Facility. The Iraq Recovery and Development directors’ level contact group, which
includes the World Bank Group, the United Nations and key donors, met on 15 and
29 March to discuss progress on establishing the core oversight, coordination and
funding mechanisms for the Iraq Reconstruction and Development Framework.
66. On 11 and 18 March, the United Nations country team met to review progress
and next steps for the recovery and resilience program me and discussed the proposed
funding mechanism. On 14 March, an informal meeting of the Development
Cooperation Forum was briefed by the World Bank Group and the United Nations on
progress with establishing the Iraq Reconstruction and Development Financin g
Facility, on the United Nations Recovery and Resilience Fund, and on the
formalization of the Government’s Executive Committee structure.

12/15

18-05477

S/2018/359

67. A workshop on mainstreaming the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development
in national and subnational development plans was held in Baghdad on 4 and 5 March.
A team of UNDP Sustainable Development Goals experts facilitated the workshop,
with more than 100 participants from ministries, governorates, civil society
organizations and United Nations agencies. Two key outcomes were: agreement on
levels of support from the United Nations to promote integration of the Sustainable
Development Goals into the national medium-term development plan; and the
identification of challenges and opportunities for strengthening alignment of the
national Development Plan 2018–2022 with the Sustainable Development Goals.
68. A regional workshop on common country assessments and preparation of United
Nations Development Assistance Frameworks was held in Amman from 20 to
23 March. The purpose of the workshop was to bring together United Nations staff
from Iraq, Syria and Yemen to explore developing the common country assessment
and United Nations Development Assistance Frameworks in complex environments.
Participants from Iraq included senior programme staff from UNDP, the Office for
the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs, the United Nations Educational, Scientific
and Cultural Organization (UNESCO), UNICEF, the World Food Programme (WFP)
and the Integrated Coordination Office for Development and Humanitarian Affairs.
This team will begin preparing for system-wide engagement on the common country
assessment and the United Nations Development Assistance Framework.

E.

Security and operational issues
69. The United Nations in Iraq continued to implement robust security risk mitigation
measures which allowed it to deliver programmes and activities in a complex and
changing security environment. Despite significant security challenges, the United
Nations and its partners remain actively engaged in political, electoral, humanitarian
and development activities countrywide, on the basis of programme criticality and in
close coordination with the Government of Iraq. The United Nations Department of
Safety and Security supports UNAMI and 18 United Nations agencies in Iraq. The
United Nations agencies recently increased their field presence in order to meet
growing operational requirements. Currently, there are 794 international and 1,600
national staff members operating from seven United Nations offices across the country.
70. Following the Independent External Assessment of UNAMI, I established an
interdepartmental and inter-agency group, led by the Department of Political Affairs,
to develop an implementation plan for the assessment recommendations, in close
collaboration with UNAMI and the United Nations country team. UNAMI has since
taken steps towards implementation. In its revised 2018 budget, UNAMI included
measures responding to recommendations falling withi n its immediate purview, for
example, to augment the presence of UNAMI outside Baghdad. Additional
recommendations will be addressed in the context of the 2019 budget proposal,
pending consideration by the mandate of the Security Council in July 2018.
71. The implementation of recommendations related to coordination, performance
reporting and management of premises is on track. For example, a Department of
Safety and Security team has reviewed the security architecture on the basis of current
threat levels and examined facility perimeter protection and access control measures
in Baghdad, Erbil and Kirkuk.
72. There has been severe pressure on staff accommodation. A number of
accommodation units in Baghdad were seriously damaged by earthquakes in January
2018, and some staff had to be relocated to temporary accommodation. Repairs to
damaged buildings, funded from a trust fund provided by the Government of Iraq in
2009, are currently under way.

18-05477

13/15

S/2018/359

IV.

Observations
73. I welcome the adoption of the legal framework governing the organization of
the Council of Representatives elections and the continued commitment of the
Council of Ministers to ensuring a safe and secure environment for holding elections.
It is of crucial importance that all efforts be made to enable the conduct of the
elections in a credible and inclusive environment in which all Iraqis, men and women,
from all governorates, are given the opportunity to participate, free from fear and
intimidation.
74. I reiterate the commitment of the United Nations to provide advice, support and
assistance to the Independent High Electoral Commission and the Government of Iraq
with regard to election preparations, as mandated by the Security Council. Only a few
weeks remain before Iraqis go to the polls to choose their next democratically elected
representatives. I welcome the efforts by the Commission to adopt the necessary
measures to promote participation of those eligible voters who may remain displaced
at the time of the elections. At the same time, I urge the Commission to undertake all
necessary steps to safeguard the integrity of the polling, vote counting and
transmission of election results, in the light of the new technologies being deployed.
For the electoral results to be acceptable, the process must remain transparent. I also
encourage a more intensified outreach campaign to familiarize voters and the wider
public with these new election features and how they will affect voting. In addition,
I welcome the efforts by the Government and its security institutions to put in place
the necessary arrangements to enable the safe and orderly conduct of the elections.
75. I call upon all candidates and political party leaders to engage in a free and fair
electoral competition which is based on mutual respect and promotes the national
interest and stability of Iraq. To that end, I commend the efforts of political parties across
the political spectrum to develop an electoral code of honour, as testimony to their
commitment to the transparency and integrity of the electoral process. UNAMI remains
committed to supporting those efforts, at the request of the political parties of Iraq.
76. I am encouraged by the progress in relations between Baghdad and Erbil, with
the opening of regional airports to international flights and the provision of salaries
for Kurdistan region employees. I call upon the federal Government and the Kurdistan
Regional Government to build on these positive steps and to act expeditiously to
address all outstanding issues between them, in line with the Constitution. There is
no sustainable alternative to genuine dialogue, and UNAMI remains ready to facilitate
discussion if requested by both parties.
77. I note the request of the Prime Minister of the Kurdistan region to set a date for
the next cycle of regional elections. I remind all parties in the region of the importance
of holding regular and credible elections, which provide elected institutions with their
legitimacy.
78. I am also pleased by the agreement reached by Members of Parliament, which
allows for the holding on 22 December 2018 of the first Provincial Council elections
in Kirkuk since 2005. At the same time, I am concerned by the negative effect on
governance and security caused by the failure to reconvene the current Provincial
Council and to elect a new Governor. I urge all parties to take these steps without
further delay.
79. I welcome the continuous efforts of the Government of Iraq to strengthen its ties
with neighbouring countries and other international partners on the basis of mutual
political, economic and security interests. I commend the strong support pledged by
the international community to the stabilization and reconstruction of Iraq, and I call

14/15

18-05477

S/2018/359

upon the international community to continue its support for the efforts of Iraq to
combat terrorism, diversify its economy and counter corruption.
80. I encourage the Government of Iraq to pass a law establishing a jurisdiction to
deal with serious international crimes in Iraq — crimes against humanity, war crimes
and genocide — for the benefit of the people of Iraq. A proposed draft law on the
subject which emerged from an Iraqi-led process involving Iraqi legal experts,
academics, judges, prosecutors, members of parliament and representat ives of civil
society has been presented by UNAMI to the Presidency of the Council of
Representatives for its consideration. Adoption of such a law would represent a
significant achievement for the country by providing the legal mechanism for
international crimes to be addressed in Iraq, in accordance with international standards.
81. I would like to praise the Government of Iraq for the detailed planning and the
goals that they have set, building on their historic victory against ISIL, as detailed in
the country’s Reconstruction and Development Framework, the poverty reduction
strategy and the national Development Plan. I urge the international community to
continue their strong support and engagement, evident at the Kuwait International
Conference for the Reconstruction of Iraq, to assist Iraq in responding to some of the
underlying issues that contributed to the rise of ISIL. In addition to continued support
for explosive hazard mitigation, reconstruction and economic stimulus, further issues
will need to be addressed in order to protect military gains, attenuate the threat of
insurgency and achieve more durable stability and security for the people of Iraq.
82. I accordingly urge Member States to continue their strong support for the UNDP
Funding Facility for Stabilization. To consolidate military gains and protect
communities against the resurgence of violence and extremism, the Funding Facility
is supporting stabilization activities in five key strategic areas. Some cities in the five
strategic areas were liberated only in late 2017 and the Funding Facility is critically
underfunded in areas where the risk of the re-emergence of violence is highest.
83. I also urge Member States to consider the importance of the recovery and
resilience programme in fast-tracking the social dimensions of reconstruction in Iraq.
Three components of the recovery and resilience programme will be implemented in
high-priority communities where violent extremism may re -emerge unless steps are
taken to restore community trust, build confidence in the Government and open up
economic opportunities. In tandem with our humanitarian and stabilization efforts,
the recovery and resilience programme is critical to Iraq, and Member States are
requested to consider supporting it accordingly.
84. Approximately 8.7 million people will require humanitarian support in 2018,
while the humanitarian partners will provide assistance to 3.4 million people.
Continued support by the international community for the 2018 Humanitarian
Response Plan is essential. I strongly urge the Government to redouble its efforts to
create the necessary conditions for the voluntary, safe and dignified return of
displaced persons. In order for the United Nations and its partners to address the
critical needs of the most vulnerable, it is important that donors provide timely
support to the Humanitarian Response Plan. Regrettably, as at 25 March, only
$52 million of the required $569 million have been funded.
85. Finally, I would like to thank my outgoing Deputy Special Repr esentative for
Humanitarian Affairs, Lise Grande, for her truly outstanding work over the last three
years in Iraq. I would also like to express sincere appreciation to my Special
Representative, Ján Kubiš, and the staff of the United Nations in Iraq for t heir
courageous, sustained efforts in implementing the United Nations mandate in Iraq
under very challenging circumstances.

18-05477

15/15
