United Nations

S/PV.6743

Security Council

Provisional

Sixty-seventh year

6743rd meeting
Wednesday, 28 March 2012, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Parham . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(United Kingdom of Great Britain
and Northern Ireland)

Members:

Azerbaijan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Colombia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Germany . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Guatemala . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
India . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Morocco . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Pakistan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Portugal . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
South Africa . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Togo . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Mr. Sharifov
Mr. Wang Min
Mr. Osorio
Mr. Briens
Mr. Berger
Mr. Briz Gutiérrez
Mr. Hardeep Singh Puri
Mr. Loulichki
Mr. Tarar
Mr. Moraes Cabral
Mr. Zhukov
Mr. Sangqu
Mr. Menan
Mr. DeLaurentis

Agenda
The situation in Guinea-Bissau

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the
delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-506.

12-27797 (E)

*1227797*

S/PV.6743

The meeting was called to order at 10.05 a.m.

14 to 18 January 2012. However, his medical evacuation
on 22 November 2011 delayed the preparations for the
event, which has now been overtaken by the focus on
the political transition following his death.

Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in Guinea-Bissau
The President: In accordance with rule 37 of the
Council’s provisional rules of procedure, I invite the
representative of Guinea-Bissau to participate in this
meeting.
Under rule 39 of the Council’s provisional rules
of procedure, I invite Mr. Joseph Mutaboba, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General and Head of
the United Nations Integrated Peacebuilding Office in
Guinea-Bissau, to participate in this meeting.
On behalf of the Council, I welcome
Mr. Mutaboba, who is joining today’s meeting via video
teleconference from Bissau.
Under rule 39 of the Council’s provisional rules
of procedure, I invite Her Excellency Ambassador
Maria Luiza Ribeiro Viotti, in her capacity as Chair of
the Guinea-Bissau configuration of the Peacebuilding
Commission, to participate in this meeting.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I now give the floor to Mr. Mutaboba.
Mr. Mutaboba: I am honoured to brief the
Security Council on key developments in GuineaBissau. My last briefing was on 3 November 2011 (see
S/PV.6648). The reporting period has largely been
marked by a political transition that resulted from the
medical evacuation and subsequent death, on 9 January
2012, of President Malam Bacai Sanhá.
My briefing today will focus on the challenging
political and security environment stemming from the
current political transition process aimed at restoring
full constitutional order. Such order has now become a
crucial priority in terms of meeting the emerging
challenges and identifying ways forward on vital
national action plans, particularly through national
dialogue, with respect to the implementation of
security sector reform (SSR) and the fight against
impunity, drug trafficking and organized crime.
The late President Sanhá had consulted and set
the date of the much-awaited national conference for

2

On 26 December, the security environment was
unsettled by an armed attack on the General Staff
Armory, with a reported removal of weapons. The
Government denied a coup attempt, although on
30 December, Prime Minister Carlos Gomes Júnior
said that there had been a plot to kill him and the Chief
of Defence Staff, General Indjai. Twenty-four military
officers, including Navy Chief Rear Admiral Bubo Na
Tchuto, and one civilian were detained. Eight of the
detainees were subsequently released. In the wake of
the incident, two people were killed — a member of
the rapid intervention police, and a police commander,
Major Yaya Dabo, who was assassinated while on his
way to surrender to the authorities.
Although the national conference was postponed
indefinitely following the death of President Sanhá,
work on technical preparations has continued, including
on enhancing the inclusiveness of the process. The
future of the initiative will depend on consultations
under a new president.
On the political transition, following President
Sanhá’s funeral on 15 January, interim President
Raimundo Pereira held wide-ranging consultations
with registered political parties, the National Electoral
Commission and some members of civil society, which
led to a consensus to hold early presidential elections
on 18 March. In support of the process, international
partners provided financial and/or in-kind contributions
to cover the budget of $4.9 million, either through the
United Nations Development Programme basket fund
or directly to the National Electoral Commission. The
consensus on the date of 18 March was later
challenged by some of its strongest advocates among
political parties in protest over the inability to update
the voter registry, which was last updated in 2008.
The Supreme Court cleared 10 of 14 candidates
to run in the elections, including former President
Kumba Yalá and the ruling candidate of the African
Party for the Independence of Guinea and Cape Verde
(PAIGC), Carlos Gomes Júnior. Some political parties
argued that Mr. Gomes Júnior’s candidacy was not
constitutional, since the interim President was not
constitutionally allowed to accept his resignation as
Prime Minister. One of the 10 candidates, Braima Dialó,

12-27797

S/PV.6743

of the African National Congress, dropped out of the
race on 5 March, claiming a lack of conditions for free,
fair and transparent elections.
Preparations for the elections were marred by
violence on 20 February, when youths protesting their
non-registration as voters in front of the offices of the
National Electoral Commission were charged by the
police, who in turn were manhandled and disarmed by
the military. Subsequently, a joint command of the
police and the military, with permanent technical
support from the United Nations Integrated
Peacebuilding Office in Guinea-Bissau (UNIOGBIS)
within the framework of security sector reform, worked
on security for the electoral process, with structures in
all regions. The United Nations also provided
multifaceted technical support for the entire electoral
process.
The election campaign process from 2 to
16 March was peaceful. On 18 March, the first round
of the presidential election was held in a peaceful and
orderly manner. No major security incidents were
reported. The killing of a former military intelligence
chief, Samba Djaló, outside his home in Bissau by
uniformed individuals marred an otherwise peaceful
election day. Investigations into the killing are ongoing
and linkages with the electoral process were refuted by
many, including the President of the National Electoral
Commission and the spokesperson of the armed forces.
In a similar development, on 21 March, the former
Chief of Defence Staff, Vice-Admiral Zamora Induta,
who had met Sambo Djaló a few hours before the latter
was killed, sought refuge inside the European Union
(EU) premises, claiming fear for his life.
The African Union, the Community of
Portuguese-speaking Countries (CPLP), the Economic
Community of West African States (ECOWAS),
Nigeria, the United Kingdom, the United States of
America and the West African Economic and Monetary
Union deployed a total of 154 election observers
throughout the country. In addition, there were three
electoral technical experts from South Africa and two
from the EU. The observers were unanimous in their
assessment that the polls had been free, fair and
transparent.
On 20 March, a coalition of five candidates who
had scored less than Carlos Gomes Júnior at the polls,
including Kumba Yalá, claimed that there had been
fraud at the polls and called for the nullification of the

12-27797

results and for fresh polls following the establishment
of a new voter registry. Sources close to Kumba Yalá
also indicated that he would not participate in a run-off
election.
On 21 March, the National Electoral Commission
indicated that since no candidate had obtained 50 per
cent plus one vote in the election, a run-off would be
held on 22 April between Carlos Gomes Júnior and the
second placed candidate, Kumba Yalá. Voter turnout
was 55 per cent, lower than in the previous elections.
I would like now to turn to developments in the
core areas of concern to the mandate of UNIOGBIS.
First, with regard to security sector reform, the
initial boost to consultations between the CPLP,
ECOWAS and the Government of Guinea-Bissau on a
memorandum of understanding for the implementation
of the SSR road map appears to have dissipated. As an
alternative option, ECOWAS and the Government
undertook to sign a bilateral memorandum of
understanding in furtherance of the implementation of
the road map. However, progress was also interrupted
by the political transition.
UNIOGBIS continued to support the Government
on resource mobilization efforts for the five-year
special pension fund for members of the defence and
security institutions. Cape Verde pledged as much as
the Government of Guinea-Bissau, that is, $4.5 million,
with $1 million to be disbursed in early 2012. On
30 January, on the margins of the African Union
Summit of Heads of State and Government in Addis
Ababa, President Teodoro Obiang Nguema Mbasogo of
Equatorial Guinea, in his capacity as outgoing Chair of
the African Union, convened an African Union
partners’ breakfast workshop in support of the GuineaBissau SSR process, where further pledges of
assistance were indicated, including from Equatorial
Guinea. On 10 February, the Government of GuineaBissau and the United Nations signed a Peacebuilding
Fund grant agreement for $2,803,378, making the
United Nations the first international partner to
contribute to the pension fund. However, Government
plans to launch the operation on 23 January were
delayed in the wake of the political transition.
Demobilization is a crucial step to trigger the
rejuvenation of the armed forces in Guinea-Bissau. Its
implementation is equally delayed.
On police reform, UNIOGBIS continued to
provide technical support for enhanced community

3

S/PV.6743

policing through the establishment of model police
stations, with the assistance of the Peacebuilding Fund,
as well as support in the areas of training, vetting and
certification. Special concern is also being paid to
gender-related matters, including gender-based violence,
including a focus on preventing and combating childtrafficking. Similar efforts are ongoing with respect to
reform in the justice sector, while the refurbishment of
military barracks and the provision of equipment and
prospective training plans are being undertaken with
the assistance of the Angolan Mission to Support
Security and Defence Sector Reform in Guinea-Bissau.
On the fight against impunity, in February 2012,
three suspects were charged with qualified homicide,
damage and grave physical offences in connection with
the investigation into the assassination of General
Tagme Na Waie, on 1 March 2009. The case is to be
submitted to the Bissau criminal court for trial. Some
suspects were cleared. As to the investigation into the
assassination of President João Bernardo Vieira, on
2 March 2009, the Prosecutor General has yet to hear
key witnesses who are outside the country.
Also, the dual assassinations of June 2009 have
been referred to the Supreme Court. Investigations
have reportedly been opened into the assassinations of
Major Yaya Dabó, on 27 December 2011, and Colonel
Samba Djaló, on 18 March 2012.
On the fight against illicit drug trafficking, there
has been progress in the implementation of the West
Africa Coast Initiative, notably in the functioning of
the transnational crime unit, which, since the end of
2011, has been carrying out reporting activities,
produced primary intelligence reports on international
drug trafficking and participated in operational
activities.
The implementation of the 2011 to 2014 national
plan to combat illicit drug trafficking, and its political
declaration, jointly designed by the Government,
UNIOGBIS and the United Nations Office on Drugs
and Crime, has been hampered by financial constraints,
in spite of existing capacity to implement it. The
deficient judiciary system adds to an already long list
of other collateral issues that impedes properly
combating impunity, drug-trafficking and organized
crime.
On benchmarks, I would also like to report on the
progress made on the implementation of the United
Nations joint strategic workplan in Guinea-Bissau.

4

Approximately 78 per cent of selected indicators are
either on track or likely to be achieved within the time
frame of 2017. On 22 February, the Government of
Guinea-Bissau and the United Nations system signed the
United Nations Development Assistance Framework
(UNDAF) for the period 2013-2017 as the integrated
strategic framework. The UNDAF for the period from
2013 to 2017 defines the collective, coherent and
integrated response of the United Nations to the
priorities and needs of the country within the
framework of the Millennium Development Goals and
is aligned with the second generation of the national
poverty reduction strategy paper covering the period
from 2011 to 2015. It will contribute to addressing the
challenges of peacebuilding and development during
the period from 2013 to 2017.
I would like to make several observations. The
death of President Sanhá, who was a moderating force
with considerable influence on the country’s fractious
political and military actors, has been a blow to
peacebuilding plans and programmes in Guinea-Bissau.
Most of 2012 will be taken up by, first, elections and
issues related to the presidential election process,
which started in January and could be completed by the
end of May 2012, when a new President is likely to be
sworn in; secondly, the PAIGC congress scheduled for
July; and, thirdly, legislative elections towards the end
of the year, probably around November. We had
factored into our planning that the political focus from
the second half of 2012 onwards would be increasingly
on the legislative elections, with a clear impact on the
progress of the activities of the United Nations system
as well as of the State. The early presidential election
has been an unanticipated, severe disruption.
The immediate impact of the early elections
should not be underestimated. The Government has
been severely constrained since January because, first,
the powers of the interim President are constitutionally
circumscribed and, secondly, the candidacy of the
Prime Minister and the involvement of other
officeholders in the campaign have further
significantly affected Government business. That
highlights the extent to which the legal framework in
Guinea-Bissau needs fundamental revision, as the
current Constitution has totally failed to provide clear
guidance on fundamental issues relating to how, in
situations such as this, holders of sovereign organs of
the State should proceed in order to avoid vacuums that
compromise the normal functioning of the State.

12-27797

S/PV.6743

A case in point is the situation relating to the
2012 budget, which cannot be signed until there is an
elected President; that has a number of consequences.
These problems, jointly with other recent challenges,
point to the already expressed need for the Security
Council to address constitutional review in GuineaBissau. That is now imperative.
The national conference is a parliamentary
initiative whose patron is the President of the Republic.
Implementation this year depends on harmonization
between the new President, Government and
Parliament, bearing in mind the fact that the
parliamentary term also expires in a few months’ time.
The window of opportunity for a national conference in
this legislature is therefore quite narrow, but the task is
not impossible.
The military events that took place on
26 December are symptomatic of a military leadership
divided and lacking a uniform commitment to
republican values. SSR therefore remains the
cornerstone reform without which democracy and
stability in Guinea-Bissau cannot be consolidated. The
leadership of the new President, who is Commander-inChief of the armed forces, will be crucial.
SSR also requires convergence among the
Government,
international
partners
and
the
beneficiaries in the defence and security sectors on
realistic and achievable targets and sequencing. The
remaining obstacles to a finalized memorandum of
understanding need to be resolved early in the new
presidency. It is encouraging that various bilateral and
multilateral international partners remain committed to
assisting Guinea-Bissau in the implementation of its
SSR strategy, but fine-tuning their roles remains a
challenge.
Nevertheless, UNIOGBIS has been providing
continuous technical assistance to the Government on
coordination through working groups in the areas of
defence, security and justice reforms, bringing together
national and international partners. However,
engagement by national and international actors needs
to be further enhanced. National and international
partners must be commended for having organized the
early presidential election within such a short time
frame. The election is an important milestone in the
process of restoring constitutional order. A newly
elected President must strive to be accommodative and

12-27797

not sacrifice the visible, considerable
achieved in the last three years.

progress

The President: I thank Mr. Mutaboba for his
briefing.
I now give the floor to Mrs. Viotti.
Mrs. Viotti: I thank you, Mr. President, for the
invitation to brief the Security Council in my capacity
as Chair of the Guinea-Bissau configuration of the
Peacebuilding Commission. I would also like to thank
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General,
Mr. Joseph Mutaboba, for his briefing and for his work
as Head of the United Nations Integrated Peacebuilding
Office in Guinea-Bissau (UNIOGBIS). I also welcome
the presence among us of His Excellency Ambassador
João Soares Da Gama, Permanent Representative of
Guinea-Bissau.
Since I last briefed the Council, Guinea-Bissau
has made important strides towards sustainable peace.
During the past months, the country’s institutions have
been able to maintain political stability and sustain
economic growth. They have also managed to
withstand two potentially destabilizing events, which
occurred a few days apart: the incident of 26 December
2011 and the demise of President Malam Bacai Sanhá,
on 9 January. The national authorities and the people of
Guinea-Bissau overcame those difficult moments with
political maturity and in full respect of the relevant
provisions of the country’s Constitution.
When facing the unexpected challenge of dealing
with the presidential succession, the national
leadership opted for steering the process in an inclusive
and consultative manner. Interim President Raimundo
Pereira opened up broad consultations with all political
forces, including the opposition. In accordance with the
Constitution, he scheduled the polls within 60 days of
the President’s demise, notwithstanding the huge
logistical and financial challenges that that decision
entailed.
The Guinea-Bissau configuration has endeavoured
to extend immediate and concrete support to the country
at this most delicate juncture. It met on 6 February to
exchange views and to promote support and resource
mobilization for the elections. The international
community’s timely and generous response has
demonstrated its confidence in Guinea-Bissau during
these challenging times.

5

S/PV.6743

According to electoral observers, including from
the African Union, the Economic Community of West
African States and the Community of Portuguesespeaking Countries, the first round of the presidential
elections was considered to have been free, fair and
transparent.
It is crucial now that all stakeholders, especially
the two run-off candidates and their supporters,
demonstrate political maturity, maintain a peaceful
environment and refrain from any action that could
lead to unnecessary tension. It is important that
electoral grievances be resolved through legally
established channels, with full respect for the rule of
law.
While supporting Guinea-Bissau in its efforts to
hold the anticipated elections, the configuration has not
lost sight of other peacebuilding priorities, such as
security sector reform. The launch of the pension fund
for the armed forces and the security forces remains
one of the highest priorities for peace consolidation
and stability in the country. It is very important that the
new Government, once installed, pursue the launch and
implementation of the fund as a matter of priority.
As I highlighted in previous briefings, an area in
which Guinea-Bissau has certainly made remarkable
strides is macroeconomic management and economic
revitalization. This month, the International Monetary
Fund (IMF) conducted the fourth review of the
country’s performance under the Extended Credit
Facility, as approved in May 2010. The mission
concluded that Guinea-Bissau had made further
progress in stabilizing its economy, reaching a growth
rate of 5.3 per cent and meeting most structural
benchmarks. The IMF team encouraged the
Government to pursue its reform efforts and noted that
political stability and improved security would be
critical for sustained economic growth.
As the international community, we must
continue to support Guinea-Bissau so that such
achievements can help to create a virtuous cycle of
stability and growth. That is why sustained efforts also
need to be geared towards other peacebuilding
priorities, among which is capacity-building to
strengthen the justice sector, to consolidate the rule of
law and to fight drug trafficking, as well as initiatives
that address social challenges, including critical
shortcomings in the delivery of basic social services

6

and the creation of opportunities for youth employment
and empowerment.
We look forward to the successful and peaceful
completion of the current electoral process and to
continuing our proactive engagement with the new
authorities on our joint peacebuilding agenda.
The President: I thank Mrs. Viotti for her
briefing.
I now give the floor to the representative of
Guinea-Bissau.
Mr. Da Gama (Guinea-Bissau) (spoke in
French): Allow me, first of all, to express my sincere
thanks for the honour that you grant me, Mr. President,
by giving me the floor before Council members, whom
we would like to thank for their commitment to and
understanding of the situation in our country. We
would also like to commend Mr. Joseph Mutaboba,
Special Representative of the Secretary-General and
Head of the United Nations Integrated Peacebuilding
Office in Guinea-Bissau (UNIOGBIS), and Mrs. Viotti
for their remarkable work towards the peacebuilding
and development of Guinea-Bissau.
This statement comes at a time when my country,
Guinea-Bissau, is in the middle of an electoral period
brought about by the passing on 9 January of President
Malam Bacai Sanhá, who strove for dialogue, peace
and development in Guinea-Bissau. As stipulated in the
Constitution, after the death of the President of the
Republic, early presidential elections should have
taken place within 60 days following a series of
internal political consultations so as to respect the will
expressed by the country’s various political parties.
The Acting President of the Republic set the date of
18 March for the holding of the early presidential
elections, thus upholding the Republic’s Constitution.
However, the actual organization of those
elections was not easy owing to the serious issue of
their financing, in particular because of the very short
two-month period for their organization and the
country’s financial difficulties. But, fortunately, thanks
to the resolve of the national authorities and the
international community’s tireless commitment to help
Guinea-Bissau to pursue the path of strengthening its
young democracy and respecting the constitutional
order, my country was able to gain the necessary
financial and logistical assistance to hold those
elections. They took place on 18 March, as planned,
preceded by an exemplary electoral and incident-free

12-27797

S/PV.6743

campaign. As a result, I would like to take the
opportunity to reiterate my Government’s gratitude to
all countries and organizations that kindly once again
stood alongside us during that electoral period.
Following the voting, international observers, in
particular from the African Union, the Community of
Portuguese-speaking
Countries,
the
Economic
Community of West African States, the West African
Economic and Monetary Union, a group of
10 parliamentarians from the United Kingdom and
some from the European Union and South Africa,
commended the peaceful climate in which the elections
took place. They all described them as free, fair and
transparent.
On 21 March, the National Electoral Commission
(NEC) announced the provisional official results of the
vote, which placed the former Prime Minister,
Mr. Carlos Gomes Júnior, in the lead, with more than
48 per cent of the vote, followed by the former
President of the Republic, Mr. Kumba Yalá, with more
than 23 per cent of the vote. Given that neither of those
two candidates gained more than 50 per cent of the
required votes, it is provided for that they go to a
second round, which, in principle, will be held towards
the end of April.
Speaking even before the publication of the
provisional results by the NEC, a group of five
candidates, including the contender with the secondhighest number of votes, made it known that it would
not accept the results of the elections, citing
irregularities and fraud, and requested that the elections
be annulled. Once the provisional results were
published, the five candidates lodged an appeal with the
NEC on the basis of the same arguments, underscoring,
furthermore, the lack of updated electoral registries that
included new voters who had reached 18 years of age.
At the same time, Mr. Kumba Yalá, as the candidate
with the second-highest number of votes, announced
that he would not participate in the second round of the
election.
In that regard, it should be underscored that the
NEC issued its decision yesterday, on 27 March,
stating that those allegations were ill founded and that
that group of candidates had a final recourse to the
Supreme Court of Justice, in accordance with the law
in force.
Despite the slightly tense atmosphere owing to
the refusal of Mr. Kumba Yalá, supported by the four
other candidates, to participate in the second round, we
hope that decisions issued by the competent electoral

12-27797

bodies, namely, the NEC and the Supreme Court of
Justice, will be respected and that, in the interests of
the country, the people’s will and good sense will
prevail and that the second round of elections will
indeed take place.
Despite the current election challenge, the
Government of Guinea-Bissau remains convinced that
reform of the defence and security sector is crucial to
peacebuilding in the country, and it is its foremost
priority. We therefore hope that conditions will be
rapidly met so as to move to implementing that reform
through the upcoming launch of the special pension
fund, which will enable the demobilization process of
elements of the armed forces and security forces to
start.
In that regard, we hope to receive as soon as
possible the release of funds pledged by our partners.
We also hope that other actors will join us in that step.
Nevertheless, I would recall that the Government of
Guinea-Bissau, under His Excellency Mr. Carlos
Gomes Júnior, with the support of our bilateral and
multilateral partners, had to agree to tremendous
sacrifices that, to date, have enabled us to see very
positive results in terms of the recovery of the national
economy and public funds administration, as well as in
the areas of infrastructure and combating drug
trafficking, among others.
National dialogue remains one of GuineaBissau’s priorities. In that regard, the National
Conference on Reconciliation, which is to bring
together political actors, civil society, elements of the
defence and security forces, religious leaders and
others, set up by President Bacai Sanhá, will indeed
take place with the election of the Republic’s new
President. That will enable the people of GuineaBissau to freely express their opinion and to find a
lasting path of understanding on issues affecting our
country.
I would therefore like to conclude by reiterating
my Government’s gratitude to the international
community for its tireless support to Guinea-Bissau to
date. We ask it to continue to provide its valuable
assistance to us in the context of peacebuilding and
development in our country.
The President: There are no more names
inscribed on the list of speakers.
I now invite Council members to informal
consultations to continue our discussion on the subject.
The meeting rose at 10.40 a.m.

7
