United Nations

A/RES/59/262

General Assembly

Distr.: General
3 March 2005

Fifty-ninth session
Agenda item 105 (a)

Resolution adopted by the General Assembly on 23 December 2004
[on the report of the Third Committee (A/59/503/Add.1)]

59/262. International Convention on the Protection of the Rights
of All Migrant Workers and Members of Their Families
The General Assembly,
Guided by the basic instruments regarding the international protection of
human rights, in particular the Universal Declaration of Human Rights 1 and other
relevant human rights instruments, and reaffirming the obligation of States to
promote and protect human rights and fundamental freedoms,
Recalling its resolution 45/158 of 18 December 1990, by which it adopted and
opened for signature, ratification and accession the International Convention on the
Protection of the Rights of All Migrant Workers and Members of Their Families,
Recalling also the entry into force of the International Convention on the
Protection of the Rights of All Migrant Workers and Members of Their Families on
1 July 2003,
Considering that, in the Vienna Declaration and Programme of Action adopted
by the World Conference on Human Rights on 25 June 1993, 2 all States are urged to
guarantee the protection of the human rights of all migrant workers and their
families and are invited to consider the possibility of signing and ratifying the
Convention at the earliest possible time,
Bearing in mind the principles and norms established within the framework of
the International Labour Organization and the importance of the work done in
connection with migrant workers and members of their families in other specialized
agencies and in various organs of the United Nations, as well as in the International
Organization for Migration,
Conscious of the marked increase in migratory movements that has occurred,
especially in certain parts of the world,
Deeply concerned at the manifestations of violence, racism, racial
discrimination, xenophobia and other forms of intolerance and inhuman and
degrading treatment directed against migrants in various parts of the world,
_______________
1
2

04-49198

Resolution 217 A (III).
A/CONF.157/24 (Part I), chap. III.

A/RES/59/262

Recognizing the urgent need to make further efforts worldwide to improve
the situation and to guarantee respect for the human rights and dignity of all
migrant workers and members of their families, and aware of the important
contribution of the Convention in this regard,
Welcomes the increasing number of signatures, ratifications or
1.
accessions to the International Convention on the Protection of the Rights of All
Migrant Workers and Members of Their Families, calls upon States parties to
undertake the necessary measures for the implementation of the Convention, and
takes note of the report of the Secretary-General on the status of the Convention; 3
2.
Calls upon all Member States that have not yet done so to consider
urgently signing and ratifying or acceding to the Convention, with the aim of
achieving a broader participation by Member States in the Convention;
Welcomes the establishment of the Committee on the Protection of the
3.
Rights of All Migrant Workers and Members of Their Families, as well as the
report on its first session, held in Geneva from 1 to 5 March 2004, 4 and takes note
of the rules of procedure adopted by the Committee; 5
4.
Requests the Secretary-General to continue to provide all the necessary
facilities and assistance for the effective functioning of the Committee on the
Protection of the Rights of All Migrant Workers and Members of Their Families,
making efficient use of available resources;
Invites the Committee to take into account the work done by other
5.
human rights treaty bodies and special procedures of the Commission on Human
Rights to promote and protect the human rights of migrant workers, as well as the
work of other international forums and other parts of the United Nations system in
addressing issues of international migration;
Also invites the Committee to take into account the efforts by the other
6.
human rights treaty bodies and the Secretary-General aimed at improving the
effectiveness of the treaty body system;
Calls upon States parties to the Convention to submit in due time their
7.
first periodic report, as requested in article 73 of the Convention;
Invites States parties to the Convention to consider making the
8.
declarations foreseen in articles 76 and 77 of the Convention;
Requests the Secretary-General to provide all the facilities and
9.
assistance necessary for the active promotion of the Convention through the
programme of advisory services and technical cooperation in the field of human
rights;
10. Welcomes the increasing activities undertaken by the organizations and
bodies of the United Nations system and intergovernmental and non-governmental
organizations to disseminate information on and promote understanding of the
importance of the Convention, and invites them to intensify further their efforts in
this regard;

_______________
3

A/59/328.
Official Records of the General Assembly, Fifty-ninth Session, Supplement No. 48 (A/59/48).
5
Ibid., annex IV.
4

2

A/RES/59/262

11. Also welcomes the work of the Special Rapporteur of the Commission on
Human Rights on the human rights of migrants in relation to the Convention, and
encourages her to persevere in her efforts;
12. Requests the Secretary-General to submit an updated report on the status
of the Convention and on the implementation of the present resolution to the
General Assembly at its sixty-first session.
76th plenary meeting
23 December 2004

3
