United Nations

S/PV.9314

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-eighth year

9314th meeting
Thursday, 27 April 2023, 5.20 p.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Nebenzia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Russian Federation)

Members:

Albania . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Brazil. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ecuador. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Gabon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ghana . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Japan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Malta. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Mozambique . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Switzerland . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Arab Emirates . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Spasse
Mr. De Almeida Filho
Mr. Geng Shuang
Mrs. Sánchez Izquierdo
Mrs. Dime Labille
Mrs. Kambangoye Ankassa
Mr. Osei-Mensah
Mr. Ishikane
Mrs. Frazier
Mr. Fernandes
Mrs. Baeriswyl
Mrs. Nusseibeh
Dame Barbara Woodward
Mr. Wood

Agenda
The situation in Afghanistan

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of
the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room AB-0601
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

23-11972 (E)
*2311972*

S/PV.9314

The situation in Afghanistan

The meeting was called to order at 5.20 p.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in Afghanistan
The President (spoke in Russian): In accordance with
rule 37 of the Council’s provisional rules of procedure,
I invite the representatives of Afghanistan, Antigua and
Barbuda, Armenia, Australia, Austria, Bahamas, Bahrain,
Bangladesh, Belgium, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Bulgaria,
Canada, Chile, Colombia, Costa Rica, Croatia, Cyprus,
Czechia, Denmark, Djibouti, the Dominican Republic,
Egypt, Estonia, Ethiopia, Fiji, Finland, the Gambia,
Georgia, Germany, Greece, Guatemala, Hungary, Iceland,
Indonesia, Iraq, Ireland, Israel, Italy, Jordan, Kazakhstan,
Kenya, Kuwait, Latvia, Lebanon, Libya, Liechtenstein,
Lithuania, Luxembourg, Malaysia, Maldives, Mauritania,
Morocco, Myanmar, the Kingdom of the Netherlands,
New Zealand, Nigeria, Norway, Oman, Paraguay, Poland,
Portugal, Qatar, the Republic of Korea, the Republic of
Moldova, Romania, Saudi Arabia, Serbia, Sierra Leone,
Slovakia, Slovenia, South Africa, Spain, Sweden, Tunisia,
Türkiye, Uruguay and Yemen to participate in this meeting.
The Security Council will now begin its consideration
of the item on its agenda.
Members of the Council have before them document
S/2023/292, which contains the text of a draft resolution
submitted by Afghanistan, Albania, Antigua and
Barbuda, Armenia, Australia, Austria, Bahamas, Bahrain,
Bangladesh, Belgium, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Brazil,
Bulgaria, Canada, Chile, Colombia, Costa Rica, Croatia,
Cyprus, Czechia, Denmark, Djibouti, the Dominican
Republic, Ecuador, Egypt, Estonia, Ethiopia, Fiji, Finland,
France, Gabon, the Gambia, Georgia, Germany, Ghana,
Greece, Guatemala, Hungary, Iceland, Indonesia, Iraq,
Ireland, Israel, Italy, Japan, Jordan, Kazakhstan, Kenya,
Kuwait, Latvia, Lebanon, Libya, Liechtenstein, Lithuania,
Luxembourg, Malaysia, Maldives, Malta, Mauritania,
Montenegro, Morocco, Mozambique, Myanmar, the
Kingdom of the Netherlands, New Zealand, Nigeria,
Norway, Oman, Paraguay, Poland, Portugal, Qatar, the
Republic of Korea, the Republic of Moldova, Romania,
Saudi Arabia, Serbia, Sierra Leone, Slovakia, Slovenia,
South Africa, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland, Tunisia,
Türkiye, the United Arab Emirates, the United Kingdom
of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, the United States of
America, Uruguay and Yemen.
2/5

27/04/2023

The Council is ready to proceed to the vote on the
draft resolution before it.
I shall first give the floor to those members of the
Council who wish to make statements before the voting.
Mrs. Nusseibeh (United Arab Emirates): I have
the honour of delivering this statement on behalf of
Japan and the United Arab Emirates in our capacity as
co-penholders on the Afghanistan file.
I would like to start by thanking the Russian
Presidency for its flexibility in scheduling today’s vote.
Today Security Council members are voting on a
draft resolution (S/2023/292) condemning the decision
by the Taliban to ban Afghan women from working for
the United Nations. Such restrictions are unprecedented
in the history of the United Nations, and they put the
very presence of the United Nations in Afghanistan in
jeopardy. But as we all know, this is just the latest in
a wave of restrictions that we have witnessed over the
past year and a half.
By adopting this draft resolution, the Council
would send an unequivocal message of condemnation
and a clear call for the swift reversal not only of this
latest ban, but of others restricting the rights of women
and girls in Afghanistan. We are pleased to be joined
by over 90 States co-sponsoring the draft resolution not
just from the Security Council, but from Afghanistan’s
immediate neighbourhood, from the Muslim world and
from all corners of the Earth.
This cross-regional support makes our fundamental
message today even more significant: the world will not
sit by silently as women in Afghanistan are erased from
society. The draft resolution also makes it clear that
stability, economic recovery and political reconciliation
are not possible in Afghanistan without the inclusion of
Afghan women and girls. At the same time, the draft
resolution recognizes that dialogue and engagement
among all relevant Afghan stakeholders, the region
and the wider international community is critical for
turning a page on this chapter of Afghanistan’s history.
Today’s draft resolution also reflects our unyielding
commitment to the welfare of the Afghan people, while
echoing our profound concern about the exceptional set
of challenges facing them: the unsustainable economic
situation in the country, the dire humanitarian needs
and the importance of the presence and operations of
the United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan.
23-11972

27/04/2023

The situation in Afghanistan

Finally, this draft resolution also underscores that
the protection of aid workers and United Nations officials
who risk their safety while serving humanitarian and
United Nations objectives is fundamental to the wellbeing of Afghan people. That process cannot be achieved
without women, and that is why the draft resolution makes
a clear demand on all to allow rapid and safe access to
humanitarian actors, both men and women.
We want to thank and recognize all Council
members for their constructive engagement with the
text, their flexibility and their active support to us, the
co-penholders, throughout the negotiation process. It is
our shared intention that the people of Afghanistan have
the opportunity to build the future that they deserve,
especially the women and the girls.
The President (spoke in Russian): I shall put the draft
resolution to the vote now.
A vote was taken by show of hands.
In favour:
Albania, Brazil, China, Ecuador, France, Gabon,
Ghana, Japan, Malta, Mozambique, Russian
Federation, Switzerland, United Arab Emirates,
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern
Ireland, United States of America
The President (spoke in Russian): The draft resolution
received 15 votes in favour. The draft resolution has been
adopted unanimously as resolution 2681 (2023).
I shall now give the floor to those members of the
Council who wish to make statements after the voting.
Mr. Ishikane (Japan): I deliver this statement on
behalf of the United Arab Emirates and Japan, in our
capacity as co-penholders on Afghanistan.
We welcome the unanimous adoption of
resolution 2681 (2023). We are grateful for the cooperation
and constructiveness by Security Council members in the
light of the pressing nature of the issue.
Three weeks ago, the international community
witnessed another alarming announcement by the
Taliban to ban Afghan women from working for the
United Nations in Afghanistan. That decision, along
with the previous restrictions, not only undermines the
human rights and fundamental freedoms of women and
girls in Afghanistan, but it also negatively and severely
impacts United Nations operations on the ground. The
impact is particularly serious given the dire humanitarian
crisis and the desperate need of the Afghan people for

S/PV.9314

life-saving assistance and basic services. The full, equal,
meaningful and safe participation of women and girls is
indispensable if Afghanistan is to have a peaceful and
prosperous future and enjoy long-term development.
Today the members of the Council, along with the
wider States Members of the United Nations, came
together to send a strong message expressing our
condemnation of the decision and calling for a swift
reversal of the policies and practices that restrict enjoyment of the human rights and fundamental freedoms
by women and girls. While maintaining our emphasis on the indispensable role of women and girls in
Afghanistan, we also stress the importance of dialogue,
consultation and engagement by all relevant stakeholders. It will be in no one’s interest to isolate the Taliban.
We must remain committed to determining how we can
best address the difficulties faced by Afghanistan and
its people. Our hearts and minds are always with them.
Mr. Wood (United States of America): Today
the Security Council has sent a clear, unanimous
message to the Taliban and to the world: we will not
stand for the Taliban’s repression of women and girls.
The Taliban have chosen to ban women from
universities, to keep secondary schools closed to girls
and to prevent Afghan women from working with
non-governmental organizations, the United Nations and
in nearly every sector of the economy. Those decisions are
indefensible. They are not seen anywhere else in the world.
Muslim-majority countries have spoken out against
the Taliban’s rationale for those decisions. In January,
the Organization of Islamic Cooperation emphasized that
Islamic law calls for women’s education, work and participation in public life. And now the Security Council has
condemned the Taliban. The United Nations and its Member
States will not remain on the sidelines when women and
girls are deprived from exercising their human rights.
The Taliban’s edicts are causing irreparable damage
to Afghanistan. They erase women and girls from
society. They also move the Taliban further away from
their desire to normalize relations with the international
community. The United States continues to urge an
inclusive political process among Afghans that leads to
a representative Government that is accountable to its
people and fully reflects Afghanistan’s rich diversity,
including the meaningful participation of women and
members of minority communities.
In conclusion, the United States would like to
acknowledge the extraordinary courage of women and
girls in Afghanistan. Despite the Taliban’s mounting

23-119723/5

S/PV.9314

The situation in Afghanistan

restrictions and intimidation, they continue to support
their families and contribute to their communities. We
applaud the many Afghan communities and individual
who have strongly and bravely stood up in support of
Afghan women and girls.
Mr. Geng Shuang (China) (spoke in Chinese): China
and Afghanistan are linked by mountains and waters,
and China always respects Afghanistan’s independence,
sovereignty and territorial integrity, as well as the
independent choice of the Afghan people. China
supports the Afghan interim Government in building a
broad-based and inclusive political architecture and in
implementing moderate and prudent domestic and foreign
policies. We expect the Afghan interim Government to
take vigorous measures against all terrorist forces and
develop friendly relations with international partners,
including neighbouring countries.
China shares the regret and concerns of many
countries about the recent ban on Afghan women
working for the United Nations. We hope that the Afghan
interim Government will protect the basic rights and
interests of all Afghan people, including women and girls
and ethnic minorities, and continue making efforts in a
direction that meets the interests of the Afghan people
and the expectations of the international community.
Following the irresponsible withdrawal of foreign
forces in August 2021, Afghanistan, already in tatters,
was plunged into new difficulties. International aid has
been drastically reduced, unilateral sanctions have been
intensified, economic development has been severely
restricted, and the humanitarian situation has continued
to deteriorate. The international community should take
a comprehensive, objective and historical view of the
multiple and complex challenges facing Afghanistan
and seek comprehensive and systematic solutions.
No matter how complex the problem is, maintaining
dialogue and engagement remains the right approach to
promote problem-solving, whereas mere condemnation
and pressure can only be counterproductive.
Against that backdrop of that principled position,
China constructively engaged in the consultations on
resolution 2681 (2023). China notes with appreciation that
the resolution incorporates the reasonable suggestions
of China and other members and includes important
improvements in a number of areas. The resolution
that was just adopted states that Afghanistan faces
multifaceted challenges, including but not limited to,
humanitarian, economic and social challenges, as well as
development, security, terrorism and narcotics challenges,
and that measures must be taken to address them.
4/5

27/04/2023

In the face of the dire humanitarian and economic
situation in Afghanistan and the increasing scarcity
of humanitarian resources, it is necessary to step up
assistance in order to promote a political solution to the
Afghan issue and maintain peace and stability in the
Afghan region at large. It is necessary to maintain dialogue
and engagement with all relevant Afghan stakeholders.
Those consensus points should serve as the guiding
principles for the Council’s handling of the Afghan issue
going forward.
China has repeatedly expressed concern over Afghanistan’s overseas assets. I would like to refer to that matter
again today. The United States froze over $7 billion worth
of Afghanistan’s overseas assets after the hasty withdrawal of its troops. Under international pressure, half of
those funds were seized to set up a trust fund under the
claim that it would be used to assist Afghanistan. Yet, as
of today, what we have seen is that the assets were only
transferred from one account to another without a single
cent being returned to the Afghan people. The resolution
that the Council just adopted explicitly calls for helping to
address the major challenges facing the Afghan economy
by using assets belonging to the Central Bank of Afghanistan for the benefit of the Afghan people. We once again
urge the United States to act as soon as possible to implement the requirements set out in the Council’s resolution
and make up for the harm it has already done to the Afghan
people, rather than continuing to aggravate their suffering.
It is both a common responsibility and in the
common interests for the international community to help
Afghanistan achieve peace, stability and development.
As a close neighbour of Afghanistan, China will
continue to work with the international community to
that end. We also hope that the Council will dutifully
play its positive role and not let the Afghan people down.
Dame Barbara Woodward (United Kingdom):
Let me start by commending the co-penholders — the
United Arab Emirates and Japan — for their approach
to securing the Security Council’s support for
this important resolution (resolution 2681 (2023).
Since the Taliban took power, they have imposed
restriction after restriction, resulting in the systematic
erasure of women and girls from society. Banning
Afghan women working for the United Nations
in-country is the latest example of the Taliban’s complete
disregard for women’s fundamental human rights.
This latest ban is a direct violation of the core
tenets underpinning the Charter of the United Nations,
including the principle of non-discrimination. It will
23-11972

27/04/2023

The situation in Afghanistan

severely impede the delivery of life-saving aid to
women and girls at a time when 28 million people, over
two thirds of all Afghans, are in need of assistance.
We therefore welcome the Council’s unanimous
condemnation of the Taliban’s latest decision and the
call for an immediate reversal of all policies that restrict
women’s rights and fundamental freedoms.
We joined other Council members and Organization
of Islamic Cooperation countries in co-sponsoring
this resolution to send an unequivocal message to the
Taliban: there is no justification for what you are doing
to women and girls of your country.
Since April 2021, the United Kingdom has given
$662 million to address the deepening humanitarian
crisis in Afghanistan. We remain committed to
supporting the United Nations and our partners working
in-country. We will not abandon the women and girls
of Afghanistan.
The President (spoke in Russian): I shall now make
a statement in my capacity as the representative of the
Russian Federation.
The Russian Federation voted in favour of
resolution 2681 (2023), on Afghanistan. We note the
efforts of the United Arab Emirates and Japan as
co-penholders on the Afghan file in the Council. They
worked to find compromise solutions while taking into
account a wide range of positions and sought to draft
a document that would account for the whole set of
challenges that Afghanistan is faced with today. In that
regard, it is a matter of sincere regret and disappointment
that steps towards a more prominent reflection of all
those problems were actually blocked by a number of
Western colleagues, led by the United States.
Of course, we do not welcome the decision by the
Taliban to restrict the rights of women and girls. Of
course, those bans must be lifted. However, the real
reasons for the unresolved issue of unfreezing Afghan
assets that belong to the Afghan people; calls for
increasing humanitarian assistance and restoring the
country’s economy; and the negative consequences of
unilateral sanctions — those matters did not make it to
the resolution. However, that approach by our Western
colleagues no longer surprises us. This is just another
example of the double standards of the United States
and its allies when discussing various conflicts in
the Council.
At the same time, those who are responsible for
the terrible crisis in Afghanistan and its consequences,
which Afghans are forced to deal with by themselves, are

S/PV.9314

precisely those who today talk loudly about the suffering
of women and girls who were left behind. If they care so
much for the people of Afghanistan, why do they not return
the money they stole from them and direct it to remedy the
dire humanitarian and socioeconomic situation without
preconditions? Why do they not lift the illegal unilateral
restrictions and start contributing responsibly to a real
settlement of the Afghan problem, which they themselves
created? Vulnerable segments of the population, including women and girls, would benefit most from such steps.
Afghanistan needs our shared support, now as never
before. We note the dedicated work of United Nations
personnel in Afghanistan under the leadership of Special
Representative of the Secretary-General Otunbayeva,
first of all by the humanitarian wing of the United Nations
Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA), who
deliver on their mandated tasks in a very complex
environment. We assume that UNAMA will continue
implementing its duties in full, including with regard
to the coordination of international humanitarian assistance to Afghanistan, and supporting the most vulnerable
groups — women, children, the elderly and persons with
disabilities. Any attempts to politicize the humanitarian
issue for various pretexts are immoral and unacceptable.
We are convinced that pragmatic interaction with the
de facto authorities on all key issues — that is, via UNAMA
in accordance with its mandate — remains imperative. It
is important to prevent the isolation of Afghanistan. A
patient and constructive dialogue will be beneficial for all:
the people of Afghanistan, the region and the whole world.
I now resume my functions as President of the Council.
As this is the last scheduled meeting of the Council
for the month of April, I would like to express the
sincere appreciation of the delegation of the Russian
Federation to the members of the Council and the
Council’s secretariat for all the support they have given
us. It has indeed been a busy month, and one in which
we rallied to arrive at consensus on several important
issues within our purview. We could not have done it
alone or without the hard work, support and positive
contributions of every delegation and the representatives
of the Secretariat, including the technical support team
and the conference service officers, interpreters, verbatim
reporters and security staff. As we end our presidency,
I know I speak on behalf of the Council in wishing the
delegation of Switzerland good luck in the month of May.
The meeting rose at 5.45 p.m.

23-119725/5
