1 ‘,I

UNITED NA TIONS

. ,d ’
1

SECURITY COUNCIL
OFFICIAL

RECORDS

THIRTY-FIRST

YEAR

1972””

MEETING:

15 NOVEMBER

1976

NEW YORK

CONTENTS

Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/l972)
Adoption of the agenda

........

. . . . . , . . . . . . . . . ,. . . . . . . , . . . . . , . . I . . . .
........................................

1
1

Admission of new Members:
Report of the Committee on the Admission of New Members concerning
the application of the Socialist Republic of Viet Nam for admission to
membership in the United Nations (S/12225) *.....a * * . . . ,,. , * t . * . I * . . *

1

SjPV. 1972

NOTE

Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined with figures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United
Nations document.
Documents of the Security Council (symbol S/ . . .) are normally published in
quarterly Sqplenwnts
of the Offlcirrl Records of the Security Council. The date
of the document indicates the supplement in which it appears or in which information about it is given.
The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a
system adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of Resollrtiom
end
Decisions of the Security Council. The new system, which has been applied
retroactively to resolutions adopted before 1 January 1965, became fully operative
on that date.

.- -

1972nd MEETING
Held in New York on Monday, 15 November 1976, at 3.30 p.m.
Mr. Jorge Enrique ILLUECA

Presidenk:

(Panama).

Present: The representatives of the following States:
Benin, China, France, Guyana, Italy, Japan, Libyan
Arab Republic, Pakistan, Panama, Romania, Sweden,
Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, United Kingdom
of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United Republic
of Tanzania and United States of America.

Provisional
1. Adoption
2.

agenda (S/Agenda/l972)

2. The PRESIDENT
(interp,.Ptcltioll
.fion~ Spcwish):
I wish to inform the members of the Security Council
that I have received a letter from the representative of
Mali asking to be invited to participate in the debate.
If there is no objection, therefore, I propose to invite
the representative of Mali ,also to participate in the
debate without the right to vote, in accordance with
the provisions of Article 31 of the Charter and rule 37
of the provisional rules of procedure.

of the agenda

Admission of new Members:
Report of the Committee on the Admission of
New Members concerning the application of the
Socialist Republic of Viet Nam for admission
to membership in the United Nations (S/12225)

3. I invite the representative .of Mali to take the
place reserved for him at the side of the Council
chamber, on the usual understanding
that he will be
invited to take a place at the Council table when he
wishes to address the Council..

Adoption of the agenda

Admission of hew Members:
Report of the Committee on the Admission of New
Members concerni.ng the application ?f the Socialist
Republic of Viet Nam for admission to membership
in the United Nations (S/12225)

4. The PRESIDENT
(infPI’pI.LJtlltioll
jkm
Sprr~rLd~):
Before we resume the debate this afternoon, I wish
to inform the members of the Council that 1 have
received a letter from the Permanent Observer for
the Socialist Republic .of Viet Nam to the United
Nations which states:

1. The PRESIDENT
(irrterpretcrtion
.fiom Sptruish):
In accordance with the decisions taken at previous
meetings of the Council [I970 trtlll 197lst nteeti/t,q.s],
I shall now, with the consent of the Council, invite
the representatives of Bulgaria, the Byelorussian
Soviet Socialist Republic, Cuba, Czechoslovakia,
Democratic
Kampuchea,
Democratic
Yemen,
the
German Democratic Republic, Hungary, India, the
Lao People’s Democratic
Republic,
Madagascar,
Malta, Mexico, Mongolia, Poland, Sri Lanka, the
Syrian Arab Republic, the Ukrainian Soviet Socialist
Republic and Yugoslavia to participate in the debate
without the right to vote.

“The Security Council is discussing the application of the Socialist Republic of Viet Nam for
membership.in
the United Nations. I wish also to
participate in the debate on this matter and speak
after the vote as.1 did last year.”
5. I also wish to’ inform members of the Council
that 1 have received a letter from the representatives
of Benin, China, France, Guyana, the Libyan Arab
Republic,
Pakistan, Romania,
Sweden, the United
Republic of Tanzania and the Union of Soviet Socialist
Republics requesting that during, the present debate
in the Council an opportunity
be afforded to the
representative of the Socialist Republic of Viet Nam
to present his Government’s
views on the question on
our agenda. If there is no objection,
I propose to
I

invite the representative of the Socialist Republic
of Viet Nam to take a place at the Council table and
to make a statement after the vote is taken.

6. The PRESIDENT
(interprettrtion $WI Spanish):
The first speaker is the representative of Mexico.
I invite him to take a place at the Council table and
to make his statement.
7.

Mr. .ROS’ENZWEIG
DIAZ (Mexico) (interpre&nr Sptrrrish): Mr. President, since this is
the first time that I have addressed the Security
Council, I should like to offer you my delegation’s
c jngratulations on your assumption of the presidency
of the Council for this month, more especially since
you represent a sister Republic with which Mexico
has common purposes and goals.

ttrtim

8. I wish also to express my appreciation to the
members of the Council for having acceded to the
request of the delegation of Mexico to be allowed
to speak at this time.,
9. At its 2354th plenary meeting, on 19 September
1975, the General Assembly adopted resolution 3366
(XXX), in which it requested the Security Council,
in strict confirmity with of Article 4, paragraph 1,
of the Charter of the United Nations, to reconsider
the applications for admission of the then Democratic
Republic of Viet Nam and the Republic of South
Viet Nam in the light of the discusssions held at the
1836th meeting of the Council on II August.
IO. On 30 September, at its 1846th meeting,
Council was once again unable to recommend
admission of those two States.

the
the

I I. In the meantime, however, one supremely
important event has taken place which has strengthened the position adopted by all those Members of
the Organization which, like Mexico, advocate the
just and well-earned right of the people of Viet Nam
to be part of the United Nations. That positive factor
which consolidated peace in the region is the reunification of Viet Nam and the formation of a single
nation, namely, the Socialist Republic of Viet Nam.
12. In the course of the debates in the General
Assembly and in the Security Council held during
September 1975, the then representative of Mexico
and present Secretary for External
Relations,
Mr. Alfonso Garcia Robles, clearly expressed the
view of the Government of Mexico. In the records
of the 2354th meeting of the General Assembly and
of the 1846th meeting of the Council, the members
of the Council will be able to read, in extcvso, what
the Foreign Minister of my country stated at the time.
13. On both occasions the representative of Mexico
referred to the joint declaration of 8 June 1945’ by

the countries that would later become permanent
members of the Security Council regarding the reasons
for which the questions contained in what came to be
Chapters VI, VII and VII of the Charter should be
subject to the unanimity rule. At that time he said that
those reasons could in the final analysis be reduced
to the fact that: “as was stated in paragraph 4 of the
four-Power statement to which I have referred, the
decisions and measures which the Security Council
would adopt in implementation
of those Chapters
might have ‘major political consequences’ which might
initiate ‘a chain of events which might, in the end,
require the Council under its responsibilities to invoke
measures of enforcement’. “Obviously,
the decisions
of the Council which have to do with the admission
of new Members are not included in that category of
decisions and therefore, the commitment entered into
by the permanent members of the Security Council in
their statement of 8 June 1945 is doubly applicable
to those decisions. In paragraph 8 of that statement,
they said that it should not be assumed that the
permanent members would ‘use their veto power
wilfully to obstruct the operation of the Council’ “.*
Mention was also made of the advisory opinion of the
International
Court of Justice of 19483 to the effect
that, when’dealing with an application for admission,
the permanent members of the Security Council
shall not-1 repeat: shall not- have the right to adopt
a position that makes the admission of a State
dependent on the support or rejection of another.
14. For all the aforementioned
reasons, my delegation is sure that in this case the Security Council
will be in a position to recommend approval of the
application for admission of the Socialist Republic of
Viet Nam.
15. The PRESIDENT
(irtte,p/,etrrtionJ~orn
Spanish):
The next speaker is Mr. Gurinovich,
Minister for
Foreign Affairs of the Byelorussian Soviet Socialist
Republic. I invite him to take a place at the Council
table and to make his statement.
16. Mr.
GURINOVICH
(Byelorussian
Soviet
Socialist Republic) (interpl.etotion
from Rtrssit~rrb’
Mr. President, first of all, allow me to congratulate
you, as President of the Security Council for the
month of November,
a time when the Council 1s
dealing with important
problems that have considerable political
significance,
and to wish YOU
success in your activities in that high office.
17. The Council is meeting, not for the first time,
to deal with the question of the admission of Viet Nanl
to the United Nations, and each time on behalf of the
Byelorussian SSR we state firmly and with determination that the Security Council must-1
stress
“,must’‘-immediately
open the doors of the United
Nations to the heroic people of Viet Nam. The
Socialist Republic of Viet Nam must be admitted as
a Member of the United Nations immediately
and
without any procrastination.

of progressive mankind
creation of the Socialist

18. The positive resolution of the question under
discussion is in keeping with the interests of justice.
It is a duty that we must fulfil in order to achieve the
lofty and noble aims of the United Nations as
proclaimed in its Charter. The right to become a
Member of the United Nations has been acquired by
the Socialist State of Viet Nam through the heroic
struggle of its people for its independence,
freedom
and unity.

have warmly welcomed the
Republic of Viet Nam.

23. In giving its full support to the admission of’the
Socialist Republic of Viet Nam to membership in the
United Nations,
the Byelorussian
Soviet Socialist
Republic proceeds from the premise that that country
fully meets the requirements of Article 4 of the Charter,
which must be met by all Members of the Organization.

19. The Vietnamese patriots had to spend 30 hard
years on the battlefields. Throughput the history of
democratic Viet Nam, its people have been forced to
repulse the armed invasions of foreign colonialists and
interventionists.
The firmness of the Vietnamese
patriots was stronger than the aggressive armadas.
Their struggle of many years was crowned by a
glorious victory. The struggle of Viet Nam will remain
in the memory of all peoples as a symbol of unique
courage and true heroism, of solidarity
and of the
determined support of the fighting people by the
socialist States and the progressive community of the
world, which led to the failure of the strongest
attempt since the Second World War by the imperialists
to eradicate a socialist State by armed force and to
crush a revolution of national liberation.

24. As indicated in the declaration of the National
Assembly of the Socialist Republic of Viet Nam,
which was adopted at the first meeting of its sixth
session, the domestic policy of the country is designed
to ensure the right of the working people to become
the collective master of their country, to carry out
socialist
industrialization,
to develop large-scale
socialist production,
to eliminate the exploitation of
man by man and to do away with poverty and backwardness. Is this not a truly humanitarian
set of
domestic political measures, carried out under the
slogan “everything
for production, everything for the
building of socialism, everything for the prosperity
of the country and the happiness of the people”?
25. As regards foreign policy, the Socialist Republic
of Viet Nam has declared its readiness to establish
and develop relations with all countries on the basis
of mutual respect, independence,
sovereignty, territorial integrity, non-aggression, non-interference in
each other’s domestic affairs, equality, mutual benefit
and peaceful coexistence, so as to strengthen solidarity
with all the peoples of the world that are struggling
colonialism,
neo-colonialism
and racial
against
discrimination
and in favour of peace, natidnal
independence, democracy and socialism.

20. In the spring of l,ast year all the peoples of the
Soviet Socialist Republics rejoiced with the Vietnamese people at that historic victory which led to the
complete liberation of the south of that country.
That victory put an end to domination by the foreign
interventionists and their helpers in the southern part
of that country. It gave the Vietnamese people achance
to begin preparations for the practical completion of
the reunification
of its country. The aim of the
imperialist and ractionary forces to partition Viet Nam
ended in complete fiasco.

26. There is no doubt that the policy of the Socialist
Republic of Viet Nam is entirely in keeping with the
purposes and principles of the Charter of the United
Nations and that it contributes to the normalization
of the situation and the strengthening of peace in the
South-East Asian region. It will make a considerable
contribution
to the struggle of the peoples of Asia
and the whole world for a stable peace, national
independence
and social progress. The Socialist
Republic of Viet Nam has also declared its readiness
to assume the obligations contained in the Charter,
and it has solemnly pledged to carry them out in their
entirety.

21. The General Secretary of the Central Committee
of the Communist Party of the Soviet Union, Comrade
Brezhnev, at the twenty-fifth Congress of the Party
said the following:
“The Soviet people are proud of having given
considerable assistance to Viet Nam in its struggle
against the imperialist aggressors. The people of
Viet Nam, which won its independence
at a high
price, is now faced with the difficult task of rebuilding
the country. It is building a socialist victory. The
victory of Viet Nam has opened up new horizons
for the whole of South-East Asia. It is a glorious
victory and it will forever be a part of the history of
the struggle of the peoples for freedom
and
socialism.”

27. The immediate admission of the Socialist Republic of Viet Nam to the United Nations has in fact
received the general support of the membership of the
Organization.
That was clearly shown during the consideration of this question in the Security Council
and the General Assembly in 1975 during the thirtieth
session. In its resolution 3366 (XXX), the Assembly
confirmed the legitimate right of Viet Nam to become a
member of the United Nations and supported the
immediate
settlem’ent
of the question, in strict

22. This year yet another glorious page was written
in the history of the Vietnamese people. On the political
map of the world we now see a unified Viet Nam
which, in terms of population,
is the third largest
socialist State in the world. Our people and the whole
3

Aligned Countries, concerning
the application for
admission to the United Nations submitted by the
Socialist Republic of Viet Nam,

compliance with the Charter. Not one Member State
cast a vote against that resolution.
28. The immediate admission of the Socialist Republic of Viet Nam is supported by the non-aligned
movement. In the Political Declaration of the Fifth
Conference of Heads of State or Government ‘of
Non-Aligned
Countries, an appeal was made to the
Security Council to give prompt and positive consideration to the application of the Socialist Republic
of Viet Nam for membership in the Organization.4
The development of the general debate at the current
session of the General Assembly has shown very
convincingly
that the admission of the Socialist
Republic of Viet Nam to membership in the United
Nations is supported by a large majority of the
Member States,

“any opposition to the admission of Viet Nam to the
United Nations is legally and morally irrelevant,
indefensible
and unjustifiable,
contrary to the
Charter and an affront to the express wishes of the
overwhelming
majority of the Members of the
United Nations representing the widest possible
spectrum of international opinion” [S//2 198, f~/mes],
It is also stressed in that communique that the admission of the Socialist Republic of Viet Nam to the
United Nations would be in complete conformity with
the provisions of the Charter and would enable the
Government of the Socialist Republic of Viet Nam to
make a valuable contribution,
as a peace-loving
country, to the cause of international co-operation.

29. In supporting the right of the Socialist Republic
of Viet Nam to become a member of the United
Nations, the Byelorussian Soviet Socialist Republic
rejects any attempts to impede the immediate settlement of this question. The artificial blocking of the
admission of Viet Nam to membership in the United
Nations is indeed a violation of the Charter and of
the principle of the universality of the Organization,
and such actions are contrary to the provisions of
the Final Act of the Conference on Security and
Co-operation in Europe, which was signed by the
leaders of 35 States in August last year at Helsinki.

33. The delegation of the Byelorussian SSRexpresses
its conviction that the just cause of the Vietnamese
people will triumph and that the Socialist Republic
of Viet Nam will take its legitimate place in the United
Nations. This is dictated by the objective course of
history, which no subjective
considerations
can
impede.
34. Mr. CHALE
(United Republic of Tanzania):
Mr. President, you will recall that, during this month
of your tenure of the presidency of the Security
Council, the Tanzania delegation already expressed
its sincere appreciation and gratitude for the most
efficient
manner
in which
your predecessor,
Mr. Akhund of Pakistan, conducted the deliberations
of the Council during the month of October. At the
same time, we warmly congratulated
you on your
assumption of the presidency. However, speaking
as I do for the first time under your presidency, I
feel that is is my pleasant duty to underline the good
wishes we expressed then to both of you. It is therefore our wish first to convey once again to the
representative of Pakistan our gratitude for the skill,
competence and wisdom with which he so conscientiously and efficiently performed
the tasks of the
Council during the month of October. What shall I
say next? Mr. President, my delegation is still overjoyed at seeing you at the helm of this ship, the
Security Council. It is our considered view that, with
your experience, tact, sense of duty, diplomatic skill,
objectivity, wisdom and humility, you will put the ship
on an even keel and continue to chart its course,
though rough the sea may be. I recall with admiration
the way you so brilliantly
displayed your talents of
logical reasoning and perceptive analysis last month
when the question of Namibia was being debated in the
Council. Your statement was replete with sparkling
wit and your presentation
was superb. Surely,
Mr. President, Vorster found in you a tough challenger. You have demonstrated that you are an nvis
ram et splendor ordinis, a rare bird and a luminary
of our order. My delegation pledges its support and

30. The arguments which were put forward as the
main pretexts for procrastination in this matter have
no relation whatsoever to the admission of new
members to the United Nations. They deal with
problems of the bilateral relations between the United
States and the Socialist Republic of Viet Nam. It
must be stressed here that, at every stage of the
‘discussions in the Council on the question of the
admission of Viet Nam to the United.Nations,
new
and groundless pretexts have been put forward. It
must also be pointed out that the Government of the
Socialist Republic of Viet Nam has repeatedly stated
its readiness to normalize relations with the United
States and to resolve all outstanding problems on the
basis of the Paris Agreement of 1973.” All the concrete
steps that have been undertaken by the Socialist
Republic of Viet Nam in that connexion indicate
that it has followed a consistent and constructive
position.
31. The Byelorussian
Soviet Socialist Republic
believes that all attempts to delay a positive settlement of the question of the admission of the Socialist
Republic of Viet Nam to the United Nations by actions
which are incompatible with the purposes and principles of the United Nations and which ignore the
existing reality in the world are contrary to the further
democratization
of international relations.
32. As pointed out in the declaration of 8 September
issued by the Co-ordinating
Bureau of the Non4

co-operation
in your difficult
task, wishes your
country, Panama, well and hopes that our friendly
relations, both personal and official, may go from
strength to strength.

Charter and an affront to the express wishes of the
overwhelming
majority of the Members of the
United Nations representing the widest possible
spectrum of international
opinion.”
[S/121 98,
nnnex.]

35. It gives my delegation great pleasure and happiness once again to welcome and support the application of the Socialist Republic of Viet Nam for
admission to membership in the United Nations. As
we intimated almost a year ago when the Council was
seized of the same matter, my delegation, like those
of the other non-aligned members of the Council,
had the privilege to be actively involved in supporting
the admission to membership
in the Organization
of the then Republic of South Viet Nam and the
Democratic Republic of Viet Nam, My delegation
reiterates its unswerving support of the application
for the admission of the now united and strong
Socialist Republic of Viet Nam.

37. In September 1975, Tanzania had the honour,
together with other delegations,’ to sponsor two draft
resolutions through which the Assembly recommended the admission of the Republic of South Viet
Nam [S/11832] and the Democratic Republic of
Viet Nam [S/II8331 to membership in the United
Nations. My delegation vividly remembers that fateful
day when the tyranny of the minority was at work in the
Security Council and the draft resolutions were vetoed
by the United States on very irrelevant and flimsy
pretexts. The current session of the Council would
have been superfluous had rationality prevailed over
emotions.

36. The Fifth Summit Conference of the NonAligned Countries, held at Colombo in August 1976,
gave its full support to the Socialist Republic of Viet
Nam, as expressed in its Political Declaration which,
i/lf~ crlia, stated that

38. In supporting the admission of the Socialist
Republic of Viet Nam to membership in the United
Nations, we are not merely exercising our solidarity
with a non-aligned State or a member of the third
world. It is more than that. The Socialist Republic
of Viet Nam has, the legitimate right to membership
and fully qualifies in terms of the principles of the
Charter and the conditions laid down in the Charter’s
relevant provisions. Furthermore, the wishes of the
majority have been explicitly expressed in General
Assembly resolution 3366 (XXX), which received
123 votes in favour and none against, with only
9 abstentions.

“the commitment entered into by the United States
under article 21, chapter VIII, of the ‘Agreement
on ending the war and restoring peace in Viet Nam’,
signed on 27 January 1973, should be honoured and
called upon the United Nations Security Council
to give prompt and positive consideration to the
application of the Socialist Republic of Viet Nam for
admission to membership in the United Nations,
in accordance with resolution 3366 (XXX) adopted
by the United Nations General Assembly at its
thirtieth session.“4

“The admission of the Socialist Republic of
Viet Nam to the United Nations would be in
complete conformity with the Charter and would
enable the Government of the Socialist Republic
of Viet Nam to make a valuable contribution, as a
peace-loving country, to the cause of international
co-operation to which the non-aligned movement
as a whole is committed. The Co-ordinating Bureau
calls on aII non-aligned countries and all nations
dedicated to peace and justice, to give thei
unqualified support to the admission of Viet Nam
to the United Nations and is confident that the
justice of their cause will receive wider recognition
than ever before.

39. The Vietnamese are a determined people. Their
determination
to regain their freedom and human
dignity from the clutches of imperialism an colonialism is something thatTanzania has always admired
and respected. The war in Viet Nam was unique in
contemporary history. The people of Viet Nam were
confronted with enormous military power of the
United States, with all the sophistication of modern
times, and yet they came out victorious. The untold
sorrow and misery inflicted upon the Vietnamese
people in the years of bitter fighting against the forces
of imperialism and United States aggression made
history in our century. The mighty military powel
and the continuous flow of American military personnel
into Viet Nam did not deter the Vietnamese people
from their heroic struggle: rather, they continued to
fight to the bitter end, when victory was on their side.
It took great courage and determination,
for the
enemy was far superior in strength. Surely, their
inspirational battle cry must have been similar to that
famous rallying cry: “Victory at all costs, victory in
spite of a11terror, victory however long and hard the
road may be. For without victory there is no survival”.

“The Co-ordinating
Bureau considers that any
opposition to the admission of Viet Nam to the
United Nations is legally and tnoralty irrelevant,
indefensible
and unjustifiable,
contrary to the

40. Providence and logic provide that wars of
liberation must be won. In this respect, the achievements and victories of the Vietnamese people are
a source of inspiration to all other peoples still

This call was reaffirmed by the Co-ordinating Bureau
of the Non-Aligned Countries, which met in New York
at ambassadorial level, in a declaration of 8 September,
which stated, idler trlia :

5

striving to free themselves from the yoke of colonialism, imperiqlism,
racism and uprprrrtheid and from
the yoke of oppression, suppression and exploitation.
For there can be no peace in the world where there
is no justice or respect for human dignity and where
there is no humanity to man.

a positive and decisive stand on this matter, especially
as discussion of the matter by the Security Council
has already been delayed once this year. Members
of the Council will recall that in our decision of
14 September [S/12200], it was agreed, upon the
initiative of the representative of France, to postpone
consideration
of the candidature
of the Socialist
Republic of ‘Viet Nam until a date in November.
The Permanent Observer for the Socialist Republic
of Viet Nam to the United Nations generously complied
with that agreement, despite the fact that Viet Nam
has for many years been awaiting membership in
the Organization and despite the overwhelming support
given their admission by peoples and countries from
the six continents of the world.

41. Having
emerged
victorious
against foreign
domination,
the Vietnamese people elected to become
one pe.ace-loving and unified non-aligned State. As an
independent and sovereign State, the Socialist Republic of Viet Nam deserves all the support that we can
give to its admission to membership
in the United
Nations-all
the support of all the members of the
Council. We firmly believe that the admission of the
Socialist. Republic of Viet Nam Organization would
make a positive contribution to the endeavours of the
Council,to promote peace, security and justice in the
world.

45. The record of the armed struggle of the Vietnamese people to achieve their liberation, unity and
right to self-determination
and their struggle to expel
the foreign aggressor need not be repeated here. That
record is well known to all. It should not surprise us,
therefore, if the people and Government
of the
Socialist Republic of Viet Nam, to achieve their
unquestionable right to become a Member with us here
in the international community, display the same sense
of commitment and determination that they so valiantly
displayed on the battlefields of national liberation and
unification.

42. Mr. KIKHIA
(Libyan Arab Republic): First, I
should like to congratulate you, Mr. President, on
your accession’ to this high office of President of
the Security Council. You have been conducting
the Council’s deliberations with the traditional wisdom
and vigour of your great people, and we have no
doubt that the Council will benefit greatly from your
enormous skill and diplomatic
experience. Our two
countries,
though on separate continents,
have
common historic and cultural affinities. Also, they
are both committed to common ideals of liberation,
brotherhood,
peace and justice. Our two peoples
have always struggled against the forces of imperialism
and colonial domination. I take this occasion to assure
you, Mr. President, and through you the noble country
which you represent, of the support of the Libyan
Arab Republic in all your just causes. I take this
occasion also to assure you of the utmost co-operation
of the delegation of the Libyan Arab Republic as
you carry out your important
duties as President
of the Council.

46. We are confident that the people of Viet Nam,
through the exercise of their d&termination
and their
own patient commitment to their righteous objectives,
will ultimately
achieve all their aspirations, both
within their country for the benefit of their people
and in the context of the international
community,
for the benefit of all peoples that are struggling or
have similarly struggled for national liberation and
unification.
47. In fact, the people of the Socialist Republic of
Viet Nam are already significant
members of our
world community, for in a real sense and in a spiritual
sense they have always been part of our international
ethos. They have made significant contributions
to
the development
and victory of twentieth-century
ideals, especially those so nobly pursued here at the
United Nations.

43. I should like also to congratulate your predecessor in this high office, Mr. Akhund of Pakistan,
who displayed his usual wisdom, deep sense of
responsibility
and devotion to his duties. I need not
emphasize here the long-standing and very extensive
relations between Pakistan and the Libyan Arab
Republic, as well as the Arab nation in general. I
should like, too, to express my heartfelt condolences
to Mr. Akhund on the loss of his father, and I would
ask the representative of Pakistan to convey to him
the sincre sympathy of the delegation of the Libyan
Arab Republic.

48. The valiant people of Viet Nam have been
struggling for more than 30 years. They struggled
under the renowned visionary leadership of Ho Chi
Minh to achieve independence
from the colonial
Powers. They continued the struggle to achieve
unity, territorial
integrity
and self-determination.
Their ultimate and triumphal victory against the forces
of imperialism has given a new dimension to all the
liberation movements throughout the world and has
caught the imagination
and won the respect of all
the peoples of the world, including the people of the
United States. The people of Viet Nam have proved
that the tenacious will of a people is more effective
than all the sophisticated murderous armaments of the

44. The Security Council has once again convened
to discuss and decide upon the admission of the
Socialist Republic of Viet Nam to the United Nations.
This question has been discussed by the Council and
by other organs of the United Nations for two years
now, and, in the opinion of my delegation, the time
has come to take, without further delay or hindrance,
6

United States war machine. In so doing they have
enhanced the determination,
confidence and idealism
of many other national
liberation
movements,
especially those of southern Africa and Palestine.

people of Viet Nam united and free in the Socialist
Republic of Viet Nam.
53. Mr. RYDBECK
(Sweden): Sweden considers
that the upholding of the principle of universality is
one of the most important elements in the efforts
to strengthen the role of the United Nations as the
central organ in the common endeavours to create
peaceful and harmonious relations between States.
The United Nations offers its Members unique opportunities not only to present their views and ideas in
a world-wide forum but also to participate in international co-operative efforts to find solutions to the
tremendous problems facing the world today. Sweden
does not believe it to be in the common interest
of the Members to exclude any nation from joining
the United Nations. Membership in the United Nations
is of special importance in cases where serious
political differences and tensions exist between States.
The United Nations system offers practical, procedural
and political possibilities in the search for the peaceful
settlement of disputes.

49. It is no wonder, therefore, that the application
of the Socialist Republic of Viet Nam for admission
to membership in the United Nations has received
the whole-hearted support and encouragement of the
overwhelming majority of nations and peoples in the
six continents of the world.
50. Last year, at its thirtieth session, the General
Assembly [WSW/II~~W~
3366
(XXX)], without a single
opposing vote, requested of the Security Council that
Viet Nam be immediately
admitted to membership
in the United Nations. This year, in the general debate
at the thirty-first session of the General Assembly,
more than 90 speakers, many of them heads of
Government or Foreign Ministers representing countries in every corner of the world and holding all
shades of political opinion, specifically called for the
immediate
admission of the Socialist Republic of
Viet Nam to membership
in the United Nations.
This opinion has also been frequently stated in other
international and regional organizations and forums.
Among those I should like especially to draw the
attention of members of the Council to the Political
Declaration agreed upon at the recent Summit Conference of Non-Aligned Countries, which called upon
the Security Council to discharge its high responsibility
in a spirit of unswerving fidelity to the principles of
the Charter “and to give prompt and positive consideration to the application of the Socialist Republic
of Viet Nam for admission to membership in the
United Nations” .4

54. Thus, Sweden, as a matter of principle, already
strongly supports the application for admission to
membership in the United Nations presented by
the Socialist Republic of Viet Nam. The Swedish
delegation has found the application to be in full
accordance with the requirements of the Charter and
has joined with other Members in sponsoring the
draft resolution [S/12226] recommending to the General
Assembly the admission of the Socialist Republic of
Viet Nam as a Member of the United Nations.
55. The entry of the Socialist Republic of Viet Nam
into the United Nations would signify the end of a
long struggle for liberation and national independence,
and it would also serve as definite confirmatjon of
full international recognition of that independence. As
a Member, the Socialist Republic of Viet Nam would
have an important role to play within the United
Nations and would undoubtedly make important contributions to the work of the Organization.

51. It is the firm belief of the Libyan Arab RepubIic that the whole-hearted and overwhelming support
for the admission of the Socialist Republic of Viet
Nam to membership in the United Nations is due in
part only to our profound admiration for the Vietnamese people and our respect for the causes for
which they have struggled and will continue to
struggle. Another significant ‘factor that causes us
to take this position without, any reservations is’that
the application for admission of the Socialist Republic
of Viet Nam complies in every respect with the
Charter, and especially Article 4, which stipulates that
membership is open to all peace-loving States which
accept the obligations contained in the Charter. This
surely applies to the case of the Socialist Republic
of Viet Nam and emphasizes once more the noble
objective so long. pursued by the United Nations:
to achieve universality of membership.

56. The Socialist Republic of Viet Nam has been
recognized by almost all Members of the United
Nations and, with one exception, by all the members
of the Council. Sweden appeals to the United States
not to prevent the admission of Viet Nam to the
United Nations. Certainly, there are several outstanding problems as a consequence of the war in
Viet Nam that need to be solved. The solution of
those problems can, however, only be facilitated by
the admission to the United Nations of the Socialist
Republic of Viet Nam.

52. Finally, the ‘Libyan Arab Republic would like
on this occasion to pay tribute to the people of the
Socialist Republic of Viet Nam and to the noble cause
for which they fought so valiantly. We proudly hail
the victory they have achieved over their imperialist
aggressors, and we are gratified to see the entire

57. The Swedish people, which followed the struggle
for independence of Viet Nam with great sympathy,
warmly welcomes the fact that the new State, the
Socialist Republic of Viet Nam, has chosen to apply
for membership in the United Nations. Refusal to let
the Vietnamese people be represented in the United
7

we are now renewing to some time in November, in
the hope that the delay would be sufficient to allow
the remaining differences between Viet Nam and
one among us to be settled. Should this hope be
disappointed,
it goes without saying that France
would be one of the first to deplore it.

Nations would be harmful both to the United Nations
and to international co-operation in general.
58. From the point of view of principle, Sweden
seriously questions the linking of the question of
membership to outstanding bilateralproblems
between
a Member State with veto power on the one side and
an applicant State on the other. It is very doubtful
indeed whether to establish such a link is compatible
with the letter and the spirit of the Charter. Therefore,
my delegation sincerely hopes that the Council will be
able unanimously to agree to recommend the admission of ‘the Socialist Republic of Viet Nam to the
United Nations.
59.

65. In the last decades the Vietnamese people has
suffered tragedies that have moved the entire world.
It is now high time for us to come to the aid of a country
that has been sorely tried, and the first gesture that
the international
community
should make towards
Viet Nam is to give it comfort and sympathy by
allowing it to takes its legitimate place in the United
Nations. Whatever may be said, the United Nations
is the most suitable place for the settlement of conflicts that at times emerge and divide us. Would the
United Nations exist if everything in the world were in
harmony?

Mr.

LECOMPT
(France) (interpr’efofion pOm
Mr. President, may I first of all congratulate
you whole-heartedly
on your assumption of the
presidency of the Council, and express to you my
delegation’s
pleasure at seeing one of Panama’s
most brilliant diplomats, a great friend of France,
so capably presiding over this month’s meetings,
which, in all likelihood, will be numerous and complex.

French):

66. As a founding Member of the Organization,
France considers, in principle, that there can be no
lasting reason to keep outside the United Nations a
sovereign State that declares itself ready to respect
the Charter and the obligations flowing from it. My
delegation has sufficiently regretted the difficulties
that surrounded the candidacy of certain States.
It has given sufficient proof of the understanding that
has imbued its attitude in particularly complex cases,
and it can therefore voice the hope that the Council
will unanimously permit Viet Nam to present itself
to the Assembly this year and to become a Member.
My delegation wishes to stress once again that the
admission of a new State in no way signifies that those
which do not oppose it have no bilateral disagreement
with the candidate. It is by no means necessary that
we have diplomatic relations with one another in order
to meet here in our quest for peace and co-operation.
All that our Charter calls for is that disputes between
us be solved by peaceful means. It would be rathei
difficult for us to understand how a great country,
with which France has ties of friendship and a very
close alliance, and with which generally we have so
many views in common, could become a prisoner of
a concept by which a single bone of contention,
however painful it might be, could lead to consequences out of all proportion to the cause of the dispute.

60. May I also ask the delegation of Pakistan to
convey to Mr. Akhund the gratitude and admiration
of my delegation for the just, clear and smilingly
authoritative
way in which he guided our meetings
in the month of October.
61. Everybody knows that for some time the destinies
of France and Viet Nam were interwoven. This allows
my delegation to bear witness, without wishing to
be presumptuous, I assure the Council, to the fact
that the Vietnamese people, throughout its long
history, has always had an acute sense of its own
personality
and unity. Truly, no one here would
dream of denying the existence of the Vietnamese
nation, or of denying that it lives in a territory which
is its own and has organized itself as a sovereign
State fully master of its own destiny.
’
62. The great majority among us, particularly its
Asian neighbours, have established diplomatic ties with
the Socialist Republic of Viet Nam. As far as France
is concerned, we have long since passed the stage of
formal recognition and have developed and multiplied
our relations with a people which, despite the vicissitudes of history, we have never ceased to admire.
Suffice it, in this connexion, to recall the visit to Paris
a short while ago of the Deputy Foreign Minister of
the Socialist Republic of Viet Nam, Mr. Nguyen Co
Tach.

67. Perhaps I might also be allowed to hope that,
apart from reasons of policy, there is also the question
of the economic will to give Viet Nam the means of
becoming an increasingly active partner in world
relations. The reconstruction of a country so sorely
tried but which has shown itself to be so industrious,
whose people seems desirous of developing peacefully, with the assistance of the most varied partners,
is a task in which the Organization is called upon to
play an important role. For its part, France is ready
to participate in bilateral and multilateral
assistance
so that the new Viet Nam may stanch the wounds
of war and establish ties of fruitful co-operation with
all parties concerned.

63. France has suffered too much from wars of all
kinds not to have learned the virtues of dialogue. It
was in that spirit that, tirelessly advocating political
solutions, we offered Paris as the site for the Conference that would bring together the protagonists of
a conflict that had lasted too long.
64. It was also in that spirit that, last September,
we proposed the postponement of the debate which
8

68. The historic and friendly ties that bind Viet Nam
and France, our Organization’s mission of universality,
our desire to see that international
disputes do not
become an obstacle to that universality,
and our
wish to encourage mutual assistance, co-operation
and the development of the various countries of the
world-these
are the important reasons which, after
leading us to sponsor the draft resolution now before
the Council, will cause us to vote in favour of the
admission of the Socialist Republic of Viet Nam to the
United Nations.

74. Mr. VINCI (Italy-): Mr. President, I should like,
first, to convey to you the satisfaction of the Italian
delegation at seeing the task of presiding over the
work of the Council for the current month entrusted to
your enlightened guidance. This satisfaction is the
greater as there is a long tradition of friendly and
close relations between our two countries, a tradition
that has been constantly enhanced by our common
cultural background.
I am sure that your long experience and your well-known diplomatic
skills will
be of great help to all of us, and I wish to assure you
of the full co-operation of my delegation.

69. Mr. ABE (Japan): The Japanese deIcgation has
studied the application for membership in the United
Nations of the Socialist Republic of Viet Nam and
its declaration accepting the obligations
under the
Charter [S/1218.3]. In the judgement of my delegation,
the applicant is able and willing to carry out those
obligations,
and qualifies for membership
under
Article 4 of the Charter. My delegation, therefore,
will vote in favour of draft resolution
S/12226,
which recommends to the General Assembly that the
Socialist Republic of Viet Nam be admitted to membership in the United Nations.

7.5. I should also like to thank your predecessor,
Mr. Iqbal Akhund of Pakistan, for the quite constructive and inspiring way in which he exercised
the presidency during the past month of October.
His outstanding qualities of leadership came once again
into full evidence in the course.of the difficult debates
we had during his term of office.
76. The Italian Government has constantly believed
that the. universality
of the United Nations is an
essential condition for the complete fulfilment of the
vital role of the Organization
in the various fields in
which it is called upon to operate, and particularly
in the strengthening
of international
peace and
security. We are firmly convinced that every State
has an essential contribution of its own to make to the
success of the United Nations. We believe, at the same
time, that all States, regardless of their political,
economic or ideological systems, should be part of the
Organization
in so far as they abide by the conditions
set out in Articlr 4 of the Charter.

70. I would recall that my delegation voted for the
admission of both the Democratic Republic of Viet
Nam and the Republic of South Viet Nam when their
applications were being considered by the Council on
11 August 1975 [1836th meeting] and again on 30 September 1975 [18#6th meeting].
71. The Government
of Japan believes that the
admission of the Socialist Republic of Viet Nam to
membership in the United Nations will be in full
conformity with the principle of universality,
which
constitutes one of the main objectives of the Organization. My Government is confident that the admission of the Socialist Republic of Viet Nam, a peaceloving State, will prove a very positive element in the
maintenance of international peace and security and
in the promotion of international co-operation.

77. We therefore fully supported all along the candidatures for membership of the -two Vietnamese States
when they were put fqrward last year in the first
stage, and afterwards the candidature of the unified
Socialist Republic gf Viet Nam. In the case of the
our support was and is
Vietnamese
application,
strengthened by a number of othel: considerations. The
Socialist Republic of Viet Nam has emerged as a
unified entity out of one of the longest and most tragic
struggles of our times. That country, relying mainly on
its own strength, has also succeeded in achieving in
a short time remarkable results in its ‘material and
moral rehabilitation.

72. The Government of Japan established diplomatic
relations with the Democratic Republic of Viet Nam
on 21 September 1973 and recognized the Provisional
Revolutionary Government of the Republic of South
Viet Nam on 7 May 1975. On 3 July 1976, the day
that the reunification of Viet Nam was proclaimed,
my Government took a further step to promote the
friendly ties between the two countries by redesignating its embassy in Hanoi as the Japanese Embassy
to the Socialist Republic of Viet Nam.

78. Italy
has already established
friendly
and
mutually advantageous relations with the new unified
State. This bilateral experience has confirmed us in
the belief that the Socialist Republic of Viet Nam is
fully qualified for membership in the United Nations
and has a significant contribution
to make to the
Organization
on both the regional and the world
plane.

73. Japan, a fellow Asian country, reaffirms its
traditional
warm friendship with Viet Nam. The
Government and people of Japan extend their best
wishes to the Government and people of Viet Nam,
with congratulations on their zealous efforts to achieve
the reconstruction and development of their country.
We look forward to increasing co-operation
with
them, both within and outside the United Nations.

79. We are, of course, aware of The difficulties
which have so far prevented Viet Nam from joining
the United Nations.
We are well aware also of
the underlying
emotions and human expectations
9
!,
/

>

_-

P’

4

apparently still standing in the way. We hope, none
the less, that it will be possible to remove these
remaining obstacles, and we find further reason for
hope in the starting of a dialogue which in our view,
should, lead-it is hoped, very soon-to a satisfactory
solution of the problems standing between the parties
concerned.

85. In the interests of the universality of the membership of the United Nations and also in the interest
of the maintenance of international peace and security
and because the Socialist Republic of Viet Nam fulfils the conditions for membership
laid down in
Article 4 of the Charter, ‘my delegation is of the opinion
that the United Nations is obliged to admit it.

80. In the light of what I have said, my delegation
will .vote’in favour of the 1 l-Power draft resolution
[S/12226]. In so doing, we feel that we will be working
in the, direction pointed out by history and by the
growing need in our present world for international
understanding and co-operation.

86. It would be tragic indeed to deny Viet Nam
admission
to the United
Nations
for reasons
unconnected with the conditions
for membership
specified in the Charter. There are, of course, some
precedents for denying membership to applicant States
for other reasons, but such cases have not added to the
glory of the Organization. Since then we have moved
on to a new phase in international relations when it
would seem strange to use the veto procedure for
extraneous reasons to deny admission to a State
that fulfilled all the conditions laid down in the Charter.

8 1 . The PRESIDENT
(i,ltPI’PI.(Jt(ltiot? fi’om Spmish):
The next speaker is the representative
of India.
Accordingly, I invite him to take a seat at the Council
table and to make his statement.
82. Mr. JAIPAL
(India): Mr. President,
may I
extend to you my delegation’s
felicitations
on
your assumption of the office of President of the
Security Council for this month and wish you all
success. May I also express my delegation’s thanks
to the members of the Security Council for giving
us this opportunity to place before it our views on
the important question of the admission to the United
Nations of the Socialist Republic of Viet Nam, a
question which has been before the Security Council on
two previous occasions. This is, in fact, the third
occasion on which my delegation has reiterated its
position on this same question.

87. We suggest that the occasion calls for a voluntary
act of self-denial on the part of the permanent members of the Security Council whereby they would not
use the veto in this case. The General Assembly has
already expressed its opinion in its resolution 3366
(XXX), when it declared, without a single negative
vote, that Viet Nam should be admitted to the United
Nations. In the Security Council in September 1975,
the admission of the two Vietnamese States was
linked, unfortunately,’ to the question of the reunification of Korea so as to reject their applications.
The two Vietnamese States have since become unified,
but we hear that other reasons are now given foi
vetoing the admission of the unified State of the
Socialist Republic of Viet Nam.

83. No national liberation struggle has left such a
painful wound on the conscience of mankind as the
prolonged war of the’ Vietnamese people for their
independence. That wound is all the more painful
because of the inability of the United Nations to do
anything in the matter. In spite of this impotence of
the United Nations, one of the first acts of the
independent State of Viet Nam was to apply for
membership in the Organization.
It seems that the
least that the United Nations can do in the circumstances is to admit Viet Nam without any furthet
fuss or delay.

88. We reiterate that, in deciding for or against
applications for membership, it would be contrary to
the Charter to go beyond the conditions for membership set out in Article 4 of the Charter. In the
present case of the application of the Socialist Republic
of Viet Nam, a voluntary self-denying decision on
the part of one permanent member of the Security
Council not to cast a negative vote would serve not
only to increase its stature but also to enhance the
prestige of the United Nations. We feel sure that by
such action the Council would be able to live up to
the expectations of the overwhelming majority of the
Member States of the United Nations and to facilitate
the admission of Viet Nam.

84. The conditions for admission of Member States
are laid down in Article 4 of the Charter. The Socialist
Republic of Viet Nam meets all those conditions, and
no one disputes this fact. Viet Nam is willing to
accept the obligations in the Charter of the United
Nations. It is certainly as able to carry out those
obligations as any other State Member of the United
Nations. It is a peace-loving State, and of this there
can be no question. There are no other requirements
for its admission to membership in the United Nations.
There is, in fact, an advisory opinion of 1948 of the
International
Court of Justice3 which supports the
view that no requirement other than those stipulated
in Article 4 may be imposed on States applying foi
admission to the United Nations.

89. The PRESIDENT
(intP,prPtr/tio/r jiwn Spanish):
.
The next speaker is the representative of Mali, whom I
invite to take a place at the Council table and to make
a statement.
90. Mr. KANTE (Mali) (irrte~p,.et~,tiorlf,‘o/lz Fw/w/~):
Mr. President, my first words will be to thank the
members of the Council through you for having allowed
my delegation to participate in this important debate.
I should like also to take this opportunity to express
my warm congratulations to you on your accession to
10

the presidency of the Security Council. The delegation
of Mali is happy to see a worthy representative
of
Latin America and of the third world guiding the
work of the Council at a time when it has before it
such an important question as the admission of the
Socialist Republic of Viet Nam to the United Nations.
91. My delegation welcomes the presence among us
of the representative of heroic Viet Nam, and we pay
tribute to his courageous people, which for more than
a quarter of a century opposed the most infernal
imperialist-colonialist
war-machine of all time. No
other people has paid such a high price for its
independence. Its courage and determination
compel
admiration
and respect. We reverently salute the
memory of its martyrs. Their sacrifice was not in
vain, because today the Vietnamese people, reunified,
has fully assumed its destiny.
92. The Socialist Republic of Viet Nam is at the same
time a symbol and an accomplishment.
It is a symbol
of the resistance of a people confronted with the forces
of imperialist and colonialist domination.
It is the
accomplishment of the revolution of August 1945 and
of the testament of its prestigious leader, President
Ho Chi Minh, whose thinking has guided the struggle
for the liberation of all the peoples on all continents.

.States. After the reunification
of those two St.ates,
the problem of the admission of the Socialist Republic
of Viet Nam could no longer be linked to the question
of divided Korea. To justify its third veto, the
United States Government has used a new argument,
this time a humanitarian
argument. It declares that
the Vietnamese Government has “refused” to furnish
information on the 800 men missing in action, that is,
the United States soldiers who disappeared during the
war. It charges that the Vietnamese
Government
shows “a lack of attachment to the cause of peace
and a lack of humanity,
which are indispensable
qualities for a Member of the United Nations”.
Under the Charter, none of these three reasons can
be used to oppose the admission of a State as .a
Member of the United Nations.
97. Indeed, in the advisory opinion that it issued on
28 May 1948,” the International
Court of Justice
declared:
“A Member of the United Nations which is called
upon, in virtue of Article 4 of the Charter, to
pronounce itself by its vote, .., in the Security
Council... on the admission of a State to membership
in the United Nations is not juridically
entitled Lo
make its consent to the admission dependent on
conditions not expressly provided by paragraph 1
of the said Article; and that, in particular, a Member
of the Organization cannot, while it recognizes the
conditions set forth in that provision to be fulfilled.. .
subject its... vote to the additional condition that
other States be admitted to membership
in the,
United Nations together with that State.”

93. After having vanquished its aggressors and freed
its country from the puppets, the Vietnamese people,
in a generous gesture worthy of herces, was able to
forgive those who had assaulted it so bitterly during
that long struggle of colonial reconquest, and today,
with its neighbours of South-East Asia, to whom it has
extended the hand of friendship, it is building true
peace founded on the principles of peaceful coexistence.

That opinion, which is authoritative,
destroys all the
arguments put forward by the United States Government to justify its three vetces. In addition, the United
Nations guarantees the unity and territorial integrity of
Korea and, therefore, it could not support attempts
made to consecrate the division of that country.
With respect to the Americans missing in action
during the aggressive war against Viet Nam, the
Vietnamese Government has reaffirmed, as recently
as 12 November, that it is prepared to fulfil its obligations with regard to “the restitution of persons and
soldiers missing in action” in accordance with the
provisions of article 8 (b) of the- Paris Agreements.’

94. The Prime Minister of the Socialist Republic
of Viet Nam, Mr. Pham Van Dong, has reaffirmed
that policy of peace with his programme statement
of 3 September 1976
95, That is why, in its wisdom, the General Assembly
at its thirtieth session adopted, by an overwhelming
123 votes, a resolution
[rqsolutiun
3366 (XXX)]
which recommended to the Security Council the admission of that State. However, the Government of the
United States did not pay any attention to that, and
in less than one year it used its right of veto three
times to prevent the entry of Viet Nam into the
United Nations. The reasons invoked were specious
and varied from vote to vote.

98. Since its victory over its aggressors, Viet Nam has
made many gestures of good will, thus it has freed all
prisoners. As recently as September of this year, the
Government
of the Socialist Republic of Viet Nam
communicated
to the Government of the United States
a list of 12 names of Americans missing in action;
through the good offices of members of the United
States Senate it has repatriated to the United States
the remains of two soldiers missing in action.

96. The first time the United States Government
tried to justify its veto by arguing that the Vietnamese
Governments lacked authority and did not have complete control over their territories. The second time
it used the pretext that the Council had refused to
consider the question of the admission of the Seoul
Government to the United Nations, so as to block
by its veto the admission of the two Vietnamese

99. On 3 September 1976, the Department of State
declared that the publication
by the Government
of
the Socialist Republic of Viet Nam of that list was a
11

people of Viet Nam. It is high time that the burden
which weighs so unjustly on that country should be
lifted. The respect which the United States Government owes to the great family of non-aligned countries’, of which the Socialist Republic of Viet Nam
is a member, should encourage it to reconsider its
position. It cannot continue to ignore a country of
50 million inhabitants which maintains diplomatic
relations with at least 100 States and, in *addition, is
a member of United Nations specialized agencies and
the International Monetary Fund.

positive and constructive step-to
use the very
language of Mr. Brown, the spokesman of the State
Department.
100. The New York Times of 4 September commenting on the good will gestures of the Vietnamese
Government, wrote the following in conclusion:
“Washington
should not oppose the admission
of Viet Nam by its veto, simply to show that the
United States subscribes to the principles of the
Charter of the United Nations and approves the
admission of any legitimate Government.”

107. The United States must overcome its hostile
feelings and yield to the pressing insistence of various
American circles in favour of the normalization. of
relations between it and the Socialist Republic of
Viet Nam. The isolation in which it finds itselfin the
Council hurts its prestige and authority, because it
cannot qualify as automatic
the majority
which
emerges here in favour of the Socialist Republic of
Viet Nam, since it includes its closest allies. My delegation therefore joins with those who have spoken
before us in appealing to the representative of the
United States to remove the obstacle so unfairly
placed in the way of the admission of the Socialist
Republic of Viet Nam to the United Nations. The
credibility of the Organization, which has been severely
shaken by the abusive use of the veto by certain
permanent members of the Security Council, will
definitely benefit therefrom.

101. We sympathize with the grief of the families
of the Americans missing in action and we share their
anxiety. The responsibility for their anguish cannot,
however, be attributed to the Government of the
Socialist Republic of Viet Nam, which also has its own
missing in action numbering hundreds of thousands,
not to say millions, The parties truly responsible for
their grief are the Kys, the Thieus and the puppets
with bloody hands who, since their defeat, are living
in luxury in royal exile in palaces in the United States
and the Unit.ed Kingdom.
102. So far as we are concerned, we, feel that it is
through co-operation, as proposed to the United States
by Viet Nam, within the framework of the resumption
of their bilateral relations, that the distressing problem
of the missing in action can be resolved-because
certainly not all of them fell within the lines of the
National Liberation Front of Viet Nam.

108. The Socialist Republic of Viet Nam is now a
reality and it cannot be ignored,. The United States
Government must somehow live with this reality and
must, without any delay, begin constructive negotiations with the Government of Viet Nam to settle
the disputes which still exist between them.

103. Already all the restrictions have been lifted on
the movement of United States citizens who reside
in Viet Nam. They can, therefore, leave that country
whenever they wish to do so.

109. The Paris Agreements of 1973 which must be
applied in all their provisions are the framework
within which that can be done. The principle of universality which constitutes the strength and wealth of
the Organization would thus be safeguarded.

104. The spokesman for the Embassy of the’socialist
Republic of Viet Nam in Paris declared on 12 November that “Viet Nam is prepared to undertake discussions to normalize relations between it and the
United States in the interests of both parties”,

110. As the Minister for Foreign Affairs of Mali,
my country, Colonel Charles Samba Cissokho, said so
well in his toast in reply to Mr. Henry Kissinger,
United States Secretary of State: “America
of the
pioneers and the trappers of whose temerity and
courage so many fascinating legends have been created
cannot in this case show irascible and hostile emotions”. That is one of the best traditions of the American people which has stood the test of time. We hope
that the United States Government will heed our appeal
and the appeals of its own citizens and its press.

the Vietnamese side wants to assume
its obligations arising out of article 8 (h) of the Paris
Agreements of 1973, that is not the case so far as the
United States side is concerned. Under article 21 of
that document, the United States side should contribute to healing the wounds of the war and to the
post-war reconstruction of Viet Nam. That contribution was evaluated by the Joint United States-Vietnamese Economic Commission which met in Paris
in 1973. As the Prime Minister of the Republic of
Viet Nam in recalling the obligations of the United
States said, “this is not only a question of right, but
also a question of honour, responsibility and conscience”.
105.

While

111. The communiques published on 13 November by
both the United States Department of State and the
Embassy of the Socialist Republic of Viet Nam in
France at the end of the first round of negotiations
between the United States and Viet Nam in Paris
allow us to hope that this will happen and that the

106. The world fails to understand the hostility of
the United States Government vis-d-vis the heroic
12

-

vote will be favourable. At any rate, the veto is
incompatible
with the optimism expressed in those
CommuniquCs.

“Our delegation hopes that, during the upcoming
discussion of this matter, reason will prevail over
rancour,“6

112. The PRESIDENT
(interpretation
from
Spanish): I wish to inform the Council that I have received
a letter from the representative of Guinea in which
he asks to be invited to participate in the Council’s
debate, in accordance with the relevant articles of the
Charter, without the right to vote.

117. It appears that historic reason is prevailing
over individual
reason, and this is in the greatest
interest of all.
118. The contribution
of a people that has known
how to gain respect can only be of benefit to the
Organization.
Those who yesterday felt its presence
to be untimely would gain also because, as we say,
it is more difficult to forget than to act. The Government and Party State of Guinea are convinced that, by
recognizing
the right of the Vietnamese people to
participate in international activities, the Organization
will be paying true tribute to the charadteristic courage
of that valiant nation. It is for this reason that we
appeal, with the Council, to the United States to
lift its veto and thus allow Viet Nam to enter the
United Nations.

113. In accordance with the provisions of rule 37
of the provisional rules of procedure and the Council’s
practice, and if there are no objections, I propose
to invite the aforementioned
representative
to participate in the discussion without the right to vote.
At the invitation
of the Presiderzt,
(Guinea)
took a pltrce at the side of
chamhes.

Mr.
Cor7dc
the Council

114. The PRESIDENT
(i,lterpretation
from
Spurnisiz): The next speaker is the representative of Guinea.
I invite him to take a place at the Council
to make his statement.

119.

The PRESIDENT
(i,7terpretntio/7
,fi~~7 Spu17are no more names on the list of speakers.
I shall therefore put to the vote the draft resolution
sponsored by Benin, China, France, Guyana, Libyan
Arab Republic, Pakistan, Panama, Romania, Sweden,
Union of Soviet Socialist Republics and United Republic of Tanzania contained in document S/12226.

ish): There

table and

1 15. Mr. CONDE
(Guinea) (interpvetr7tior.r
.fiw~
Frenck): Mr. President, I should like first of all to thank
you for allowing me to speak here, and, on behalf of
my Government, to congratulate you on assuming the
presidency of the Council for this month.

In fir~r/r~: Benin, China, France, Guyana, Italy,
Japan, Libyan Arab Republic,. Pakistan,
Panama,
Romania, Sweden, Union of Soviet Socialist Repub- * .
lies, United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern
Ireland, United Republic of Tanzania.

116. In his statement to the General Assembly
during the thirty-first session, the Foreign Minister of
the Republic of Guinea, when speaking of Viet Nam,
said:
“In Asia, the liberation
struggle victoriously
waged by the heroic peoples of Viet Nam, Democratic Kampuchea and Laos compels the admiration
of all, and constitutes an inestimable contribution
to the triumph of the ideals of liberty and progress.
The international community must contribute to the
efforts of national reconstruction
undertaken
by
those States.

A,qtri/7st:

United

States of America.

120.

The PRESIDENT
(iltte~,prclortot/ ,/iwn? Spr117I would request the Secretariat to prepare a
special report in accordance with the provisions
of the third paragraph of rule 60 of the provisional
rules of procedure.

ish):

“Our delegation wishes to take this opportunity
to pay a particular tribute to the great people of the
immortal Ho Chi Minh, which, after having defeated,
one by one, all the imperialist
armies, has just
proclaimed to the world the birth of its reunified
nation, the Socialist Republic of Viet Nam.

121. I shall now call on those members
to explain their vote after the vote.

“The American veto, two years in succession,
of the admission to the United Nations of this
country, which has contributed so much to the
liberation of peoples and to the strengthening
of
peace, is lriddmissible and demonstra1e.s the umnipotence of some countries in the conduct of world
affairs within an Organization
which seeks universality.

who wish

122. Mr. SCRANTON
(United States of America):
The United States voted against the application
fol
membership
in the United Natiovs by the Socialist
Republic of Viet Nam, not because we doubt [hat the
Socialist Republic of Viet Nam is able to carry out
the obligations
of the United Nations Charter but
rather, because the United States has serious doubts
I3

about the willingness of Viet Nam to do so. It is this
lack of demonstrated
will which leads the United
States to conclude that the Socialist Republic of
Viet Nam does not meet the standards established
by Article 4 of the Charter.
123. Let me be specific. The Socialist Republic of
Viet Nam has failed so far to manifest satisfactory
humanitarian or practical concern regarding American
servicemen missing in action. It has failed, despite
the information available to it, to account satisfactorily
for Americans missing in action and to return the
remains of those killed in the recent conflict in Indo“hina, despite repeated efforts by the United States
to persuade it to do so. We cannot help but conclude
from the Vietnamese refusal to provide a fuller
accounting that the Socialist Republic of Viet Nam
persists in its attempts to play upon the deep anguish
and the uncertainty of the families of those missing
men in order to obtain economic and political
advantage.
124. Through its record and policies, the Socialist
Republic of Viet Nam has convinced my Government
that it is not willing to carry out obligations of the
Charter. As we all know, these obligations embrace
not only the maintenance of international peace and
security but also observance of human rights.
125. Should the Socialist Republic of Viet Nam, by
its actions, demonstrate its willingness to carry out
fully the Charter obligations, the United States for
its part would reconsider its position in regard to a
renewed application for entry into the United Nations.
126. I should like to take the opportunity to use just
a moment more to comment on some of the views
that have been expressed by a number of representatives during the course of this debate. Some have
spoken with great seriousness and evident preoccupation; some have reacted angrily; and still others
have exuded virtuous indignation
in very strong
terms.
127. ‘My
delegation
acknowledges
the genuine
concern of some among us over the present situation.
What we cannot accept is the cynical posturing
represented in many of the statements we have heard
in the Council’s debate on the issue, For instance, it
shows a singular lack of grace for that Power which
has cast 110 vetoes in the Council to lecture us in
self-righteous tones on proper behaviour. Fifty-one of
those 110 veto%--51 of them-were
applied to
membership applications.
128. Ps I look around this table, I see among the
present members of the Council one whose application
was vetted six times betbre that country was tmally
admitted.
Another now at this table suffered foul
such vetoes.

Asian State because it did not like the way that State
had come to independence.
Later, it relented and
allowed the application to be accepted.
130. Numberpus members of the non-aligned
grouP
on the COUnCll
and among the general member&$
of the Organization have spoken with fervour on the
rights of the current applicant. However, as recently
as a year ago, the members of the non-aligned grouP
on the Council could not bring themselves evea to
consider the application
of a well-qualified Asian
State-a State whose population is greater than that of
124 Members of the United Nations and whose gross
national product exceeds that of 107 of the current
membership.
And yet the non-aligned talk of sn
unfailing commitment
to the principle of universality,
13 1. I do not seek here to be contentious. 1 merely
wish to recall some facts in the Council’s record,
Those who make accusations-whether
pious or
ill-tempered-might
be well advised to examine the
reflecting mirror for examples of their actions in times
past and times recent. I speak directly to the point.
I appeal. to the current applicant to give attention
to the human rights provisions of the Charter, to
abandon trading on the sorrow of families to attain its
ends. Normalization
of relations could then flow very
swiftly.
132,

LA1 Ya-Ii (China) (intepetofion
frm
In August and September last year when
the Security Council was considering the applications
of the Democratic
Republic of Viet Nam and the
Republic of South Viet Nam for membership in the
United Nations, the United States tried to make a
so-called package deal by linking them with the
so-called application of South Korea and used this asa
pretext to obstruct the admission of the Democratic
Republic of Viet Nam and the Republic of South
Viet Nam into the United Nations.
133. This time, when the Security Council is considering the application of the unified Socialist RePublit of Viet Nam for membership in the United Nations,
the United States, under the unjustifiable. pretext of
for those missing in
demanding
an “accounting
action”, once again used the veto to obstruct the
Socialist Republic of Viet Nam from being admitted
into the United Nations. Such a practice on the Part
of the United States is in complete Violation of the
relevant provisions of the Charter on the admission
of new members, The Chinese delegation expresses
serious regret at such a crude and unwarranted act
of the United States. Such an arbitrary Practice On
the part of the United States, far from doing any
harm to the Vietnamese people, can only land the
United States itself in isolation.
BOYA
(Benin)
(i,rte,p~ettrticln .@/”
The Security Council has just concluded Its
debate on the application for admission of the Sdcia’ist
Republic of Viet Nam to membership in the lJnited
134.

Fw7d7):

129. An Asian permanent member did not hesitate not
so long ago to veto the application of an emerging

Mr.

Chinaw):

Mr.

information
at all has ever been given to us on this.
Yet our State wishes to establish relations with all
Governments and all States, and we are firmly adhering
to this policy. We have good relations with all,
even with those who are somehow related to the war
of the past and to its beginning.

Nations. Of the 15 members of the Council, 14 voted
in favour of the admission of the Socialist Republic
of Viet Nam, and yet the representatives of the heroic
people of Viet Nam will not be able to occupy the
place which common sense recognizes as theirs.
The numerous appeals to reason that were made by
many representatives who spoke in the debate have
fallen on deaf ears and have not shaken the position
of the United States Government.
That Government has categorically
rejected the demand of the
overwhelming
majority of the Organization,
coldly
using its power of veto.

140. The representative of the United States said-1
am sorry that he has left the chamber, because I
hold him in very high esteem-that
it was not very
appropiate for some States here to say that it was
not legitimate, and so on, to exercise the veto at this
time. To this I would reply very simply that Mr. Scranton should n6t’ refer to the history of the United
Nations. He knows very well why the veto was used;
it was because the United States and those who
supported the United States impede the admission of
socialist States to the United Nations.
There is
absolutely no need at all now to study what happened
in the 1950s. We are not now in the 1950s; we are in
the 197Os, and the world is completely different.

135. However, what we do know and what encourages us is that the people of Viet Nam is a great
people. It has been seasoned by dozens of years of
armed struggle and political struggle, That is why the
delegation of the People’s Republic of Benin is
convinced that the people of Viet Nam will persevere
in its struggle until its triumphant entry into the United
Nations
136. Mr. KHARLAMOV
(Union of Soviet Socialist
Republics) (interpwtotion
f~~~tn Ruxsicrrz): Today the
Security Council could have adopted a good, just and
Iegitimate decision on the admission of the Socialist
Republic of Viet Nam to the United Nations. The
people and the Government
of that country have
long ago deserved to take their place with us as Members of the United Nations. It is a great pity that they
were not able to achieve this today.

141. Therefore, if today the United States tried to
restore the practices which it used in the past, we
can say that those practices are not valid at this’time.
They cannot be justified by anyone.
142. We want to say this to our Vietnamese friends:
Y6u have a good country. You are a good people.
You have many friends both within the United Nations
and outside it. They will heIp you. They will give you
assistance and support so that the wounds of war may
be healed as quickly as possibly, so that you may make
your country strong, so that your country may develop
economically
and culturally.
You can rely on these
friends. And, among these friends, the Soviet Union
will be at the forefront in giving you assistance. We
helped you during the hard war you had to fight, and we
shall help -you now’ that the war is over, I want to
voice the firm conviction that one day you will be
here in the United Nations,
despite the artificial,
invented reasons for procrastination
and despite any
artifical motives for votes against your country’s
admission to the United Nations.

137. Only one argument against this was not put
forward, one that it is very difficult to consider
seriously. Doubt was cast on the ability of the Socialist
Republic of Viet Nam to comply with that part of
the Charter dealing with humanitarian concerns. The
response to this had already been given by the Government of the Socialist Republic of Viet Nam. It was
very convincing and very thorough.
138. Those who raised this question only unilaterally
and think that it applies only in one direction are very
much mistaken. The Socialist Republic of Viet Nam
is absolutely entitled to ask this question in return:
where are the thousands of Vietnamese who have
disappeared and whose fate is unkown to anyone?
Nobody is prepared to say anything about their fate
to the Government of the unified State of Viet Nam.
Has that question no foundation? It has exactly the
same foundations as the argument which was put
forward today by the representative of the United
States.

E43. Mr. KIKHIA
(Libyan Arab Republic):
Once
again the Security Council has failed to take a decision
on the application of the Socialist Republic of Viet
Nam. It has been prevented from admitting
the
Socialist Republic of Viet Nam to membership of the
United Nations. Once again this has been because of
the negative vote of the United States of America,
because of the use, or rather the abuse, of the privilege
of the veto by the United States.

139. We are very sorry that so many of the families
of those who are missing in action know nothing
about their fate, but they did not go to Viet Nam at
Viet Nam’s request, War is war. Our country too
was very badly shaken and many disasters were
inflicted on it during the Second World War. Many
families in our country still do not know what happened
to their children, their sons, their fathers, and no

144. My delegation deplores the United,States action,
which resulted in preventing
peoples that have
oppression
and
struggled
against
imperialism,
exploitation
from exercising their right to membership
of the United Nations, from participating,
as they
have every right to’do, in the international community.
15

145. The United States claims that it defends the
principle of the universality of the United Nations.
It defends that principle especially when the racist
regimes in South Africa and in Palestine are involved.
But it denies the application of that principle when
it comes to the rights of free peoples like those in
Viet Nam or Angola.

150. Such a reconsideration
of the veto privilege
might result in the elimination
of the failings of the
present situation, whereby a permanent member can
unfairly use its veto privilege to blackmail the applicant
or demand the applicant’s co-operation on issues 01
disputes totally unrelated to the justice of its application
for membership.

146. The delegation of the Libyan Arab Republic
believes that it is most unfortunate that the policies
that brought so much tragedy in the past to the people
of Viet Nam should have been resurrected by the
United States in this body, in this fashion and at this
time, and at the sacrifice of democratic, just, humanitarian principles. This policy of obstructionism and
abuse of the veto privilege on a question of the
admission of a new Member to the United Nations has
already been applied three times this year. It gives
rise to very considerable concern. The policy was
applied once in June, when the United States was
alone in opposing the admission of the People’s
Republic of Angola to the United Nations. It was
applied for the second time last September, when,
because of United States obstructionism,
it was
decided to postpone consideration of the question of
the admission of the Socialist Republic of Viet Nam
to the United Nations. Its third application was today,
when the United States, in complete opposition to the
views and desires of the vast majority of world opinion
and the vast majority of the opinion in the Council,
vetoed for the second time the admission of Viet Nam
to the United Nations.

151. This futile, anti-Charter policy will not detet
the Vietnamese and other peace-loving peoples al]
over the world from their will to continue theii
struggle for freedom, progress, international
cooperation and brotherhood.
152. Mr. CHALE (United Republic of Tanzania):
It is truly very disappointing
that so many appeals
made today have been rejected. I wonder what Cicero
would have said had he been with us today. He no
doubt would have addressed the United States delegation in the way he addressed Catilina: “QIIOIIS~IIC
tandem
ukutese, Cutilinu,
putieutiu
nosr~~r?“--“How
long, Catilina, will you abuse our patience?“.
He
would have turned to this Council and thundered:
“QUOIIS~IIE

tnndem

pcrtientimini,

fostissimi

viri?“-

“How long, honourable
gentlemen,
wil you be
patient?“. History repeats itself. I can just see Cicero
here, faced with Catilina.
153. I would, then, say to Mr. Sherer, the United
States representative
in the Committee
on the
Admission of New Members, that this is indeed a
lost opportunity-a
lost opportunity
to regain the
friendly consideration of the world community.
Look
at the many appeals that have been made. And
we are told that they were lectures and accusations.
This was a lost opportunity
to erase what was not
palatable in the past, a lost opportunity for the outgoing
Administration
to leave the house to the new
Administration
without debit. It has been said that it
would perhaps be better to leave this question to
the incoming Administration.
Although we may have
full expectations, let us not forget the wise warning
of President Woodrow Wilson when he entered office.
He was the twenty-eighth President of the United
States. What did he say? He remarked, “When a man
takes office in Washington, he either grows or swells”.
There is a world of difference, I would telI Mr. Sherer.
We would have liked the outgoing Administration
to leave a clean slate behind it.

147. It is obvious to all the members of the Security
Council, to the United Nations as a whole and to the
world community that the United States is now, as in
the past, abusing its veto privilege for the sole purpose
of blackmailing the Socialist Republic of Viet Nam in
the current dispute between the two, countries.
Whereas our Charter stipulates that United Nations
membership is open to all peace-loving States, the
United States, flaunting its veto privilege, has added
another condition-namely,
that the applicant should
first solve all disputes with the United States.
148. It is incumbent upon the Council, which is
entrusted with the maintenance of world peace and
security, to consider what steps are appropriate to
remedy this abuse of the veto. My delegation questions
whether the veto privilege can rightfully be exercised,
particularly on the question of admission to membership in the United Nations. We are greatly concerned
when the abuse of the veto privilege results in
frustrating
the achievement
of universality,
an
objective that has long been pursued by the United
Nations.

154. It is with great consternation,
therefore, that
we look upon the veto just cast by .the United States.
This is another very sad occasion for my delegation.
Once again the will of the majority is being trampIed
down by the tyranny of the minority-indeed,
the
absolute minority. This is onIy one of the numerous
occasions that have seen the continued misuse of the
veto power by the United States. Many lame excuses
are used to block the admission of the Socialist
Republic of Viet N&n to membership in the Organization. This is a disservice to the Vietnamese people
and disrespect for the sovereignty of the Socialist

149. This behaviour not only is contrary to the letter
and spirit of the Charter, but also serves to exclude
the United Nations from assisting in an effective
manner is settling disputes in which it is justly concerned.
16

Republic of Viet Nam. There can be no justification
whatsoever for denying the people of Viet Nam
representation in the Organization.

Council now expected to base. its decisions on the
concept of a “package deal”, instead of on the recognized principle of universality and the Charter. It was
obvious and legitimate, even to the United States, that
the Council could not accept the application
of the
regime of South Korea, and yet the rejection by the
Council of its application
was, the excuse given for
denying membership
to the two Vietnamese States.
Now that Viet Nam is united, we encounter new
manceuvres again to deny the Vietnamese
people
representation in the world body.

155. The use of the veto by the United States comes
to my delegation both as a surprise and as no surprise.
It is a surprise because the Socialist Republic of
Viet Nam has the legitimate right and is fully qualified
to become a Member of the United Nations in terms
of the principles and conditions of the Charter and
its relevant provisions. Furthermore, the wishes of the
majority have been expressed in General Assembly
resolution 3366 (XXX), which received 123 votes in
favour, none against and nine abstentions.

161. The extraneous conditions
imposed for the
admission of the Socialist Republic of Viet Nam to
membership
in the United Nations are unacceptable
and totally irrelevant under the Charter. The disclosure
by the Vietnamese authorities of the names of those
missing in action, who were involved in the war of
aggression against Viet Nam, has nothing to do with
Article 4 of the Charter.

156. It is no surprise because on numerous occasions
in the recent past the veto power has been used to
maintain the outdated and discredited
policies of
imperialism,
colonialism and apartheid. The more we
witness the abuse of the veto, the more we are
vindicated
in our view that this privilege,
this
extraordinary and obsolete power, is detrimental to the
work of the United Nations and calls for immediate
reconsideration, together with the overall,review of the
Charter. It is frequently used to frustrate and trample
underfoot the legitimate rights of other sovereign
States and other peoples and to hamper enforcement
measures required to enhance adherence to the principles of the Charter.

162. We do not know what other lame excuses will
be given in the future. What more right has Tanzania,
or the United States for that matter, or any Member
State represented here, to be a Member of the United
Nations than the Socialist Republic of Viet Nam?
The action taken by the United States only goes to
confirm the suspicion of its mistaken belief that the
aggressive war lost in Viet Nam could be won within
the walls of the Security Council chamber. Such
action can only lead to a further loss of prestige for
the Power exercising the veto.

E57. I am shocked sometimes to think that even
among the permanent members there is no majority.
Only one has to speak and the die is cast. We should
at least have democracy among the permanent members-and an absolute majority. If the other four agreed
with the fifth, that would be all right. But otherwise,
it is a mockery.

163. The United States can only restore the honour
it lost with its defeat in Viet Nam by its reversing its
attitude towards the Vietnamese State and people and
by extending a hand of co-operation to them.
164. Shakespeare said, “O! it is excellent to have a
giant’s strength; but it is tyrannous to use it like a
giant”.

158. It is not the first time the United States, using
lame and irrelevant excuses has used its veto power to
block the admission of other sovereign States to
membership in the United Nations. Here I refer not
only to the Socialist Republic of Viet Nam but also to
the independent and sovereign State of Angola, whose
application has been vetoed on similar pretexts, a veto
that negates the principle of universality.

165. Mr. DATCU (Romania) (intel;or’Ptotio/r .fiwu
Fw~~h): I should like to express the profound regrets

159. The members of the Council and the United
Nations generally were made to understand that the
independent and sovereign State of Angola could not
become a Member of the United Nations simply
because it had troops of a friendly State on its soil.
We were rather puzzled and indeed dismayed to learn
of this new condition for admission to membership
in the United Nations. How many countries that are
Members of the Organization have on their soil troops
of other States-those
of the United States not
excluded?

of the Romanian delegation concerning the situation
created by the negative vote of a single delegation,
that of the United States of America. As far as we are
concerned, its attitude remains unjustifiable,
as indeed
it is in the eyes of the peoples of the world that
have followed
the Security Council’s debates. The
explanations advanced by the United States delegation
were based particularly on past events. We,sincerely
believe it wise to look courageously and honestly to
the future, and the future can be based only on new
principles of international relations aimed at amore just
world based on equality and justice for all, great and
small alike and for permanent members as well as other
States.

160. The previous application of the Socialist Republic of Viet Nam was rejected purportedly also because
of the concept of a “package deal”. Is the Security

166. We remain convinced that the just cause of the
Vietnamese people will triumph and that the valiant
people of Viet Nam will undoubtedly,
in the’neai
17

Government of the Socialist Republic of Viet Nam,
submitted to the Secretary-General
its application
for membership
[S/12183], in which it undertook
to respect the duties and obligations set out in the
Charter of the United Nations. Nearly all Members
States expressed their support for that candidacy in
the general debate at the thirty-first session of the
General Assembly. Fourteen members of the Security
Council also expressed support for our candidacy.

future, take its rightful place here in the United
thus giving expression to the almost
Nations,
unanimous will of the States Members of the United
Nations.
167. The PRESIDENT
(interpretation
from
Spanish): As no other Council member has asked to speak
after the vote, I now invite the representative of
the Socialist Republic of Viet Nam, in accordance
with the decision taken earlier by the Council, to
take ‘a place at the Council table and to make his
statement.

173. The President
of the thirty-first
of the General Assembly,
Mr. Hamilton
Amerasinghe, in his opening address, said:

168. ,-Mr. DINH BA THI (Socialist Republic of
Viet Nam) (i,rterpretatio/7fr.o/77
French):
I wish to thank
you, Mr. President, and all the members of the Security
Council, for allowing me to speak. May I take this
opportunity, lo congratulate you on your assumption
of the duties of President of the Security Council for
the month of November. I am particularly pleased
to note that the friendly relations and mutual support
between our two peoples continue to develop in the
interest of our common struggle for the national
independence, sovereignty and territorial integrity of
our two peoples, and for internationAl peace and
security.

session
Shirley

“After 30 years of bitter fratricidal
conflict
during which they were a divided nation [the two
Viet Nams] have succeeded in achieving their
unification through the free will of their people.
This is a unique and unparalleled
achievement
during the post-Second World War era and by
itself establishes beyond cavil their credentials+ They
have demonstrated
clearly their intention
and
capacity to discharge the obligations of a Member
of the United Nations.“7
174. The Fifth Conference of Heads of State or
Government of Non-Aligned Countries, which met at
Colombo last August, unanimously
called upon the
United Nations Security Council to give prompt and
positive consideration to the application of the Socialist
Republic of Viet Nam for admission to membership.4
As is clear from the foregoing, the Socialist Republic
of Viet Nam has fulfilled all the requirements under
Article 4 of the Charter, and no one can deny its legal
status, desire or ability to make an active contribution
to the achievement of the noble purposes of the
Charter of the United Nations.

169. I wish, first of all, to reject categorically the
unfounded
allegations which the United
States
representative has just made in a vain attempt to
justify the erroneous and indefensible policies of his
Government.
170. This is the third time that the Security Council
has met to consider Viet Nam’s application for United
Nations membership. It is perfectly clear to everyone
that throughout these meetings the problem has not
been whether Viet Nam is or is not qualified for United
Nations membership,
because at these meetings
14 members of the Security Council and a large
number of other States not members of the Council
have spoken in support of Viet Nam’s candidacy and
have criticized the unjustifiable attitude of the United
States delegation, which, for the fifth time, has vetted
our candidacy.

175. The pretext used by the United States Government this time to veto the admission of Viet Nam is an
allegation by that Government that the Vietnamese
side has not provided a complete list of Americans
missing in the Viet Nam war and, consequently,
is
not devoted to the cause of peace and humanitarianism-indispensable
qualifications
for membership in the United Nations.

171. It should also be pointed out that, at the two
meetings of the Council in August and September
1975, the head of the United States delegation stated
that he was not opposed to the admission of Viet
Nam as a Member of the United Nations and that he.
upheld the principle of universality. Yet that same
representative, on the pretext of his opposition to
so-called selective universality, resorted to the veto
four times to block Viet Nam’s application, thereby
opposing genuine universality which was defended by
the other members of the Security Council as well as
by 123 Members of the United Nations at the thirtieth
session of the General Assembly.

176. The United States delegation in the Committee
on the Admission of New Members put forward at
the meeting on 10 November one more pretext which
took this vague form: “at this stage and considering
the present circumstances, the United States Government is not in a position to support that application”
[S/C.2/SR.5.5].
177. On 12 November, immediately following the first
meeting between the Vietnamese and United States
representatives
in Paris, the United States State
Department hurriedly stated:

172. On 10 August this year, after achieving full
reunification,
unified Viet Nam, represented by the

“No progress in the first round of negotjations
with Viet Nam in Paris was recorded that might
18

prompt any change in the American intention to veto
the application
of Viet Nam if a vote takes place
next week.”

the millions of unemployed who are the direct victims
of American neo-colonialism
in South Viet Nam?
Are their consciences troubled with regard to the entire
people of Viet Nam who must now overcome enormous
difficulties and accept all manner of deprivations in
order to bind the wounds of war caused by 2 million
American soldiers armed to the teeth, by the 15 million
tons of explosives and by the tens of thousands of
tons of American toxic chemical products used in the
war‘?

178. First of all we believe that it must be stressed
that the problem of Americans missing during the war
in Viet Nam, like the negotiations
which are taking
place in Paris between Viet Nam and the United
States, is part of the bilateral relations between the
two countries and has absolutely nothing to do with
Article 4 of the Charter. The United States Governaccording to the
ment, using various pretexts
circumstances and its needs of the moment-their
opposition to so-called “selective universality”,
the
problems of missing Americans,
the results of
negotiations
at Paris, and so forth-is
continuing
its policy of obstruction with regard to the admission of
Viet Nam to membership in the United Nations.

182. In spite of all that, the Vietnamese Government,
aware of its tradition of generosity and the humanitarianism of its people, has proved by its acts,
its flexibility and willingness to settle the problem.
of the Americans missing in the war in Viet Nam.
Furthermore, who can deny the legitimate and legal.
right of the Vietnamese people to demand of the
United States Government that it honour the signature
of its representatives and that it respect its commitment
to contribute to healing the wounds of war and to the
reconstruction of Viet Nam after the war?

179. By mentioning
the problem of the missing
Americans and considering that as a humanitarian
problem, all the while using terms that are insulting
to the Vietnamese people in response to gestures of
good will on the Vietnamese side-terms
which are
unworthy of being repeated here out of respect for
this distinguished gathering-the
Ford Administration
has tried to strike a sensitive chord in world public
opinion for political
purposes that are very well
known. In reality, that Administration
has not shown
any good will with regard to the settlement of the
problem of Americans listed as missing in the war in
Viet Nam.

1.83. As our Prime Minister, Pham Van Dong, stated
at the Summit Conference of Non-Aligned Countries
at Colombo: “That is a problem of conscience, of
responsibility and of honour that the United States
Government cannot shirk”.
184. The Vietnamese people were victims of a long
and barbaric war of aggression, But after the war, that
people, in keeping with a foreign policy of peace and ,
friendship with all peoples, on a number of occasions
proposed talks with the United States Government
in order to discuss settlement of problems outstanding
since the Paris Agreements on Viet Nams and concerning the two countries in an effort to normalize
relations between them, Whereas the United States
Government has left no stone unturned in its attempts
to delay any response to our constructive proposals,
the Vietnamese Government has demonstrated its good
will by giving the American side the lists and remains
of those American soldiers killed in the war in Viet Nam
whom we were able to identify. A special committee
of experts from various competent services of Viet
Nam are still hard at work in an effort to seek out
and identify missing Americans.

180. All those who prize justice and peace, including
a large segment of the American population, will surely
not forget the crimes of aggression and genocide
committed by the imperialist
aggressors against our
people, crimes which shocked the conscience of all
mankind during the United States war of aggression
in Viet Nam. Commenting
on the position of the
United States Government
with regard to our application for membership
in the United Nations, the
French newspaper, Le Mode,
stated in its editorial of
15 September 1976:
“And since the leaders in Washington are SO
anxious to invoke humanitarian
questions, one
might reply that they were less troubled by their
consciences when it was a question of bombing
cities and burning the villages of Viet Nam.”

185. We are still awaiting acts of good will and a
co-operative attitude on the part of the United States
Government, in the hope that these matters can be
disposed of as soon as possible, but thus far that
Government stubbornly clings to its unilateral policy,
its intransigent and unrealizable demands and its
hostile attitude towards the Vietnamese people. While
talks are continuing between the two parties in Paris
on the settlement of the problems concerning the two
sides, including the problem of Americans missing in
the war in Viet Nam, and while there are encouraging
signs that it may be possible to begin serious negotiations, as The Nell) York .Times of 14 November last
mentioned, the opposition of the United States veto to

181. In keeping with humanitarian
considerations, we
should like to add to that remark by asking the leaders
of the United States if they were at all troubled in
their consciences regarding the tens of thousands of
Vietnamese families which suffered because their children, two years aftkr the end of the war, are still
listed as missing? How do they feel about the hundreds
of Vietnamese who continue to be killed by mines and
unexploded devices which were left by the aggressors
after their departure? How do they feel about the
hundreds of thousands of prostitutes and orphans and
19

190. From the foregoing, we believe that a few useful conclusions may be drawn.

our candidacy only proves one thing: that the policy
of the Ford-Kissinger Administration is based more on
rancour and vengeance than on a serious desire to
settle the problem of missing Americans.

191. First of all, the Vietnamese people, after30 years
of struggle, was able to recover its independence
and its freedom and has played an active part In
the common struggle for international
peace and
security and for the independence and the sovereignly
of the peoples of the world. The Socialist Republtc
of Viet Nam pursues a foreign policy of peace and
friendship with all peoples, has diplomatic
relations
with more than 100 countries and is a member of
almost every international
organization
within the
United Nations system. Our people is fully qualified
for membership in the United Nations and should be
allowed to play its rightful role in the international
community. That also seems to be the desire of nearly
all the Member States.

186. Pursuing that same policy, that Administration
has gone even further and has done its utmost, in a
desperate and unsuccessful effort, to oppose the entry
of the Socialist Republic of Viet Nam to a number of
international organizations, such as the World Bank,
the International Monetary Fund, the Food and Agriculture Organization and, more recently, the United
Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization-but
there the United States Government does
not have a veto. That policy will only serve to prolong
the days of suffering for American families whose sons
have been listed as missing in the war in Viet Nam and
it will only place the United States in a state of
complete isolation.

192. Secondly, the United States Government’s
attempt to use arbitrary pretexts for crudely violating
the provisions of the Charter to veto Viet Nam’s
application for admission to membership in the United
Nations only confirms the position of the Co-ordinating
Bureau of the Non-Aligned Countries as set forth in
its statement of 8 September 1976:

187. The lack of good will and of a co-operative
attitude on the part of the United States Government
are also reflected in a manceuvre cunningly pursued
by Messrs. Ford and Kissinger, who, whenever they
have an opportunity to do so, are still asking the
Vietnamese Government to give them a complete list
of missing Americans. Everyone realizes that that is an
intransigent attitude, a demand which cannot be met
and a position which hardly does anything but obstruct
a settlement of the problem.

“any opposition to the admission of Viet Nam to
the United Nations is legally and morally irrelevant,
indefensible
and unjustifiable,
contrary to the
Charter and an affront to the express wishes of the
overwhelming
majority of the Members of the
United Nations representing the widest possible
spectrum of international
opinion.”
[S/121 98.

188. The history of modern wars shows that in general
terms the problem of those listed as missing in war is
a difficult and complicated problem. Of the 6,000 Americans listed as missing in the Second World War,
2,000 are still listed as not having been found. Of the
5,000 Americans listed as missing in the Korean war,
1,000 have never been found.

annex.]

193. Thirdly, in the long-term interests of the Vietnamese and American peoples, the Government of the
Socialist Republic of Viet Nam on several occasions
has stated and has shown by concrete actions that it is
prepared to discuss with the United States Government the settlement of problems held over from the
war concerning both sides and, in so doing, to
endeavour to establish normal relations between the
two countries. The United States Government, for its
part, must end its hostile policies tow’ards the Vietnamese people and must prove by its actions that it is
moved by good will and a sincere desire to settle the
problems held over from the war between Viet Nnm
and the United States, including the problem of missing
Americans. If it stubbornly continues to cling to its
unilateral and intransigent attitude, if it continues
to pursue policies hostile to the Vietnamese people
and to obstruct our admission to the United Nations,
it must realize that it bears full responsibility for these
erroneous actions.

189. The situation is even more difficult and complicated in wars such as the war in Viet Nam, where
the most sophisticated weapons from the war arsenal
of the United States were used to destroy and to kill,
where the terrain is a long narrow strip of land with a
coastline of more than 3,000 kilometres, where a dense
jungle covers three fifths of the country and where
80 per cent of the United States military personnel
listed as missing were aircraft pilots who were shot
down over the sea or over the dense jungle. In the
report presented by the Foreign Affairs Committee
of the United States Senate, Mr. Roger Shield,
Assistant to the United States Secretary of Defense,
said:
“We never promised the families of the missing
that we would be able to give them complete
statistics in the sense that we would be able to
specify
i%dividual
.
- evervthing
_
- that hannenedTn-each
_case. That is something that is impossible. There are
quite a few cases in connexion with which we do not
expect to be able to obtain pertinent details, even
if we .were to go to the scene to establish what
happened.”

194. Fourthly, the Ford Administration
has Vetoed
for the fourth time in one year important resoIutions
pertaining to the national and international interests of
the peoples of the world that are fighting against
colonialism, racism and apartheid,
thereby prevenling
20

the Council from performing its functions under the
Charter. It has opposed the admission of Angola and
Viet Nam, two independent and sovereign countries
fully qualified for membership in the United Nations;
it has opposed resolutions relating to the struggle of the
South African people and of other peace-loving and
justice-loving peoples against colonialism,
racism and
apnrtheid; and opposed a resolution on the struggle of
the Palestinian people for its fundamental
national
rights. Those were unjustifiable abuses of the veto
power and a serious blow to the prestige of the
United Nations. Those abuses have aroused widespread indignation within the Organization and annoy
the world’s public and they will doubtless inspire a
more vigorous struggle on the part of the Members
of the United Nations, which will require of the
United States Government that it put an end immediately to these arbitrary practices.

names. What if the Vietnamese were to.require instead
the names of their hundreds of thousands, perhaps
millions, of citizens who were killed by bullets or who
languished in.the darkness of cells? Were not the children, women, old men and soldiers who died on the
side of Viet Nam human beings? Can their untold
sufferings be described? Can the martyrdom of the
Vietnamese people ever be represented by figures?
201. It is obvious that the opposition to the entry
of the Socialist Republic of Viet Nam is based on a
unilateral
attitude which derives from a bilateral
controversy between two States and that it certainly
does not fall within the clear text of Article 4 of the
Charter of the United Nations, under which the
Socialist Republic of Viet Nam has a perfect right
to become a Member State of our Organization.
In this connexion, the conclusion to which the International Court of Justice came in its advisory’ opinion
of 28 May 1948-7 categorically repudiates the pretexts
adduced to veto the admission of Viet Nam. Indeed
the International
Court found that a Member of the
United Nations which has to take a stand on an
application for membership “is not juridically entitled
to make its consent to the admission dependent on
conditions not expressly provided by paragraph 1 of the
said Article”-Article
4.

195. On behalf of the Government of the Socialist
Republic of Viet Nam, I wish to express our most
sincere thanks to the representatives of the 14 States
members of the Security Council that have taken part
in this debate and supported our application. We are
confident that nearly all the other Members of the
United Nations which have not participated
in this
debate will also give us their support when the matter
is placed before the General Assembly.

202. Over and above diplomatic
disputes, political
posturing and specious arguments, there is a fact that
history will reflect, and it is that after the heroic and
epoch-making
struggle of the Vietnamese people, the
word dignity is still spelled as before, but it is
pronounced “Viet Nam”.

196, Consistent with our tradition,
we shall continue to fight for international peace and security,
for the safeguarding of our independence
and the
sovereignty of peoples, and we shall continue to
make an active contribution to the achievement
of
the goals set out in the Charter of the United Nations.

203.
197. The PRESIDENT
(ir~terpretciticm jhm
S~NIIish): With the.Council’s permission, I shall now make
a statement as the representative of PANAMA.

In

the

pages

of the

Osfiyi

Sltakcsprtrw

Apoch~~p/~~~ there are a few lines which, by way of

conclusion, I should like to offer as food for thought
to those who oppose the entry of the Republic of
Viet Nam to the United Nations:

198. In the long struggle of peoples for freedom,
territorial integrity and sovereignty, the people of
Viet Nam has written one of the most brilliant
and memorable pages in history.

“Great Achilles’ spear could heal the wounds it
made: The moral is: what mighty men misdo, they
can amend.”
That was all I wanted to say on behalf of the delegation
of Panama.

199, Panama, like the vast majority of the Members
of the Organization, wishes to see the representatives
of the heroic Vietnamese people occupying their
rightful place within the community of nations.

204. In my capacity as PRESIDENT,
I should like
to remind the members of the Council that, as the
Security Council did not adopt the draft resolution
which is before it, in conformity with the provisions
of paragraph 3 of rule 60 of the provisional rules of
procedure, the Council should submit a special report
on this item to the General Assembly. Conse’quently,
immediately
after the vote on the draft resolution,
I requested the Secretariat to prepare a brief factual
report. The draft report is now being distributed to
the members of the Council.

200. It is a people and nation today involved in the
difficult task of clearing the rubble left by a 30-year
war, a people whose name is greeted with respect and
admiration
by all contemporary
witnesses of its
struggle. None the less, obstacles are placed in the
way of its entry into the United Nations; arguments
are put forward which have nothing to do with the
conditions laid down in the Charter and our rules of
procedure; mention is made of hundreds of soldiers
and officers missing in action and the Vietnamese
Government is required to submit, as a condition of
its admission, a list of their names-a few hundred

205. I should like to express the hope that the draft
report will be rapidly adopted by the Council, to
21

enable it to make an early report on this matter to the
General Assembly in accordance with the usual
practice.
206. If there are no objections and if no member of the
Council wish to comment on the draft report, I shall
take it htat the Council adopts the special report to
the General Assembly provided for in rule 60 of the
provisional rules of procedure.

Notes

1 United
111/l/37.
2 Ojjjcid

Nations Conference on International
Records

Hewry Meetings,

of the General

Assembly,

Organization,

Thirtieth

Scssiorl,

(Charter,

Art. 41,

2354th meeting.

3 Admission
of a State to the United
Advisory
Opiniotl:
I.C.J. Reports 1948,

Nations

p. 57.

4 A/31/197, annex I, para. 101.
S United Nations, Trerrty Series, vol. 935, No. 13295, p. 2.
h Qfjciol Records

of the Gellerol

Assembly,

Thirty-first

Sessiw,

Plewly Meetings,
16th meeting, paras. 272 to 275.
’ Ibid., 1st meeting, para. 64.
8 Ibid., Thirty-first
Sessim,
Annexes,
agenda item 26, document
A/3 l/330.

HOW

Litho

in United

Nations,

New

TO OBTAtN

York

UNITED

NATIONS

PUBLICATIONS

00150

83-60801-February

1985--2,200

I’

’
