United Nations

S/PV.6581

Security Council

Provisional

Sixty-sixth year

6581st meeting
Tuesday, 12 July 2011, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Westerwelle . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Germany)

Members:

Bosnia and Herzegovina . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Brazil . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Colombia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Gabon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
India . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Lebanon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Nigeria . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Portugal . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
South Africa . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . .
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Mr. Alkalaj
Mrs. Viotti
Mr. Wang Min
Ms. Holguín Cuéllar
Mr. Araud
Mr. Moungara Moussotsi
Mr. Hardeep Singh Puri
Mr. Salam
Mrs. Ogwu
Mr. Brites Pereira
Mr. Pankin
Mr. Radebe
Sir Mark Lyall Grant
Ms. Rice

Agenda
Children and armed conflict
Report of the Secretary-General on children and armed conflict (S/2011/250)
Letter dated 1 July 2011 from the Permanent Representative of Germany to the
United Nations addressed to the Secretary-General (S/2011/409)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the
delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-506.

11-41067 (E)

*1141067*

S/PV.6581

The meeting was called to order at 10.10 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Children and armed conflict
Report of the Secretary-General on children
and armed conflict (S/2011/250)
Letter dated 1 July 2011 from the Permanent
Representative of Germany to the
United Nations addressed to the
Secretary-General (S/2011/409)
The President: I wish to welcome the presence at
this meeting of the Secretary-General, His Excellency
Mr. Ban Ki-moon, as well as that of ministers. Their
presence is an affirmation of the importance of the
subject being discussed.
In accordance with rule 37 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite the
representatives of Afghanistan, Armenia, Australia,
Austria, Azerbaijan, Bangladesh, Belgium, Benin,
Bulgaria, Canada, Chad, Chile, Costa Rica, Croatia, the
Czech Republic, Denmark, Estonia, Finland, Greece,
Guatemala, Honduras, Hungary, Iceland, Iraq, Ireland,
Israel, Italy, Japan, Kenya, Kazakhstan, Kyrgyzstan,
Latvia, Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Malta,
Mexico, Monaco, Montenegro, New Zealand, Norway,
Myanmar, Pakistan, Papua New Guinea, Peru, Poland,
the Republic of Korea, the Republic of Moldova,
Romania, Samoa, Slovakia, Slovenia, Spain, Sri Lanka,
Sweden, Switzerland, Thailand, Ukraine and Yemen to
participate in this meeting.
Under rule 39 of the Council’s provisional rules
of procedure, I invite Ms. Radhika Coomaraswamy,
Special Representative of the Secretary-General for
Children and Armed Conflict, and Mr. Anthony Lake,
Executive Director of UNICEF, to participate in this
meeting.
Under rule 39 of the Council’s provisional rules
of procedure, I invite the Acting Head of the delegation
of the European Union to the United Nations, His
Excellency Mr. Pedro Serrano, to participate in this
meeting.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

2

begin

its

Members of the Council have before them
document S/2011/425, which contains the text of a
draft resolution submitted by Australia, Austria,
Belgium, Benin, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Bulgaria,
Canada, Chad, Chile, Costa Rica, Croatia, the Czech
Republic, Denmark, Estonia, Finland, France, Gabon,
Germany, Greece, Guatemala, Honduras, Hungary,
Iceland, Ireland, Israel, Italy, Japan, Kazakhstan,
Latvia, Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Malta,
Mexico, Monaco, Montenegro, New Zealand, Nigeria,
Norway, Peru, Poland, Portugal, Qatar, the Republic of
Moldova, Romania, Samoa, Slovakia, Slovenia, Spain,
Sweden, Switzerland, Ukraine, the United Kingdom of
Great Britain and Northern Ireland and the United
States of America.
I wish to draw the attention of Council members
to documents S/2011/250 and S/2011/409, containing,
respectively, the report of the Secretary-General on
children and armed conflict and a letter dated 1 July
2011 from the Permanent Representative of Germany
to
the
United
Nations
addressed
to
the
Secretary-General, transmitting a concept paper on the
item under consideration.
With the Council’s permission, I shall now make
a statement in my capacity as Minister for Foreign
Affairs of Germany.
Let me seize this opportunity to warmly welcome
the cooperation of all present on this topic. The
protection of children in armed conflict is of great
importance to all of us. This was evident also during
the negotiations leading to the draft resolution before
us. We are honoured by the presence of the
Secretary-General today, and let me also thank
Mr. Lake and Ms. Coomaraswamy for their presence
here.
I am confident that I speak for all those present
here today in saying that we do not want to see
children being used in conflicts. We do not want them
to be forced to fight. We do not want them to be
injured, abused or killed. We want children to grow up
knowing that their schools are safe places. Schools
should be places of learning and playing where
children can grow and thrive. Attacks on schools and
hospitals are barbaric acts. We want children to feel
safe when they are in need of physical help, when they
are weak, sick or wounded. Hospitals should therefore
also be safe and protected places.

11-41067

S/PV.6581

Consequently, I am very hopeful that the Council
is about to take the important decision to expand the
triggers for listing parties that commit serious
violations against children. Attacks on schools and
hospitals will then be among those triggers. This is a
big step forward.
We are also convinced of the importance of
actions plans between the United Nations and parties to
conflict. Implementing action plans is the only way to
get off those lists. In future, actions plans can also
include countering attacks on schools and hospitals.
There has been progress, and this progress is
encouraging. But we all know that we have to do more.
Persistent perpetrators need to face credible
consequences. If they do not change their behaviour,
they should face measures through sanctions regimes.
That is why it is important that today’s draft resolution
also increases the possibility of targeted sanctions
against perpetrators listed in the report of the
Secretary-General.
Societies should be judged by the way in which
they treat their children. Our attitude towards our
children is a testament to our attitude towards our
future. We will continue to try to protect children from
the effects of war and conflict. We will continue to
listen to their stories for as long as it takes.
I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.
It is my understanding that the Council is ready
to proceed to the vote on the draft resolution before it.
I shall now put the draft resolution to the vote.
A vote was taken by show of hands.
In favour:
Bosnia and Herzegovina, Brazil, China,
Colombia, France, Gabon, Germany, India,
Lebanon, Nigeria, Portugal, Russian Federation,
South Africa, United Kingdom of Great Britain
and Northern Ireland, United States of America
The President: The draft resolution received 15
votes in favour. The draft resolution has been adopted
unanimously as resolution 1998 (2011).
I now give the floor to the Secretary-General.
The Secretary-General: I thank Germany for
having organized this open debate, and I thank the
Council for its sustained commitment to the protection

11-41067

of children affected by armed conflict. I should like to
thank in particular the Minister for Foreign Affairs of
Germany for taking the time to preside over this
meeting and for his leadership.
Since 1998, the Council has adopted eight
resolutions on this issue. It has asked me to report on
the recruitment and use of child soldiers, the killing
and maiming of children, rape and other sexual
violence, abductions, attacks on schools and hospitals,
and the denial of humanitarian access to children by
parties to armed conflict. It has sent a consistent and
clear message: the protection of children in armed
conflict is a peace and security issue, and the
international community will not tolerate grave
violations of this principle.
Today’s resolution takes us one step further. It not
only emphasizes that schools and hospitals should be
zones of peace respected by all parties to conflict; it
adds attacks on schools and hospitals as listing criteria
in my annual reports on children in armed conflict. I
welcome this advance. Places of learning and places of
healing should never be places of war.
Our proactive efforts on previously listed
violations, such as the recruitment and use of child
soldiers, have yielded positive results. I thank
Governments, civil society and non-governmental
organizations for their work. These efforts and the
action plan concept — laid out in resolution 1539
(2004) and later resolutions — have led to the signing
of 15 action plans covering nine conflict arenas. Two
more action plans are expected this year.
These successes show the value of naming and
shaming. Last year alone, around 10,000 children
associated with armed groups were released. We must
now secure longer-term international support for their
full reintegration into their communities. This is an
essential
component
of
peacebuilding
and
development.
The United Nations system is fully committed to
protecting children in armed conflict. My Special
Representative on this issue, Ms. Coomaraswamy, is
working with dedication and courage. The work of my
Special Representative on Sexual Violence in Conflict,
Ms. Wallström, is also helping to combat impunity. The
Department of Peacekeeping Operations, too, is
playing an important role. It has deployed child
protection advisers in at least 13 missions since 2001,
and today has advisers in seven peacekeeping missions

3

S/PV.6581

and three political missions. They are working to help
missions support the implementation of Security
Council resolutions. United Nations country teams,
too, are making an important contribution, not only in
monitoring and reporting under resolution 1612 (2005),
but also in supporting reintegration and other
humanitarian interventions. UNICEF, in particular,
plays a key role here.
In closing, I would like to acknowledge the work
of the Working Group on Children and Armed Conflict,
of which Germany is the Chair. With the innovative
and steadfast engagement of many partners, the
Council has demonstrated that protecting children in
armed conflict is both a moral and a security
imperative. Let us keep working together to ensure that
children everywhere can grow up safe, healthy and
educated so that they can help to build a secure and
sustainable future for themselves, their families and
their societies.
The President: I thank the Secretary-General for
his briefing.
I now give
Coomaraswamy.

the

floor

to

Ms.

Radhika

Ms. Coomaraswamy: Thank you, Sir, for
convening this open debate on children and armed
conflict. Your presence signals a commitment at the
highest level to the protection of children during war. I
would also like to commend the dedication of
Ambassador Peter Wittig and his staff for their
effective engagement as Chair of the Working Group
on Children and Armed Conflict. Their dedication must
be truly commended and we look forward to continuing
to work closely with them.
I also want to thank the Secretary-General for
honouring us with his presence and his unwavering
support for the cause of women and children. I also
want to thank all the ministers who have come from
afar to be with us today.
The Security Council has before it the tenth
annual report of the Secretary-General on children and
armed conflict (S/2011/250). In 15 of the 22 situations
covered in the report, we found evidence of attacks on
schools and hospitals. During my visits to conflict
areas, I have personally seen the devastation — schools
completely destroyed, bombed or burnt to the ground. I
have also seen schools with broken window panes and
empty classrooms where children have been recruited

4

as child soldiers. I have met girls whose colleagues
stay away from school because, as female students,
they may be the victims of acid attacks.
These images stay in my mind and remind me of
how important it is to ensure that schools are zones of
peace for children. Half of all the children who do not
go to primary school in the world live in conflict areas.
They do not go to school because their schools have
become part of the tragedy of conflict. Schools are
increasingly under physical attack, resulting in either
full or partial destruction, oftentimes in violation of
international humanitarian law. Schools are also closed
as a result of threats and intimidation. Teachers and
students are also killed and maimed in targeted attacks.
Military use of schools is also a concern, as such use
can put children in clear danger. To deprive children of
an education is to destroy their future. A future
destroyed — a future without hope — will only sow
the seeds of further conflict.
Hospitals are also vital to children, especially in
war. Attacks on hospitals are two-fold atrocities; not
only do they kill and wound girls and boys, but they
also leave them without access to treatment. Attacks on
hospitals and hospital personnel deprive the
community of a much-needed lifeline. In fact,
protecting hospitals and its personnel was the founding
element of modern humanitarian law.
The Secretary-General has repeatedly called for
strengthened attention to and focus on the need to
protect schools and hospitals from attack. Germany’s
initiative to bring today’s resolution 1998 (2011)
forward demonstrates the Council’s resolve to expand
the protection of girls and boys. The resolution
provides for the listing of parties who attack schools
and hospitals and those who use intimidation to force
their closure. It also reaffirms the need for the
enhanced monitoring and reporting of incidents where
there are violations that deprive children of their right
to go to school or be treated in hospitals. The
resolution gives concrete impetus for action on the
ground to protect these facilities.
The promise of the resolution is very real. I know
this because we have achieved so much since the
adoption of resolution 1612 (2005). What I would like
to highlight today are a few successes we have had,
and thereby to thank the Council for being steadfast
and committed to children.

11-41067

S/PV.6581

First, in February this year, the Afghan
Government signed an action plan for the prevention of
underage recruitment into the Afghan security forces,
including the police. The United Nations country task
force on children and armed conflict, with access to
military and police installations, has sent to my Office
progress reports about the effective implementation of
the plan. Further, the Ulema Shura, the highest
religious body, has proclaimed a fatwa on violations
committed against children in conflict.
Secondly, last year in Nepal, 2,973 minors were
discharged. Despite a few concerns about reintegration,
the United Nations country team has risen to the
challenge, offering programmes and following up on
the children once they returned to the community.
Thirdly, in the Philippines in January 2010, the
Moro Islamic Liberation Front (MILF) signed an action
plan with the United Nations with the full support of
the Government. Further, MILF issued a supplemental
general order warning its commanders of sanctions for
recruiting and using children and created child
protection units. Children are now being registered and
released, and UNICEF and the International Labour
Organization (ILO) have stepped up their presence to
provide these children with education and vocational
skills.
Fourthly, in the Central African Republic during
the course of 2010, 525 children were separated from
the ranks of the Armée populaire pour la restauration
de la démocratie following the commitment made by
their commander during my visit to the Central African
Republic a few years ago.
Fifthly, in Sri Lanka, 562 children, including 201
identified at the end of the conflict as formerly
associated with armed groups, were released after one
year of rehabilitation. They were reunited with their
families by a magistrate’s order. This was done in close
cooperation with UNICEF and my Special Envoy.
Lastly, I also visited Chad in June to witness the
action plan signed between the Government of Chad
and the United Nations for the release of children.
Again, they have given the United Nations access to
military installations and have requested our assistance
in the reintegration of the children into the community.
Moving forward, I am hopeful that I will be able to
witness the signing of an action plan with the
Government of Myanmar, which acknowledges the key

11-41067

role of the country task force, including UNICEF and
ILO, in the coming months.
Yet, great challenges remain. Persistent violators
of children are on the list of the Secretary-General with
little action taken against them. Their impunity remains
a blot on justice systems, both national and
international. In time, the Council must deal with this
issue in a comprehensive manner and find ways and
means of dealing with perpetrators. As a testimony to
that, a list of persistent violators is attached to my
statement. The reintegration of children often left at the
doorstep of UNICEF and its partners also requires the
commitment of resources and personnel.
While we work with these issues of
accountability, we must also attempt to understand the
root causes of violations against children. Without
prevention and understanding, long-term solutions will
not be sustainable.
In 1999, the Council began a journey of great
promise. There have been important landmarks along
the way, including the Council’s demand for clear
monitoring of violations, the proper implementation of
action plans and accountability. Governments and
non-State actors have begun to respond to the
Council’s call for action. When I meet them in the field
they display great respect for the power and authority
of the Security Council. In addition, the Council’s
commitment has real and positive effects on the lives
of thousands of children. As Council members have
just heard from the Secretary-General, only last year
10,000 children were released from armed forces and
groups and reintegrated into their communities. Today,
at this open debate, I bring the Council their message
of thanks.
When I was in Chad recently, I met with many
children in a refugee camp. One girl grabbed my hand,
curled her fingers around my wrist and whispered,
“Madame, I want to go to school.” Today, with the
Council’s adoption of resolution 1998 (2011), we have
acknowledged the importance of schools and education
to children all over the world, especially in conflict
areas. We hope it will usher in an era where children
can study, play and learn in an atmosphere of safety
and dignity.
The President: I thank Ms. Coomaraswamy for
her briefing.
I now give the floor to Mr. Anthony Lake.

5

S/PV.6581

Mr. Lake: On behalf of UNICEF and the children
whom all of us here serve, I thank the Council for
convening this debate on a subject of urgency, and
especially for adopting this important resolution
(resolution 1998 (2011)) this morning.
A few months ago, I met a 16-year-old boy in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo. “Years earlier”, he
told me, “they came to my village and took me away
and, from that day on, I was a soldier”. That was
literally true. But looked at another way, on that day he
lost his childhood. His childhood was taken from him
at the point of a gun.
On the same visit, I met a young girl who had
lived through the horror of rape by an armed soldier.
She, too, was violently robbed of her childhood, and of
so much more. As we have heard today, and as the
Secretary-General’s report (S/2011/250) describes in
grim detail, their stories are painfully repeated in
conflict areas around the world. Millions of children
bear the brunt of war. They are killed, maimed,
orphaned, forced to flee their homes, sexually
assaulted, pressed into the service of armed groups and
exposed to unspeakable violence. Those horrific acts
are not only violations of international and
humanitarian law; they are violations of our common
humanity. Today, the Council has affirmed that attacks
on schools and hospitals are attacks on children and
must be treated as such, for these grave violations are
alarmingly common.
As has been described, schools have been burned
and bombed, classrooms used to billet soldiers and
schoolyards used to bury the dead. Unexploded
ammunition and mines litter playgrounds, threatening
life and limb. Hospitals have been looted and
immunization campaigns interrupted. Children have
been taken, literally, from their classrooms to the
battlefield.
The human costs of these attacks are beyond
statistical calculation. The economic costs are also very
high, forcing communities to rebuild schools and
replace stolen supplies and equipment when conflicts
come to an end — a cost that most can little afford, few
budgets provide for and humanitarian aid rarely covers.
The costs to society are also staggering. As Radhika
Coomaraswamy just noted, almost one half of all
children out of primary school in the world today live
in conflict areas in countries that are often among the
world’s poorest places. Those same children are less

6

likely to see a doctor or visit a health clinic and are
more likely to be deprived of their most basic needs.
The great educator Maria Montessori once said
that education is the most effective way of opposing
war. It is also an indispensable foundation for peace
and prosperity. And it is at the very heart of equity. In
times of peace, education gives disadvantaged children
the chance to break the cycle of poverty and to
contribute to their societies. It is no different in times
of war, and may be even more important then.
Schools restore a sense of normalcy and teach
children the skills they need to survive and thrive,
helping them rise above the horrors that they have
witnessed. Without those skills, they are more
vulnerable to violence. And so the vicious circle of
poverty, despair and conflict continues. We must not
fail these children. It is up to all of us to take action to
protect the schools where they learn and the hospitals
where they heal. To do so is to protect their individual
futures and the futures of their societies.
We are making progress in meeting this challenge
thanks to the commitment of the Secretary-General, the
strong resolve of the Council and the ceaseless efforts
of so many. In particular, all of us owe so much to the
tireless and admirable work of the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, Radhika
Coomaraswamy, as well as to Ambassador Peter Wittig
and the Security Council Working Group on Children
and Armed Conflict and, increasingly, the Department
of Peacekeeping Operations (DPKO) as more children
are swept up in violent conflicts.
Today, the Council has acted on that progress and
is building upon it. Adding attacks on schools and
hospitals as a trigger for listing parties in the
Secretary-General’s annual report will heighten
awareness of these grave violations and the terrible
impact they have on the lives of children. We hope that
this will spur Governments and groups to do more to
prevent attacks on schools and hospitals through
defining concrete plans to end those violations. If they
do not, creating clearer links to sanctions committees
will strengthen the Council’s ability to take action.
Impunity is as intolerable in a civilized society as
justice is indispensable.
Our purpose today is one of principle, but it must
also be one of practicality. Monitoring, reporting and
listing alone are not enough. Sanctions alone are not
silver bullets. While denunciation gives expression to

11-41067

S/PV.6581

the outrage we all feel, it alone will not move
Governments. Those are necessary conditions, but
insufficient to achieve lasting change. To do that, we
must also find practical new ways to prevent these acts
from occurring. Action plans are an important part of
this. The United Nations should have access to all
Governments and groups that want to pursue them.
Furthermore, today’s resolution should lead to
necessary discussion on the military use of schools and
hospitals, thus encouraging more Governments to
follow the lead of Nepal and the Philippines in
protecting schools as zones of peace.
Finally, even as we strengthen the legal
framework to increase our response to these abuses, we
must never lose sight of the children who have been
abused and those who are at risk. Too often, I believe,
we refer to the children caught in conflict simply as
victims to be pitied. But as so many of us have seen,
they are remarkably and poignantly resilient, and brave
beyond imagining. They deserve our admiration,
perhaps even our awe. They have hopes and dreams
like children everywhere, even when virtually
everything has been taken from them. They do not need
our pity. They need practical support and programmes
designed to help them make the most of their potential
and a positive contribution to their societies.
The young boy whom I met in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo had returned to his life as a
soldier twice and then been released. He continues to
be at risk of recruitment because he lacks the skills and
resources to withstand it. He intends to find another
community in which to live and he is receiving more
training for civilian life. But his future is very
uncertain.
On the same trip, I met another young man who
was kidnapped at the age of 11 and forced to fight for
years before he escaped. Fortunately, he found a way to
use his training. Today he operates a carpentry shop, is
married and has a child of his own. I will never forget
his pride as he told me that he had made the chair I was
sitting on, or the hope his example has inspired in
others at the training centre where he was trained, who
now go to visit him as a symbol of their hope for the
future.
In 2009 we commemorated the twentieth
anniversary of the Convention on the Rights of the
Child, and it has been more than a decade since the
adoption of the Optional Protocols, which ban some of

11-41067

the worst forms of exploitation and abuse against
children. I urge those Member States that have not
done so to sign, ratify and implement those
indispensable instruments.
Let us never forget, however, that human rights
are not an end in themselves. The lives of people, of
children, are our purpose. Rights are a context for
upholding human dignity and for creating the
conditions for human progress. It is the practical steps
we take to protect these rights — and the impact of our
actions — that can change the world. Today, we are
taking another step forward, and I cannot thank the
Council enough for its commitment to children affected
by armed conflict and for making this critical issue a
priority.
The President: I thank Mr. Lake for his briefing.
In accordance with the understanding reached
among Council members, I wish to remind all speakers
to limit their statements to no more than four minutes
in order to enable the Council to carry out its work
expeditiously. Delegations with lengthy statements are
kindly requested to circulate the texts in writing and to
deliver a condensed version when speaking in the
Chamber.
I will now give the floor to the representatives of
the Security Council.
Ms. Holguin Cuéllar (Colombia) (spoke in
Spanish): At the outset I would like to thank
Ms. Radhika Coomaraswamy for her briefing and
report and Mr. Anthony Lake, Executive Director of
UNICEF.
It is a pleasure for my delegation to join the
Council in this important debate. We are grateful for
the opportunity to share with the Member States of the
United Nations our vision of this problem, which we
know close up. Therefore we believe we can contribute
to a better understanding of this matter, given our
experience and the measures we have undertaken. We
know that the decisions the Council makes, if focused
correctly, have an effect on the solutions that States are
able to provide.
The welfare of children affected by conflict must
be the central motivation that brings us together to find
definitive solutions. Policies of prevention and
cooperation undoubtedly are more effective than
finger-pointing and excluding Governments from the

7

S/PV.6581

debate, from the exchange of information and from the
search for solutions.

talk to those groups directly and without the consent of
Governments is inadmissible and unacceptable.

Since resolution 1612 (2005) of July 2005, it has
been recognized that the monitoring and reporting
mechanism must operate with the participation of and
in cooperation with national Governments and relevant
United Nations and civil society actors. In this
instance, the Council has once more reiterated the
primary role of Governments in the protection and
rehabilitation of children and has reaffirmed that all
actions undertaken by United Nations entities must be
designed to support and supplement the efforts of
national Governments.

Colombia is a State where the rule of law
prevails, a solid democracy where we fight to have a
peaceful country, and to spare our population the
nightmare of illegal armed groups financed by drug
trafficking. I reiterate this point today because this year
it was discussed by the Group of Experts.

What has happened in recent years is that the
Governments of affected countries have been excluded
from the debate and the working mechanisms. This
trend takes us farther away from definitive solutions
with regard to the protection of affected children,
because it is Governments that must take corrective
actions. In this context, we would like to underline
that, as stated in the Secretary-General’s report
(S/2011/250), the results so far obtained are the
product of actions by Governments, peace processes or
the end of conflicts.
Resolution 1612 (2005) indicates that the
monitoring and reporting mechanism must support and
complement the capacity of national Governments for
the protection and rehabilitation of children. Since
2005, when the mechanism was created, there has not
been much progress towards solutions, but there has
been an increase in blaming. We believe that
strengthening each country’s capacities — an
fundamental principle of the United Nations response
to this problem — has been insufficient. The United
Nations must go further than denouncing; it must use
its experience, working more decisively with States in
the search for solutions.
Allow me to speak in a blunt and realistic way. It
is entirely naive to think that the United Nations or any
other multilateral organization can change the minds of
terrorist organizations that for decades have struck fear
in civilian populations, that profit from illicit activities,
that utilize terror as a modus operandi, that use
children as their tools to those ends and that have
always ignored national and international norms. For
that reason Colombia believes that the stated intention
of agencies of the United Nations system to attempt to

8

We are convinced that we would have more
results if the United Nations realized that it could
strengthen the goal of protecting children affected by
recruitment if it maintained its commitment to national
Governments. That commitment is fulfilled through the
cooperation and participation of the Governments. In
this context, we do not share the generalities of these
resolutions, since every situation is different and
particular. Developing lists creates difficulties and
complicates the search for solutions for each country.
We stated this in 2005, and time and the state of this
debate today have proven us right. Progress is made
through concrete projects fitted to the realities of each
society and each situation.
Without a doubt, changing the focus to emphasize
cooperation and dialogue among the Members of this
Organization, working in countries in a way that
respects the guiding principles of the United Nations,
and turning Governments into allies in the promotion
and protection of the rights of children affected by this
plague is the way to achieve results and to have no
more children deprived of freedom. We hope for
greater understanding that we, the Member States and
the United Nations, can work together on the same
path. Only in this way will their work be strengthened.
Colombia has implemented a prevention plan. We
have always believed that prevention should guide the
actions of the Council and the United Nations.
Unfortunately, neither this resolution nor the other ones
on the matter have considered prevention as a strategy
in its central policies, missing the opportunity to carry
out actions so that children may truly have a different
life with opportunities and a future.
For many years we have been promoting the issue
of the rights of children in local and regional policies.
We receive our greatest support from the International
Organization for Migration, to whom we extend once
again our gratitude for the way in which it has, over the
years, made the effort to work on this issue with our
Government. That is why we have proposed to the

11-41067

S/PV.6581

United Nations system that it work under one single
plan in a comprehensive manner and to focus on 29
municipalities that are especially vulnerable to
recruitment by illegal armed groups. I appreciate the
support of Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon, whose
help has been essential to getting the system in
Colombia to commit to carrying out this project. In the
coming months, several projects will be running with a
social, educational, recreational and training focus to
provide opportunities for children and young people in
at-risk areas.
With that in mind, and considering the best way
to attain results, we propose that a serious and
unpoliticized
evaluation
of
the
effect
and
implementation of the resolutions on this matter be
carried out. Such an evaluation must include a review
of the mechanism in order to assess its effectiveness.
We consider a review imperative, because we have
been discussing this issue for a decade with few
results. Colombia, whose children have been the
victims of these practices and who has combated them
for many years, considers that an in-depth reflection
concerning this painful subject is in order.
Mr. Alkalaj (Bosnia and Herzegovina): At the
outset, I would like to express my appreciation to you,
Minister Westerwelle, for presiding over this important
debate. Bosnia and Herzegovina welcomes and
commends the efforts of your country as Chair of the
Security Council Working Group on Children and
Armed Conflict. Our thanks also go to SecretaryGeneral Ban Ki-moon for his statement and to Special
Representative of the Secretary-General Ms. Radhika
Coomaraswamy, and Mr. Anthony Lake, Executive
Director of UNICEF, for their comprehensive
briefings.
Bosnia and Herzegovina attaches the utmost
importance to the protection of children affected by
armed conflict, and strongly condemns all violations of
international law committed against children in conflict
situations, including recruitment, killing, maiming,
rape and other sexual violence, attacks on schools and
hospitals, and denial of humanitarian access. We wish
to emphasize the primary responsibility of States to
respect and assure the human rights of all individuals
within their territory and subject to their jurisdiction,
as provided for by relevant international law. In
addition, we stress that the Convention on the Rights of
the Child and its Optional Protocol on the involvement
of children in armed conflict, as well as the Geneva

11-41067

Conventions and their Additional Protocols, constitute
the standard in the promotion and protection of the
rights of the child in armed conflict.
However, bearing in mind that all parties to
armed conflict should comply strictly with
international obligations, we are deeply concerned over
the continued violation, with impunity, of the relevant
provisions of international law relating to the rights
and protection of children in armed conflict. All
available tools should be used to end impunity for
violations committed against children. The perpetrators
must be brought to justice and held accountable. This
will send a clear signal that violations and abuses
against children in situations of armed conflict will not
be tolerated and will not go unpunished.
In particular, more vigorous and targeted
measures against persistent offenders must be applied
when appropriate. We call on the Special
Representative for Children and Armed Conflict to
continue the established practice of briefing the
sanctions committees and, in particular, providing concrete
recommendations from the Secretary-General’s reports and
from the conclusions of the Working Group on Children
and Armed Conflict for country-specific situations.
We are also confident that resolutions 1882
(2009) and 1960 (2010) have contributed to
establishing practical means to bridge the difficulty of
collecting, systematizing and verifying information on
sexual violence in conflict situations, while retaining
the separate focus of each mandate. In that regard, we
also fully support the cooperation between the Special
Representatives for Children and Armed Conflict and
for Sexual Violence in Conflict regarding parties
responsible for rape and sexual violence. We also
support and emphasize the importance of the work of
the Security Council Working Group on Children and
Armed Conflicts.
While we welcome the report of the SecretaryGeneral (S/2011/250), we call on all parties listed in its
annexes to respect their obligations under international
humanitarian and human rights law, to halt violations,
to enter into dialogue with the United Nations, and to
commit to preparing and implementing time-bound
action plans. That dialogue needs to be facilitated in
close cooperation and with the consent of the host
Government. In the same vein, preparation and
implementation of time-bound action plans should be
carried out and coordinated efficiently with all relevant

9

S/PV.6581

actors in the field, including the host Government,
United Nations entities, civil society organizations and
donors. It is essential that such efforts be provided with
proper resources and funding in the countries where
monitoring and reporting mechanisms are being
implemented.
Bosnia and Herzegovina is encouraged that a
number of parties have signed action plans with the
United Nations aimed at ending the recruitment and
use of children in conflicts. We also welcome the
development of guidance on resolution 1882 (2009)
and subsequent action plans. Furthermore, we wish to
stress that effective reintegration programmes for
children recruited by armed forces are a critical
element in sustainable peace and security, and, more
importantly, in ensuring the welfare of those children.
Last year, Bosnia and Herzegovina was one of the
main sponsors of General Assembly resolution 64/290,
entitled “The right to education in emergency
situations”. We would like to recall that the
resolution — which emphasizes that all possible
measures must be taken to ensure the right to education
in all phases of emergency situations, and calls for the
criminalization under domestic laws of attacks on
schools — was adopted in the General Assembly by
consensus. We are deeply concerned about the number
of attacks, as well as of threatened attacks and closures
of schools and hospitals in situations of armed conflict,
and about military use of schools and hospitals
contrary to international humanitarian law. We are
convinced that effectively addressing issues related to
attacks on schools and hospitals will ensure that
children are not denied their right to education during
or after a conflict.
In addition, I would like to discuss some elements
and facts derived from Bosnia and Herzegovina’s
experience, reminding the Council that among the
more than 10,000 people who were killed in the
besieged city of Sarajevo were 1,500 children, as well
as many other children throughout Bosnia and
Herzegovina. They were innocent children who will
never attend school or play again. Related to that was
the reburial yesterday, on the sixteenth anniversary of
the genocide in Srebrenica, of an 11-year-old boy,
Nesib Muhić, and his 15-year-old brother Hasib, who
were among the 613 newly identified bodies. And they
were not the only ones. Let us, from this Chamber,
send a strong message that such crimes against

10

children will be firmly condemned and punished, and
will not be tolerated.
We therefore firmly believe that the Security
Council should remain committed to protecting
children in armed conflict, including through
determination to ensure the full implementation of and
respect for its resolutions on this issue. Bosnia and
Herzegovina stands ready to contribute to that aim.
Mr. Radebe (South Africa): We would like to
take this opportunity, Mr. President, to thank you for
presiding over today’s meeting and your delegation for
having organized this important debate. We thank
Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon; Ms. Radhika
Coomaraswamy, Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for Children and Armed Conflict;
and Mr. Anthony Lake, Executive Director of UNICEF,
for their respective briefings. We also welcome
resolution 1998 (2011), which has just been adopted.
South Africa remains deeply concerned about the
plight of children in armed conflict. Children involved
in armed conflict are deprived of the opportunity to
grow up in an environment where they can realize their
full potential. South Africa is particularly concerned
that thousands of children continue to bear arms as
soldiers and that many also suffer as victims in armed
conflict. We thus remain steadfast in our firm
commitment to eradicating the recruitment and use of
children in armed conflict.
Significant progress has been made since the
compilation by Graça Machel in 1996 of the first
United Nations report on children affected by armed
conflict (A/51/306). South Africa is pleased that the
issue of children and armed conflict continues to
receive the attention it deserves on the agenda of the
United Nations in general and the Security Council in
particular. We are encouraged that the Council has
identified six grave violations committed against
children in armed conflict. Our country believes that
each should be given equal weight and attention by the
Council.
In that regard, we welcome the expansion of the
trigger mechanism for punitive measures against those
committing recurrent attacks on schools and hospitals.
We are concerned about the emerging trend of such
attacks. We call on all parties involved in conflict to
abide by international humanitarian law and to refrain
from attacks against civilian targets, particularly those
where children might be present.

11-41067

S/PV.6581

South Africa is concerned that, despite the
positive efforts of the international community to
address the challenges faced by children in armed
conflict, parties continue to commit violations against
children. In the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
Palestine, Afghanistan and elsewhere, children
continue to be casualties of war and their rights
continue to be violated. We are also concerned that a
substantial number of countries and situations where
children are involved in armed conflict are on the
African continent. We welcome the improvement of the
conditions of children involved in armed conflict in
some areas, such as in Burundi. We call on parties that
remain on the list to follow the example of those States
and entities that have adopted specific action plans to
improve the situation. South Africa is deeply
concerned about recently reported additional violations
in emerging conflicts, such as in Côte d’Ivoire and
Libya. We call upon affected Governments, with the
assistance of civil society and the international donor
community, to develop and implement concrete plans
to address the challenge of children affected by armed
conflict. The international donor community should
continue to provide long-term and sustainable
assistance to facilitate such programmes.
On our part, South Africa has ratified the
Optional Protocol to the Convention on the Rights of
the Child on the involvement of children in armed
conflict. The Optional Protocol sets the minimum age
for direct participation in hostilities, for recruitment
into armed groups and for compulsory recruitment by
Governments at 18 years. Furthermore, our national
children’s act and national defence force policy are in
line with the Optional Protocol, in that they define the
age of majority as 18 years, which is also in line with
the South African Constitution. The children’s act
recognizes the need for special care and protection
from harm, abuse and neglect of children. It gives
effect to South Africa’s commitments in line with the
Convention on the Rights of the Child.
It is vital that we do not forget the long-term
needs of children who have been affected by armed
conflict. South Africa therefore underscores the
importance of adopting a broad strategy with regard to
conflict prevention, which should address the root
causes of armed conflict in a comprehensive manner
and create a conducive environment for the protection
and promotion of children’s rights.

11-41067

South Africa welcomes the unwavering
commitment of the Office of the Special
Representative and of UNICEF in the implementation
of the monitoring and reporting mechanism, which will
go a long way in addressing the recruitment and use of
children and other violations committed in armed
conflict. We encourage them to work within their
respective mandates and in an integrated manner with
other key stakeholders, including the Department of
Peacekeeping Operations, concerned Member States
and non-governmental organizations, to ensure
coherence in addressing this scourge.
We also commend the work of the Security
Council Working Group, especially its role to review
progress in the development and implementation of
time-bound action plans by parties to conflict to halt
the recruitment and use of children, which are
violations of international obligations.
In conclusion, South Africa would like to express
our continued commitment to working with Council
members and the international community to ensure
that the protection of children remains our main
priority.
Ms. Rice (United States of America): We are
grateful to you, Mr. President, as well as to
Ambassador Wittig and the German Mission, for
hosting this important debate and for your leadership
as Chair of the Security Council Working Group. We
also very much appreciate the important statements by
the
Secretary-General,
Special
Representative
Coomaraswamy and UNICEF Executive Director Tony
Lake.
Abuses against children in armed conflicts do not
just tear at our hearts, they also rip the fabric of our
societies, undermine our shared security and challenge
us all to do far more to bring these outrages to an end.
The toll never ceases to shock. According to a recent
UNESCO report, between 1998 and 2008 an estimated
2 million children were killed in conflicts and 6 million
were left disabled. Approximately 300,000 children are
reportedly being exploited as soldiers. Let there be no
doubt: we are failing the world’s children so long as so
many continue to suffer such brutality and abuse.
This is not to diminish the work that has already
been done to assist children in armed conflicts around
the world. Since 2004, the United Nations has signed
15 action plans in nine conflict zones, and concluded
five of them. The Special Representative and United

11

S/PV.6581

Nations agencies in the field have had a measurable
impact on the ground. One of the brightest spots in the
Secretary-General’s otherwise depressing report
(S/2011/250) is the number of child soldiers who have
been released. An estimated 6,300 children were
released from such servitude this year in the Sudan,
Nepal, Chad, the Central African Republic, the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, Burma and Sri
Lanka. We have increased the spotlight on grave
abuses. We have built up our information-gathering
capacity, including comprehensive reports by the
Secretary-General. We have listed serious perpetrators
and frankly examined individual country situations.
All those steps by the Working Group help to
keep such abuses squarely on the international agenda
and to bring them to the urgent attention of national
authorities. But, as we all know, a great deal more
needs to be done. For instance, I have just returned
from witnessing the birth of the Republic of South
Sudan. Some progress has been made throughout the
Sudan, notably the release over the past year of almost
1,200 children from the terror of armed groups. The
United Nations has concluded action plans and signed
memorandums of understanding with several groups in
the Sudan. But the abuses persist, including by the
Lord’s Resistance Army and others. The Government
of the Sudan and the Sudanese Armed Forces have not
yet signed and implemented an action plan. Separately,
we urge the former Sudan People’s Liberation
Movement to continue to implement its now-expired
2009 action plan, as well as to sign a formal extension
of that plan.
In Burma there are still child soldiers within the
ranks of Government forces and armed groups. The
Government of Burma has committed to stop the
recruitment and use of child soldiers and to develop an
action plan with the United Nations. We urge it to do
so as soon as possible and to draw from the expertise
of relevant agencies, such as the International Labour
Organization and UNICEF.
We are deeply troubled as well by the situation in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo. Half a dozen
groups from that country are listed in annex I of the
report of the Secretary-General. The Government of
the Democratic Republic of the Congo has failed to
engage meaningfully with the United Nations to end
abuses against children committed by its armed forces.
As a result, child recruitment has risen in some areas.
The Government of the Democratic Republic of the

12

Congo should move immediately to remedy those
alarming violations, including by finalizing and signing
a long-overdue action plan with the United Nations.
This year’s report also documents another
appalling trend, namely, increased attacks on schools
and hospitals, in particular in Afghanistan, Côte
d’Ivoire, the Democratic Republic of the Congo, Iraq,
Burma, Pakistan, Yemen and the Philippines. In Côte
d’Ivoire alone, according to UNICEF, 224 schools
were attacked during the post-election crisis, disrupting
the education of some 65,000 children. The report of
the Secretary-General documents such attacks. With
today’s resolution (resolution 1998 (2011)), the
Secretary-General will have the mandate to name and
shame those who perpetrate such attacks on a recurrent
basis.
Overall, we remain deeply concerned that
persistent perpetrators continue their violations against
children with impunity. Sixteen parties to armed
conflict listed in the annexes to the Secretary-General’s
report have been listed for five years or more. That is
plainly unacceptable. Thus, the United States urged the
inclusion in today’s resolution of the Council’s timebound commitment to consider a broad range of
options to increase pressure on persistent perpetrators.
The Council’s unanimous support for that commitment
is an important step towards holding egregious
violators accountable for their actions.
Today, let us rededicate ourselves to working
towards a world in which all children have the security,
opportunity and hope that we seek for our own sons
and daughters.
Mr. Brites Pereira (Portugal): I would like to
begin by thanking you, Mr. President, for convening
this open debate on children and armed conflict, an
issue to which Portugal attaches great importance. I
also wish to welcome and thank Ms. Radhika
Coomaraswamy, Special Representative of the
Secretary-General on Children and Armed Conflict,
and Mr. Anthony Lake, Executive Director of UNICEF,
for their briefings. I also take this opportunity to
commend their work and efforts to ensure the
protection of children in situations of armed conflict.
Let me start by reaffirm Portugal’s strong
commitment to the promotion and protection of human
rights and the safeguarding of international
humanitarian law. The protection of civilians in armed

11-41067

S/PV.6581

conflict has been one of the priorities of our action as
an elected member of the Council.
Back in 1998, during our last tenure in the
Council, we promoted the first debate held here on the
issue of children and armed conflict (see S/PV.3896).
We were already convinced then, as we are today, that
this issue has serious implications for international
peace and security. To protect children in armed
conflict requires the commitment of the international
community as a whole. Portugal is fully committed to
this objective.
Since then, the Council has made significant
progress and established, step by step, a strong
normative framework and mechanism to monitor,
report and respond to grave violations against children.
The resolution that we have adopted today (resolution
1998 (2011)) expands the causes for listing parties in
the annexes of the reports of the Secretary-General to
include attacks on schools and hospitals, as well as
attacks and threats of attacks against schoolchildren
and educational and medical personnel. That will
enable the Security Council to act in a consistent and
timely manner to further enhance the protection of
children and their access to education and health
services.
The inadequate provision of education and health
to children in situations of armed conflict is a serious
problem that will have consequences for the long-term
development of the countries concerned. According to
UNESCO, 28 million children are denied their right to
education because of armed conflict. This situation is
totally unacceptable and it needs to be urgently
redressed.
In that regard, my county has regularly
introduced a draft resolution at the Commission on
Human Rights and at the Human Rights Council on the
realization of the right to education, which was at the
origin of the mandate of the Special Rapporteur on the
right to education. This resolution, as well as the
resolution on education in emergency situations
adopted last year in the General Assembly, which my
country co-sponsored (resolution 64/290), is a step in
the right direction that will guarantee not only a
fundamental human right but also an important tool in
the fulfilment of other basic rights.
In this context, let me say a word of appreciation
for the important work carried out by civil society in
terms of increasing the protection of children’s rights,

11-41067

which has significantly helped to pave the way for the
work of the Security Council in this very important
area.
During the past few years, the Security Council
has consistently strengthened accountability for
persistent perpetrators of grave violations against
children. In the near future, we hope to see all such
violations given equal treatment, including the
abduction of children and denial of humanitarian
access.
This normative framework for the protection of
children in situations of armed conflict must furthered.
Portugal believes that the Council must continue to
address certain situations of concern while striving to
find the best way to promote the protection of children
affected by armed conflict. In that regard, action plans
are an excellent tool for engaging armed forces and
organized armed groups. But we must bear in mind that
such plans might not be as efficient in cases involving
militias or other non-State armed groups that do not
have a firm command structure.
Furthermore, many conflicts have a cross-border
impact. That perspective might be lost when adopting a
country-by-country approach. Parties like the Lord’s
Resistance Army act with complete disregard for
borders. Children are abducted in one country and
taken to another, and sometimes to a third. In that
regard, we welcome the ongoing coordination efforts
by the Department of Peacekeeping Operations,
UNICEF and the Office of the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General. But we believe that more
needs to be done in terms of coordination to address
cross-border child protection concerns.
The ability to impose targeted measures on
persistent perpetrators of grave violations against
children is an important tool available to the Security
Council in this area. We strongly believe that, as they
are being renewed or established, the mandates of
existing sanctions committees should include child
protection criteria and expertise.
But Portugal also believes that the Council needs
to find a solution to consider targeted measures for
perpetrators of grave violations against children in
situations where a dedicated sanctions committee does
not exist. We welcome the discussion that will take
place in the Working Group on Children and Armed
Conflict on options to increase pressure on persistent

13

S/PV.6581

perpetrators of acts committed against children in
situations of armed conflict.
The advocacy and dedication of the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General and her Office
have been crucial in promoting this agenda. Let me
welcome the five field trips that she undertook since
the last debate (see S/PV.6341) and the commitments
reached in each and every place she visited. Portugal
supports the renewal of her mandate. That mandate has
helped to foster progress on the promotion and
protection of the rights of children.
Let me conclude by underlining that much has
been done since 1996, when Graça Machel’s report
(see A/51/306) on the impact of armed conflict on
children revealed the suffering of children in situations
of armed conflict throughout the world. This study is
clearly the foundation for the children in armed
conflict agenda, but each resolution adopted by the
Security Council has reinforced the children’s
protection framework. I hope that this open debate and
the resolution that we have just adopted will be useful
tools in assisting the work of the Council and that of
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General in
the discharge of her mandate.
The harmful and widespread impact of armed
conflict on children and its long-term consequences for
durable peace, security and development are nowadays
widely recognized. As Graça Machel said in 1996, the
impact of armed conflict on children must be
everyone’s responsibility. It still is.
Sir Mark Lyall Grant (United Kingdom): I
would like to join other speakers in thanking you,
Mr. President, for convening today’s debate. We
welcome the international attention that Germany has
brought to this issue, both in its role as President of the
Security Council and in its chairmanship of the
Working Group on Children and Armed Conflict. We
are grateful for the statement of commitment from the
Secretary-General this morning and for the briefings
from Ms. Radhika Coomaraswamy, his Special
Representative for Children and Armed Conflict, and
from Mr. Anthony Lake, Executive Director of
UNICEF. Let me express my particular appreciation for
the work of Ms. Coomaraswamy. We are very grateful
for her efforts to help children across the globe and for
the leadership that she has brought to this dossier.

14

I would like to focus on three topics — ambition,
practical action and the importance of addressing
attacks on education.
First, our ambitions for this agenda must remain
high. United Nations efforts to help children affected
by armed conflict can, in many situations, work and
work well. In the Sudan and Afghanistan, we look
forward to the implementation of new action plans to
release and reintegrate children recruited and caught up
in fighting.
We can highlight specific results, such as the
release of almost 3,000 children in Nepal in 2010 and
the reintegration of 191 children in Chad this year. But
there are also areas where progress has been much
slower. In the Democratic Republic of the Congo, we
need to generate far greater momentum to release child
soldiers, including those associated with the Forces
Armées de la République Démocratique du Congo. In
Burma, the United Nations needs to be granted greater
access to monitor and report on abuses against
children, particularly in areas of ethnic conflict.
In the five years following the adoption of
resolution 1379 (2001), two-thirds of the world’s child
population were living in the 42 countries most
affected by violence and conflict. In a series of
resolutions, Member States have demonstrated the
courage to tackle violations of children’s rights
globally. Resolution 1998 (2011), which we have
adopted today, marks another important step forward,
but it should not mark the end of our ambition.
Secondly, we should continue to focus our efforts
on
practical
action.
The
preparation
and
implementation of country action plans remain the
most effective tool for releasing children. It is here that
we should focus much of our effort. Of course, we
must carefully consider the context before deciding
which actions to take. No two countries are the same,
so the Working Group and country task forces must
constantly be searching for new and innovative
methods to make the maximum difference on the
ground. We welcome the increased use of field visits,
for example, which have been shown to be an effective
tool in informing the decisions of the Working Group
and bringing about increased local dialogue.
Thirdly, I welcome the focus of our new
resolution on addressing attacks on schools and
hospitals. Denying children access to education is in
itself a violation of their human rights; it also robs

11-41067

S/PV.6581

them of the ability to understand and claim their wider
rights. Safe schools can deliver life-saving advice in
conflict zones. Attending school can keep children
from more dangerous livelihoods. It can help prevent
conflict in the longer term by reducing youth
employment and ensuring that young people are not
disenfranchised from society. We hope that this
addition will strengthen our efforts to reduce attacks on
children and improve their lives.
United Nations action on children and armed
conflict works, and it works best when we are
practically, not institutionally or theoretically, focused.
That is why it is right to maintain and increase our
ambition, including by expanding children and armed
conflict work to cover the important topic of attacks on
education, as we have done today.
Mrs. Viotti (Brazil): I would like to congratulate
you, Sir, on convening this important debate. I thank
the Secretary-General for his remarks, and I am also
grateful to Ms. Radhika Coomaraswamy and to
Mr. Anthony Lake for their presentations today and for
their invaluable work on this important issue.
Shielding children from the horrors of conflict is
an important dimension of the Council’s efforts to
protect civilians, to break the cycle of conflict and to
establish sustainable peace. We welcome resolution
1998 (2011), adopted today, and its focus on
addressing attacks against schools and hospitals.
Education and health are basic human rights and
building blocks of peaceful societies. To attack them is
to attack the very notion of human dignity.
The Council has developed an important body of
norms on children and armed conflict that constitute
useful tools to protect civilians. They have led to
progress in curbing grave violations against children.
Nevertheless, much remains to be done to make our
work both more efficient and more effective. We
commend the German chairmanship of the Working
Group on Children and Armed Conflict and support a
continued reflection on how to better use the tools at
the Group’s disposal to protect children.
When dealing with situations of armed conflict,
respect for international humanitarian law must be our
core concern. It is neither necessary nor desirable for
the Council to create a new set of norms to discipline
the actions of parties in conflict. In cases where
international humanitarian law is being violated, the

11-41067

Council may decide that a more direct involvement is
necessary to protect the most vulnerable.
International humanitarian law is clear in regard
to attacks on schools and hospitals. Teachers, students,
patients and medical personnel are civilians and
therefore protected persons under international
humanitarian law. The Council has time and again
reiterated the responsibility of all parties to conflict to
protect civilians. We must avoid selectivity and be
consistent in our demands for strict observance of
international humanitarian law.
In cases outside the purview of the Council,
where there is no armed conflict, Member States
should support national and international mechanisms
to promote children’s rights. Where, in turn, there is an
armed conflict, the Council’s efforts to protect children
must be closely linked to its broader goal to maintain
international peace and security. The signing of action
plans and the release of child soldiers are very
important achievements, but our ultimate goal must be
to end the conflicts that have given rise to such
violations.
Sustainable peace is the best guarantee of lasting
protection. Brazil will continue to firmly support the
Council’s efforts both to ensure the protection of
children in armed conflict and to help lay the
foundations of long-term peace.
Mr. Pankin (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We are pleased to welcome you, Sir, the
Minister for Foreign Affairs of your country, to the
President’s chair at this Security Council meeting, and
thank our German colleagues for taking the initiative to
hold this meeting and for their very professional
chairmanship of the Council’s Working Group on
Children and Armed Conflict. We are grateful to the
Secretary-General, Mr. Ban Ki-moon; his Special
Representative for Children and Armed Conflict,
Mrs. Radhika Coomaraswamy; and the Executive
Director of UNICEF, Mr. Anthony Lake, for their
attention to the problem of protecting children in
armed conflict and for their useful information on the
state of affairs in this area.
Despite all the steps being undertaken at the
international and national levels and the existence of a
broad international legal basis, we note that children
continue to be one of the most vulnerable groups
suffering in armed conflicts. The Security Council,
within the framework of its mandate to promote

15

S/PV.6581

international peace and security, grants significant
attention to this issue. In this regard, we welcome the
adoption of resolution 1998 (2011) today, and hope that
its implementation will contribute to enhancing the
system for protecting children and international
cooperation in this area as a whole.
However, we would like to point out that the task
of protecting children is system-wide in nature, and it
is important that the work done in this area be well
coordinated. That will enhance its effectiveness and
prevent any duplication of efforts, because these
questions are also handled by the General Assembly,
the Human Rights Council and the Peacebuilding
Commission, within their respective mandates. There is
a clear need, therefore, to respect the existing system
of burden-sharing among the various United Nations
bodies, in accordance with the Charter and other
international legal instruments. Significant work is also
being undertaken in this area by several international
organizations within the United Nations system, in
particular UNICEF.
Resolution 1612 (2005) laid the basis for
protecting children during armed conflicts and the
post-conflict reconstruction process, including through
the monitoring and accountability mechanism and the
work of the Working Group on Children and Armed
Conflict. We believe that those instruments should
focus principally on the most severe and large-scale
armed conflicts on the agenda of the Security Council,
including situations where States agree to their case
being considered by the Working Group. In this
context, it is particularly important to establish close
cooperation, dialogue and trust, which should help to
improve the situation of children on the ground.
We have closely studied the report of the
Secretary-General (S/2011/250), and we note that it
contains a wealth of information. Nevertheless, we
must once again point out the doubtful reliability of
some of the evidence referred to in the report. Clearly,
a balanced assessment based on objective and reliable
information
will
guarantee
further
practical
implementation of the recommendations contained in
the report. We express our concern at the loose
interpretation of what is meant by “armed conflict” in
the report. This leads the report to include references to
situations of concern. In this context we would like to
point out that there is no justification for the references
in the report to India, Pakistan, Thailand, the

16

Philippines and Haiti. The situations in those countries
cannot be called armed conflicts.
The work on the report and on the draft resolution
has shown — as have the discussions — that many
countries have problems as to how the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General on Children
and Armed Conflict is actually implementing some
aspects of her mandate. We believe that the time has
now come for a broad discussion of this issue in order
to answer Governments’ concerns.
With regard to the recommendations in the report
of the Secretary-General, we support the idea of the
need to give equal attention to all six categories of
serious violations of children. Crimes against children
must not go unpunished.
It is also necessary to take long-term measures
for the rehabilitation of children who are affected by
conflicts and for their reintegration into society. It is
extremely important in this connection to establish the
right conditions for children to obtain uninterrupted
and complete education, and also to have access to
comprehensive health care.
Finally, it is important to consistently enhance the
mechanisms for bringing to justice those who are
guilty of violating the rights of children. I repeat,
impunity is not acceptable.
We strongly condemn the killing and maiming of
children, both during planned attacks and as a result of
indiscriminate or excessive use of force. Despite the
additional measures being taken to prevent this from
happening, including by international military
presence, they occur with tragic regularity. We believe
it is unacceptable to try to describe the victims among
civilian populations, particularly children, as collateral
damage. That contradicts the provisions of the Geneva
Convention. We advocate careful investigation of such
incidents and punishment for the guilty.
Nor is it acceptable that children should continue
to be detained in military prisons of international
forces without having access to the civil justice system.
We call on the Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral on Children and Armed Conflict to give
particular attention to this issue.
In conclusion, I would like to express again the
view that effective cooperation, including in the area of
protection of children, is impossible without
cooperation with the Governments of countries

11-41067

S/PV.6581

involved in conflicts or in the post-conflict
reconstruction stage. In that context we stress the
importance of cooperation between United Nations
missions and United Nations country teams with
non-State armed groups must take place only with the
agreement of the Governments involved in those
conflicts.
Mr. Salam (Lebanon): Allow me at the outset to
thank Minister Westerwelle for his presence here to
preside over this important meeting. I also wish to
thank
Secretary-General
Ban,
the
Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for Children
and Armed Conflict, Ms. Coomaraswamy, and the
Executive Director of UNICEF, Mr. Lake, for their
comprehensive briefings.
Confronted with the dehumanizing effect of
force, children are too often robbed of their childhood.
The front lines of conflict bring them face to face with
the absurd horrors of war and threaten their education,
health care and the most basic human right — the right
to life.
Though notable progress has been made at the
normative level and in some specific contexts, the
overall situation of children in armed conflicts remains
troubling, as outlined in the report of the SecretaryGeneral (S/2011/250). We condemn all indiscriminate
and disproportionate use of force against children, and
we call on all parties in situations of armed conflict to
strictly adhere to international humanitarian law.
Attacks against schools and hospitals are a
growing trend, as evidenced in the Secretary-General’s
report. Lebanon had first-hand experience of attacks on
its schools and hospitals during the last war waged by
Israel, in 2006. By introducing a new criterion —
attacks on hospitals and schools — for listing parties to
armed conflicts in the annexes of the SecretaryGeneral’s annual reports, the resolution before us
makes critical progress in the protection of children in
armed conflict. It sends a clear warning to perpetrators
about the serious consequences of committing such
violations.
Targeting schools also has far-reaching and
damaging repercussions on development. Indeed, the
World Bank, in its report on education in the Middle
East and North Africa, argued that the provision of
education, particularly for girls, is the single most
effective intervention that countries can make to

11-41067

improve human development and to tackle conditions
of fragility.
In a more comprehensive manner, we believe that
the six grave violations enumerated in resolution 1612
(2005) are of equal gravity and should be accorded the
same attention by the Working Group. These are:
killing and maiming of children, recruitment and use of
child soldiers, rape and other forms of sexual violence
against children, abduction of children, attacks against
schools or hospitals, and denial of humanitarian access
to children. We look forward to the day when the
criteria for listing in the annexes of the SecretaryGeneral’s report will be extended to all these six
violations.
Looking ahead, we wish to stress first that the
introduction of new listing criteria will require the
provision of accurate and verifiable information to the
Council — which will further strengthen the reporting
and monitoring mechanism already in place — in close
cooperation with the local authorities. Secondly, we
underscore the importance of a more effective followup to the implementation of the recommendations of
the Working Group and the Group’s swift response to
urgent situations in which children are affected on a
large scale. Thirdly, accountability relating to crimes
against children in armed conflicts remains the
exception. The United Nations could play a crucial role
in that respect through providing capacity-building and
coordinated support to fragile States in the field of the
rule of law.
I wish to conclude by recognizing the role that
education can play in fostering the value of peace,
tolerance and inclusiveness as the most effective way
to prevent conflict, protect children and heal them of
the traumas of war.
Mr. Araud (France) (spoke in French): I align
myself with the statement to be made on behalf of the
European Union.
I wish to thank the Minister for Foreign Affairs of
Germany for his initiative to convene the Security
Council to consider the issue of children and armed
conflict.
This morning the Council is showing that it is
determined to ensure respect for the right to education
and health in armed conflict. Attacks against schools
and hospitals and their staff are prohibited under
international humanitarian law. During conflicts they

17

S/PV.6581

destroy infrastructure and wipe out the elite that are
vital for any country. Following conflicts such attacks
have a lasting impact on the country’s reconstruction.
The Security Council is today sending a clear
message to parties to conflicts who commit such
attacks by deciding to act on the basis of information
provided by the Secretariat. That is significant
progress. It responds, first, to the increase in attacks
against schools and hospitals and their staff that have
been seen on the ground, as has been demonstrated by
the situations in Afghanistan, Pakistan and Syria. But it
is also a response to the awareness among the
international community that has followed the
presentation of the UNESCO report, The Hidden
Crisis: armed conflict and education, which showed
that 28 million children were deprived of basic
education in countries in conflict. That report also
evidenced the contribution made by the World Health
Organization.
In the absence of progress, we must not hesitate
to implement robust and targeted sanctions. The
Security Council’s Working Group on Children and
Armed Conflict is to consider this issue in order to
present specific recommendations to the Council
within a year. In the context of this exercise we
emphasize two aspects.
First is improving the overall coherence of the
sanctions systems architecture in order to enhance the
credibility of the Security Council’s actions.
Secondly, with respect to enhancing the links
between the Working Group and the international
criminal justice system, we welcome the contribution
made by the International Criminal Court to combating
impunity, as evidenced by the ongoing trial of Thomas
Lubanga on charges of war crimes. We call on civil
society and non-governmental organizations to
continue to provide material for consideration by
States.
We also pay tribute to the work of the SecretaryGeneral and of his Special Representative for Children
and Armed Conflict. We endorse the analysis and the
recommendations contained in the report of the
Secretary-General. We commend the personal
commitment of the Secretary-General to protecting
children in armed conflict as well as the work of his
Special Representative, Ms. Radhika Coomaraswamy.

18

We share the goal of the United Nations of
achieving a world without child soldiers within 25
years. That is an ambitious but realistic goal. It is
estimated that there are 250,000 child soldiers
worldwide, and UNICEF is contributing to the
reintegration of approximately 10,000 of them each
year. Major challenges remain in terms of addressing
the broad-ranging issues of sexual violence and the
killing and maiming of children. To facilitate the
implementation of resolution 1882 (2009), we call on
the Secretary-General to provide the necessary
resources to the monitoring and reporting mechanism
and for the dissemination of information, as well as to
take into account the cross-border aspect of certain
conflicts, as was done in the process of fighting against
the Lord’s Resistance Army.
We commend the signing of the action plans in
Afghanistan and in Chad, and we call on the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and Burma to
complete their own such plans, in coordination with the
United Nations.
With regard to the support provided by the
Secretariat to the Working Group of the Security
Council, we thank the Secretary-General for the
administrative support, and we look forward to the
continuation of country visits by the Working Group at
the current pace, following those to Nepal in 2010 and
to Afghanistan in 2011. We hope that such missions
will be financed as new measures under the regular
budget for 2012-2013, which will be adopted in the
fall.
Together with the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for Children and Armed Conflict,
UNICEF and our partners in the steering committee,
we will convene the fourth ministerial follow-up
Forum on the Paris Commitments and the Paris
Principles, to be held on the margins of the ministeriallevel meeting of the General Assembly in September.
Finally, I should like to pay tribute to the
Ambassador of Germany, Mr. Peter Wittig, for his
outstanding chairmanship of the Security Council
Working Group on Children and Armed Conflict.
Mrs. Ogwu (Nigeria): Let me convey Nigeria’s
profound appreciation to the German presidency of the
Security Council for having convened this timely
meeting on children and armed conflict. I commend
your personal leadership, Mr. President, in planning
and organizing this important meeting. Germany has

11-41067

S/PV.6581

not only demonstrated excellent leadership of the
Security Council Working Group on Children and
Armed Conflict, it has also taken a determined stance
on compelling moral issues, including attacks on
schools and hospitals in situations of armed conflict.
Let me also add Nigeria’s voice to those who
have expressed appreciation to Special Representative
of the Secretary-General Coomaraswamy and
Executive Director Anthony Lake for their inspiring
statements. I must also thank the Secretary-General
and his team for the painstaking and lucid report
(S/2011/250) on the subject.
Over the past 12 years, significant progress has
been made in identifying children at risk and engaging
with those who would otherwise threaten their wellbeing and reintegrating and rehabilitating children who
have been affected by war.
The development of the monitoring and reporting
system, the steady growth in the implementation of
action plans and the refocusing on the fundamental
principles of international humanitarian law have in
many instances made the world a safer, if not more
peaceful, place for children.
In spite of these notable improvements, several
challenges still exist. Of particular concern to most
delegations, including mine, is the troubling trend of
attacks and other violations against schools, hospitals,
pupils and staff. It is critical that parties to armed
conflict are made to recognize the special status such
institutions enjoy as safe havens in time of conflict.
That status must be inviolate. It must be inviolate, as
impeded access to health care and education will have
devastating
and
long-lasting
humanitarian
consequences. In protecting these safe havens, we
recognize the human rights to education and health as
enshrined in the International Covenant on Economic,
Social and Cultural Rights and the Convention on the
Rights of the Child.
There is indeed an accountability gap for
violations against children affected by armed conflict,
which we should breach. Impunity for violations
against children, which remains an ever-present feature
of conflicts, is a symptom of a wider issue of capacity.
States involved in conflict are resource-starved and
therefore lack the manpower to devote to the
investigation of crimes against children. It is the
obligation of the international community to
adequately resource such Governments, provide the

11-41067

necessary technical assistance and guidance for the
drafting and implementation of national action plans.
In addition, justice-sector capacity-building
should constitute a vital part of our peacekeeping
activity. In support of national efforts, the Security
Council should be unremitting in applying these
targeted measures against the perpetrators of grave
violations against children. We must remain open to
ensuring that the work of the Working Group benefits
our wider policy bodies, including the sanctions
committees, where appropriate. It is our sincere hope
that the resolution adopted today will move beyond the
incremental improvements made thus far and breach
the accountability gap once and for all.
Nigeria unequivocally endorses the cooperative
approach to child protection that features prominently
in the report of the Secretary-General. We are
unequivocal in our support for the highly effective
partnership between the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General on Children and Armed Conflict and
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General on
Sexual Violence in Conflict, as well as the functional
partnerships between UNICEF and the Office of the
United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights.
The in-country task forces, peacekeeping
operations and special political and peacebuilding
missions should also be commended for their efforts to
systematize approaches to child protection within their
respective mandates. Their engagement with civil
society and State actors is a prerequisite for long-term
improvement in this regard. A notable model for such
cooperation is the United Nations regional strategy on
the protection of children affected by the Lord’s
Resistance Army.
Nigeria is a signatory to the Optional Protocol to
the Convention on the Rights of the Child on the
involvement of children in armed conflict and a
founding signatory to the recent N’Djamena
Declaration. We believe that these actions underscore
our commitment to standards for the protection of
children, particularly those who are vulnerable to
armed conflict. We are and will remain an active
participant in the effort to shield our young people,
enforce their rights and, more importantly, to hold
accountable those who violate those rights. It is our
collective duty, we believe, and our vocation to protect
the innocent and the vulnerable from the ravages of
war. It may be helpful for us Council members to

19

S/PV.6581

consider ourselves in loco parentis. We are, in fact, part
of the larger community that it takes to raise and
protect each and every child. Accordingly, we must all
be watchful, vigilant and even fierce in our
commitment to keep armed conflict from indelibly
scarring our youth.
Mr. Moungara Moussotsi (Gabon) (spoke in
French): Mr. President, your country’s excellent
stewardship of the Working Group on Children and
Armed Conflict attests to your leadership and deep
interest in the fate of children and armed conflict. The
organization of this debate confirms Germany’s
commitment to this important issue.
We thank the Secretary-General for his important
statement on this issue early in the debate. We also
express our gratitude to Ms. Coomaraswamy for the
skill with which she is discharging her duty to provide
greater protection for children affected by conflict, and
for the highly useful information she has shared with
us. Finally, we welcome the presence of the Executive
Director of UNICEF, Mr. Anthony Lake, and reiterate
our support for the significant contribution of his
institution to the defence of the cause of children in
general, and those affected by conflict in particular.
Today’s debate is taking place in the overall
context of the Security Council’s action to protect
civilian populations in armed conflict. As noted in the
Secretary-General’s report (S/2011/250), thousands of
children continue to fall victim to serious violations of
international law in conflict zones. Gabon firmly
condemns such violations, particularly the recruitment
and use of child soldiers, murder, kidnapping, rape and
other forms of sexual violence, the denial of access to
humanitarian assistance, and attacks on schools and
hospitals. These serious crimes committed by
Government or armed non-State forces violate the
provisions of international law and the relevant
resolutions of the Security Council, including
resolution 1612 (2005).
We should like to make two observations — the
first with respect to the progress achieved in the
Council’s normative action to protect children, and the
second concerning the challenges we continue to face
in protecting children in the field.
Turning first to the normative framework, we
applaud the considerable headway achieved since the
adoption of resolutions 1379 (2001), 1539 (2004) and,
most particularly, 1612 (2005), establishing the

20

monitoring and reporting mechanism. Since the
adoption of resolution 1882 (2009), the Security
Council has been able to refer to lists, annexed to the
reports of the Secretary-General, of parties to armed
conflict who commit the murder and maiming of
children, rape and other forms of sexual violence.
Together, these measures constitute an effective
architecture for raising the awareness of all parties to
conflict on the gravity of the crimes they may commit.
Such measures are also deterrent in terms of the
sanctions which their perpetrators run the risk of
incurring.
This progress has also strengthened the activities
of peace missions and facilitated the work of the
principal actors on the ground. In that regard, we stress
the key role played by advisers in the protection
component of peace missions. We point to the success
achieved in Chad, the Sudan, the Central African
Republic and, most especially, the Democratic
Republic of the Congo thanks to the joint activities of
the United Nations Organization Stabilization Mission
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo and UNICEF
that contributed to the liberation of many child
soldiers.
The progress we have made should not make us
lose sight of the various challenges remaining ahead in
ensuring the more effective protection of children in
situations of armed conflict. In that regard, I would
raise two specific issues.
First, it is deplorable that certain Governments
remain strongly resistant to the possibility of engaging
in constructive dialogue with the United Nations with a
view to signing an action plan geared to ending
violence against children in armed conflict. It is also
regrettable to note that increasing numbers of parties to
conflict are targeting public institutions, such as
schools and hospitals that shelter children, teachers and
medical staff. Gabon therefore supports your initiative,
Sir, of considering the inclusion of attacks on children
in schools and hospitals on the list of criteria for listing
persons accused of serious violations against children
in the annexes of the Secretary-General’s reports.
In conclusion, we express our desire to see the
Security Council’s action to protect children in armed
conflict subject to ongoing evaluation and
strengthening in order to make our struggle against the
impunity of offenders more effective, especially with
regard to the heinous crimes perpetrated against

11-41067

S/PV.6581

children. Gabon will continue to support the
international community’s fight against the use of
children in armed conflict and all forms of abuse,
violence and deprivation to which they are subject.
Mr. Hardeep Singh Puri (India): I, too, would
like to express our appreciation for Germany’s able
stewardship of the Working Group on Children and
Armed Conflict and its organization of today’s debate.
Rabindranath Tagore, the national poet of India,
said that “every child comes with the message that God
is not yet discouraged of man”. Children constitute
one-third of humankind — the most important third.
They are also the weakest and therefore the most
susceptible to suffering. If we are to be judged by how
we treat the weakest among us, then we have a lot to
account for.
Children continue to suffer appallingly from
violence, hunger and illness. What is perhaps most
tragic is the manner in which millions of children are
condemned to live their lives on the margins, bereft of
opportunity and sometimes of hope. They do so as
other, more fortunate children embark upon lives of
unprecedented prosperity and promise.
President Nelson Mandela has said that “we owe
our children, the most vulnerable citizens in our
society, a life free of violence and fear”. This is, in
some ways, the primary responsibility of every
Government — the most important element of the
social contract between Governments and citizens. The
work of the United Nations on children in general, and
on children and armed conflict in particular, is
therefore among its most important activities.
India believes that the international community
has the responsibility and, indeed, the obligation to do
its utmost to provide succour to children affected by
armed conflict. We have engaged constructively in the
ongoing efforts to make the work of the United Nations
more relevant and effective in this area. We strongly
support the Working Group on Children and Armed
Conflict. We have participated actively in its
deliberations and will continue to contribute to the
strengthening of a regime that protects children in
situations of armed conflict.
The work being done by the international
community in this area is in some ways on the cutting
edge of international politics and international law. We
need to move forward with deliberation, taking into

11-41067

account the concerns and experiences of Member
States. India has a number of concerns about the
manner in which Security Council resolutions in this
area are being interpreted. Several representatives who
have spoken before me have raised the same concerns.
My delegation believes that the provisions of the
Charter of the United Nations must be followed
consistently and scrupulously. Member States should
not outsource the exercise of their basic prerogatives
and responsibilities to international civil servants. The
actions of the international community that have legal
and judicial characteristics must be in accordance with
the doctrine of natural justice and separation of
powers. The principle of audi alteram partem — or
“hear the other side” — must be adhered to. Mandate
creep must be checked and countered.
India deplores grave violations and crimes
committed against children during war. We have
ratified the Convention on the Rights of the Child and
its Optional Protocols, and are committed to the norms
and practices associated with this international regime.
The Government of India accords the highest
priority to ensuring that the rights of children in India
are protected. Nineteen per cent of the world’s children
are Indian, and we have created a legal and
institutional framework to protect and promote their
rights and their well-being. A national charter for
children has been adopted. Free and compulsory
education up to the age of 14 years has been declared a
fundamental right that is enforceable. A National
Commission for the Protection of Children has also
been set up and a national plan of action for children
has been adopted.
The Government of India is committed to
creating, through these and other initiatives, a
protective environment for children. In this connection,
I would also like to point out that Indian civil society is
an integral part of that framework. We consider civil
society to be a valued partner in our national and
international efforts on children’s issues.
India has been at the forefront of converting the
Council’s word into deed through its peacekeeping
mandates. More than 100,000 Indian troops and police
officers have participated in peacekeeping operations
over the past five decades. Based on our experience on
the ground, we would like to emphasize that the central
challenge to the implementation of the Council’s
mandates is the question of resources.

21

S/PV.6581

I am sure that Special Representative
Coomaraswamy, whose zeal is remarkable, will agree
with me when I say that peacekeeping missions require
more child protection advisers with more resources.
My
country
would
encourage
the
Special
Representative to work with national authorities in
developing capacities to deal with children in armed
conflict. We believe that support for efforts by national
authorities to end impunity and ensure accountability
should be a key focus area.
The monitoring and reporting mechanism
requires the involvement of Member States and close
supervision by them in order to ensure veracity and
credibility. We expect that the processes of data
collection and analysis and of listing and de-listing will
be carried out in a transparent and judicious manner
under the close supervision of Member States.
Vast numbers of children are affected and
traumatized by armed conflict. However, we cannot
lose sight of the economic and social marginalization
of the poorest nations that is driving hundreds of
millions of children towards childhoods that could well
make them part of tomorrow’s problems rather than
tomorrow’s solutions. We need to address this broader
picture of the destitution and desperation that claim
even more lives than armed conflict and often pave the
way for a fresh cycle of violence. This dynamic,
unfortunately, neither attracts international media
attention nor appears on the Security Council’s agenda.
Nevertheless, in our discussions here the Council must
ensure its clear focus in order not to lose sight of the
emergency before it, which constitutes a global
challenge.
In concluding, I would like to quote an English
author who said that “children begin by loving their
parents; after a time, they judge them; rarely, if ever,
do they forgive them”. We must not be found lacking
in our efforts if we expect any chance of forgiveness
from the children of our future.
Mr. Wang Min (China) (spoke in Chinese): I
welcome Germany’s initiative to convene today’s
meeting. I thank Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon for
his statement, as well as Special Representative of the
Secretary-General Ms. Radhika Coomaraswamy and
UNICEF Executive Director Mr. Anthony Lake for
their respective briefings.
China attaches the utmost importance to the issue
of the protection of children affected by armed conflict.

22

China rejects the recruitment and use of child soldiers
and other acts that violate the rights of children in
armed conflict. China supports the continued efforts of
relevant United Nations bodies to protect children
affected by armed conflict in accordance with their
respective mandates and based on their advantages and
strengths. In this connection, I would like to emphasize
the four following points.
First, in order to ensure that children affected by
armed conflict are protected against harm, the issue
must be tackled from its root causes. More attention
should be focused on the prevention, control and
elimination of armed conflicts. The Security Council
should effectively implement its primary responsibility
to maintain international peace and security. It should
strengthen preventive diplomacy to encourage and
support the peaceful settlement of disputes by the
parties through good offices, mediation, dialogue,
negotiation and reconciliation, and should work to
reduce and respond in a timely and appropriate manner
to situations of conflict so as to create a safe and
favourable environment for the healthy development of
children.
Secondly, the mandates of Security Council
resolutions must be strictly implemented, in
accordance with provisions of the Charter as well as of
relevant Security Council resolutions. The Council
should give priority attention to the issue of children
affected by armed conflict. China supports the
important role of the Special Representative on the
issue of the protection of children affected by armed
conflict, in accordance with the Council’s mandate.
Since armed conflicts have varied causes,
protection measures for children affected by armed
conflict should be established based on relevant factors
of each particular situation. There is no on-size-fits-all
solution. Sanctions remain the choice of last resort at
the Council’s disposal to address situations that pose a
threat to international peace and security. China has
always advocated caution in adopting sanction
measures.
Thirdly, efforts should be made to ensure the
effectiveness of various programmes and plans to
protect children while adhering to the principle of
national ownership. Governments bear the primary
responsibility to protect children affected by armed
conflict. The actions of relevant United Nations entities
are meant to support and supplement Government

11-41067

S/PV.6581

actions. The Security Council and its Working Group
in Children and Armed Conflict should strengthen
communication with the Governments concerned. The
Secretary-General and his Special Representative
should establish a channel for sharing information at
the earliest possible moment and maintain contact
thereafter. The Council should consider the information
provided by all the relevant parties to an armed
conflict, particularly that of the Government.
Fourthly, the long-term impact of armed conflict
on
children
must
be
addressed
seriously.
Comprehensive measures must be adopted to ensure
the return of children affected by armed conflict to
society and the resumption of their normal life. In
promoting
post-conflict
reconstruction,
the
international community should ensure the return of
children to their families, schools and societies as a
priority matter. In this connection, the international
community must provide sufficient resources, scale up
development assistance and redouble efforts in the
areas of poverty elimination, universal education and
the promotion of sustainable development in order to
provide safe and favourable conditions for the
development of children.
The President:
representative of Italy.

I

give

the

floor

to

the

Mr. Ragaglini (Italy): I wish to thank you, Sir,
for convening this open debate on children and armed
conflict. I also would like to commend Germany’s
leadership role as Chair of the Security Council
Working Group on Children and Armed Conflict. Let
me express my deep appreciation to the SecretaryGeneral, to his Special Representative, Ms. Radhika
Coomaraswamy, and to the Executive Director of
UNICEF, Mr. Anthony Lake, for their commitment to
defending and promoting the rights of children who
fall victim to armed conflicts.
In taking the floor, Italy endorses the statement to
be delivered by the European Union. We also support
the comments made by Canada on behalf the Group of
Friends of Children and Armed Conflict, of which Italy
is a member.
The protection of children’s rights during armed
conflicts is one of Italy’s foreign policy priorities. We
have consistently advocated greater commitment by the
Security Council to address this scourge. We welcome
the steady progress achieved in strengthening the
protection framework. Resolution 1998 (2011),

11-41067

adopted today — which Italy is proud to have
co-sponsored — confirms this trend. The decision to
include attacks against schools and hospitals and
attacks or threats of attacks against protected persons
in relation to schools and hospitals as new listing
criteria for the annexes of the Secretary General’s
reports is indeed a vital step towards comprehensive
protection of children from all grave violations.
Italy welcomes the Secretary-General’s report
(S/2011/250)
and
strongly
endorses
its
recommendations. We join other delegations in calling
on the Security Council to adopt more vigorous
measures against persistent violators. Impunity can
seriously undermine the credibility of the protection
system we have created. Relevant sanctions
committees must address this issue within their
respective mandates. In cases where sanctions
committees are not established, the Council should
consider how to tackle the accountability gap.
Cooperation with the International Criminal
Court is also key. Monitoring and ensuring adequate
follow-up to the conclusions of the Working Group on
Children and Armed Conflict is another important
aspect.
We attach great importance to action plans. We
welcome the recent signing of plans in Afghanistan, for
example, and urge Governments to give concrete
follow-up to their commitments.
The Child Protection Advisers of United Nations
missions also perform essential duties. Adequate
training in child protection is one of the core
recommendations expressed in the Secretary General’s
report. Italy is supporting an initiative by the
Department
of
Peacekeeping
Operations,
in
cooperation with the Office of the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for Children
and Armed Conflict, UNICEF and Save the Children,
to develop a comprehensive and systematic training
programme on child protection and child rights for all
peacekeeping personnel. We hope that other donors
will join us in supporting this strategic project.
I conclude by expressing our strong support for
the United Nations campaign for the universal
ratification of the Optional Protocols to the Convention
on the Rights of the Child. Important results have been
achieved since its launching in 2010. We believe that
universal ratification is an ambitious but realistic goal.
It would reflect our determination to put an end to the

23

S/PV.6581

worst violations of the rights of the child, which
violations are also a major threat to the stability and
welfare of our societies.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Mexico.
Mr. Heller (Mexico) (spoke in Spanish): I would
like to thank the Minister for Foreign Affairs of
Germany, Mr. Guido Westerwelle, for convening this
important debate, and to congratulate his delegation on
assuming the presidency of the Security Council during
the month of July and the chairmanship of the Working
Group on Children and Armed Conflict. Mexico had
the honour of chairing the Working Group during its
term as non-permanent member of the Security Council
in the biennium 2009-2010. We are well aware of the
responsibilities involved.
Resolution 1998 (2011), adopted this morning,
represents a positive step, as it gives both the Security
Council and the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General better tools with which to respond to
the serious violations that, regrettably, are committed
against thousands of children in armed conflicts in
various parts of the world.
Over recent years the Security Council has
contributed to improving the United Nations capacities
in the comprehensive protection of children in armed
conflicts. Resolution 1882 (2009) broadened the
criteria whereby parties to a conflict can be listed in
the annexes to the Secretary-General’s reports to
include sexual violence and the killing and maiming of
children. Resolution 1998 (2011) includes an additional
criterion: cases of attacks against schools and hospitals
and attacks or threats of attack against protected
persons in relation to schools and hospitals.
This new criterion is particularly important,
considering that attacks against schools and hospitals
not only threaten thousands of children, teachers,
doctors and support staff but also represent an attack
on the future of societies, depriving boys and girls of
the inalienable right to education and health and
therefore undermining the development of the country.
The Security Council has reaffirmed today its
unequivocal commitment to protect children in
situations of armed conflicts and is sending a clear
message that the commitments imposed on parties by
international law regarding the security and well-being

24

of children must be respected and all abuses of or
violence against children avoided.
Nevertheless, such violations will continue to be
committed as long as we do not sanction those
responsible for those crimes and do not fight impunity
at all levels. It is important that national authorities and
the parties concerned take the relevant legal measures
to bring those responsible to justice.
Combating impunity must go hand-in-hand with
the process of reintegrating and caring for children
affected by armed conflict. In this context, the Security
Council must ensure that the sanctions committees
view the protection of children as a core element of
their mandates, and the Council must analyze in detail
the cases where specific committees do not exist so as
to adopt the necessary measures against those who are
responsible for systematic violations against children.
Mexico recognizes the importance of bolstering
the mechanisms that are available to the Working
Group in order to improve its effectiveness and to
contribute to the effective implementation of its
recommendations. We consider that the Working Group
should use all the tools available to it in an efficient
way, including regular field visits and emergency or
informal meetings in the case of serious violations at
the request of the Chairman or any member of the
Working Group. Also, the Security Council must
continue to strengthen the mandates of peace missions
for the protection of children by deploying advisers
and establishing reintegration and support programmes
for victims of sexual violence.
Finally, I would like to recognize especially the
extraordinary work of Special Representative Radhika
Coomaraswamy and her team, as well as Mr. Anthony
Lake and the officials of UNICEF, who together with
civil society are implementing this mechanism and are
working tirelessly on this priority issue on the
international agenda.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Canada.
Mr. Rivard (Canada): First, I would like to thank
Germany for convening today’s open debate and to
commend their leadership in protecting children in
conflict.
Let me also say a few words on behalf of the
Group of Friends of Children and Armed Conflict, an
informal network of 38 interested Member States.

11-41067

S/PV.6581

The Friends Group is pleased with the work
undertaken by the Security Council in the past few
years in progressively strengthening the protection
framework for children affected by armed conflict. We
also commend the work of the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General for Children and Armed
Conflict for her work to ensure that children
experience the full protection of all human rights in
situations related to armed conflict, and the dedicated
work of UNICEF in this regard.
Members of the Friends Group have reliably
called on the Security Council to further strengthen its
protection framework and have consistently called for
all six grave violations committed against children in
armed conflict to be included among the listing criteria
established by resolution 1612 (2005). The Friends
Group has supported a progressive approach in this
regard and therefore commends the Security Council
for filling an important gap in the child protection
framework by including attacks on schools and
hospitals as the latest trigger through resolution 1998
(2011), adopted today.
For the Friends Group, a new trigger such as this
includes in the annexes to the Secretary-General’s
reports not only those parties to armed conflict who, in
contravention of applicable international law, engage in
attacks on schools and hospitals, but also those who
engage in threats or attacks against schoolchildren,
patients, and education or medical personnel. In
addition, a new trigger such as this would include
United Nations country-level task forces monitoring
attacks on schools or hospitals; threats or attacks
against schoolchildren, patients, and education or
medical personnel; and military use of and other
relevant disruptions to educational and medical
facilities. The Friends Group is pleased to see these
measures included in the resolution adopted today.
Although the Friends Group applauds the action
taken by the Security Council so far in strengthening
accountability for persistent perpetrators of grave
violations against children, we call for three types of
further decisive action against such perpetrators. First,
we urge the Security Council to ensure that grave
violations against children trigger the imposition of
sanctions when mandates are established or renewed
for relevant sanctions committees, as agreed in the
presidential
statement
of
16
June
2010
(S/PRST/2010/10).

11-41067

Secondly, we call on the Secretary-General to
include in his annual reports actions taken by existing
sanctions committees regarding such provisions, as
well as proposals for additional steps to ensure
perpetrators’ accountability.
Thirdly, we remain concerned about the
accountability gap, and call on national authorities and
all concerned parties to take appropriate legal action
against persistent perpetrators. The Friends Group also
calls on the Security Council to take decisive action
against all persistent perpetrators listed in annex I of
the Secretary-General’s reports and, in cases where
there is no designated sanctions committee, to consider
how to address that gap through proactive means.
Lastly, the Friends Group has stressed the
importance of follow-up regarding the implementation
of the Working Group’s recommendations, as called for
in resolution 1882 (2009). We call on all parties to
conflicts, including non-State actors, to follow up and
implement the recommendations of the Working
Group.
(spoke in French)
In my capacity as representative of Canada, I
would like to formally welcome the SecretaryGeneral’s annual report on children and armed conflict
(S/2011/250). This debate is an opportunity once again
to bring to the Security Council’s attention the
seriousness of the acts of violence that continue to be
perpetrated against children.
We firmly believe that today’s adoption of a new
resolution on children and armed conflict will highlight
the gravity of the attacks being made on schools and
hospitals. With this additional trigger, strong support
on the part of the international community will be
needed for the monitoring and reporting mechanism
country teams to track attacks on schools and hospitals
on a systematic and comprehensive basis. Canada
believes that education is the strongest tool we can
provide to children in order to improve their chances in
the future. That is why one of Canada’s signature
projects focuses on increasing access to education in
Kandahar by investing up to $12 million in building,
expanding and repairing 50 schools in selected districts
of Kandahar province.
We are also pleased that the Working Group on
Children and Armed Conflict is actively seized of the
issue of accountability. We therefore call on the

25

S/PV.6581

Council and its relevant sanctions committees to
impose sanctions more systematically so that
perpetrators of grave violations against children may
be held to account. As the Secretary-General has
recommended, Canada urges the Council to take more
vigorous and targeted measures against offenders who
have been listed in the Secretary-General’s annual
report for at least five years for committing grave
violations against children. Canada also calls on the
Working Group, in accordance with its mandate, to
hold urgent or informal meetings in order to ensure a
speedier response to new situations where grave
violations are being committed against children in
armed conflicts.
Children’s rights are a priority of Canada’s
foreign policy and international development aid.
Canada will continue to play a strong role and to help
contribute to concrete results both at the United
Nations and on the ground in countries concerned.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Slovenia.
Ms. Štiglic (Slovenia): Allow me first to thank
Germany for having organized this important open
debate. I would also like to thank Secretary-General
Ban Ki-moon, his Special Representative for Children
and Armed Conflict, and the Executive Director of
UNICEF for their briefings and for their tireless efforts
dedicated to protecting children affected by armed
conflict. I would also like to align Slovenia with the
statements of the European Union, the Human Security
Network and the Group of Friends of Children and
Armed Conflict.
Today’s debate is based on the SecretaryGeneral’s latest report (S/2011/250), which shows that
2010 was not a very positive year for children affected
by armed conflict around the world. There have
nevertheless been some improvements, among which I
would like to highlight the signing of new action plans
and the progress made in implementing existing action
plans. We welcome the fact that the Special
Representative for Children and Armed Conflict gave
briefings to a sanctions committee that resulted in its
adding the practice of recruiting and using children as
a criterion for sanctions. We hope that this practice will
be adopted by other committees.
Although positive steps have been taken to hold
persistent perpetrators of grave violations against
children accountable, we believe that the Security

26

Council should impose further targeted measures on
such perpetrators that will prevent them from
committing any other grave violations against children.
Slovenia would also like to voice its support for the
Secretary-General’s recommendation
encouraging
concerned Member States to facilitate contact between
the United Nations and non-State actors in order to
ensure broad and effective protection of children.
We are pleased to see that the mechanism for
protecting children affected by armed conflict that was
developed subsequent to resolutions 1539 (2004) and
1612 (2005) has produced important and visible
results. We would like to commend the Working
Group, and in particular Germany and other previous
Chairs of the Group, for the work it has done over the
past five years. The Working Group has become a
credible and well-established subsidiary body of the
Council. We encourage it to use all the tools at its
disposal, including more field visits and the
organization of urgent or informal meetings, which will
enable it to be even more responsive.
Two-thirds of the country situations discussed in
the Secretary-General’s report include attacks on
schools and hospitals. Almost half of children who do
not attend school are children in conflict situations.
Education gives children the possibility of a future
without insecurity. This has been confirmed on many
occasions, including at the 2009 thematic dialogue in
the General Assembly on education in emergencies,
and General Assembly resolution 64/290 on the same
topic last year.
Slovenia strongly supports the expansion of the
new trigger on attacks on schools and hospitals, by
expanding both the Secretary-General’s list of parties
to the conflict who engage, in contravention of
applicable international law, in attacks on schools and
hospitals, and of the monitoring and reporting
mechanism. That decision further develops the
protection framework for children affected by armed
conflict and is a step in the right direction. We hope
that in the not-too-distant future it will encompass all
six grave violations against children in armed conflict.
Both Optional Protocols to the Convention on the
Rights of the Child are part of the normative
framework for the protection of children affected by
armed conflict. Slovenia therefore supports the
campaign for universal ratification of the Protocols by
2012. Slovenia will also continue to be engaged in

11-41067

S/PV.6581

rehabilitating disabled children affected by armed
conflict and in efforts to remove landmines and other
unexploded ordnance.
Children should not suffer because of armed
conflict; they should not be victims of any grave
violations and should enjoy their rights fully. Today’s
adoption of resolution 1998 (2011) is an important step
in that direction, and it is for this reason that Slovenia
has joined in co-sponsoring the resolution.
The President: I give
representative of New Zealand.

the

floor

to

the

Mr. McLay (New Zealand): New Zealand thanks
the
Secretary-General
for
his
latest
report
(S/2011/250), Ms. Coomaraswamy for her outstanding
work as his Special Representative and Germany for
organizing this debate during the month of its
presidency, thus giving us an opportunity to influence
the Council’s consideration of the issue of children and
armed conflict, including through the informal event it
hosted on 30 June.
For the Council’s decisions to be effective, the
commitment and investment of the wider United
Nations community is also required. For the 177
countries that cannot sit at this table, participation in
the Council’s work ensures that commitment, and
regard to our voices encourages that investment.
It is important to remember that, as we sit in the
Chamber today, children are still being forced out of
classrooms and playgrounds and onto battlefields. They
are suffering the vilest forms of sexual abuse and rape.
They are being disfigured, maimed and even murdered.
The Council’s actions can improve the lives of those
children, as has been demonstrated through its
institutional innovations, such as the creation of the
monitoring and reporting mechanism and through the
consolidation and implementation of the protection
framework. But, as always, more concrete action can
be taken that will improve the lives of children affected
by conflict, including girls, minorities such as
indigenous children and children with disabilities.
To that end, New Zealand fully endorses the
recommendations made a short time ago by the
representative of Canada on behalf of the Group of
Friends of Children and Armed Conflict. Given the
time constraints, I will not repeat those points except to
say that New Zealand welcomes the addition of a new
educational and medical trigger. We support

11-41067

strengthened sanctions and other targeted measures to
punish and deter persistent perpetrators. And we urge
the Working Group on Children and Armed Conflict
more effectively to follow-up on its recommendations.
I will expand, if I can, on just three points.
First, the Council can better target persistent
perpetrators. As well as asking the Secretary-General
again to list persistent perpetrators in his annual report,
the Council could designate child-protection criteria in
the mandates of the relevant sanctions committees and
request child-protection expertise in its expert groups.
The Council could also seek the advice of the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General more often
and more systematically emphasize the cross-cutting
nature of this issue by including concerns about
children in its reports.
Secondly, more effective action can be taken to
ensure the implementation of the Council’s resolutions
and conclusions. The Working Group could, for
example, use the full range of tools at its disposal, as
well as emergency meetings, to respond to crisis
situations and to follow up on its recommendations.
Child protection provisions could be more
systematically included in the mandates of United
Nations peacekeeping and peacebuilding operations.
It is not just the Security Council, however, that
must act to protect children. Member States and the
various United Nations organs also have a vital role to
play. We urge those countries concerned, for example,
to allow United Nations country teams to contact
non-State actors so that they can prepare action plans
and carry out other protection measures. We ask the
Council to take a more active role to ensure that
context.
Those are just a few steps that could be taken to
protect children affected by conflict even more. There
are others. It is to the Council’s credit that its actions
over the past decade have improved the lives of
hundreds of thousands of children. But hundreds of
thousands are still affected. It is our collective duty to
take bold and effective action to protect them all. That
duty is one for each and every one of us.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Switzerland.
Mr. Seger (Switzerland): It is my honour to
speak on behalf of the Human Security Network,
namely, Austria, Chile, Costa Rica, Greece, Ireland,

27

S/PV.6581

Jordan, Mali, Norway, Slovenia, Thailand, South
Africa as an observer, and my own country,
Switzerland.
We welcome the efforts and the important
progress in different parts of the world in addressing
the six grave violations against children in armed
conflicts. The adoption of resolution 1998 (2011) today
fills an important gap in the comprehensive childprotection framework by including attacks against
schools and hospitals as the latest trigger in the
monitoring and reporting mechanism. This step will
also complement ongoing efforts by other bodies of the
United Nations system. However, challenges remain.
Accountability for persistent perpetrators of
grave violations against children should further be
strengthened. We call on the Security Council for
further decisive action, including through targeted and
graduated measures against such perpetrators, and to
consider how to address the accountability gap through
proactive and effective means. We also call for more
efforts to address impunity and to investigate,
prosecute and punish all those who commit grave
violations against children.
We acknowledge the positive trend towards
mainstreaming the protection, rights and well-being of
children affected by armed conflict within some United
Nations missions on the ground. We encourage the
relevant departments of the Secretariat responsible for
providing support to the field to continue to work
closely together to ensure a more systematic and
consistent approach in all missions. The appointment
of more child protection advisers and the inclusion of
child protection modules in the pre-deployment
training of police and troop-contributing countries
could also contribute to that end.
From a human security perspective, it is
important to complement existing action plans with a
strong programmatic response to support Governments
in the implementation of comprehensive national
strategies that include prevention and provide a
multisectoral approach to the assistance and social
protection of children who have been associated with
armed forces and groups. Assistance measures must
focus on avoiding their marginalization and
stigmatization, as well as facilitating their social
reintegration. Furthermore, a more stable and longterm funding structure to fulfil all the elements of the
action plans is crucial.

28

Last but not least, the Human Security Network
invites the Council to enhance its efforts in order to
approach the protection of civilians in a more
systematic and coordinated manner, taking into account
the situation of children and women. We therefore
appreciate the fact that consultations on how to foster
such synergies were held under Brazilian presidency of
the Council in February. We encourage further
discussions on this issue and call on members of the
Council to be as inclusive as possible.
(spoke in French)
With the President’s permission, I should now
like to make a few comments in my national capacity.
With regard to General Assembly resolution
64/290, on the right to education in emergency
situations, Switzerland welcomes the fact that, through
resolution 1998 (2011), the Security Council has today
filled an important gap in the framework for the
protection of children by including in the list of
triggers recurrent attacks against school and hospital
facilities. The inclusion of those new elements should
make it possible to expand the roll of shame
maintained by the Secretary-General not only to
combatants who carry out such attacks in violation of
international law and international humanitarian law,
but also to those who repeatedly threaten or attack all
those afforded protection in this context.
We also call for new and decisive steps be taken
against perpetrators. First of all, we urge all sanctions
committees to ensure that the gravest violations against
children be made subject to sanctions at the time that
mandates are established or renewed.
Secondly, we call on the Secretary-General to
include in his annual reports all the steps taken in
sanctions committees with regard to the actions called
for in those reports, as well as with regard to proposals
made to move towards greater responsibility for the
perpetrators of such violations.
Thirdly we remain very concerned about the lack
of responsibility owing to the lack of sanctions
committees charged with dealing with repeat
perpetrators of violations set out in the annexes to the
Secretary-General’s reports. We commit to urgently
taking resolute measures against these offenders, thus
filling the gaps in a proactive manner.
Oversight of the implementation of the Working
Group’s recommendations in implementation of

11-41067

S/PV.6581

resolution 1882 (2009) is of capital importance. That is
why we would invite the Working Group to request a
response from countries or the concerned party, if
necessary, on the report on the conditions for the
implementation
of
the
Working
Group’s
recommendations. We expect a strengthening of
existing tools, starting with field missions and making
extensive use of options already available, as well as
emergency meetings in order grapple with the
resurgence of violations on the ground.
Like my colleague from New Zealand, who just
spoke, Switzerland once again calls on Member States
to facilitate contacts between the United Nations and
local and international actors, with a view to
guaranteeing comprehensive and effective protection of
children. These contacts will in no way prejudge the
political and legal status of non-State actors.
Finally, children are increasingly being detained
for association with armed groups. Their detention
often includes the use of violence, abuse, threats of
violence or abuse and other brutality, with the sole
purpose of obtaining information from them.
Switzerland counts on the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General for Children and Armed Conflict
to address this issue in a working document and
propose appropriate measures for strengthening the
protection of children.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Iraq.
Mr. Al Bayati (Iraq): Please allow me, at the
outset, Mr. President, to express my delegation’s
appreciation to the Secretary-General on the
presentation of his annual report to the Security
Council on children in armed conflict (S/2011/250).
We also appreciate the important role played by the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General for
Child
and
Armed
Conflict,
Ms.
Radhika
Coomaraswamy, in monitoring the state of children in
armed conflict. I would also like to thank Mr. Anthony
Lake, Executive Director of UNICEF, for his presence
and remarks. I commend the Security Council for
adopting resolution 1998 (2011) today.
In
her
speech
this
morning,
Representative Coomaraswamy stated,

Special

“During my visits to conflict areas, I have
personally seen the devastation — schools
completely destroyed, bombed or burnt to the

11-41067

ground. I have also seen schools with broken
window panes and empty classrooms where
children have been recruited as child soldiers. I
have met girls whose colleagues stay away from
schools because, as female students, they may be
victims of acid attacks.”
I would like to state that nothing like that is happening
in Iraq, because Iraq is not a conflict area. However,
my delegation is pleased to make the following
observations about the section on Iraq in the SecretaryGeneral’s report on children and armed conflict.
The report covers the situation during 2010 and
emphasizes that children were used by the terrorist
group Al-Qaida and the affiliated terrorist group, the
Islamic State of Iraq. We would like to note that the
security situation in Iraq has continued to improve
since 2003. The year 2010 witnessed a very low rate of
terrorist attacks and casualties, as a result of the
growing capabilities of the Iraqi security forces, the
pursuit of Al-Qaida and pre-emptive strikes against it,
and the capture of most of its leaders in Iraq.
The year 2010 also witnessed the killing of
Al-Qaida in Iraq leader Abu Ayyub al-Masri and the
leader of the Islamic State of Iraq, Abu Omar
al-Baghdadi, who were both killed in mid-April 2010.
These strikes and arrests have dispersed Al-Qaida’s
strength, disrupted its strategies and revealed to Iraqi
security agencies Al-Qaida’s plans, thus weakening
Al-Qaida’s ability to finance and recruit terrorists in
Iraq.
The year 2010 witnessed a lot of security
achievements, the most prominent of which was the
safe atmosphere surrounding the general election held
on 7 March, which clearly indicated the great
improvement in Iraq’s security situation and the
growing capabilities of the Iraqi security forces to
maintain order throughout the country. The SecretaryGeneral mentioned this fact in his report to the
Security Council on the activities of the United Nations
Assistance Mission for Iraq (UNAMI), stating that
“the overall environment in which the poll was
conducted was relatively free of violence and
without any major security incidents that affected
the polling itself” (S/2010/240, para. 6).
In paragraph 16 of the same report, the SecretaryGeneral further states that

29

S/PV.6581

“the Iraqi security forces have demonstrated their
increased capacity to assume greater security
responsibilities, evidenced by their successful
maintenance of security during the March
elections”.
Paragraph 97 of the report contained in document
S/2011/250 states that there were consistent reports
from many parties during 2010 that Al-Qaida forces in
Iraq were managing a wing of its organization called
“Birds of Paradise”. The same paragraph also refers to
the difficulty in obtaining information concerning that
group and identifying its leadership.
In that connection, we would like to note that the
report covers the year 2010 and that the wing was
discovered before 2010. According to reports from
Iraqi security forces, the intensive security campaigns
carried out by Iraqi forces at the beginning of 2010
resulted in the elimination of most of the forces of AlQaida, the dismantling of the majority of cells and the
arrest of its leaders, including members and leaders of
the Birds of Paradise. This wing did not commit any
terrorist attacks in 2010. We thus believe that there is
no need to refer to this wing of the organization in this
report.
Paragraph 97 of the same report also refers to
information that was based on allegations and not
evidence: “In other instances, insurgents have allegedly
used children as proxy bombers who did not know they
were carrying explosives”.
Paragraph 98 of the report indicates that a
number of children were killed or injured as a result of
the continued conflict in Iraq. In fact, the losses
incurred in 2010 were the result of attacks carried out
by terrorist groups such as Al-Qaida and its affiliated
groups, including the Islamic State of Iraq, and were
not due to any conflict.
Paragraph 98 mentions that access to many parts
of Iraq is limited and that the verification of all
incidents was not possible. The United Nations thinks
that the figure may underrepresent the actual numbers.
What is stated in this paragraph gives a picture that is
contrary to the reality of the Iraq situation in 2010,
witnessed by the current stability and the inability of
terrorists to have a public presence in any region of
Iraq. The security forces control all areas of Iraqi.
Civilians and security forces have ease of movement,
especially in areas that were previously reported to be
dangerous.

30

Paragraph 98 also speaks about child casualties
resulting from their presence in areas of armed clashes
or during confrontation at checkpoints. We reiterate
that the improvement in security in 2010 prevented
direct clashes between security forces and terrorists
because the terrorists have lost control of the ground as
a result of the dismantling of their groups by security
forces. Therefore, terrorists started to attack randomly
and in a way that did not reveal them to the public.
Paragraph 99 refers to the danger that prevents
children from going to schools, while paragraph 98
refers to the incident that took place at the Church of
Our Lady of Salvation. The report states that some
schools were closed in Baghdad for a few weeks
because they were located next to churches.
Throughout 2010, there were no general school
closures, despite the fact that there were such closures
for weeks in many countries throughout the world due
to all kinds of disasters, such as floods, epidemics,
hurricanes and so on.
The report does not mention the efforts made by
the Iraqi Government to combat the remnants of
terrorist groups and improve security in all areas of the
country, nor its success in limiting the recruitment of
children by terrorist groups. As I said earlier, we feel
that the report’s section on Iraq is in need of more
accuracy, especially as regards the monitoring of the
situation of children in Iraq. This section of the report
contradicts some information contained in reports of
the Secretary-General on UNAMI that point to an
improvement in the security situation in Iraq, including
facts. We therefore hope that, in the future, the Office
of the Special Representative for Children and Armed
Conflict will be able to provide more accurate
information in order to give a clear picture to members
of the Security Council.
I would like to conclude by extending our thanks
to the Special Representative of the Secretary-General
for Children and Armed Conflict and her Office for
their efforts. I would like to invite her to visit Iraq
again. Since her last visit, three years ago, a lot of
improvements have taken place in Iraq. We will
continue to cooperate with United Nations bodies to
ensure human rights in general and the rights of
children in particular as priorities of the Iraqi
Government.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Japan.

11-41067

S/PV.6581

Mr. Nishida (Japan): I would like first to
congratulate you, Sir, on your presidency of the
Security Council for this month of July. I would also
like to express my gratitude to the Secretary-General,
his Special Representative Ms. Coomaraswamy and the
Executive Director of UNICEF, Mr. Lake, for their
comprehensive briefings. Japan very much appreciates
the advocacy activities of Ms. Coomaraswamy, in
particular her country visits, as well as the dedicated
field work done by UNICEF in the area of children and
armed conflict.
While there has been commendable progress,
such as the signing of action plans by the Governments
of Afghanistan and Chad this year with the United
Nations to end the recruitment and use of child
soldiers, many challenges still remain on the agenda in
terms of children and armed conflict, including sexual
violence against children.
Based on Japan’s two-year experience in the
Council’s Working Group on Children and Armed
Conflict, until the end of last year, I would like to
focus on three issues that we regard as particularly
important, namely, attacks on schools and hospitals,
accountability for persistent perpetrators and a
comprehensive approach.
First, Japan is deeply concerned about the
reported trend of an increasing number of attacks on
schools and hospitals during conflicts. We strongly
condemn the perpetrators of such attacks, in particular
those who target female students and girls’ schools.
Attacks on and the military use of educational
and medical facilities and attacks against pupils,
teachers and medical personnel not only deprive
children of their lives but also seriously violate a
child’s fundamental rights to access to educational and
medical services. Such acts are not permissible under
any circumstances, in particular in conflict situations.
The Security Council should play a key role in
protecting children’s rights to education and health.
In that regard, we welcome that the new
resolution just adopted by the Council (resolution 1998
(2011)), which Japan proudly sponsored, requests the
Secretary-General to include in the annexes to his
reports those parties that engage in recurrent attacks on
schools and hospitals and against protected persons in
relation to such facilities.

11-41067

Secondly, Japan continues to be concerned about
the fact that as many as 15 parties to conflict have been
listed for more than five consecutive years in the
annexes to the Secretary-General’s reports. In order to
ensure accountability for persistent perpetrators, the
Security Council must reinforce targeted measures
against them, as the Council already agreed to impose
seven years ago in resolution 1539 (2004).
We welcome the fact that, as a result of the
briefing by Ms. Coomaraswamy in the Security
Council Committee established pursuant to resolution
1533 (2004), concerning the Democratic Republic of
the Congo, the Committee included several individuals
in its sanctions list for their grave violations against
children. We encourage the holding of briefings on a
more regular basis to the relevant sanctions committees
by both the Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral for Children and Armed Conflict and the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General on
Sexual Violence in Conflict.
We commend the German presidency and all
Council members for addressing in very strong terms
the issue of accountability for persistent perpetrators in
the new resolution.
Thirdly, I would also like to underline the need to
address the issue of children and armed conflict in a
more comprehensive manner, through cooperation
between Member States and the United Nations
system. Support must be ensured seamlessly, from the
protection of children in conflict to the rehabilitation,
care and reintegration during peacebuilding efforts of
those formerly associated with armed forces or groups
and who are victims of sexual violence. Children’s
perspectives need to always be considered in the
processes and programmes related to disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration efforts, as well as
those associated with security sector reform,
landmines, unexploded ordnance and cluster munitions.
We also expect that the Working Group on
Children and Armed Conflict, apart from just adopting
conclusions on each situation annually, will be more
creative in holding special meetings and issuing
political messages in a timely manner in response to an
urgent appeal by a Special Representative of the
Secretary-General.
In its assistance to conflict and post-conflict
countries, Japan has placed great importance on the
protection and empowerment of children, who are the

31

S/PV.6581

most vulnerable. For example, in cooperation with
international partners, we have extended assistance in
the areas of rehabilitating child victims of landmines
and providing mine-risk education in countries such as
Cambodia. Through the United Nations Trust Fund for
Human Security, Japan has also supported communitybased programmes that improve the educational
environment and provide education and training for
former child soldiers in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo. By preventing and alleviating the deleterious
impacts of conflict, we will continue to endeavour to
enable children around the world to have a brighter
future.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Luxembourg.
Ms. Lucas (Luxembourg) (spoke in French): I
would like to fully associate myself with the statement
to be delivered on behalf of the European Union.
Luxembourg warmly welcomes the convening of
this open debate and the adoption of the new resolution
on the issue of children an armed conflict (resolution
1998 (2011)). This demonstrates the continuing
commitment of the Security Council to promote the
protection of children, both in countries that are on its
agenda and in other situations that are of concern to us
all.
We would also like to thank the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General and the
Executive Director of UNICEF for their tireless efforts
in support of children. We encourage them to continue
to strive to ensure that children are better protected and
that violations against them are brought to our
attention.
The roll of shame that is annexed to the
Secretary-General’s reports and, more generally, the
Secretary-General’s reports based on information
gathered thanks to the monitoring and reporting
mechanism are of vital importance in obliging us to
face up to the brutal reality of children in time of
armed conflict. The country visits by the Special
Representative, the work of experts on the protection
of children in field missions and the new practice of
field visits by the Working Group on Children and
Armed Conflict contribute considerably to greater
awareness of violations against children in conflicts.
Initial tangible results can indeed be seen. More
and more children are being released by armed forces

32

or rebel groups in many conflict situations. However,
additional efforts and resources will be necessary in
order to have a greater impact on the ground.
In 2010, the Security Council, following
consultations with the Special Representative, imposed
for the first time sanctions against individuals in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo who were
responsible for serious violations against children. The
Council will be able to build on that precedent in order
to punish in the same way those who are responsible
for serious violations against children in the context of
other armed conflicts.
We call on the Security Council to continue to
work to that end and at the same time to consider, as
the Secretary-General has suggested, ways by which
sanctions may be imposed in contexts where there are
no Security Council sanctions committees.
From now on, parties to a conflict that attack
schools or hospitals could find themselves on the list of
shame contained in the report of the Secretary-General.
We congratulate the Council for having thus enhanced
the monitoring mechanism, and it is our hope that the
Council’s gradual approach will allow for the
inclusion, in the not-too-distant future, of the two other
categories of serious violations against children
identified in resolution 1612 (2005). Ultimately, we
must assign equal importance to all serious violations
against children.
Allow me briefly to dwell on the issue of attacks
against schools. As is clear from the report of the
Secretary-General, we are witnessing on an
increasingly frequent basis the destruction of schools
and attacks on students and their teachers. In certain
cases, girls’ schools are specifically targeted. Insecurity
prevents parents from sending their children to school
for fear that their health or even life might be at risk.
This year, the Economic and Social Council is
examining, at its substantive session now under way in
Geneva, the issue of education for all. Synergies with
our debate today are quite clear. In his speech before
the Council on 5 July last, the Deputy Prime Minister
and Minister for Foreign Affairs of Luxembourg,
Mr. Jean Asselborn, emphasized the fact that
“protection against violence is one of the key
preconditions for enjoying the right to education”. He
welcomed the Security Council’s initiative aimed at
expanding the criteria for listing on the list of shame to
cover attacks against schools and hospitals, thereby

11-41067

S/PV.6581

allowing for the imposition of sanctions on those
responsible and contributing to the fight against the
impunity that is far too common for these heinous
crimes.
Minister Asselborn called on the international
community to take additional measures to help the
28 million children who are deprived of education
because of armed conflicts and who are subjected to

11-41067

rape, sexual violence, targeted attacks against their
schools and other human rights violations. I wish to
reiterate that appeal today.
The President: There are still a number of
speakers remaining on my list. I therefore intend, with
the concurrence of the members of the Council, to
suspend the meeting until 3 p.m.
The meeting was suspended at 1.05 p.m.

33
