UNITED NATIONS

SECURITY COUNCIL
OFFICIAL
RECORDS
FORTIETH

YEAR

2600&

MEETING:

25 JULY 1985

NEW YORK

CONTENTS

Revisional agenda (wAgcncw-.l)
Expfdoiloftbankstotbc~8tatment

by the R&dent

mat*e

. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . ..*...........
. ..*............-

,.........

,,,.......,..L...............................
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . ...*..*

nequestimofBwtbAf~
RCpWlltdVCOfFrancCtOtbC
Lctterdatal24MyJ98Sftmnt&Fcmmnm
unitedNBtioar~toule~dt&scarritycuuncil(5/17351);
Lmndstcd25July19k5fromL&~Reprr#ntativeoi~to~
U~tcd~~addrersEdtot&Rdrleatoft&~~council(5/17336)..

S/W%00

NOTE
Symbols of United Nations documents BR compuscd of capital ktters combined
with fieurcs. Mention of such a symbol indicareo a nfercnoc to a United Nations
doaueent.
Documents of the security Council (symbol W . . . ) m normally publisbcd in
quarterly SqpplWtentr of the QgcialRnnwdr
of &e Wuriary CMdl. The date of the
document indicates tha supplement in which it appeamorin whichinfommtionab
it
is &en.
The rosoh~tions of the Sect&y CWacil, numlemd in accofdmnce with a system
oltdl&cihntofthe
adopted in 1964, are published in yearly vohuncs of Ruokt&~
&cutity carrrtl. The new system, which has been appucd mroactively to resolutions
adoptcdbefotc 1 January 1%5,bccantcfuUyopur&sonthatdatc.

26tWb MEETING
Held III New York oa lhrsday,

25 July 1985, at 3.39 p.m.

&es/dent: Mr. Gucnnadi 1. OUDOVENKO
(Ukrainian

&tter dated24 July 1985fmm un?piiwmanent
Rep-

Joviet Socialist Republic),

tkntotive of Franceto tbe Uoited NatIoua a&hewed to

Pa-sent: The representatives of the following

States:
Australia, Burkina Fess, China, Denmark, Egypt, France,
India, Madagascar, Peru, Thailand, Trinidad and Tobago,
Ukrainian Soviet Socialist Republic. Union of Soviet
Socialist Republics, United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland, United States of America.

I.

Adoption

2.

The question of South Africa:
Letter dated 24 July 1985 from the I%nanent Representative of France to the United Nations addressed to the President of the Security Couucil
(s/17351);

the mwkkftt of the Beaulty tI4budl (W17351);
&Uer&teU2SJdy19a5fromtbeI’cmamtRepFp
senWiveofMaUtotbeUaftedNotiolrp-to
ulel9addmtd(beSccPlty~(5/17356)
3. The PRESIDENT (Ittterpe&tkmjiom RttsAn): I wish
to inform members of the Council that I have received
letters from the repmsentatives of Cuba, Kenya, Mali and
South Africa in which they request to be invited to participate in the diiion
of the item on the agenda. In accordance with the usual practice, I propose, with the consent of
the Council, to invite those representatives to participate in
the discussion, without the right to vote. in conformity
with the mlevant provisions of the Charter and rule 37 of
ihe provisional rules of procedure.

of the agenda

letter dated 25 July 1985 from the Rnnauent Rep
resentative of Mali to the United Nations addredtothcPresidentofthesecuutycouncil
(S/17336)

At the lnvltotlon of the Ausldenr. MP. Ntd (Mol(l took o
pkttx ot the Cowtctl roblo; Mr. Omtms Oliva (Ctthaf),Mr.
M&ho (Kenya) and Mr. wn srihbrpllyg (South @iat) took
lhepkt?S?W?Vt%tf#thm,OrIheSidk~~cormdl
chamk.

me me&g ws dlw to OthT ot 4.43pm

4. lhc PRESIDENT
(btteg)twtotfonflvm Russ&m]: I
should like to inform members of the Council that I have
mceivedaIetterdated2$JuIyfromtheC!hairmanofthe
x
thmitue
qamst ApmrArM, which reads as
:

1. The PRESIDENT (&~PM&&H
b=-bh
this is the fm meeting of the Council ln July, I should Bke,
on~halfafthemcm~oTthtCoundl,topsyivibutt
to the Minister for Foreign AR&s of Trinidad and
Tobago,h4r.ErroIMahabir,andtothe+ment&eoC
Trinidad and Tobago, Mr. D. H. N. AIRyus, for HIM&
KrviccasResidsntsofthe~dur&tgIhemomhof
June.IamsurethatfspcakforaIlmembemoftheCatncII
in expressing deep appmeiatkm for the ,occpt dipIom&
skill and courtesy with which they comlucted t’u ktshwsrr
of the council last month.

‘1b3~thehonwttoncpwrttheSeMityCouncil(o
permItmetoparticipatelumycap&yasChaimmnof
thEspeeipl~~~nd~U~thC~

vlsionsofruk3!loftheCuuncil’sprovi&Mlruksof
pramlute, in the Council’s co&&ration
mwqucsuonofsouthAfIica’“.

of the item

5. Gnpmviousoaasions,theCouncilhasextendedinvitaUons to mpmcntoUves of other United Nations bodies
inconnectionwithtbeconsiderationofmattersonits
agenda. In m
with past practice in this matter, I
r
?f+ the Council extent an invitation under rule 39
~~;VII
NICS of procedure to the ChalmIan of the
“!4pccz “5Tonktt
iiiph.t ApdiG.

2. The PRESIDENT
(iiunprrcffbr,
@a
gssss&nh I
shouti like to inform the Council thar the vGeneralisunabletohewithustodaysincehehasto
undergo some medical tats. I am sure tht~;aB~eIt
the Council ioin with me in express@
wishes. We arc conftit
that he will be back with us
within the next few days.

ItlbKLtsodecklcd
6. The PRESIDENT

(intetpmath from Rudm): The

Councit L meeting today in response to the requests conI

tained in letters addressed to its President: one dated 24
July, from the representative of France [5;/173.51]; the
other dated 25 July, from tbe representative of Mali
[s/f 735q.

The solution lies only in the establishment of a just and
democratic society based on the equality of civil and political rights and on equal respect for the dignity of every
human being.

7. Members of the Council have before them document
s/17354, which contains the text of a draft resolution submitted by Denmark and France.

15. None the less-and again I quote the head of the
French Government--“Ihe
events of recent days have
shown a new and serious deterioration. By declaring a
state of emergency, by conferring full powers on the army
and the police, by multiplying arbitrary an&s and by
giving the order to tire on the populations, the South African Government is increasing its repression.”

8. Mr. de Kf%OlJLARlA
(Franc4 (~~fer~refuiOn/rom
French): First, Sir, let me wish you the most effective possible presidency. Your widely acknowledged diplomatic abilities, amply demonstrated during our consultations.
convince us that our confidence in you is well placed. We
are very happy to have you as President and wish you
every success.

16. Those are the facts that led my Government to
request an emergency meeting of the Security Council.
17. It is indeed the Council’s duty to renew its condemnation of the system of uporrheidand the practices that derive
from it, including the mass arrests that the government of
Pretoria has just initiated. It should also call for the immediate lifting of the state of emergency and the prompt and
unconditional release of all political prisoners-including
Nelson Mandela, who has been imprisoned for more than
20 years.

9. Secondly, mindful of the fact that last month the Minister for Foreign Affairs of Trinidad and Tobago presided
over an imposing number of meetings, with a very heavy
agenda, my delegation would therefore ask his rep-mative hen to convey to him our appteciation of his tine
conduct of those debates. In addition, I pay tribute to our
colleague the representative of Trinidad and Tobago, who
also displayed mt
intelligence and diplomacy.

18. The draft resolution which my delegation has submitted for the Council’s consideration [S//7354 urges States
Members to take a certain number of measures against the
Republic of South Africa. Faced with the increased suffering endured by the men and women of South Africa, the
international community expects from us a reaction that is
both firm and realistic. It is in this spirit that we have
drafted the text on which we have invited the Council to
take a position. Some may find, in one sense or another,
that this text does not meet their own concems. What we
aft seeking in this tragic situation is a unanimous stand on
the pan of the international community.

10. “nK qwrtheti r&u
of South Aftica is abhorrent
to all persons committed to just& and human rights.” In
making that statement the day kfore yesterday, the prime
Minister of France, Mr. Laurent Fabius, recalled a wellknown position of my country. which my predcassora and
I have expressed on many occasions within these walls.
France is totally opposed to racial discrimination and
llcjcasit,allthemorrwhenitis~asasystem.
I I. Thii year, when TV ate celebrating the fortieth an&
versary of the Or&anization, must 1 recall that in the
Pmamble of the Charter of the Unitai Nations, the pcopks
of the united Nations have de&red heir determination
“to nemnn faith in fundamental human rights, in the
d$dn&aaddtiA
y ?,=3n per-4 in theeqd rights

19. France, for its part. has decided immediately to recall
its Ambassador to South Africa and to suspend forthwith
and unconditionally any new French investment in that
country.
20. May I be allowed. by way of conclusion, to quote
once again the Rime Minister of France, Mr. Fabius. who
said, “France is, by tradition, a land of human rights and
freedom. It cannot turn a blind eye to the flagrant violation of fundamental human rights. We hope that many
other countries will join us so that justice and wisdom may
finally prevail in that part of the world.”

i2. Ihcb%&erforFo&gnAHairsofFmnccreconrrrmcdthatfundaJWntalpmiti4mhminNcwYorkon9
&to&r of hst year during a &al
me&g organ&d by
the Ctmbrwnof tbe Speciar Committee against &7*&i.

13. Fram shares that position with the other memb
of tbe European Community, whose Ministenr for Foreign
Affairs, in their declaration of 23 July, expressed their
“gravest concern at the continuance of human suflering in
South Africa caused by the qwrfheid system” [sn
s/17362 unnex].

21. Mr. MAKEY (United Kingdom): I should like first
to congratulate you, Sir. on your accession to the presidency of the Council for the month of July. This first
formal meeting of the Council is taking place late in your
presidency, but you have in the informal consultations
which

II. A,p?fMd h mrr?wy 10 !!!e mnn! r???!pd!!ic??! prk!cipks on which our society is based. Its elimination. as was
&led
in Brussels by the Minister for Foreign Affairs of
France, Mr. Roland Dumas, offers the only prospect for a
pomibk settlement. Neither arrests, arbitrary detentions,
the policy of forced removal of populations nor vidrnce
exercised by the forces of law and order can be a solution.

have

heen

under

wav

d!s!ng

!kp

CCL’+

4

!!F

month shown the high prof&onal
qualities. the impartiality and the good humour which the Council looks for in its
President.
22. I extend my delegation’s cordial thanks also IO the
repmntative
of Trinidad and Tobago. and the Minister

2

for Foreign Affairs of that country, for the admirable, not
to say exemplary, manner in which they guided the aflairs
of the Council in June.

united in our view that the system of upurtheid must be
brought to an end as soon as possible, There are differing
views on the ways in which this can be achieved. For my
own Government, the path of negotiation and of dialogue
between the communities concerned must be preferred to
armed struggle, violence and the repression which thts
engenders. We believe that it would be gravely irresponsible for the Council to encourage violence. We equally
believe that the Council must consider in a serious, sober
and responsible way the likely consequences of other
courses of action.

23. My Government and the British people are horrified
at the growing violence within South Africa. This violence,
which has continued throughout the last year. has now
claimed over 400 lives. It bus occurred not only between
members of dilferent racial groups. but within those
groups. It is the tragic but inevitable result of the deepseated frustration of the majority of the people of South
Africa. Repression provides no answer. The South African
Government must address the root cause: the need for
fundamental reforms.

29. It would not be responsible to call for measures
which, on the basis of extensive past experience, including
the experience of southern Rhodesia, we know to be ineffective. It would not be responsible to call for measures
which would have a damaging effect on the population 0’
South Africa and of neighbouring countries, without
achieving the end which we all desire. It should be common ground between us to maintain a balance of pressure
and persuasion in our relations with South Africa, keeping
open the channels of communication and the prospect of
economic advancement for poorer sections of the community while insisting on far-reaching reform.

24. The state of emergency imposed in 36 districts of
South Africa since last weekend has now been followed by
further deaths and the detention without charge of
hundreds of people. Such action, in adding to the numbers
who languish in detention without trial, will solve nothing;
it simply increases domestic tension and international concern at the situation. In Britain, Parliament has been
debating the situation in South Africa until the early hours
of today, 25 July.
25. The sense of parliamentary and public outrage in the
United Kingdom is shared by our partners in the European Community. The Ministers for Foreign Affairs of the
Ten issued a unanimous declaration in Brussels on 23 July
deploring all acts of violence in South Africa and calling
for an end to the state of emergency and the release of all
those held under its provisions. The Ten stressed that the
tirst requirement was the rapid opening of dialogue
between the South African Government and the authentic
representatives of the non-white community, with the clear
goal, Inrpr alio, of ensuring adequate representation of the
black community at the national level [see S/17362,
MIIPX]. It was, I am sure. right to put dialogue at the top of
the list, for the way forward must be through negotiation.

30. As Sir Geoffrey Howe stated on 23 July, the state of
emergency has sharply underlined the urgent need to redress fundamental grievances. There must be action of a
convincing and effective kind to create a climate of conftdence which will permit a real dialogue with genuine leaders of the black community, whom blacks must be
permitted to choose.
31. Sir CieotTrey called on the South African Govemment to take the following steps: the unconditional release
of Nelson Mandela and other acknowledged political leaders; an end to forced removals; an end to detention without
trial; an end to the state of emergency; the progressive
abolition of dllminatoty
legislation such as the pass
laws and the Group Areas Act; a commitment to some
form of common citizan&ip for all South Africans.

26. The British Foreign Secretary, Sir Geoffrey Howe, in
a speech to the Royal Commonwealth Society in London
on 23 July, gave further emphasis to the British Govemtnent’s strong views about the present situation in South
Africa.

Our objectives in this debate must be to persuade the
South African Government to take these steps and to
implement the far-reaching reforms which we agree to be
necessary. Our objective is to show South Africa that there
is an alternative to the present violence and repression.
This objective will best be achieved if we approach the
issue with seriousness and a sense of responsibility, and
above all if we express the unanimity of view which
undoubtedly exists.

32.

27. He racalled that a quarter of a century ago the then
British Prime Minister, Mr. Harold Macmillan, had
warned the South African Parliament that the wind of
change was blowing through the continent of Africa and
that the growth of national consciousness was a political
fact. Sir Geolfrey Howe declared that apmthefd was unacceptable, unworkable and indefensible; it was contrary to
all British and Commonwealth values and was given
added repugnance by the existence side by side of two
communities-a
ruling minority and a majority deprived
of power-between
which the inequalities were vast. Most
repugnant of all was the fact that these inequalities were
built upon foundations of racial di.scrimination.

33. Mr. GRUNNET (Denmark): First of all I should like
to congratuiate you, Sir, on your assumption of the presidency of the Security Council for t..e month of July.
34. I would also take advantage of this opportunity to
express our deep admiration for the extremely efftcient and
skilful way in which the Foreign Minister of Trinidad and
Tobago and the representative of that country handled the
Council’s affairs during the very busy month of June.

28. There is no disagreement within the Council. indeed
within the whole United Nations, on these points. We are
3

our thanks also to the Minister for Foreign Affairs and the
representative of Trinidad and Tobago, who acted as
President last month, for the skilful, able and wise way in
which they guided the debate of the Council.

35. @rice again the apartheid system has shown its hideous face and true nature. The most recent action by the
South African authorities in declaring a state of emergency
in certain areas marks a very serious escalation of reprossion in that country. Indeed. repression seems to be the
only answer from the white minority to the demands of the
black majority to exercise its rightful political and civil
rights.

44. This is the fourth time in as many weeks that the
Council has met to discuss issues relating to South Africa.
Such is a measure of the insecurity and violence that beleaguers the area. bringing anguish to so many.

36. My Government once again strongly condemns this
inhuman uwr/&id
system, which the latest measures
clearly aim at preserving. These measures will only lead to
a further increase in the human sufferings caused in South
Africa by the upartheid system and result in further violence and bloodshed.

45. Today, however, we are not discussing a military
strike or the efforts of a people to realize nationhood; we
are discussing a Government’s treatment of its own population. Such a discussion must focus on one overriding
goal: what the world can do to help abolish the system of
apartheid
whereby a person, because he or she is not white,
is deemed socially and politically inferior.
.

37. The state of emergency must therefore be brought to
an end immediately in the interest of all concerned. and all
those held under its provisions released without delay.
Denmark’s unequivocal condemnation of the apartheid
system is well known and was stated clearly during the
Council’s deliberations on the situation in South Africa
only a couple of months ago. My Government has in
many ways implemented this policy in practical and concrete action, and we have also emphasized the necessity of
the Council’s adopting manrkttory sanctions against South
Africa.

46. My country underwent a terrible civil war to rid itself
of institutional&d
servitude and prejudice. Brother fought
against brother until an abhorrent racial system was eliminated. We wish no country to undergo the same haemorrhage of lives and talents that inevitably results when one
man seeks to oppress another.

38. The latest manifestation of the racial policy of repression clearly demonstrates the need for increased intemational pressure against the apt&e&i
system. The South
African Government must be brought to understand that
the up&&d
system has to be abolished while it is still
possible through peaceful means.

47. Since the formal instigation of aparrhetd the United
States has sought, in a variety of ways, to encourage the
leaders in Pretoria towards a truly humane government.
There are those in this room who, while sharing our objeetives, criticise our means. They say we have not done
enough to premum the South African Government on its
internal policies, and that no signiticant change can k
effected without totally isolating Pretoria economically
and politically.

39. Denmark strongly believes that the situation in South
Africa constitutes a serious threat to international peace
and security and that the Government of South Africa is
guilty of acts of aggression and breaches of the peaa, in
violation of the provisions of the Charter of the United
Nations.

48. The United States ftmtly believes, however, that such
an isolation would lead to more bloodshed, to increased
autarky of the South African economy, to a curtailment of
external influence to effect change and, in the end, to
greater suffering for tlte very people we are all trying to
help.

40. Pending mandatory sanctions tmder Chapter VII of
the Charter, it is important that the members of the Council co-operate quickly, in a spirit of comprontise. in order
to reach agreement on measures against South Africa
which can in an effective way increase the international
pressute.

49. The United States condemns unequivocally the systern ofom.
The Administration of Prdknt Beidgan
holds uprtr&id directly @ble
for the tragic events
oceuring at this time in South Africa. Particularly under
the present state of emergency, we look to the South African Government to exercise its msponsibilitk in a manner
which respects the fundamental rights of all South Africans. The violence and deaths must end-now-so
that
South Africans can proceed to a meaningful dialogue leading to urgent, fundamental reforms and an end to the
system of upurfhefd.

41. Consequently, Denmark co-sponsors the draft resolution presented today.
42. Mr. ‘YALTERS (United States of America): Mr.
President, I would like to begin by joining my colleagues
who have expressed to you their congratulations on the
r&!ful

pnti

imprhl

way

i* w&&

y+

hg+ve q+&*!gj

50. My Government has on numerous occasions over the
.,_- cv,,+c,cv
_^..._.,^ A ,-L” .L-... L ,-x,,&coII
*b-L--- ““.‘,I~LIICII,,
a-Y------r
:- puu-..L
,W.Y
LOCeOUYIII
111
lit and in private, its firm conviction that up&reld will
sooner or later lead the country into chaos. To underscore
the seriousness of our conviction, we have undertaken various measures. For example, in an effort to eliminate opurrheid, United States arms sales to South Africa bave been
embargoed since l%3. and in 1977 the United Satcr

!hc

Council’s consultations and deliberations, wisely and with
humour. On behalf of the United States delegation, I
would like to express ou
tnks to you for that.
43. Although I had but a brief opportunity to observe
their conduct of the Council’s business, I wish to express
4

joined the United Nations
in imposing
a further
mandatory arms embargo
again:.t South Africa. Our regulations
ace, in fact, more severe than the United Nations embargo
and restrict United
States exports
to the South African
military
and police for items which are not covered in the
United Nations embargo.
In December
of last year [256&h
meering].
the United
States joined
with other Security
Council members
in voting for an embargo
on imports of
arms and ammunition
produced
in South Africa. We have
recalled our Ambassador
to Pretoria
for consultations.

55. Mr. WGOLCOl~
(Australia):
On behalf of the Austrahan
delegation,
Mr. President,
I wish to congratulate
you on assuming
the presidency
of the Council
for the
month of July and to express our appreciation
of the very
skilful manner
in which you handled our informal
consultations earlier this month.
56.
I wish also to express brielly the thanks of the Australian delegation
to the Foreign
Minister
and the representative
of Trinidad
and Tobago
for the exemplary
manner
in which they discharged
their duties throughout
the month
of June.

51. Our commercial
relationship
is now also restricted.
We extend no official credits to South Africa. The ExportImport
Bank
is essentially
prohibited
from
tinancing
United States sales to South Africa except under very restrictive circumstances.
The Overseas
Private
Investment
Corporation
does not provide
investment
guarantees
for
South
Africa.
Our representative
at the International
Monetary
Fnnd must actively oppose any facility
involving use of Fund credit by any country
whieh practices
upurtheid,uniess the Secretary of the Treasury makes certain certifications
to Congress.
United States trade fairs do
not travel to South Africa.
We carefully
review
export
license applications
for the export of, among other things,
United States crime control equipment
to prevent
the use
of such items in the enforcement
of upurfhed.

57. On four separate occasions this year, the Council has
been called into session to consider
the policies of the
South African
Government--first
in relation
to upurtheid,
then in relation to Namibia
and subsequently
in relation to
its actions against Angola and Botswana.
We regret that
circumstances
require
us yet again to meet to consider
South Africa’s
actions.
58.
Australia’s
policy on apartheid
was set out at length
in our statement
to the Council pn 8 March [2571sr meerkg], and I will not repeat what we said on that occasion. I
wish, however,
to emphasize
that our opposition
to apartheidis fundamental.
Apartheidis a universally
condemned
system of State-controlled
racism, and it is backed by a
range of draconian
security
legislation.
It disadvantages
and degrades the overwhelming
majority
of South Africa’s
population.
It is at the root of the political
instability
and
tensions
which increasingly
atllict
southern
Africa.

52. My Government
seeks to eradicate
apartheidby
employing
the full power of its diplomacy,
by working
with elements in South Africa that share a vision of peace
and harmony,
by encouraging
fair employment
practices
for United States companies
there and by involving
ourselves in financing
programmes-of
some $30 million
in
three years-to
give South African
blacks better training
and opportunities.
We are joined
by Americans
from
many walks of life, our companies
that are spending millions of dollars
to aid the black working
man in South
Africa, our press, civic organizations
and other bodies. In
short. United
States policy has teeth.

59.
In a statement
on 22 July, which has been circulated
to members
of the Council
[s/IIJJJ,
.-xl,
the Australian Foreign
Minister,
Mr. Bill Hayden.
vigorously
condemned
the decision of the South African
Government
to
introduce
a state of emergency
in 36 districts
of South
Africa. Mr. Hayden urged the South African
Government
to enter into dialogue with the real leaders and representatives of the black communities
in South Africa in order to
avert an impending
catastrophe.

53. Furthermore,
we believe our actions
have had 23
&ect,
but that extreme
measures
will not produc:
the
desired result. We are not convinced,
however,
that certain
elements of the draft resolution
under consideration
are
suitable means of discouraging
upurtheid.Particularly
the
suspension
ot new investments
troubles
us. It can only
disrupt the functioning
of an economy
that has in recent
years been increasingly
open to blacks and has grven them
growing
power to eliminate
apurtheid.
Between now and
the end of the century.
the black population
of South
Africa will double, and thousands
of Africans
from neighbouring
States will seek employment,
as they now do,

60. The state of emergency
is the first introduced
in
South Africa since 1%0, when the South African
Govemment invoked
emergency
powers
in the wake of the
Sharpeville
massacres. It gives the South African army and
police authorities
nearly unlimited
powers
of arrest and
detention
and search without
warrant,
and extensive
powers to impose curfews and censor information
about unrest
and protest in affected areas. While non-white
South Africans, and. indeed, some courageous
white South Africans,
are daily deprived
of their basic human
rights, the intrc+
duction of the state of emergency
reveals starkly the extent
to which the South African authorities
are prepared
to go
to shore up the uparrheid
system. We are often treated to
South African assertions that South Africa is a defender of
democratic
values in the face of a totalitarian
onslaught.
These protestations
have been shown once again to be
hollow by South Africa’s
own recent actions. Repression
and violence
are the weapons
of totalitarianism.
not of
liberal democracy.

54. The United States will continue
to speak out and act
against oppression
in South Africa.
The dignity
of mankind is at stake, The situation
in tiuth
Africa is dangerous. Human
lives are at stake.
It is time for the
international
community
to act responsibly
and to use its
influence constructively,
not to take actions that will have
the opposite
effect from those intended.
We call on all
States to join with us in responsible
and constructive
action.
5

61. While exact figures are difficult to ascertain, it
appears that the authorities have moved ruthlessly in
detaining over 800 people so far-people about whom it is
an offence to publish information. In addition to those
detained under the provisions of the stazc of emergency,
others have been detained under the provisions of previous
legislation. In addition, many others have been killed and
wounded in associated violence since 21 July.
62. The Australian Government strongly condemns
those moves further to restrict human and political rights
in South Africa. The fundamental concerns, needs and
aspirations of black South Africans will not be addressed
by the state of emergency. So long as 73 per cent of the
population is constitutionally excluded from the political
process there can be no prospect of stability in South
Africa.
63. Recent cosmetic attempts at reform in South Africa
have failed to produce dialogue or political stability. On
the contrary, they have resulted in widespread protest and
violent opposition. The process of reform upon which the
South African Government claims to be embarked has
proved ineffective as a means of redressing fundamental
wrongs and has been increasingly discredited.
64. ‘Ihe state of eme:gency was imposed after months of
violent protest by the black community against the
Government’s constitutional measures. Some 500 people
have been killed and thousands injured since the new discriminatory constitution was promulgated last year. The
South African Government and security authorities have
responded to legitimate protest and grievances with shocking and widespread repression.
65. Leaders of black political movements, including the
UDF and the Azanian People’s Organization (AZAPO),
as well as of student, church and community groups, have
becn~ted.MostofttteleadersbipoftheUDFhaabcen
put on trial on charges of treason. Administration, edttcatimandamnma!
in manytownshtpttavebrokendown,
66, Inourview,thcstateofeme~willnotprovidea
permanent end to violence. Rather, it is more likely to
encourage people to feel that the only way to achieve real
progmss Iii through confrontation and violence,
67. The storm clouds of frustration and anguish darken
daily over southern Africa. If the South African Govemment dccs not turn away from confrontation to reconciliation within its own boundaries. inevitably and tragically
that storm will bunt. The Australian Government therefore calls upon the South African Government to lift the
state of emergency in those districts in which it has been
imposed and to set free immediately and unconditionally
all political prisoners and detainees.
68. On a number of occasions in the past, Australia has
made it clear that it remains ready to support the imposition of mandatory economic sanctions against South
Africa in response to its UP,V&~ policies. The draft resolution before us urges States Members to take a number of

steps in relation to their dealings with South Africa. While
the Australian Government holds the view that only fully
respected and. universally applied economic sanctions can
be really eflective. we can support the draft resolution
before us [s/17JHj.
69. In conclusion. I should like to cmphasize that the
Australian Govcrnmcnt does not condone violence. WC
recognise:. however. that only the removal of the grievanccs and the introduction of gcnuiue political reform,
through consultation with the real representatives of the
black community, can offer the prospect of lasting and
peaceful solutions in South Africa.
70. Mr. QlAN Yongnian (China) (interpretorion from
Chinese): At the outset. Sir, I wish to extend to you the
warm congratulations of the Chinese delegation on your
assumption of the presidency for this month. I am convinced that with your outstanding talent and rich experience in diplomacy you will certainly be able to guide the
Council to the successful completion of its work for July.
71. I wish also to take this opportunity to convey our
thanks and admiration to the Minister for Foreign Affairs
and the representative of Trinidad and Tobago, who
served as President of the G>uncil fast month, for their
excellent performance in helping the Council discharge its
heavy tasks in June.
72. Since the end of last year, the South African m&t
authorities, in deface of strong condemnation by the
international community, have been conducting sang&
nary suppression of the broad masses of the South African
people struggling against qmrthefd, thus seriously aggravating the situation in that country. On 20 July this year,
the South African authorities once again declared a state
of emcr, my in 36 cities, towns and districts, to step up
and attempt to legalise their massive repression of the
South Aftican people. According to tbc latest reports.
moretban800peoplewemermstedartdaboutsdozen
killed in three or four days. All justice-upholding anmtriu
and peoples throughout the world arc outraged at this new
c-lewlopmmt.
The Chinese Government and peopk
strongly condemn these fmsh criminal acts of the South
African autboritiea. They am deeply sympathetic to the
black masses who have been subjected to repression and
persecution by the South African authorities, and are
tirmly supportive of the just struggle of the South African
people.
73. It is only a matter of course that the South African
authorities should have met with resistance from breed
sections of the South African peopk, including many
white people, and uith strong condemnation by large
numbers of African countries and peoples and all the
justice-upholding countries and peoples in the world, as
they are still practicing, even today in the 19803, the barbarous policy of u~rtheld which should long ago have
been swept onto the garbage heap of history. The General
Assembly and the Security Council have adopted ntmurous resolutions condemning South Africa’s poliq of am/reaf and demanding the complete elimination of that

system. However, the South African authorities have
turned a deaf ear to all of this and have refused to implement the relevant llnited Nations resolutions while obstinately clinging to their system of qx&teid.
Furthermore,
they have intensified their barbarous policy of suppression
and their policy of aggression against their neighbours.
This is something the international community can never
tolerate.
74. In order to deceive public opinion, the South African
authorities have, since last year, been playing the tricks of
their socalled constitutional reforms and their “parliamentary and presidential elections**. However, the broad
sections of the black people are still deprived of their basic
rights as citizens. and the system of opartkid has remained
untouched. When this,fraud was exposed by the South
African people and the international community, the
South African authorities immediately resorted to the
Police and armed forces to intensify their rutbless suppression of the defenceless black masses. Since last September
more than 500 innocent people have been killed and thousands more have been thrown into prison. The double
tactics of deception and suppression only serve to expose
further the false nature of the “reforms” made by the
South African authorities, who are in essence trying to
defend the apartk&f system.
75. The Chinese delegation believes it is timely that the
Council is meeting on this matter. The Council should
strongly condemn the South African authorities and take
urgent action immediately to stop the savage repression of
the South African people by the South African authorities.
It should ask the South Afrlean authorities immediately to
lift the state of emergency, release all the innocent
metnbets of the masses detained of late and set free forthwith Mr. Nelson Mandela and other black leaders, as well
as all other prisoners arrested for political masons. The
Cotmcil shotttd further call upon the States Mentbe~ of
the United Nations and the entire international eommunhytoa&pt+73riousmeasuresof~
agfhtst south
Afrleaandtoauppo~theheroiestrt@eoftheSouth
Aft&n people against opmtkpfd. Shoutd the South African author?te remain umqetent and refuse to implement
the tekvam resohttions of the General Assembly and the
Security Council, the Cot&l must seriously comider the
imposition of cumprehensivc mandatory sanctions against
it in eomjtliattce with Chapter VII of the Charter of the
United Nations.
76. I wish to reiterate here that the Chinese Government
and people have all along firmly opposed and strongly
condemned the system of apartkti in South Africa, and
have refused to have any ccmtact whatsoever with the
South African authorities. They will. as always, resolutely
support the just struggle of the South African people
against upurrieid and for rafiai cquaiiiy
u&i
i&i iXtij&
wins final

victory.

77. Mr. SAFRONCHUK
(Union of Soviet Socialist
Republics) (intetpreration from Russiun): Allow me, Sir. on
behalf of the !kwkt ckkgation. to congratulate you heartily on your assumption of the lofty post of President of the
Council.

78. I wish also to take this opportunity to express our
gratitude to the Minister for Foreign Affairs and the representative of Trinidad and Tobago for :heir work as President last month.
79. The Council is meeting today in connection with the
serious deterioration of the situation in the southern part
of the African continent. The policy of apartheid pursued
by the racist authorities in South Africa has long posed a
challenge to the African peoples and to all freedom-loving
peoples. That policy has been described in many United
Nations decisions as constituting a threat to the maintenance of international peace.
80. Recently, the racist authorities in South Africa have
been carrying out massive repression against those in
favour of eliminating the inhumane system of upartheidin
that country. In the early morning of 22 July a state of
emergency was declared, which gave the police and military authorities the right to take unlimited arbitrary
action against the majority of the population of the country. Hudteds of innocent people have been arrested and
imprisoned. On the basis of fabricated accusations of tmason against the State, the leaders of mass democratic
organizations have been anested. Army units and large
police forces have been used against unarmed demonstrators. Dozens of people have been killed and hundreds
wounded in recent days. Since September last year, the
opartheid r&time has killed more than u)o people. Strict
censorship has been imposed to conceal the bloody crimes
of the optwkti r&me against the indigenous population
of the country. Essentially there is a war being waged by
the racist r&ime against the majority of the South A&art
Population rebelling against that rlgime. For the third
time in the last 25 years, the umtkfd
r&ime is trying to
crush a popular revolt using bloody terror tact& against
the native population.
81. Events in South Africa cannot fail to cause wide
spread indignation and condemnation throughout the
entire world. The worsening explosive situation in the
southern
~BII of Africa demands decisive acts by the ecurity Council.
82. ThemcenteventsinSouthAfrieasltowthattheeriminal system of qpmthrld is in the throes of deep crisis. Tlte
so.ealled catatitutiollel
reforms loudly heralded by the
fktoriarCgimelta~tumedouttobermothingleesthan
another species of that same qplrrrlicldpoli.
The essence
of the aprtkhisystem
and the polity daggmmion, which
causes suRering to the people of Africa, remains
unchanged and goes against the basic interests of the
people of South Africa and other African peoples.
when all fmedom-loving peoples are cek.83. In 1985,
---:----.
^Z.*-.2.4^-,
-l-cwuu
omiirig iM C--I-L
totucu, ourfi~*~*~,
VI ~8%•hb~*, VIC,
WOCUI.I
and the estabbshrnent of the United Nations, we find it
especially intolerable to have recidivists of the racist inhuman ideology mpmsented by OpOrrkti
continuing their
work.
84.
head

We would also recall that many of those who now
the apartheid r&time or headed it in the recent past

were, in the years of the Second World War, which was
unleashed by Hitlerite fascism, open proponents of fascism. For example. The Nets York Timestoday published
material which shows that the former Prime Minister of
South Africa, Verwoerd. after the war was editor of the
newspaper Die nunsvoler. which glorified the evil acts of
the Fascists. Another former Rime Minister of South
Africa, Vorster. was one of the leaders of the pro-fascist
terrorist orgar&tion
Die Ossewa-Brandwag. Finally, the
current President of South Africa, Botha, during the war
was one of the leaders of the Nationalist Party of South
Africa, which declared itself a proponent of fascism and
openly attacked the anti-Hitlerite coalition. Now, as everybody knows, that is the ruling party of South Africa.

to resort to new harsh repression. It is precisely the socalled constructive engagement of Washington with the
upartkti regime which has led to an increase in Pretoria’s
aggressiveness in recent days, to persecution against those
fighting racism in South Africa and to expansion of its
aggressive acts against neighbouring African States.

85. We mention all thu to show that the present @ime
in Pretoria is a spritual successor to fascism. It is also
known that the fascism of Hitler. in order to camotdlage
its criminal plans for world domination, used the bugaboo
of a communist threat. The same trick is now being used
by the upwtkti r&me. The representative of that shameftd regime has more tban once teaorted here to anticommunist rhetorkz, and we are sum that he will continue
to do so. But we hope that nobody wiil be deceived by it
with repd to the true gds of the policy of qmrtkti.

91. All African countries, all non-aligned countries and
all the socialist States have been advocating the adoption
of urgent, effective measures against the uparrheld r&ime
in South Africe This demand is contained in the decisions
of many international forums, the Organization of African
Unity (OAU), the Movement of Non-Aligned Countries
and so universaJ a forum as the General Assembly.

90. The Soviet Union vigorously condemns the militarypolitical support for the racist regime by certain Western
countries members of the North Atlantic Treaty Organization. the United States policy of “constructive engagement” with the Pretoria authorities, and the attempts to
lead the South African rkgime out of a situation of political isolation.

92. Indeed, at its thirty-ninth session, as we all recall, the
General Assembly vJgorou%ly condemned the South African uporrheid &ghtte for its continued brutal oppression
and vJolence, for its illegal occupation of Namibia and its
npeated acts of aggtession, subversion and terrorism
against independent African States [rpso!uron 39172 R qf

86, ‘2he upwrkkf dgitne is a tttaJigttant tumour in the
hotly of A&a. It endangers peace and must be nmoved
6urgia3lly; that k eompr&ettsive and binding aanetions
must be introduced, as provtded by chapter VJI of the
charter of the United Nationa. The argumems, ttdmottitiotts and JttcantatJotts we Jtave heard here today from tJte
tepmeahves
of some countrJes, wbJcb. indeed, are auppnrtJngtbeRetorJar&JmeinanywaytJteycan,aswccan
tee from paot expricnce wiJJ not help the sJtt&3n, The
limitd ecmlotttic sattdotls ttletttioned here will not lead to
tIteelimb38tioodtber4ime.
87. ItishownhtfofmanyyearsthcsccurityCouncil,
the General Assembly and other unitul Jwotm
-anendtotheuJ.wtk~sy6tem
haw V-Q
inficna4mAfrlcaattdkewdnnendcdthe~of
equdfigbtatothccntlfepoJndatlonof8otttbAf~.

13 lkdr

1984,porn. 3j.

93. The General Assemb& has stated that only the total
eradication of tqmrrhed and the est6bJiiment of a nottracial democratic society had on majority rule, throu&
tJte full and free exetcktc of adult suffrage by all the people
in a united and nott-ftngmented Soutb AfrJca. eatt lead to
a just and Jesting softttiott of the explosive situ&m in
south Africa [KM, m.
3J

hodial

94. ?lteGendhscmblybas~thcSecurityCouncilto~mea9uresteensttrethetoudtffhlsMnofthe
mdstr@JrtteofSotttJtAfrJcaffomtheunJtedNatJonsand
JtsfamiJyofof@zatJotte,andbastcquattaJtJte~ty
&urteJJtogJ~specieJattenthmtoaction,underChaptcr
VJI of th Chnftcr, ngaittutSouth Africa [i&t, pms.

88, lnPfcaoh&nit~unanimourlyon12Msrdl

IO

1985[twtaknt arw985)ll, thechacil urgedtheGovem- ad JJ$

metndRetorJatoendvi&neeand
twpreMhagaittetthe
ttativcpoptdationandagainatotheropponentooffJpurrkefd and to carry out immedJmte nteaattmi to elimittate
~?JowdiJ&thAfriearespondtotJteaeappeab
attddemandsoftbeJmematJcmaJcommuttity7lIte~
riaatttborJtie8erudelyJgnoredthemamJconthmetotrampk upon the ekmmtary human rights of23 miJJkm n&e
inbabhamsofSoutbAfricaattdtopersistintheiraetsof
h-G
&J
&m&U
wli-h,

95. Tbe Soviet Union feeb tbat the Council should act,
with the full sense cd raponribjlity gJven to it by tJte Charter, to examine the present -our
shuation in southem
AfticaantJurgentJytakeeff~mea8itteaagainstthe
taeiur@ime,fortJtesitttatJottinSouthAJricaqresetitaa
seriou heat to internatioMl pew and security.
96. Recent events in South Africa agttJn underline tJte
thneihlessofthedemand,ofAf~statathatthesccurity Council impose, under Cha~ster VJJ of the Charter,
cornpreheMivc mandatory satt&mpopinstthepmoria
dgime. ne soviet union vigorously supports those
demands. The Council must exert its weigh and authority
ro~toprtanendtothcSouthATricanracirtrCgime.s
acta of repre&m agabtst the Mming
majority of

89. Obvioudy, the South Aftican racists would not act so
bntzetily and plovoartlvely a they CotJJdnot rely upon the
conutant support of their WeHcm proteetom. mainly the
UAi(rd~,who!lekadrnprottPimthepoticyd”cotlstwtive engamnt”
with J%wtoria. lltis support for tbe
Eghtte slknvs it to carry out a policy of State terrorism and

8

the pople of that country. The Council should make its
contribution to eliminating the most shameful phenomenon of our time-aparlheid.
97. In conclusion, I wish to state that the Soviet Union
stands united with those fighting racism and uptrthetd.
Our country has always given and will continue to give
necessary support to the African peoples in their just struggle against apartheld and for freedom and social progress.
The Soviet Union will continue consistently to carry out its
policy of supporting the national liberation movements,
including those in southern Africa, and of firmly and
vigorously rebtdling aggressive schemes of racism and
imperialism and of pursuing the speedy elimination of
colonialism and upartheidin southern Africa.

the majority of the people and depriving them of their
civil, political and social rights. We are also distressed to
see that legal instruments are being devised for the
unequivocal purpose of consolidating and perpetuating
that universally repudiated system.
105. Moreover, the South African Government, under
the state of emergency, is implementing a policy of practices that have installed a reign of terror, violating the most
basic of universally recognized norms of human conduct.
106. The constant repression and the declaration of a
state of emergency with all its brutality are nothing more
than the simple armed guarantee on which the South African racist system is based.

98. tkfortunately, the two-Power draft resolution that
has been distributed in document s/17354 is clearlv inadequate in terms of carrying out genuinely effective t&sures
against the racist r&ime in Pretoria. In that tespect, the
draft does not go far enough, and needs substantial additions. Therefore the Soviet delegation reserves its position
on this ddi rrMMon.

107. In these circumstances, I believe that the combined
force of both internal and external pressure-the latter in
the form of specific measures--would have a decisive influence on the Pretoria authorities and bring about conditions more favourable to the struggling lloutb African
people.

99. Mr. LUNA (Peru) (tttterpretutbt from SpPnsh):
Allow me first to congratulate you, Sir, on your assumption of the presidency for the month of July. I am sure that
with your well-known personal and professional gifts, you
will ensure that the Council appropriately and in timely
fashion meets the lofty responsibilities conferred upon it
by the Charter.

108. There is no need for me to reiterate here my country’s well-known position, nor to tea&m Peru’s moral
commitment to the tlitnination of up&&d
and of evcrything that serves to ittstitutionalixe or consolidate it. We
are committed to an ‘end to repression, to the ftiing of
politifel prisonem and to a lifting of the state of emergency
which has led to the trampling underfoot of basic human
rights and of juridical norms governing t&tiotts btwcen
the State and its oyyn nalionaLq causing wffering- to the
majotity moor of the Sot& African pcop!e, which hart
ettff~
discritnination. Once the sbatneful system of
~~ltasatlastlxeadlxnm&d,hafrae,rktuocratic, multimcial eociaty be extablislted in that tormented
cotmy4mguarsmetin%cqtmlrlghstoauitsdt&ctts.

100. 1 should like to congratulate c&o the Mitt&er

for

FOdgtlAihirSMdthCEpSUMtiVCOfTfidddMtd

TobagoontheirskiIfttIperfonnattcuintbepre&ncylast
tnonth.

110. Mr. van SCHIRNDING

103, Theprcambktotttyc4nmtty’spoBucalcowritudon
cnshtinestbeprimacyofthehumtlnbci~allmcn,being
qualindi@ty,sharerightsofuni~~tythat
mF&
. -_.
w
in’& a$--, Fir a&
;m
itiii atii *k

(&ntth

Africa):

111.lAmeetthcoumt#aceottrecldtbatmy
clovcmmdceanotmgardtbehuemalsituatlonin
SauthAfficaasanmtterfordisussiibytbcSecllrity
cowril.laedditian.itrcjectsthecounell’r&tIbkstMdar&indebatingtbeda&rmiiofastateofcmetgencyin
certainpartsofmycoumrywhikitcboosuto~
dmib
aitlaarinu
hr
--I.-dwf-.. nltlar
-I-. marrlr.
--......v.

plSOttiSthCSttpCU3CpttQOSedrocictyMtdthCSlatc.

Gbviomly, this profound humanism, which charpcteripr
tk!4tateandpeopleofPkru,bmfkctedinitsf4ncign
pdicy.
104. Gmsequaktly, Rru is gravely coIy*eAcd at tlu perpetuationoftbeqporpMdsyuerninacountry,opPraairtg

112. Itisnotewortbytbattbismeetingofthccouncil
dmddhawbtenteqestdbyFrsna,acotmtiy~
iudodyreculuyprodaitncdastateof
Ti&Z
cTakdo&tilekstuesdgedFEench~
Facilicoculn.~tolejlorts,morethan5~
manbersoftbeFtcnchaaxuityforceswcreaenttoNew

Pleasa

Caledonia-an
area with a lotal population
to wstorc law and order thcrc.

of l46,t100-

political participation without destroying stability and
progress in all spheres of life for all our communities.”

113. It is furthermore signilicant that only the other day
there were clashes bet&een police and demonstrators in the
French-ruled archipelago of Ciuadeloupe. Crowds of
people were reported to have put up barricades around the
capital and set vehicles on tire. Shops and public oflices
were apparently shut. Evidently those involved wcrc proindependence supporters protesting a prison sentence
imposed on a militant separatist.

117. However, one condition has been laid down, that is,
that violence should be foresworn as a means to achieve
political ends. 1 think that that is a reasonable condition
which any reasonable person would accept. In this connection, the South African Minister for Foreign Atfaits said
the following, as recently as yesterday:
‘The organirels of violence in South Africa are not
striving for the improvement of Black peoples’ living
standards or for a system in which Black leaden will
have a say in decisions which atfect the interests of all.
The door is open for Black leaders who reject violence
as a means of achieving political aims to advance Black
interests, including Black political rights, through a process of dialogue and negotiation.

114. Those developments alone, if not its long colonial
heritage, should have reminded France of the difliculties of
coping with such emotional issues as civil and political
rights. But no, it has seen fit to call this meeting of the
Council to condemn South Africa for its handling of what
is an immeasurably more complex situation.
115. The Council is aware of the process of reform in
South Africa to which my Government is committed. That
procffls is aimed at achieving a political dispensation in
South Africa involving ah the communhies in the country.
116. The South African Governmsnt

“It is ptecisety because the establishment of a peaceful disuensation for all South Africa’s communities has
manif&ted itself as a test&of the Government’s reform
programme that those elements which advoate a
Marxist dictatorship have acted to arrest the proxss of
reform and to prevent moderate Black leaders, or those
who are anti-Marxist, from playing a eonstruetive role
in the new constitutional dispensation. Tltey remain
silent when asked why 1.5 million workers from neighbouring States come to seek work in South Africa. lhey
do not concern themselves with the millions of starving
people in other parts of Africa. They are not cotteemed
about the laek of politieol rigbts and press freedom in
most African countries, precisely because they secretly
have in mind a system of tyranny in which not a single
lttndamattal right or freedom will k tofemted. Their
mcthcds are proof of this.

stands raadv to

black opinion in order to fhtd an quhable’sohttion
to our
problems which will satisfy the masortable aspirations of
ail Ute peoples of South Africa, My Government is seeking
to create structures of government which will allow partieipation by all, without domination. As recently as 29 June,
+&c~~~~wuntrylDjdtbcfol~htbasumh
:
“1 tejca anphaticauv the charm that our amtittttional objectivaa run eottttter to eiviliaed qnceptions of
human righoe, dig&y and freadom inuspeuivaofma,
cokntratrafigiott.Chtrf~
airnistoetmbIc
ourpaopfasto~whbotteancubaeiaau&a
wayasmey&ntarffyk~buwaeatbcm.bt
wcsmdetaDdfw~

“It is for this reason that the State Fmident
appwfedtoallSou&Afr&anstoappmaebotuootm=
try’rpfobkm$witbmulual~to~
cldhmaaakdr-sndu~tkpmIna
ciommmtdossnotdo3tbt
tsspmaematuser.‘Iht
th6ttkm&w&yoftkpsoplein~Aflic6~6
pcdttlaoh6&ntoourprobletna.Thfflcbtoomuehat
etakeforaHsanhAfriaattsto&owourfutttmtok
dctedndbypcfpemltorsofvlolenawttohum
people auvt.”

bafi

118. It is manifestly &at that my Govermttent has
embarked upon sinmre etforts at reform, in stark contradistinctiontomunycountrimoftbeworkI.Moreandmore
blwk Afriarns are standing up and saying exactly that,
Professor George Ayittcy. a Ghanaian As&ant Rofcunr
of Ekmomies
at Blooms&r8
University in pCnnsyfvania,
rricrrlng to oppo&km detnenta In black Atiica, wrote the
fohowii
in the wa# S&W Jarrnvd on 22 Jttiy: “Many
leadem have either outlawed political parties or have
declared their countries one-party States and liqt&tcd
tk qqosition.
Many opposition men&r8 have mysterlously ttmlshd”
He went on to remark, -App@lng a
lower standard of morality to black Africa Ways an
insulting do&k-standard
qurinst blacks.”

7heimportanttbingistomeettheneedsandaspiratimtscdsouthAffiat*apmpk6.
“My Govmnmt
stab for an evolutionary process
ofadaptationandirmovationbaseduponandtaibraf
.A
n.)L *.
6 &f--b
w NY
YIY Ad....,.w.--.
tiorttowbicbtbeSoutbAfricanOoclcmmcatbcommittcdka~thewayopcnforunBmitedpatibilitics
umqtatibkwithtkcboiccswilicheachpoplhtbn
gmlporcummitymaycMnttauywbhtomske.
‘Tbercalpointatiirurhthcreforenotoneofob*
tiw but of mdod-the
best practical way of ensuring
10

119. -fhe ltnrest in South Africa has been and continues
to be instigated IO frustrate the reform process. Moderutc
black leadership is being intimidated by acts of assasination, murder, arson and threats to their lives und propcrties in order to prcvcnt their becoming involved in the
negotiating process.

instant solution and brought about an immediate end to
the violence?
126. The French Prime Minister has done the c’rluse 01
reform in South Africa a disservice. France’s own cxperience should have persuaded him of the error of his
Government’s impulsive, if not opportunistic, action. Sudden virtue does him no credit. The measures he has proposed, if they should ever be implemented, will bring
nothing but misery to the people he now professes to want
to help, as well as to our neighbours. Inevitably. the black
peoples of South Africa will be the first to feel the cfliects ol
measures designed to undermine the South African economy. Is that what the French Prime Minister wants:’

120. No Governmen; can allow lawlessness to continue
unchecked. The excesses perpetrated by the extremist elements have been beyond belief. In addition to murder,
arson and wanton acts of destruction of property, those
elements have indulged in such barbaric acts as burning
people alive. Essentiai services in the affected black areas
have been stopped, transport has been disrupted, garbage
has piled up in the streets, shops providing the daily necessities of life have been gutted. and the inhabitants, mainly
black pople. feared for their lives whenever they emerged
from their homes. It was in ordetto cope with those circumstances that the authorities needed additional powers.
They had tried for months to restore order with the normal powers at their disposal, but to no avail.

127. Let me assure the Council that the additional measures taken by my Government please nobody in South
Africa. They will be lifted as soon as the vio!ence diminishes. We shall continue the process of dialogue and
debate, and nothing the Council may say or plan will deter
us from doing what we believe is in the best interests of all
the peoples of South Africa.

121. In last night’s opposition press in South Africa,
Bishop Tutu. who is no friend of my Government. under a
banner headline “End Violence or I Quit” is re rted as
saying that if suspected enemies were killed in t I?c way in
which a woman was burned alive in Duduza township !ast
Saturday, he would leave South Africa. He said before a
large crowd, “If you do this kind of thing, I will find it
di&ult to speak for the cause of liberation”. And Bishop
Tutu was speaking not about white-black violence but &W
lutce$qetmtedbyblacksagaiastblacks.Membaaofthe
Cotmcilnodoubtwitues&theseeventsandthcBi&p’s
remarke via local American t&v&on covenige.

128. The PRESIDENT
(interpretorion from Russian):
The next speaker is the Chairman of the Special Committee against Aparfhed, Mr. Joseph Garba. I invite him to
take n place at the Council table and to make his
statement.
129. Mr. GARBA (Chairman of the Special Committee
against &WtM)z
First of all, Sir, let me say how gmtied
I am that the Council is meeting under your presidency.
We of the @e&l Commlt~ agWst &i&e&I
wiluti very
highly the support of your cotttttty for the just stntggle of
tbe oppmsed people of South Africa and your own pereonal conttibutiott to the work of tite Spccia~ Cotttmittee
as its Vim.

122. Surely the mcmbcrs of the Council must re3lize that
ifithatlbeenatallpossiMctorestofeofderandnonndity
inthebladiareeebytheuscafnonttal,stan&rdmethoda,
the auWritie8 would have done so. But the violence had
~beyottdtkpohttalwh&hit~dbebrougltt
lltUk~~apnnatpOlkCsetlon.Addi~SCCUtity
msanu~#olilly.

130. I should also like to Ckpress our gratitude to the
MMterforFotei~nAffairsandtheqmaentativeofTtittidadendTobagqwkob&oadcdicatedtnctttberofthe
Bpe4M~Qlaimt&#W4forthevetyable
mMncrinwbidtclwkdtleeptfaneonductrdtbcworkof
thcaautldllectmmtth.

123. We real&d fuUy what the consequences of such
action would be. internally as wdl as externally, but we felt
we had a duty to the people directly al&ted, whatever the
~mightbe.Andkmee~dlattheemcrgency measures were introduced not to protect white lives
and pmpeny but black lives and property in black areas.

131. <)n 17AugtW 1984,theCotmciladopteditsresolutbr,554(1084),dSlWUdgtllC~fltWoorwitution
in South Africa, which excluded the African majority~ and
thcekcdonsto~-fordwcolourcd
peopkandpeopleafA&tnorigin,wamingthatthey
would further aggravate the already explosive-1 rejWat,
rxplde-dtti
ittdde !hh
Africa and reque&g
theSecmtaq-Genemltoteportotttheimplementationof
thatrWcWion.ltde&kdtoremains&edofthe~
in view of its extreme -mvity.

124. Ihavethe@nWsionthatsotnemetnbersafthe
Cowtdlwotddhavepreferfeditifwehaddmptyigttofed
tttcpktsofblackpMplefwacdonbytbeautboritleat0
pUtMcndtOtbCVbkSlCClkflkti~thdtheirdailylii.
125. HaHtbeFrcncbllOtfhemYhrcl~tlmttlle
l!odhkmdume#rcqrdra
pfotcahofdviliMsunda
-lecluhymcnrwcr?whatPbocutbethatdteybaHadoptaltofcprcsstbcviokncethathas
Z*$y&F
usd +ep-prc
tttmmon m those st e-torn colomes
aaunacccptsMrMdnquirlngtbeattcndoiloftheCouncil? Would owmight political Ghan* haw provided an

132. TIM rtponirpldrcgime proceeded, in contempt of the
Security Council. to enforce the racist constitution. provoking legitimstc protest by the oppressed majority. h
tried to contain the
liar upsurge through naked viokVIce, deployment o p”p”
armed forces against African low+
ships. and detention of leaders of peaceful protest on
charges of treason.
II

recently, another to Bishop Desmond Tutu. This movement deserves respect as well as true solidarity at this critical time.

133. On 12 March 1985. the Council, concerned over the
repression and killings that had led to an aggravation of
the already explosive situation, adopted its resolution 560
(1985). in which it strongly condemned the Pretoria
r&me. demanded that it end repression, and once again
requested the Secretary-General to report on the implementation of the resolution. Once again the Council
decided to remain seized of the matter in view of the gravity of the situation.

141. On behalf of the Special Committee, I am obliged to
draw attention to the inescapable responsibility of the
Security Council. As we approach the fortieth anniversary
of the United Nations. I need hardlv remind members of
the Council that the drganimtion Gas been seized of the
question of racism in South Africa ever sirtoe the first session of the General Assembly in 1946. Hundreds of r~~lutions have been adopted by the United Nations, and the
Pretoria regime has invariably defied them with impunity.

134. ‘Ihe Pretoria regime, again in utter contempt of the
Council. further escalated killings and repression. Forty
blacks in a funeral procession were butchered by the police
at Uitenhoge on the twenty-fifth anniversary of the Sharpeville massacre, and since then there has been further vialence, including the cowardly killing of unarmed refugees
in Botswana.

142. The Council has proved unable to discharge its
responsibility under the Charter owing to the stubborn
determination of some of its Permanent Members to protect the upartheid r&me from international action because
of profrt from the inhuman oppression of the black people.

135. Despite this escalating violence and repression, the
racist regime has been unable to suppress the resistance of
the oppressed people. who have been driven to the wall
and are ftghting for their elementary rights. In its dcspcration it has now declared a state of emergency, authorizing
its police and armed forces to arrest, search, torture or
even kill the black people and white opponents of upanheid with impunity and to block out news of their crimes
through censorship.

143. 1 must recall that as early as 1952 the Atrican and
Asian States, in requesting that the Cleneral Assembly consider the question of race ConfIict resulting from upar&&i,
warned of the danger to international peace and security.
Tlte Security Council recognimd that danger in the wake
of the Sharpeville massacre of 1960. And yet, again and
again, the Western Permanent Members have oppmed a
determluation under Chapter VII of the Charter that the
situation in South Africa constitutes a threat to intemational peace and security and calls for sanctions and other
measures.

136. Alarming reports have been coming out of South
Africa shtce the imposition of the state of emergency last
Saturday. I will not take the Council’s time to recount
them, but I mtut empha&e the extrame gravity of this
aihIatllm.
137. The Issue before the C4nmeil is not the mem eaatlation of mpmasion against mle
struggling for the p&clpla9oftkc%arteroftlteunitedIu&naandtIte
Unlvemal De&ration of Hutnatt RigMa. It is not even the
grlumma-,likethoecofSharpcvillc,sowaoend
Utteahnge,whlcbwlllIivalahiatoryasbloteonhuman
UZbati3eIs
of miluone of psopfo-en8 tweh

144, The Pretoria @ime has been guilty of countless
massacres. It has committed aggression and terrorism
a@st Angola. Botswana, Zambia, Zimbabwe, Mozambique, Lesotho and even the Seychelles. But for some
Western Powers that is not considemd even a threat to the
peace, much leas a breach of the peace, because according
to them the obnoxlotts Pretoria r&gime has stood by them
“in all the wars they have fought”. Never mind tbii falsiIIcation of history.

138. Eventshaveshownthattheracisl~&Retotia
baurmist~whiehknnmnootktrwsyof&aling
withkgitimauprouetthanthKmghtiknreaIldwhiehis

145. Webavell&nedatterttivelytotbestttternentoftlte
repnmtadvr
of the United &alar. With all due rrrpeet,
lrisutatementtnotetbanmissedthepoint.Tltequeftionof

detcminedtouopataothbIgtopracnewtdtemcIst

Sullivan principl& which, in any
caBe,arerIotevendheredtobyalltheunltedsuues
eompMks~bu3lncuhtsouthAfrlca.~knot
merely an issue of qtml employment opportunitim offemd
byUr.ritedStatescompamu
rupportedby~-of
blackawhoseworkingandlivingconditionsdemeantbe
value and meaning of human dignity.

Annhdon.
For anyone to suggest, tlterefore, Utat this
lawful&gimeeanrestorelawancIorderoreagineerreforrn
isagmeslnsulttohumanimelIlgenee.
139. The Cuuneil has repeatedly reeognized+umt
recently in resolutionr 554 (1984) and 566(1985)-the
legitimacyofthestnrggkoftheoppesscdptopkfaaunited,
non-m&i and democta tic South Airka. Rat must be the
point of departure for any &cusGon of the present grave
&ii
in South Africa.
140. TlteoppmmedpeopkofSouthAfticahavebuiha
gKatt~movunem,
tbanobllhyofwhkbhasbeen
aeknmvkd@dbytheawatdoftwoNobelPcsccPrizaina
generation, one to the late chief Albert Luthuli

146. AprrtMdprimarilydenksthemajorhypopuktior,
the exe&e of its inalienable right to selfdeterminatlon.
Tbhistbeeruxoftbematter.IwouMask:bowdothe
so&led Sulliin principles address this unjustif~ denial7
We have stated on numerous oecaslons &tat *idis
notref~,itbastobeemdicated,Itsinhumanevib
cannot merely be made leas oppressive.

and,
I2

154. I wish also, Sir, to congratulate your predecessor,
the representative of Trinidad and Tobago, who conducted the work of the Council so well last month.

147. I submit, on behalf of the Special Committee, that
at this grave juncture the minimum that is required of the
Council is a clear determination that the situation in South
Africa constitutes a threat to international peace and security under the terms of Chapter VII of the Charter. If any
Member State so interprets the Charter that the indiscriminate killing of black people and incessant attacks on independent African States do not constitute a threat to the
peace, let it stand up and be counted.

155. Finally, I thank you and the other members of the
Council for having invited me to speak here as the Chairman of the Group of African States.
156. The Council is meeting today toconsider the serious
situation prevailing in South Africa following the proclamation on 20 July 1985 of a state of emergency in 36 black
towns, thus giving the security forces in that country
unlimited power to arrest, torture and assassinate ali black
opponents. By proclaiming that state of emergency, the
Botha government is trying to massacre the people and
conwlidate and perpetuate the abominable system of
apmheid.

148. The oppressed people of South Africa have a right
to expect of the Security Council ancrete and meaningful
action which will put an end to the inhuman system of
aprvriheldand the terror that is inseparable from it, not yet
another resolution that Botha and his clique can defy with
impunity.
149. Before concluding, I should like to recall that on 28
November 1975, on the occasion of the thirtieth anniversary of the United Nations, the General Assembly adopted
resolution 341 I C (XXX). in which it proclaimed, in paramph 1.

157. Since making that proclamation, the racist Pretoria
Government has refused to give any information, which
shows that the regime is preparing to intensify the reign of
terror while concealing its immoral and inhuman acts from
international investigation.

“that the United Nations and the international community have a special responsibility towards the oppressed
people of South Africa and their liberation movements,
and towards those imprisoned, restricted or exiled for
their struggle against upatrfrel6’.

158. This latest atrocity in the criminal career of optkid shows the *me’s
strong but futile determination to
oppose the advent of freedom and self-determination in
South Africa. The Pretoria r&me’s violent intransigence
is encouraged by certain Western countries which are its
allies. It is clear that the latest action is only one more link
in the long chain intended to strengthen the up~hti
r&ime artd to perpetuate the domination of the white
minority.

150. While the entire continent of Africa feels deeply the
humiliirrion of the indigenous African people by the racist
minority dgimc in South Africa and considers the liberationst~eofthatopptcsscdpoopleasitsorm,thep~
lemof~lnSoutbAfrlcacannotkregardedas
merely an African Irsponsibility. It is in that content that I
amgra~ltbattheGoveNmen
tofFrancchastakenthe
inltlatlvc in condg
tbls meeting of the Council. I hope
that that inltlatlvr will cn~uragc the active contribution of
WesfromallrcgionsofthcworldtotheefTortsofthe
Ufdted Natkms for the ellli@lon
of the scourge of
M
151. I thank you, Mr. Preskknt, and, thugh
thc~ofthaCouncilfortbisopportunitytomakea
rratemntoalbehaKofthespceialcommitteeagaiMt
Aporrkcid.

159. The Pretoria r&gime’s ideology is such that one cannot expecl to engage its leaders in a constructive dialogue
capable of bringing about an evolution of its anachronistic
structures. To proceed on the basis of illusions about an
internal evolution in the country through dialogue, without the abandonment of the racist ideology itself, would be
a negative ee
that could only strengthen the structures of oppression.

you, all
160. The basic p&km
is the rules and practices of the
racist Pretoria r@te, and the only solution is the total
elimination of -heid.
lltcre is an urgent need for the
international community to keep up its pressure on the
Pretoria r&me to oblige it to restore the legitimate rights
of the South African people, by the establishment of a free.
indivisible and democratic South Africa on the universal
basis of human rights.

152. n# PRESlDENT
(inlerprptotion from &u&m):
Ike next speaker ia the reprmcntativc of Mali, who wishes
tomaLeastatcmmtinhiscapacity~~Chairmanofthe
GroupofAfrican&atcsattbeUnitcdNaticmsforthe
month of July.

161. llw Group of African States cundemns the policy
nf cw?t?r~ve er!ge~g?-!w?! srd al! c&r feel- nf~~~
nation with um
which encourage the racist Pretoria
r&irne in its intransi~.
It calls on the international
community-and
in particular the United Nations-to
shoukier its responsibility as regards uprrrlscld and the
increasing threats it v
to international peace and security. It calls upon the Council to take the ne#ssary measures under Chapter VII OF the Charter for the total
isolation of the uparfhfd *me.
It rcaffkms it wiidarity

133. Mr. NIARE (Mnli) @uqmti,fm
lkwh): I
wbh first, Mr. Rwbt,
to offer you on behalf of the
GroupofAfricanStatcsandonmyownbehalf,warm
congratulaticxtsonyourassumpionoftbep~kkncyof
the Couitcil for this month. I am particularly happy to do
10, ktce you
a friendly country, the Ukninian
blic, whose undeniable and formidasovietsocialist T
ble commitment to freedom and dignity make possible a
full understanding of the tra@y of the African people.
I3

with the prople of South Africa and their liberation movements in their legitimate struggle for freedom, justice,
peace and progress.

principal foundation of the Pretoria regime is violence,
whether withm the country, aimed against the black population, or outside it, aimed against neighbouring States.
Recent events have shown unequivocally that the regime
shrinks from nothing in its violence against the black pop
ulation. That violence has brought about the death of
more than 500 blacks and the arrest of hundreds without
specific charges in the brief time since the declaration of
the state of emergency in regions inhabited by blacks. ‘Ihe
number of casualties and detainees must be viewed with
great reservation, since the sources of those statistics are
the very Pretoria authorities which declared the state of
emergency and gagged the press, preventing neutral
observers from visiting the troubled regions.

162. The Council should make the Pretoria regime
clearly understand that this declaration of the state of
emergency is bound to worsen terror and conflicts in
South Africa itself and throughout southern Africa.
163. Mr. SHAKER (Egypt) (infer~re&zr& from Arobic):
We are very happy to see you, Sir, presiding over the
Council. and we wish you every success, particularly as we
consider the item to be of the greatest concern to us all.
164. I wish also to express our deep gratitude to the
Minister for Foreign Affairs and the representative of Trinidad and Tobago for the examplary manner in which they
conducted the Council’s proceedings last month, when the
Council considered another item pertaining to southern
Africa that is also of me greatest concern to us.

169. The international denunciation of the actions of the
Pretoria regime, which are based on the policy of apurrheid
and on repression of the black population, has become
evident in recent months, increasing when the regime
declared a state of emergency aimed against the black pop
ulation and granted itself full power to determine the fate
of the inhabitants, Public opinion everywhere, and people
of all views, have demanded that the inhumane upmheld
regime be brought to an end. It is now imperative that all
Governments in the world. particularly those which malntain close relations with the Pretoria regime, use all their
influence to exert pressure on the regime to make it see
reason and stop trying to conceal a reality which is obvious
to everyone. It is clear that all attempts of persuasion and
conciliation have failed to dissuade the racist regime from
its policies and practices, which have been rejected by all
the f~untries of the world.

165. The Council has just concluded three meetings in
succession last month to consider the actions of the South
African Government, which are in contravention of the
principles of international law, and that country’s refusal
to abide by United Nations resolutions, whether on its
persistent illegal occupation of Namibia or its aggression
against neighbouring States. Now the Council finds itself
obliged to meet again in order to consider the worsening
situation in South Afriea itself. That situation is the result
of the policy pursued by the Government of that eotmtry,
which has imposed a state of emergency on the black
inhabitants, depriving them of their right to equality and
human dignity.

170.
We have had occasion in the past to note the Council’s special responsibility to force the South African
r&ime to respect its resolutions, which the r&gime eontinues to defy. We have also indicated that permitting that
r&me to continue its racist policies will uldmately bring a
bloody eonfliet, whose eonsequeneea would transcend the
eonfmes of South Africa and affect the entire southern
Afrkan region, with repercussions harmful to interMtional peace and seetuity. Current events demonstrate the
truthdthosepn?dii.

166. I wish immediately to express our gratitude to the
French Government for havhtg decided to free% all new
investment in. South Afrka and to recab the French
AmbarPsdor from that country. We also thank Ftanee for
its initiative yesterday in cnIIing for a meeting of the Courtcil to con&der the deteriorating situation in South Africa.
The&oupofAfrieanStateaba6madea&rilareaIltoday.
ThemeasunrstakenbyFraneeareaprecursorofother
measures to be taken by States which have bean reluctant
to take such rneaauma so far.

171.
That is why, today more than ever before, the Cormcil must shoulder itx resPonsibilitlea, entrusted to it by the
international community, for the maintenance of intemational pcaee and security. It is the Council’s duty to meet
its responsibilities and not to hesitate to make use ofall the
resources available to it- under the Charter of the United
Nationa. Any slackening in discharging this duty will have
repercussions for the Council’s prestige, its status on the
international scene and its future effectiveness. Rut there
will also k unforeaeeabk consequences for the inhabitants
of ^kuth Africa. whatever the Miour of iheir skin. Untii
when shall we delay application against the Pretoria
r&ime of the provisions of Chapter VII of the Charter7

167. It must now be absolutely clear that the mainindeed, the only-reason behind all the regrattabk elemerits of the situation in South Africa, including the
repmsiorandaetsofvioknragaimttbebkekpopulalion carrkd out by the South Afriean rwrnc, is the policy
of aprthetd
mbbomly
pumxd
by the Government of
South Africa,
in &lit
of the international eonscienee
. and wtll. 1he Ptetoria *me tiii never succeed in eonceaiing that truth or in justifying the state of emergency which
has been declared to give unlimited powers to the security
forces and to permit them to enga~ in mprmsion of the
defenceless black population.

172. The Council must demand that South Africa rescind the state of emergency, which is aimed against the
black population, along with all other emergency and spe
cial measures which have been adopted. The Council must

168. When the Council recently considered the question
of Namibia, my delegation stated [2583rdmee@J that the
I4

I

declare null and void all those measures, and demand that
the Pretoria r&me free immediately all political detainees,
including the valiant freedom fighter Nelson Mandela.
173. The Council is in duty bound to demand that the
Government of South Africa embark unconditionally
upon a dialogue with the true leaders of the black majority
to lay the foundations for a democratic, authentic Govemment in South Africa, in which all inhabitants, whatever
the colour of the skin, would participate on an equal footing, and to put an immediate end to the upurtheid regime.
I/A The Council, finally. must ensure that the South
African regime understands cicarly that if it ignores those
demands. the Council will be compelled to enforce the
provisions of Chapter VII of the Charter. It has become
imperative that the Council make the Pretoria regime
understand that the world is not prepared to pay the cxorbitant price it will have to pay if the Pretoria regime persists in its unacceptable policy of upurtheid
in southern
Africa.
175. Egypt reaffirms that it stands by the side of its
brothers in southern Africa and that it is unswerving in its
support of their heroic, legitimate struggle for justice,
democracy and equality. We have every conftdence that
the blond shed by the valiant freedom fighters will not
have been shed in vain, but tbat it will result in real progress, making it ultimately possible for the people of South
Africa to recover its full rights.
176. Mr, VERMA

(India): Allow me fimt of all, Sir, to

under indictment and a system under siege for the inhumanity and shame that it represents. The so-called emcrgency powers now given to the police and armed force% of
the racist r&gime enable them to carry on the same crimes
against the majority of South Africans-killing,
torture,
detention and harassment-with
even greater impunity.
180. The Government of India strongly condemns the
imposition of a state of emergency in South Africa. which.
as the Special Committee against Apartheid
noted in its
statement of 24 July, amounts to a declaration of war
against the oppressed people of South Africa and the
opponents of upurtheid. If the racist regime hopes that by
this act of desperation it will be able to check the inexorable tide of population resistance against apartheid,
it is
naive to do so.
181. Sharpeville. Soweto. Crossroads and Uitenhage are
but some of the grim reminders of the escalating cycle al
violence unleashed by the racist regime against innocent
men, women and children. They are, at the same time.
milestones in the glorious struggle of the vast majority of
South Africans for selfdetermination.
freedom and
human dignity. The nationwide demonstrations in South
Africa against the upariheid
regime, the overwhelming
rejection of the socalled constitutional reforms, the strikes
and boycotts, are all proof that the people of South Africa
are astir, that they have seized the initiative and that policies of intimidation and terror cannot crush their indomitable spirit.

182. My delegation and many others have time and
again said in this Chamber that the responsibility for the
the month af July. Although the Council is meeting forpersistence of an explosive &union in South Africa must
mally for the first time under your presidency only towards
devolve m part on the Security Council itself for the inefthe end of your term. we have had ample evidence behind
fectiveness of its actions so far, and more particularly on
the scenes of your diplomatic skill, wisdom and dedication
those in the Council who have prevented firm action from
to duty, as wall as of your perennial good cheer. We are
being taken against the uparfheid
r6gime. Apurtheid
is a
conlidcnt that you will guide our &liberations with sagaccrime against humanity. It is an intrinsically violent sysity and bring them to a fruitful conclusion.
tem, bred on the violence that it tinds necessary IO inflict
uponits hapless victhns. it cannot be reformed; it can only
177. krmit me also to convey our congratulations to the
be eradicated. Patience and persuasion have not worked,
Minister for Fomign A&its and the repmaentative of Trinnor have innumerabte resolutions of the Council. Pretoria
idad and Tobago for the admirable manner in which they
has turned a deaf ear to the crescendo of international
c4mductedthecouncil’spoceedingsduringthemontbof opinion. The people of South Africa have determined that
June.
upartheid
must bo destroyed, come what may, and that, if
the Council does not act with a sense of purpose, they shall
act on their own through mass popular mobilization. The
If& We welcome and appreciate the initiative taken by
cycle of violence and bloodshed produced by racist terror
France to convene this meeting of the Council to consider
can only intensify.
the ever-worsening situation in South Africa, This initiatiw has received the support and endomnt
of tbe
Group of African States, which has also asked for Security
183. The Council, therefore. cannot afford to vacillate,
Council con&ration
of the subject.
but must act decisively. Them can be little doubt of the
threat that tbe situation in South Africa ,oday poses to
international peace and security. The non-aligned coun179. The current tragic happenings in South Africa come
triesare convinced that comprehensive mandatory sancas no surprise. The indiscriminate violence once again
tions are the only answer.
unleashed by the racist Pretoria r@ime, the killing and
maiming of innocent and defencckss people, the massive
and arbitrary arrests and detentions and all else that is
184. Mr. KASEMSRI (Thailand): At the outsetI should
associated with the state of emergency imposed last week
like to convey to you, Sir, my delegation’s sincere, warm
in South Africa have a familiar ring to them. We have long
congratulations on your assumption of the presidency for
become accustomed to these frenzied actions of a r&g&
the month of July. We are confhnt that your experience,

congratulateyou on your assumption of the presidency for

diplomatic
skill.
boundless
dedication
assist the Council
in its deliberations
important
matters
pending
before it.

and energy
will
on this and other

is clear and consistent.
My Government
condemns
it in the
strongest
possible terms and unreservedly
supports
every
means to bring about its dismantling
as soon as possibk in
keeping
with rclovant
United
Nations
resolutions.

185. Allow me also to cdprcss my delegation’s
gratitude
to your predecessor,
the Minister
for Foreign
Anjirs
of
Trinidad
and Tobago,
for guiding the deliberations
of the
Council
on the question
of Namibia
to their successful
conclusion.
mlhr success was indeed one in a series of
important
questions
before the Council,
which benefited
greatly from his statemanship
and guidance.
I also wish to
pay a wcll-deservcd
tribute to the representative
of Trinidad and Tobago,
for the competent
and dignified
manner
in which he conducted
the Council’s
proceedings
during
the remainder
of the busy month
of June.

191.
My delegation
therefore
strongly
condemns
the Pretoria &ime
for its imposition
this month
of the state of
emergency
in 36 districts,
which will not only aggravate
the
sufferings
of the black maioritv
in South Africa but will
also exacerbate
tension a& t&eaten
international
peace
and security.
In this connection.
my delegation
demands
that the racist Pretoria
r&ime
end its policy and practices
of upartheid. cease the oppression
of the black majority
which became unbridled
through
the declaration
of the
so4kd
state of emergency,
normalize
conditions
in the
36 districts
in which it has been imposed,
set free immediately
and unconditionally
all political
prisoners
and
detainees
and comply
with all relevant
United
Nations
resolutions
without
further
delay.

186. The Council is convened
in an urgent meeting today
in response to a request made by the representative
of
France, joined by the Group
of African
States, to consider
events taking place in South Africa.
My delegation
fully
supports
the timely convening
of this meeting. The events
prevailing
in that country
constitute
not only a negation of
a necessary democratic
process, and thus are a matter of
concern to the peace-loving
nations, but are also a serious
threat to international
peace and security.

192.
Mr. BASSOLE
(Burkina
Faso) (interpretation from
Freti&):
Although
the hour is late, before getting to the
heart of the matter I should like first of all. Sir, to congratulate you sincerely
on your assumption
of the presidency
for the month of July. Your great diplomatic
qualities and
your acute sense of human relations
have led all of us in
the Council
to admire you. We are convinced
that under
your wise and dynamic
conduct of our proceedings.
our
deliberations
will help to benefit the people of southern
Africa who have been victimised
by the barbaric
racists of
Pretoria
for their faith in justice and their profound
aspiration to freedom
and independence.

187. My delegation
learned of the deteriorating
situation
in South Africa with grave concern.
Moreover.
the recent
heinous
acts of the South African
Government.
which
have caused tremendous
sufferings
through
the arbitrary
arrests and detention
of hundreds
of black people, further
indicate the inhumane
extent of its abhorrent
policy and
practices of upl&ti,
as well as the moral bankruptcy
and
perfidy
of the racist Pretoria
r&gimc. The extent of such
shameless hypocrisy
is indicated
by the statement
of Pretct
da’s representative,
particularly
when he asserted that the
state of emergency
was imposed in order to protect black
iives and black property.

193.
I should like to pay a tribute also to the Minister
for
Foreign
Affairs
and the representative
of Trinidad
and
Tobago for the outstanding
work they did when they presided over the Council
in June.
194.
For nearly a month now the Council
has met constantly
to consider
the consequences
for the whole of
southern
Africa of the irresponsible
policies of the odious
upmtl#id
r&me
of Pretoria.
While it was striving mightily
to fmd ways and means of freeing Namibia
from the colanial and racist domination
of that r&time,
information
reached it from Angola and Botswana
of violations
of the
national
sovereignty
of those States,
with the usual
consequences.

188. My delegation
is of the view that the root cause of
the present unrest is oprrheld.
in particular
in its depriving
the black majority
of their legitimate
rights and continuing
the r&hne
of oppression
against them in South Africa.
The just solution
to this problem
can only be the total
eradication
of apur&?ld
and the establishment
of a nonracial democratic
society in which all segments of the pop
ulation, irrespective
of colour, race or crecd,can
determine
for themselves
their own future.

195.
Now, by means of the declaration
of the state of
emergency.
the racist rCgime of Pretoria
has entered a new
phase in carrying
out its programme
designed to perpetuate its domination
over the peoples which it has constantly
been oppressing
solely because of the colour of their skin.

189. My delegation
joins with the previous
speaken
in
paying homage to the countless men, women and children
who have made and are making
the supreme sacrifice in
the continuing
struggle to establish a just and free society
in South Africa, based on racial equality
and human dig+ , , zud
&I .**...
Aair
Ined “1
.J *ha
~~.e~~~ae “.4 “pw.SHW.
r-&-IA
“.... 1,.
,” 1,s
.a...”
,a*. .mYY.~

The intemationai
commumty
once again seems to
E
passive witness. Although
voices have been heard. and
will continue
to be heard, in various
quarters
around
the
world denouncing
and condemning
this recent escalation
of violence
that is bring suITered by our South African
brofhers.
everything
kads one to believe that they wilt not
be enough to put an end to the grim designs of the Pretoria
regime.
Arbitrary
arrests as wrll as illegal detention
will

190. 11 is a matter of profound
concern to the intemational community
as well as to my delegation
that the
South
African
Government
persists
in its arrogant
det-kince of council
resolutions
and cotMug
to treat with
disdain and cynicism
the Council’s
actions in this mpect.
Thailand%
position
with regard to uparrkid has been and

16

nazism that our two peoples fought
shoulder half a century ago.

continue. Deaths and casualties will be counted in the
dozens, if one is to go by the unlimited powers accorded to
a blind and unbridled police force

shoulder-to-

“Your attitude is an example to those who, through

nuktd or a hypocritical will to lull our consciences.

197. The profound meaning of these aggressions against
the sovereignty and territorial integrity of neighbouring
States, this unquenchable thirst to silence for all time the
voice of freedom lighters by all means, and primarily
through violence, resides in the larger context of the burning desire of international imperialism to dominate the
world.

continue to preach that dialogue can put an l*nd to
apartheid. Accordingly, we must use that example to
establish the real nature of the butchers of imperialism.
“The logic of your commitment means that, together
with other peoples, we can hope to pool all economic
and military means to uproot from our planet once and
for all this last cancer of humanity.

198. What is happening in Namibia, Angola, Lesotho
and Botswana. and now in South Africa itself-and I am
talking about the terror that the racist rkgime has constantly been sowing in South Africa in general-is part of
the same pattern, that of an embattled regime assailed
from all quarters, from within and from without, trying
vainly to retrench itself within its last redoubts-the
pattern of a regime which to survive-and for how much
longer?-believes only in violence.

“When the French Government announced its decision actively to boycott Pretoria, we had no doubt that
our black brothers of South Africa were happy, as were
all those who, whatever the colour of their skin, have
fraternal feelings for all other human beings. Not to force
ourselves to pursue this noble combat could give rise to
frustration, disappointment and even greater traumatism and by complacency or complicity, deliver these
men and women to their butchers because they believed
in our determination.

199. This entire orchestrated pattern is nothing other
than a sign of certain collapse, the death rattle of a regime
in agony. hated and hounded from within, denounced and
condemned without a r6gime that feels its inhuman aportheid system shrinking irreversibly.

“ln this part of Africa there will always be more
indulgence for those whose pessimistic evaluations of
their means will have prevented them from embarking
upon a crusade against apartheidthan for those who
have only half-heart&y
engaged in battle.

200. For how much longer will the international community abandon the peoples of southern Africa struggling for
their liberty and independence to the death-throes of the
paranoia of the South African racists?

“Today, as heretofore, the people of Burkina Faso
firmly and decisively supports the fraternal French
people in this noble struggle, which once again illustrates the ideals of peace, democracy and progress so
dear to all peoples of the world.

201. For our part, we say it is high time to use the only
lmguage that South Africa understands: the language of
force. As to the Council, this should be reIYected in the
immediate adoption of comprehensive mandatory sanetionn a@rtst that r&ime under Chapter VII of the Charter
of the United Nations. Should the Council do that, as we
hope it will, it will not k for want of having vied to avoid
rceoum to this ultimate sohltion.

“We take this opportunity you have given us to sup
port a courageous act and appeal to other Western
countries to learn once again to cherish and to pay the
price of freedom for all.”
203, While welcoming the French initiative which
brought us together today, we feel that it would have had,
and stilI might have.,greater effect if without any hesitation
or half-measures we could adopt a strong draft resolution.

202. ‘Ihe peopk and Government of Burkina Faso wed
come the French initiative. As Mr. Thomas Sankara. Pm&
dent of the National Council of the Revolution, Prariint
andHeadofSseteofBurLinaFaso,eaidina~gic
along these lines addres& to Mr. Fran@ Mitterrand.
Presiit
of the French Republic:

204. My delegation would have preferred to see the
Council take a decisive step towards the logical solution by
deciding to act under Chapter VII of tbe Charter. We
regret that that is not the case, because France’s draft
nsolution remains very far from such a decision.

“It is a pleasant duty for my people and its political
leadership, the National Council of the Revolution and
myself, to address to you very sincere congratuIations
and our strong support for the recent courageous and
just steps, in keeping with the revoiutionary tradition of
Franoc, that your Government has just taken against
the fascist sentinels of South Africa.

205. However, we venture to hope that the consultations
to be hell wiii provide an opportunity for aii of us IO
express our views on the draft, make it more consistent
and rally a consensus in the Council on its new contents,

“The people of Burkina Faso salutes this political
decision and ls happy to note that the fraternal people
of France has realized that the real nature of the racist
dgimc of Pretoria is only a repetition of the Hitkrite

206, The PRESIDENT
(ittterpretatton from Sudan):
The next speaker is the representative of Cuba. I itwlte him
to take a place at the Council table and to make his
statement.
17

been reduced, and we want to point out to the Council
todav that we would not be surprised if, in their feverish
imaiination. they will say they have had to bomb some
neighbouring country in order to prevent the patriots of
the ANC from continuing their actions against them.

207.

Mr. ORAMAS OLIVA (Cuba) (interprerationfiom
I extend to you, Sir, the representative of the
Ukrainian Soviet Socialist Republic, our congratulations
on your assumption this month of the functions of President of the Council. Your country was the scene of epic
battles and victorious struggles for the elimination of fascism 40 years ago. We are meeting today to consider once
again a cruel manifestation of fascism in South Africa.
Spanish):

213. It is very clear that what we must do is adopt all
necessary measures to halt this cruel and inhuman state of
affairs. Humanity can no longer witness indifferently the
genocide of the South African blacks. We should like to
seize this opportunity to appeal from this tribune to all
men of goodwill for us to unite our voices, our energies
and our efforts to bring about the fmal elimination of the
odious and inhuman evil which is upurtheid.

208. 1 take this opportunity to extend my delegation’s
gratitude to the Minister for Foreign Affairs and the representative of Trinidad and Tobago for the constructive way
in which they conducted the Council’s proceedings last
month, when on three occasions the same criminal as
today, that is, the racist rkgime of Pretoria, was arraigned
before the Council: first. because of its obstinate and
absurd idea of perpetuating its domination over the Territory of Namibia, thus violating all the relevant resolutions
of the General Assembly, the Security Council and all
those international bodies which have been obliged to consider the problem of Namibia; next, because of its attempt
to blow up the oil installations of Gulf Oil in the province
of Cabinda, in Angola; and then, because of its flagrant
and criminal act of banditry against the military installations of the African National Congress of South Africa at
Gaborone, the capital of Botswana.

214. Today, more than ever, we recall the following
words uttered by the national hero of my country, Jo&
Marti, who said: “I feel that one of my children i, b.eitrg
killed whenever a man is deprived of the freedom of
thought.”
215. No human mind could have conceived that at the
end of this century there would still persist such an odious
r&ime. Those who up to today have been invoking all
kinds of arguments to support South Africa now see the
results of their policies. We hope that those who have
advocated the policy of ‘oonstructive engagement” and
attitudes of indulgence towards South Africa will relinguish them, thus avoiding contributing lo any continuation of the practice of State terrorism that prevails in that
country, the victims of which are not only the black people
of that country but neighbouring countries. There can no
longer be any excuses for failing to apply to racist South
Africa the measures laid down in Chapter VII of the Charter or for continuing to oppose the outcry of the whole of
mankind.

209. Today we have before us evidence of what has so
often been said by some delegations in the Council and in
the General Assembly, that is, that channels have been
blocked for the South African black masses to eliminate
the uprtheid
r&me by means of dialogue, and we are now
witnessing a pneralized uprising in which people are no
longer afraid of bullets, bayonets or tanks. A whole people
has risen with a single voice and cried out, as was put by
Archbishop Tutu: Liberty, liberty and equality for all!

216. I should like to quote another saying of ,the great
Jest Mati: “To watch a crime calmly is to commit it”.

210, Dozens of towns where blacks live have been destroyed or damaged, thousands of persons have been left
homeless, more than 800 have been arrested. and the racist
police and army have declared open season on blacks like
something out of a Tatzm film. Five hundred dead is the
minimum toll of black South African victims in the past IO
months for the sole crime of having asked for racial equality in the land of their birth. Let us all be aware that those
mas.seswill fight to the bitter end to achieve their goal: the
elimination of a~rlheid.
There will be no peace until apurth&j has been eliminated.

217. In paragraph I4 of its resolution
adopted on 19 June, the Council urges:

566 (PBS),

“‘States Members of the United Nations that have not
done so to consider in the meantime taking appropriate
voluntary measures against South Africa, which could
include the foliowing:
(a) Suspension of new investments rind application
of disincentives to that end;

211, How long can we go on tolerating this situation? It
is not simply a violation of human rights, but a cowardly
and cruel act of genocide. which has worsened today with
the offiial assumption of certain so-called emergency
powers that are nothing moR than a sham, since everyone
L__- -L-r
.L--..-L-... rZjiri~i~~S IOiig hisioiy arbiirary
L~OW~
umb rutvuywu~
arrests have been carried out, thousands of blacks have
been murdered, many persons have been summarily
gaoled without triai. with the utmost disrespect for the
most elementary r~rms of human rights.

(b) Re-examination
with South Africa;

of maritime and aerial relations

(0 Prohibition of the sale of krugerrands
other coins minted in South Africa;

and all

(d) Restrictions on sports and cultural relations”.
218. We are gratified to see that some States have
already taken steps in that direction, and we would urge

212. But his measure by Mr. Botha reveals the state of
desperation and fear to which these cowardly racists have

ix

those that have not yet done so to apply such measures to
accelerate the end of this tragic episode in the history of
mankind.

basic rights as full citizenship of their motherland and the
right to determine their future in full freedom.
229. But the racist apurtkti regime would have none of
it. Instead, the r6gime is telling the black majority of South
Africa that it must, at the pain of brutal death, regardless
of the numbers involved, succumb to the evil system of
upar/hetiimposed by the white racist dictators. In its intoxicated arrogance as to its power to impose the inhuman
system within its borden, and encouraged by its kith and
kin and allies in the Western world, the racist r&me has
had the audacity to tell the international community to
join the millions of black South Africans it seems to be
bent on annihilating to sit mum and look another way. We
cannot afford to let them down and deepn their sorrow
by sitting here simply bemoaning the situation and begging
the arrogant and recakitrant upwrkti regime to relent in
its murderous acts.

219. My delegation believes that it is essential that the
Council assume its responsibilities and unequivocally
demand South Africa’s immediate abolition of all the discriminatory laws against the black comm;lnity, that is, the
definitive end of u~rtheti, an immediate lifting of the socalled state of emergency just declared by Mr. Botha; and
the unconditional release of Nelson Mandela, who has for
21 years languished in racist prisons, and of all the other
political detainees who have been imprisoned simply
b~cx~sethey bave opposed apartheid,
220. If Sourh Africa does not heed these demands, the
situation will, in the view of my delegation, become more
and more explosive with *‘cry passing day; thousands of
people will shed their blood on the path to liberty and
equality in that country.

230. The racist @me is intent on hoodwinking
the
world by pretending that all it is attempting to do is to
maintain law and order within its borders. Its allies and
kith and kin abroad have lost no time in abusing the Charter of the United Nations in their protestations that,
although they reject upurtkid, South Africa should be left
alone to restore law and order within its borders and generally mind its own business.

221. Therefore it is the duty of each and every one of us
today to call an end to the genocide of a people by a
regime that has lost its reason, a r&gime that reminds us of
the attempts 40 years ago to trample the soil of the
Ukraine and reduce to ashes the great values of universal
civilisation.

231. My delegation joins issue with the racist r&me and
its supporters and sympathizem. It has been and remains
our firm conviction that what is happening in South Africa
today, grave and appalling as it is, is neither new nor an
internal matter on which the international community.
through the Council, can irmain indifferent. It is not new
because the black South Africans have lived under the de
fucro emergency state of affairs for years. They have
known no privacy of theip homes, and arbitrary arrests
and detctttions, not to mention wanton killings, have
become a painful way of life.

222. Eternal glory to those who have fallen in the name
of liberty and racial quality in South Africa! I should like
to conclude by once again quoting from Jo& Matdz **We
are not working for the applause of the selfuh few: we are
working to join the futttte company of the martyrs**.
223. The PRESIDENT
(Interptw?rio~jbm J&&m):
The next speaker is the repmentative of Kenya. I invite
himtotaLeeplaceatthcCouncilteb~andtomakehis
statement.
224. Mr. MUDHO (Kenya): I thank you, Mr. President
and, through you, the members of the council for mting my deltgation to participate in this important debate.

232. Similarly. the recent action by the racist r&ime is
not a mere exercise in maintaining law and order but a
vicious and ruthless intensification of the evil system of
upurtkti The international community-and
the Council
in particular-has
long and repeatedly condemned and
rejected upurtheid,The racist regime’s continued defiance
of world public opinion, including the opinion of the
world’s highest court and of the Council itself, is not only
ample proof of the inadequacy and failure of the measures
and methods employed 80 far and the consequent legitimate duty of the rest of the world to speak out on behalf of
millions of black Africans against whom atrocities are
being perpetrated by that r&ime, but an eloquent testimony of that r&ime’s true character as an outlaw State.

225. Africa has just spoken through the Chairman of the
Group of Aftican States, and this statement is made in full
solidarity with what hs said, with which we fully associate
ourselves.
224. We should like to expms our appreciation to the
French delegation for its initiative in railing for this meeting; we in the Group of African States joined in calling for
it.
227. This meeting of the Council is takinn daec pc
hundreds of black South African families mo& &bury
tens of their innoant children, women and men brutally
killed by the ta&t @me in that country.

233. l’herefore, by their own conduct the racist oppressors have forfeited any claim to apeak in the name of all
South Africans, let akme try to justify their criminal acts in
the name and under the fraudulent pretence of maintaining law and order, when they themselves are mischievously
engaged in disrupting the live0 of innocent and peaceloving black South Africans who have been denied peace

228. l%e only crime committed by the black population
of South Africa is their insistence on full tealization of the
fundamental rights of every human being, including such
I9

for years. How ironic, then, is it to read the words of the
President of the upartheid r&gime quoted in today’s issue of
rite New York Times, when he stated that

emergency by the Government of South Africa on the
black towns in that country. The escalated political riots
and social violence obtaining in South Africa for the
last couple of years are clear manifestation to the entire
world of the complete failure of the upnrtheidpolicies
punued by the Government of South Africa in total
defiince of world opinion and pressure. The current
intensity and dimensions of this political uprising and
demonstrations by black people of South Africa,
including schoolchildren, are clear warnings to the Pretoria r&gime that no amount of force and brutality is
now capable of containing the Aliicans’ demands l’or
democracy, equality and justice in their own country.

‘South Africa had a responsibility to its people not to
be prescribed to by foreign Governments ‘about what is
in the best interests of the oeople of South Africa’ “.
234. While it may be readily conceded that under the
Charter of the United Nations, and the charter of the
Organisation of African Unity, as well as under international law, no State-and much less the United Na!ionshas any right to interfere or intervene in the internal affairs
of another State except under certain restricted circumstances, as I have already stated, apartheid has been condemned and rejected and declared to be a crime against
humanity. Therefore, upurtheid or any acts, whether of
commission or omission, in furtherance of that evil, are
not and cannot be an internal matter for South Africa. In
any case, when the leaders of that abhorrent system speak
of rejecting being dictated to from outside as to what is
good for South Africans, the question may be posed as to
what, in their definition, constitutes South Africans. Can
they seriously contend that the total subjugation of the
black population, who are the vast majority of that cotmtry, is a demonstration of the wisdom of the white racist
minority which the international community must praise
and support, and to which the only alternative is that
dreadful spectre in the mind of the white racists known as
international communism? surely, arbitrary arrests, detentions and unprovoked murders of innocent black children,
women and men cannot be in the best interests of the
people of South Africa, white or black.

“It is in the light oi these realities that the Kenya
Government vehemently condemns the declaration of a
state of emergency in the black towns of South Africa
by the Pretoria rt!gime in a futile attempt to silence the
black people of South Africa from their legitimate
demands for emancipation from the tyrantlical and
oppressive regime.
“It is abundantly clear that the imposition of the state
of emergency will not solve the chronic problem of
South Africa. There can never be political peace in that
country until the Pretoria rhgime introduces and
upholds justice and respect.
The Government of Kenya therefore believes tbat a
lasting solution of the problems in South Africa is the
total dismantlement of the uprthetisystemand immediate introduction of popular democracy throughout
the country. We therefore call upon the Government of
South Africa to release immediately and unconditionally all political detainees, including Nelson Man&k,
and to commence, without delay, discussions with the
true leaders of South Africa with a view to adopting a
democratic constitution for the future Government of
scwtb Africa.

235. In sum, my delegation strongly deplores the curtent
situation in South Africa, particularly the wanton loss of
life and destruction of property. The cause of this tragic
and worsening speztacle is the evil system ofqpmrireid. llte
racist &gime must wake up to the reality that no amount
and -frustration
population.

of the majority

of the
“Nothing short of this can ever prevent the imminent
social tribulations and catastrophe in that country.”

236. My delegation, therefore, is u&need
that, Iirst.
greater pressure, in the form of mandntoty and eomprehen&e sanctions, needs to be strictly and sc~puIously
applied against South Africa, Secondly, it is the view of my
delegation that the racist r&me should embark on imtnedlate dialogue between the different races of that cotmtr)r
with a view to instituting a democratic system of goventment. Thirdly, the uprtheti dgime should immedia@ly
and unconditionally release all political detainees, including Nelson Mandela, to facilitate the process of peaceful
political solution to the evil problem of up&r&i.

238. Mr. de KfiMOULARIA
(France) (intqwetutlon
from Ren&: The reoresentative of South Africa. whom I
io not see in the Cha&er and whose absence I reg& while
letting it be clearly understood that the situation in his
country is of a colonial type, was so bold as to compare the
repression in South Africa and what is alleged to be happening in certain parts of the territory of my own country.
There is a fundamental difference, among many others,
which the representative of South Africa was wrong to
disregard. France does not have an institutional&d
racist
r&me, nor a system of State racism. The laws of my
--.L.-,
“.,I.,-- r),” “mIAI*u”II
x-.:-A:-^_ A.-I-l---1-----C?-.““.A.., II*Pu
“0
,‘,G Lee:UaaII)“1
UK WIU”‘
“1 Iub
citizens.

Council the text of the statement made yesterday by Mr.
Daniel arap Moi, President of the Republic of Kenya, in
the wake of the impositio,, of the state of emergency in a
number of black South African towns. He said:

239. I now turn to another point. My delegation has put
forward a draft resolution [S/5/17.3.54j.In order to make
possible certain consultations that have been requested, I
ask that the meeting be suspended for 45 minutes, which
should enable us to vote when we resume.

The Government of the Republic of Kenya has been
deeply grieved by the recent declaration of a state of
20

Mr. Resident, that you put to the vote the draft resolution
submitted by my delegation.

240. Mr. BASSOLE (Burkina Faso) (interpretation from
French):The non-aligned members of the Council have the
same concern as the representative of France has
expressed. We had intended to ask you, Mr. President, to
be kind enough to suspend the meeting to make it possible
for consultations to take place on the draft resolution
before us. We think it only proper to make every effort to
see that all Council members can support the draft resolution and, to this end. we must have the necessary time for
these consultations. I still think that we can reach agreement. The representative of France and we make this
request under rule 33.1 of the provisional rules of procedure. We do not now know how long the negotiations will
take. We hope that we can work speedily, but, to make it
more likely that the draft resolution will be adopted by
CO~~~NUS,prhaps we should be as open-minded as possible so that we may discuss it fully.

244.

Mr. BASSOLE

(Burkina

Faso) (ituerpretadon from

French):Again speaking on behalf of my colleagues in the
Council who are members of the Non-Aligned Movement,
I associate myself and them fully with what the representative of France has just said about our deep regret at having
had to delay the Council for so many hours. I am sure that
you will understand, Mr. Resident, that we were making
great efforts to reach consensus on the draft resolution.
245. I have listened to the request of the representative of
France, Bearing in mind the negotiations and consttltadons that have aheady been started and the stage that we
have reached in them, I ask on behalf of my colleagues
that we take no decision on the draft resolution tonight, in
order to enable some of us to consult our Governments on
a number of points that still give grounds for

241. Mr. de KEMOULARIA
(France) (httwptetdon
from French):I am pleased by the statement of our colleague and friend from Burkina Faso, since consultations
are apparently necessary. I ask that the meeting be
resumed, say, at 8.30. which allows 45 minutes or an hour
for negotiations. I hope that we shall reach agreement. If
by chance, though I find it difficult to believe, there is still
need for further negotiations, we would report that to you,
Sir, on resuming. I think that would be wise, and I am
happy to see that the representative of Burkina Faso Is
nodding assent.

disagfeemcnt.
246. The PRESIDENT (Inrerpretarlon from &s&k): We
have heard statements by the representative of Franoe,
co-sponsor of the draft resolution now before the Council,
and by the representative of Burkina Faso, who spoke on
behalf of the non-aBgned members of the Council.
247. I should like to say that much work was done by
those representatives in the past hours; they have not
wasted their time. All who were present in these corridors
were able to see that truly intense, hard work was taking
place. This attests to the @eat sense of responsibility with
which the Couttcll has approached this matter.

242. The PRESIDENT (interpretationfron, hks&n):
The Council has heard the proposal by the representatives
of France and Burkina Faso to suspend the meatlng under
rule 33.1 of the provisional rules of procedure.

248. Beating in mind the proposals just put forward, and
the fact that a few speakers remain to be heard, I propose,
lf there is no objection, to adjourn this meeting now. The
next meetingwill be held today at II a.m. to hear the
speakam ramah&
on the list. I would ask interested par243, Mr. de KEMOULARIA
(France) (inrerpretution ties to meet before that time to continue their consultatlomi
/fom Fred): I wish tirst, Mr. President, to apologize to
sothatthaGnm&lwillbeabletoadoptacle&ionau%p
you and my other colleagues for the length of our consultatabla to all.
tions. It should certainly not be taken as a sign of disrespect for you or the Council. Having said that. I propose,
Themeet& twe 01 12.10a.m., F&y, 26 July 1935

I& meetingwassuspet&dat 7.45PA, lRurs&y, 25
JIJV;it rewmedat 12.05a.m. FWy, 26 Jdy.

21
