TWENTY-

FIFTH

YEAR

rd
MEETING:

NEW

8 DECEMBER

1970

YORK

CONTENTS
Provisional agenda (SIAgendall.563)

Page

. . . . . . . . . . , . . ,. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . , . . . . . .

1

Adoption of the agenda . . . . . . . . . . . . . . , , . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . , . . , . . . . . ,

1

Complaint by Guinea:
(0) Letter dated 22 November 1970 from the Permanent Representative of
Guinea to the United Nations addressed to the President of the Security
Council (S/9987);
(b) Report of the Security Council Special Mission to the Republic of Guinea
established under resolution 289 (1970) (S/10009 and Add-l) . . . . . . . . . 1

S/W. 1563

NOTE
Symbols of United Nations docwnents are composed of capital
hined with figuses. Mentiolz of such a symbol indicates a reference
Nations document.

letters conzto a United

Documents of the Security Council (symbol Sl . . .) are normally published
in quarterly Supplements of the Official Records of the Security Council. The
date of the document indicates the supplement in which it appears or in which
information about it is given.
The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a
system adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of Resolutions and
Decisions of the Security Council. The new ,system, which has been applied
retroactively to resolutions adopted before 1 January 1965, became fully operative
on that date.

FIFTEEN

HUNDRED

AND SIXTY-THIRD

MEETING

Held in New York on Tuesday, 8 December 1970, at 3 p.m.

President:

Mr. Y. MALIK (Union of Soviet
Socialist Republics).

Presc/?t: The representatives of the following States:
Burundi, China, Colombia, Finland, France., Nepal,
Nicaragua, Poland, Sierra Leone, Spain, Syria, Union
of Soviet Socialist Republics, United Kingdom of Great
Britain and Northern Ireland, United States ofAmerica
and Zambia.

Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/l563)
1.

Adoption of the agenda.

2.

Complaint

by Guinea:

Letter dated 22 November 1970 from the Permanent Representative of Guinea to the
United Nations addressed to the President of
the Security Council (S/9987);
Report of the Security Council Special Mission to the Republic of Guinea established
under resolution 289 (1970) (S/l0009 and
Add. 1).

place at the Council table. The other representatives
will be invited to take the places reserved for them
in the Council Chamber, it being understood that each
one of them will be invited to take a seat at the Council
table when it is his turn to speak.
At the invitation qf the President, Mr. A. Tour6
(Guinea) took a place at the Council table; and Mr.
G. SOI:? (Mali), Mr. J. M. Baroody (Saudi Arabia),
Mr. N. Barnes (Liberia), Mr. S. A. Saiirn (United
Republic qf‘Tanzania), Mr. A. Psoncak (Yzzgoslavia),
Mr. R. K. Ramphzzl (Mauritius), Mr. T. Gebre Igzy
(Ethiopia), Mr. R. Alar&
(Cuba), Mr. P. OfMJot2o
(Uganda), Mr. S. L. Seiz (India), Mr. M. Antoine
(Haiti), and Mr. A. Shahi (Pakistan), took the places
reserved for them.
3. The PRESIDENT
(translatedfrom Russian): The
Security Council will now resume its consideration of
the item on its agenda as it appears in document
S/Agenda/ 1563.

Adoption of the agenda

4. I wish to inform the members of the Council that
the draft resolution submitted by the delegations of
Burundi, Nepal, Sierra Leone, Syria and Zambia has
been circulated as document S/10030.

Complaint by Guinea:
(n) Letter dated 22 November 1970 from *the Permanent Representative of Guinea to the United
Nations addressed to the President of the
Security Council (S/9987);
(b) Report of the Security Council Special Mission
to the Republic of Guinea established under
resolution 289 (1970) (S/10009 and Add.1)

5. Mr. ESPINOSA
(Colombia) (interpretatior1 .fiom
Spanish): Mr. President, allow me to start my statement by extending my congratulations to you because
it is once again your turn to be President of the Security
Council. You represent a great country and, moreover,
you are held in high esteem as a statesman and diplomat
within the United Nations. I am sure that your guidance
of the debates will effectively contribute to the success
of the work of the Council during this month, My
delegation is pleased to offer you its active cooperation.

1. The PRESIDENT
(translatedfr’om Russian): May
I remind the Council that when it discussed the present
item at previous meetings it decided to invite the representatives of Guinea, Senegal, Mali, Saudi Arabia,
Mauritania, Algeria, Liberia, the United Republic of
Tanzania, the People’s Republic of the Congo, Yugoslavia, Mauritius, the Sudan, the United Arab Republic,
Ethiopia, Southern Yemen, Cuba, Uganda, India,
Somalia, Haiti and Pakistan to participate, without the
right to vote, in its consideration of the item.

6. I also wish to express my admiration to your predecessor, Ambassador Tomeh, the representative of
Syria, for the brilliant manner in which he exercised
his mandate in a month full of problems and difficulties.
I am also most grateful to you, and I wish to state
this publicly, for having decided, in consultation with
the Secretary-General and the other members of the
Council, to include Colombia in the membership of
the Security Council Special Mission to the Republic
of Guinea established under resolution 289 (1970) to
discharge the specific mandate entrusted to it.

2. In view of the limited number of seats at the Council
table, I propose, in accordance with the Council’s practice, to invite the representative of Guinea to take a

7. To the signal honour of representing the Security
Council was added that of sharing grave responsibilities

12. My delegation will proceed in this new phase with
the same spirit that guided us in the previous one.
And we shall be faithful to a glorious Colombian tradition which has its roots in the very origins of the Republic, when its founding fathers heroically fought for
independence and freedom, and which later was integrated in the tradition of the sister republics of America,
in our persistent endeavour to create not only a legal
consciousness, but also a set of rules, to prevail against
the blows of force, to protect our individuality and
ensure our right to self-determination.

with distinguished spokesmen from friendly countries,
with whom the intense and delicate work was carried
out in the greatest harmony, prompted by the desire
to find the truth, in order to bring it to the Security
Council, together with the explanation of how we had
arrived at it and with the basic elements on which
we formed our judgement. This task, which was complex in itself, was facilitated by the talent and prudence
shown at all times by the Chairman of the Mission,
Ambassador Khatri, the representative of Nepal, to
whom I am pleased to express my friendship and
gratitude. May I also say that I was honoured to have
been able to work with such prestigious colleagues
as Ambassadors Jakobson, Ku&ga and Mwaanga, the
representatives of Finland, Poland and Zambia respectively who, in this important trip, also displayed many
of the virtues which are characteristic of them.

13. It has been a long road of more than 150 years,
with painful setbacks which at no time weakened our
spirit nor clouded the minds of those who created our
homelands. At this stage of the twentieth century we
look back with pride on the foresight of those who
created what can rightly be called the law of the
Americas. Before, long before the last world conflagration made it necessary for the United Nations to be
set up, the American countries had signed on 26
December 1933, the Montevideo Convention’, which
in its articles 4 and 11 states that the rights of each
State do not depend on power to ensure their exercise,
“but upon the simple fact of its existence as a person
under international law”; nor is it feasible to recognize
“territorial
acquisitions [nor the] special advantages
which have been obtained by force, whether this consists in the employment of arms, in threatening diplomatic representations, or in any other effective coercive measure”.

8. The Secretariat staff acted with exemplary devotion and efficiency, a fact which I deem it necessary
to record and applaud. I do so as an elementary act
of justice.
9. Personally I never hesitated for a second. Since
the President of the Security Council invited me to
go to the Republic of Guinea, I recalled a maxim which
iswellknowninColombiabecausewequoteitfrequently
-all of us who have gone through its law schools.
It states: “ The law is without a heart and the magistrate
who lends his heart to it thereby violates it.” This
was, in fact, the frame of mind in which I went to
the ‘Republic of Guinea: as a magistrate of the international community has its laws, with no more heart than
the internal laws of countries, severe and strict, and
which must also be complied with strictly, under pain
of incurring the penalty prescribed for those who disobey or violate the law. Such a magistrate could not
afterwards declare anything but the truth, as it has
been given him to perceive it, giving no throught to
the possible results of what he said.

14. As important as those principles are, and even
more important, because they reveal the spirit and
determination with which they were agreed to and the
unshakeable will to put them in practice, is article 8
of t1.e Montevideo Convention, whose text is brief and
concise: “No State has the right to intervene in the
internal
or external affairs of another.”
That
unequivocally means that within the Americas we condemned foreign intervention before any other continent
had formulated such a rejection, and that the legal slandards of our world were rules of international conduct
which only years later were accepted by all States.

10. The distinguished colleagues on the Special Mission were also magistrates. Hence the objectivity of
our report[SS/10009 ancl Acld.I], the few words we used
and its very brevity. It was sufficient for us to describe
what we saw, how we saw it and then record our frank
opinion on what we saw. No considerations could distort our reasoning. Our honesty and the dignity of the
countries which we represented protected us from that.
As a spokesman for Colombia it came to my mind
that it had been the delegation of my country which
had most strenuously fought in San Francisco for
embodying in the Charter of the Organization the principle of good faith. I am proud to affirm now that the
same good faith guided us and was the essence of the
work which we discharged on behalf of the Security
Council.

15. I trust that the preceding affirmation will not be
considereti a proof of arrogance. I have mentioned this
for the very different purpose of proving that there
are certain ideas, certain principles which are a fundamental part of the history of the Americas and, therefore, of Colombian history. We are faithful to them,
not because we are sentimental nor because we venerate the past too much, but because we agree with them
completely and because we are aware that their
implementation
is as logical and as necessary tcday
and tomorrow as they were throughout the years when
they were transformed from individual and bold Or
ambitious thoughts into a felt need, into an ideology
and doctrine for millions of human beings.

II.
No one could have thought that there would be
no consequences following on the report of the Special
Mission. The preservation of the supreme rules of the
international community require timely, effective and
equitable decisions.

’ Convention on Rights and Duties of States adopted by the
Seventh International Conference of American States (League of
Nations, ?YeorySeries, vol. CLXV, 1936, NO. 3802).
2

16. The equality proclaimed for States, and respect
for which must be uncompromisingly
demanded at the
risk of perishing, has a necessary corollary: nonintervention. For there will always be small and
medium-sized States side by side with the great Powers
and even the super-Powers. Rules, principles, law,
jurisprudence,
are their protective shield, against
which the weapons of the ultra-powerful must be shattered. That is the reason for civilization, just as in
the past there was a law of the jungle.

the General Assembly of the United Nations condemned colonialism and solemnly affirmed the right
ofpeoples to their independence. These were our rules,
rules for the Americas, and they became universal
rules. The clock of history cannot be stopped. The
international community has decreed the extinction of
colonialism, and it is not permissible for any country
to try to ignore the evolution of the times nor dream
of maintaining situations which should have disappeared years ago.

17. One cannot remain indifferent when faced with
so lofty a principle. Its violation obviously, begins by
affecting the smaller or medium-sized nations but culminates in a disaster for the great. We, the countries
which lack the means to mobilize
gigantic war
machinery, must out of preference mount guard to
defend that principle-it
is our survival which is at
stake-but the principle must also be respected by the
industrial and warring Powers, since international
peace and harmony would otherwise not be feasible.

21. One hundred and fifty years ago there was no
such organization as the United Nations with its vocation of universality , its purposes of peace and harmony
in which the equality of all Member States is axiomatic.
In the distant past international organizations did exist
but only among the super Powers of the time, which
were passionately and vehemently devoted to maintaining the srai~rs gl/o and rushing the irresistible march
of nations to their liberation. Because of that terrible
and bloody wars were necessary, in which valour and
lives were wasted on all sides. It would be deplorable
if at present violence, destruction and death were
required in order that the territories subjected to foreign
control might accede to their independence. What
would the difference then be? Why should we have
the United Nations‘? Should we be resigned to being
convicted of powerlessness? I hope that these questions will lead to adequate responses and correlative
action.

18. As the representative of Colombia, I approach
the study of the delicate matter with which we are
dealing from another standpoint too. It is true that
the African,continent in the last years, and even now,
has lived through episodes and adventures which are
as far-reaching as those which shook life in our
Americas a century and a half ago, when peoples rebelled against a foreign yoke and gained their independence with untold valour and sacrifices. Our
forefathers uttered the first cry against coIonialism in
America about 1810, and started their carefu1 course
towards freedom and the quest for the betterment of
their peoples. The African peoples are doing the same
now or did so recently. Like ourselves and like all
peoples in the world lhey are worhty o-f having their
self-determination and independence to determine their
own fate. Their struggle does not surprise us. We
understand it with the ever-present memory of our
heroes and great statesmen.

22. The foregoing considerations explain the consistent position of Colombia in international assemblies.
It is a logical, juridical position, which will be reflected in the final attitude of my delegation with
regard to the item now being discussed in the Security Council.
23. An African State has been the victim of reprehensible external armed aggression, which implies a grave
violation of the principle of non-intervention.
Vast
areas of the African continent are still subject to foreign
domination,
in flagrant contradiction with resolution
1514 (XV).

19. We have resolved that the land of the Americas
will not be the soil for selfishness. Hence our principles,
our legal concepls, are not for our exclusive use on
our vast territory. When we stigmatize foreign intervention in the life of nations, this condemnation is also
valid when the principles of non-intervention is violated
in Africa, in Asia, in Europe, in any continent. When
we proclaim the right to self-determination,
independence and freedom, we never do so for our own benefit;
but with a profound sense of solidarity, we therefore
viewwithsympathyandsupportwithfervententhusiasm
the strivings for independence of all peoples. Nations
do not always experience at the same time the shining
hours of their development. But these shining hours
are recognized and arouse feelings of understanding
and harmony. We in the Americas are not unaware
that Africans are living through this epoch in this century, just as our predecessors did in the last one,
resolved to wrest their nations from foreign
domination.

24. The United Nations, and specifically the Security
Council, cannot remain passive. This Organization,
besides being a meeting place for the great Powers
or a place for the alternative confrontations and meetings of the mind of the super-Powers, must watch over
the security of the small and medium-sized nations.
25. The case of the Republic of Guinea is not an
isolated one. Were we to tolerate that the external
attack of which it was the object remain unpunished,
other aggressions would inevitably foflow against other
States, and nobody knows against how many other
States. There would be no peace on earth.
26. These are the reasons why my delegation has
decided-and
we wish to announce it now-that we
shall vote in favour of the draft resolution submitted
by the delegations of Burundi, Nepal, Sierra Leone,
Syria and Zambia, which condemns the attack perpetrated on the Republic of Guinea by an invading force
which, according to the information available to the

20. On the other hand, nor are we unfamiliar with
the categorical terms of resolution 1514 (XV), whereby
3

Special Mission of which I was a member, “was assemd
bled in Guinea (Bissau)” and “was carried out by naval
and military units of the Portuguese armed forces, acting in conjunction with Guinean dissident elements
from outside the Republic of Guinea” [,~/l0009,

ests of the entire Asian-African membership of the
Organization. It is in the areas of Asia and Africa that
colonialism, not any the less destructive because it
is anachronistic, still prevails. It is in these areas that
%he self-determination
of peoples is still thwarted. It
is in these areas that a number of peoples are still
the victims of chauvinism and aggression, some
uprooted from their homes, others condemned to living
in perpetual fear, all of them prevented from deciding
their own future without coercion or constraint. As
an Asian nation, Pakistan cannot but be deeply perturbed that no action taken by the Security Council
so far has served to provide an assurance that aggression by armed attack is bound to be punished and that
the world order envisaged in the Charter of the United
Nations will be made a reality as much in Asia and
Africa as elsewhere. As an Asian nation, therefore,
Pakistan feels it a duty to voice its anxiety over the
situation confronting the Republic of Guinea before
the Security Council.

para. 41).

27. The draft also declares that the presence of colonialism on the African continent is a serious threat
to the peace and security of the independent States
of Africa, thus merely reiterating what has already
affirmed in resolution 1514 (XV). That at least is now
my delegation sees it.
28. The new text is within the framework of resolution 1514 (XV), and it is nothing other than a requirement that that resolution be complied with. No other
interpretation would be valid, in the opinion of my
delegation. Nor would it be valid to try to link it to
any special chapter of the Charter. This draft
resolution, in the aspect I have referred to-1 think
it is fitting to repeat it-can only refer to resolution
1514 (XV), which has been quoted several times.

34. The question currently under debate has several
features which distinguish it from certain other items
on the Council’s agenda. That it is a case of an armed
attack on the territory and government of a Member
State is by itself something that lends it a special
gravity. But its added distinction is that an authoritative
special mission of the Security Council itself has, after
careful investigation, confirmed the fact of aggression.
There could be no greater clarity than is furnished
by the conclusion of the Special Mission that:

29. The explanation given here yesterday by the representative of Burundi [1562na meeting] in introducing
the draft resolution on behalf of all the sponsors in
regard to the consultations held and the manner in
which they took into account important observations,
clearly indicates their will for understanding and harmony. My delegation expresses its confidence that it
will be adopted unanimously. It would be a historic
and far-reaching step, a step towards the consolidation
of a new world which is being created with the independence of all countries and which, unlike the past world,
should ensure uninterrupted peace for several generations.

“The invasion of the territory of the Republic of
Guinea on 22 and 23 November was carried out by
naval and military units of the Portuguese armed
forces, acting in conjunction with Guinean dissident
elements from outside the Republic of Guinea.”
I;s/10009, para. 41.1

30. The PRESIDENT
(translated $*aln Russian): I
thank you for your words of welcome to the President
of the Council and for your kind assurances of cooperation.

35. The degree and scale of the attack or its success
or otherwise are factors which affect neither its culpability nor its political ramifications. It is a fact that
the Republic of Guinea, like many other newly independent Asian-African States, does not yet dispose Of
deterrent military power. In its case, therefore, an
organized attack on its territory designed to bring about
the overthrow of its Government does not become any
the less an invasion because it was carried out by a
few hundred armed troops. A well-planned attack of
a kind which might appear quite minor from outside
is enough to threaten the independent life of many
a State. It is such a State which, more than any other,
needs to be assured by the Security Council that the
Council will not let any assault on its political indepenjence or territorial integrity to remain unpunished.

3 1. The next speaker on my list is the representative
of Pakistan, whom I invite to take a place at the Council
table.
32. Mr. SHAH1 (Pakistan): Mr. President, the Pakistan delegation is grateful to you and to the other members of the Security Council for according it permission
to participate without vote in the discussion of the
question currently under consideration by the Council.
33.. In requesting this permission, we are not unmindful of the normal construction of Article 3 1 of the Charter of the United Nations. Nor are we insensitive to
the opinion strongly and persuasively expressed that
a distinction must be preserved between a debate in
the Security Council and one in the General Assembly,
with respect at least ,to the range of participation of
Member States. However, when a situation is brought
before the Security Council which involves the issue
of freedom from armed attack of newly independent
Asian and African States, the issue is one which transcends regional boundaries and affects the direct inter-

36. My delegation is aware that proposals for suitable
action by the Security Council are currently being
negotiated among the Council members. It is not mY
intention to make any statement in prejudice of the
outcome of these negotiations. However, my delegation would feel remiss in its duty if it did not make
the earnest submission before the Council that the fact
of invasion by the-forces of one Member State uPon
the territory of another having been so clearly and
4

r

conclusively determined, the matter is now one which
calls for measures under Chapter VII of the Chartel
of the United Na.tions. Indeed, the case is one where
it can be shown that there is a whole range of such
measures available to the Security Council. Ifthe application of one type of measure is not feasible, another
can be taken which will be effectiv,e and proportionate
to the circumstances. It seems to 11s that the stoppage
of military assitance to Portugal and the enforcement
against Portugal of reparations for the attack constitute
the minimum requisites of this situation. This is an
occasion when it is imperative for the Council to prove
that, in this day and age, one State cannot invade the
territory of another and escape the consequences. This
is an occasion when the Council has to move beyond
the pronouncement of an anathema in the form of a
mere condemnatory resolution. It has to decide upon
concrete action including the restitution of damage to
the victim State. We must express our deep apprehension that any hesitancy on the part of the Council in
this regard will undermine the trust which is the very
foundation of international security.
37. There is another consideration on which, we
hope, will weigh with the Security Council in reaching
its decision on the question. The invasion of the Republic of Guinea by Portugal comes as the culmination
of many other actions which were the subject of complaints lodged by the Republic of Guinea, Senegal and
Zambia. All these are actions forced on Portugal by
its own persistence in its outmoded colonialist course.
Ail these are actions previously condemned by the
Security Council. They demonstrate how international
peace and security are jeopardized by Portugal’s campaign of suppressing the struggle for liberation being
waged in African territories now under Portuguese control. Both the Security Council and the General Assembly have affirmed the principle that peoples under cofonial or alien domination have the right to receive moral
and material support from other Member States in their
fight for freedom. The Government of the Republic
of Guinea is therefore entitled to the gratitude of other
Member States of the United Nations for the support
and assistance which it gives to the people of Guinea
(Bissau). Portugal’s audacity in attacking the Republic
of Guinea in order to siop such assistance is an act
of determined opposition to the whole process of the
liquidation of colonialism in which the United Nations
is deeply and vitally involved. It is an act therefore,
which, not only calls for commensurate measures by
the Security Council. It also underlines the necessity
of such courses of action being adopted by the p:rmanent members of the Security Council, in the domain
of their own policies, as will exert sufficient pressure
on Portugal to abandon its colonialist position in Africa
and give expression to the non-racist genius of its own
people. If the permanent members of the Security
Council could only persuade themselves to act unitedly
in the full discharge of their special responsibility for
the maintenance of peace and international security,
of
the
deplorable
attack
on the Republic
Guinea-which
has rightly been called an attack on
Africa-may
in retrospect seem to have brought about
the end of colonialism and all its attendant tensions
and dangers in Africa.

38. Finally, my delegation would urge the Council
to bear in mind the long-term implications of Portuguese actions for the situation in Africa. The phrase
“a threat to international peace” does not always imply
the full consequences of a certain action or situation,
Portugal’s adventures in a desperate bid to retain its
colonial possessions not only have an immediate impact on independent African States, If they are allowed
to continue, and in the absence of a peace-keeping
machinery of the United Nations to guard against invasions, a situation will develop which will force African
States to acquire military weapons, to enlarge their
military establishments and, if necessary, to forge new
alliances. Year in and year out we debate the question
of disarmament in the General Assembly and we all
deplore the enormous waste involved in the diversion
of mankind’s material resources to armaments. Yet
there is a situation where an arms race can be prevented, not only by injunctions or appeals, but by a
concrete act which would give the African States an
assurance against armed attack. It would be an assurance of the needlessness of entering an arms race. The
prevention of such a race is one of the prime responsibilities of the Security Council. What it has not been
able to achieve in other regions can still be accomplished in Africa. The present is an occasion where
it can make a desirable contribution to that end by
judicious and timely action.
39. Mr. YOST (United States): Mr. President, 1
should like to welcome you on your assumption of
the Presidency of this Council, an office you have so
often filled in the past with your customary distinction
and dignity. I assure you of the entire co-operation
of my delegation in carrying out the responsibilities
of this Council.
40. I should also like to pay a tribute to our President
of last month, the representative of Syria, who performed his duties at a difficult time with skill, patience
and impartiality.
41. The armed raid made on the Republic of Guinea,
which led to the creation of the Special Mission whose
report is now before us, is a matter of particular concern
to the United States. I should like to emphasize at
the outset that the Government of the United States
deeply deplores the loss of life and the injuries that
resulted from the action, as well as the physical destruction it caused. We view in the most serious light an
attack of this nature, which appears to have been prepared and mounted outside the country.
42. President Nixon made that clear in a message
he sent to President Tour6 declaring:
“On behalf of my Government and the American
people I should like to express sympathy to you
and to the Government and people of the Republic
of Guinea in this difficult peiiod. I should like to
take this opportunity to renew to you my assurances
that the United States opposes any infringement of
Guinean national sovereignty or outside interference
in the internal affairs of the Republic of Guinea.”

5

43. I should like to join in the remarks that have been
made commending the work of the Special Mission
and to thank its members for a most useful report.
The charges under consideration by the Council are
extremely serious, and it was fitting and proper that
the Council should have made an independent effort
to determine the facts before considering what action
it wished to take.
44. Clearly, the Special Mission was not able to investigate all the possible elements of this situation, but
we congratulate it for its success in gathering a substantia] body of data concerning the events of 22 and 23
November.
45. It is evident that in drawing up its conclusions
the Special Mission considered all information made
available to it with the care and measured judgement
a matter of this gravity deserves. Its conclusions were
not arrived at lightly or in haste. My Government has
no reason to question the Mission’s considered opinion
and judgement concerning responsibility for the attack.
46. The report concludes that elements of the Portuguese armed forces participated in the armed raid,
an action my Government must condemn as contrary
to the injunction of the Charter that we should refrain
from the use or threat of force directed against the
territorial integrity or political indeljendence of any
State and in any other manner inconsistent with the
purposes of the United Nations.
47. An event of this nature leads us to as]< why it
occurred and what can be done to prevent its recurrence. In considering those questions, my Government
can agree with those who believe we should view the
particular events under discussion in a broader context.
That context involves the unrest and violence to which
differences over the question of the future of the Portuguese Territories have given rise over almost a
decade. My Government has repeatedly made clear,
and reaffirms now, its support for the exercise by the
people of those Territories of their legitimate right to
self-determination. The United States continues to support that principle and will continue to work with those
concerned to see it carried out.
48. In working toward that goal, however, my
Government believes we must avoid violence and seek
peaceful solutions. Violence can only bring counterviolence, with its attendant misery and suffering. No
one involved in this situation, least of all the peoples
of the territories whose interests we are trying to
aclvance, can gain through resort to force, It is for
that reason that the United States provides no arms
to Portugal for use in Africa and is unwilling also to
provide them to those who would use them against
the Portuguese Territories in Africa,
49. Some of the speakers in this Council have
objected that the Council did not on 22 November comply with the request of the Government of Guinea by
sending at once a United Nations peace-keeping force
instead of a fact-finding mission. Let me make two
points in regard to that objection. First, it is prop-

er-indeed
essential-that
the Security Council, the
principal organ for the maintenance of peace and security, should do its best independently to ascertain
the facts relative to any serious issue on which it is
conremplating action. If it did not insist on doing so,
it would soon lose its credit and authority and would
involve our Organization in the greatest difficulties.
Secondly, members of this Council are well aware that
the United Nations disposes of no forces that can be
sent immediately to a troubled area. My Government
has long worked without avail for improved procedures
that would permit the prompt dispatch of peacekeeping forces. I hope that those who have spoken
out during this debate will in the future give firm support
to efforts to strengthen peace-keeping procedures, Fortunately, in the present case the Guinean forces gained
control of the situation successfully and rapidly without
requiring the help of United Nations forces.
50. I would appeal once again io all concerned to
examine their consciences and exert renewed efforts
to develop fresh, imaginative approaches to the basic
problem underlying so much of the violence that disturbs the normal lives of so many of the people of
Africa today. The attack on Guinea must not be
repeated, but beyond that we must all redouble our
efforts to resolve the more fundamental problem,
5 1. The spirit and letter of the Charter of the United
Nations commits us and the parties here concerned
first of all to seek Ihe solution of disputes likely to
endanger peace and security by discussion and by a
common will to look for and find peaceful means of
settlement. In our view, the draft resolution now before
US would be more realistic and do more to promotea peaceful settlement if it also took that view into
account.
52. I should like to pay a tribute to the way in which
the Afro-Asian members of the Council went about
developing the draft resolution submitted on their
behalf by the representative of Burundi yesterday
[1562nd meeting]. The authors of that draft showed
an awareness of some of the special problems
associated with this particular complaint. They had
the courtesy to seek the views of other members of
the Council before deciding to introduce their draft,
and we appreciate their consideration. During our con.
sultations with the sponsors we made known our rest
vations about the Council acting under Chapter VII
in this instance. We recognize that, in response to the
concerns of my Government and certain other members of the Council, rhe sponsors made substantial alterations in their original draft, which was circulated
informally.
53. I should like to comment briefly at this point on
a few aspects of the draft resolution that has been
submitted to the Council. I have already indicated the
United States position concerning the action of Pop
tuguese forces involved in the armed raid on the Republit of Guinea. There are a number of other provisions
of the draft resolution before us, however, that mY
Government cannot support, and we shall therefore
abstain in the vote on the draft resolution.

54. In the view of the United States, the draft resolution does not constitute a finding that a Chapter VII
situation now exists, nor could it commit the Council
to taking action under Chapter VII in any future
situation. Nevertheless, the draft resolution does seem
to us to go much too far in this direction and to create
presumptions about our future action in a very broad
range of situations which are not warranted at this
time.

61. I submit that the original draft resolution was
turned down by the friends of Portugal, the Portugal
which has been absent from these proceedings. Portugal’s absence is tantamount to contempt of the
Council, but in spite of that contempt, what do we
find? The friends of Portugal are very careful to spare
its feelings. I do not want to say Portugal; it is the
Government of Portugal, because I have known many
Portuguese people who are as good and as bad as any
one of us here or outside.

5.5. We view the events of 22 and 23 November as
very serious, but we cannot support the very farreaching conclusions that some of the provisions of
the draft resolution seem to draw from them. With
regard to paragraph 6, I have already reiterated the
well-known policy of the United States, in effect since
1961, of providing no arms to Portugal for use in Africa.
In the view of my delegation, that policy fully meets
the objectives of paragraph 6. An effort to broaden
the scope of the Council’s recommendations
concerning assistance to Portugal would be unjustified in our
opinion and not in the interests of the people of the
African Territories under Portuguese control.

62. I must say, with all due respect to those who
worked on the latest draft resolution which is before
the Council, that it is ineffectual and repetitious, if
we consider the provisions of other resolutions that
were adopted by the CounciI under the terms of a consensus. Why?
63. The representative of the United States just mentioned that the Council should not go as far as to apply
Chapter VII. Why should there be a mention of Chapter
VII in the Charter for that matter? Why did those who
formulated the Charter include Chapter VII? Is it only
a sort of museum piece in the Charter to be looked
at? Is it academic or functional? If it is academic, let
us strike it out of the Charter. If it is functional, let
us use it.

56. The PRESIDENT
(trcrnslntedfiorn
Russicrn): I
thank you for the words you have addressed to the
President of the Council and for your offer of cooperation.

64. I think that looking at the whole question in retrospect will give us a better perspective and show more
clearly why we are confronted with such ineffective
resolutions.

57. The next speaker on my list is the representative
of Saudi Arabia, whom I invite to take a place at the
Council table and make his statement.

65. Our colleague from the United States mentioned
that no arms that the United States gives to Portugal
are being used-or at least, the United States had seen
to it that no such arms were being used-for anything
other than the defence of Portugal. But has the United
States any jurisdiction over Portugal? Do they tie a
red thread into the arms they give them, saying “this
is for use in seIf-defence” and that any of those arms
with the red thread tied to them, if they are used abroad,
will create a grave situation? What if Portugal untied
that thread from the arms that are earmarked for the
dkfence of Portugal? And for defence of Portugal
against whom? Spain has no designs on Portugal; that
is irrefutable. Nor has France any designs, nor any
other European State for that matter, on Portugal.

58. Mr. BAROODY (Saudi Arabia): I thank the President and the members of the Council for allowing me
to address the Council again on the item under consideration. After having read the report of the Security
Council’s Special Mission to the Republic of Guinea,
my doubts that a European Power had organized the
aggression against Guinea have been dissipated. My
last statement in the Council Ll55Sth meeting] has
unfortunately been vindicated,
59. All of the members of the Council may recall
what I said: that if Portugal-and
it was a big “if ‘-was
really the aggressor, it would indeed be a serious
matter. It is most unfortunate that although we know
who perpetrated aggression against Guinea, we find
that a watered-down draft resolution has emerged after
intensive consultation among the Council’s members.

66. This is why it behoves us to look back into the
history of Portugal. If we do not learn any lessons
from history, then why should we have history books?
I am not talking about historiography, but of history.

60. Why do I say a watered-down draft resolution?
Because I had the privilege of seeing the original joint
draft resolution, which was turned down by certain
Council members. Allegedly, that draft resolution was
too strong, and those members considered it as lying
outside the pale of the classical Council consensus.
I use the word “classical” judiciausly,
because since
the veto has been shelved for the last four or five years,
the Council has abjured any confrontation between the
members and has opted for a consensus, which is the
lowest common denominator of agreement regardless
of those who are aggrieved. The consensus, in effect,
dealt with platitudes and gave no redress to the victims.

67. As you all know, after the destruction of the
Carthaginian power by Rome, the civitization of Rome
spread over the Iberian peninsula, including, of course,
what is now known as Portugal. When Rome declined,
barbarian races took over, and the Visigoths ruled,
only to be overthrown by the Arabs-who incidentally,
stayed for eight centuries in the Iberian peninsula. The
Arabs came, under the leadership of Tariq ibn Ziyad,
who crossed from Africa with his troops to the Iberian
pensinula. He gave his name to Gibraltar-Jebel-Tariq,
the mountain of Tariq. Later the Ar’abs were conver7

ted-they were not chased out, but were converted
to Christianity by Isabel and Philip, and many Spanish
people, ethnologically
speaking, have been Arabs.
Towards the end of the eleventh century, Portugal was
still an obscure territory, afief of the Kingdom of Ledn,
as I am sure my colleague from Spain will affirm. Its
name was derived from a small seaport, Portus Gale.
At that time it began to derive the rudiments of
civilization, mostly from Lin and from Arab sources.
In the twelfth century, a Portuguese kingdom was
established. In the early fifteenth century, the period
of exploration began, culminating in the discovery of
an ocean route to India. That was in 1497 to 1499.
It was from 1499 to 1580 that Portugal acquired a vast
empire, including Brazil and possessions in the Old
World. But it was not long before Spanish kings were
ruling over Portugal, and that was for a period of
approximately sixty years, between 1581 and 1640.
However, the Portuguese monarchy was restored, after
a long struggle lasting from 1640 to 1675. The following
seventy years witnessed the reforms of Portugal,
which, after the Pensinsular War, led to a change from
absolute to constitutional monarchy. That was, if my
memory does not falter, in 1833.
68. Why does Spain not lay claim to Portugal, then,
since they ruled that land? Why has Spain not said
that Portugal is a province of Spain? Because Spain
had the good sense to let the people decide for themselves, after the conflict between Spain and Portugal.

in 1939, when they waged a war that cost them 60
million people? They did not abjure violence. Where
is the wisdom of abjuring violence? And against whom
is violence committed‘? Is Guinea trying to invade Portugal? Guinea and Senegal, and every African State,
are committed to the liberation of territories that are
still under the colonial yoke.
72. Some of our European colleagues, time and again,
say: “We should not resort to force”. They say that
from a guilty conscience. They are the first to resort
to force when their economic interests are threatened,
But when people who are living under the yoke of
foreign domination rebel here and there, they say: “Try
and crush them”-as
they are trying to do in Palestine.
Crush the Palestinian people! Crush the Angolan
people! Crush the people of Mozambique!
73. Why’? Is there a double standard in the United
Nations? It was that double standard that spelt out
the dissolution of the League of Nations. Do you want
to follow in the wake of the League of Nations and
let this Organization founder? I warn you, gentlemen:
that is what we are in effect doing.
74. Now, what is the population of Portugal? I am
told, between 9 and 10 million-I
do not have the exact
figures in front of me. But what is the African territory-or
what are the territories-under
the control
of Portugal? About 2 million square kilometres, if I
am not mistaken; and 15, to 16 million Africans are
still under the yoke of a European Power.

69. Why have I mentioned all these historical
episodes? Because Portugal claims that its African Territories, including Portuguese Guinea, are provinces,
Have you ever heard of provinces of Portugal that
are not inhabited by Portuguese?

75. What shall we do? adopt another resolution? Let
us examine this draft resolution very carefully-first,
how the preambular paragraphs begin: “gravely concerned”; “gravely concerned”-another
paragraph;
“Grieved at the loss of life”. And then, in the operative
part: “endorses. . . the report of the Special Mission”;
“strongly condemns the Government of Portugal”;
“demands” -demands from whom? From Portugal?
It is treating you with contempt; it is not represented
here. Are you demanding in absentia? “Appeals to
all States to render moral and material assistance to
the Republic of Guinea”. No one heeded that appeal
except a few African sister States, who were ready
to render moral and material assistance. But tell me,
did any European States send troops-except
mercenaries to invade Guinea and perhaps overthrow its
Government?

70. But this is not all. When did Portugal become
a Member of our Organization, this United Nations?
In 1955. I recall when it was admitted to the United
Nations. And under what terms was it admitted? That
it would respect the Charter. But Portugal has consistently refused to transmit information to the United
Nations on the territories under its administration, on
the pretext that they are provinces of Portugal. Those
territories include Angola, Mozambique and Guinea,
which is known nowadays as Guinea (Bissau).
However, it was not until 1969, fourteen years later,
that the United Nations, through the General
Assembly, expressed its deep concern about the persistent refusal of the Government of Portugal to recognize
that its overseas Territories are inhabited by people
who are not by any stretch of the imagination Portuguese. We have been calling upon the Government
of Portugal to adopt immediate measures for granting
the right of self-determination to the territories under
its domination. And what do we hear our colleague
from the United States say? That we should abjure
violence in trying to redress the grievances-I
am
paraphrasing; that is what he meant by implication-of
those against whom a colonial Power, in this instance
PortugaI, has committed aggression.

76. “Declares that the presence of Portuguese COlonialism on the African continent is a serious threat
to the peace and security of independent African
States”. What has the Security Council been doing
since 1955, when Portugal was admitted? What has
the Security Council been doing about this threat to
the peace and security of independent African States?
Do you want to act post mortem, when the whole of
Africa will rise one day, massacring the Europeans
and everyone else from outside the continent who is
associated with colonial rule directly or indirectly? Will
you act then? It will be too late.

71. But why did not the United States-and the European countries, for that matter-not
abjure violence
8

77. Then here is the watered-down paragraph 8:
“Solemnly warns the Government of Portugal that in
the event of any repetition of armed attacks against
independent African States, the Security Council shall
immediately consider appropriate effective steps or
measures in accordance with the relevant provisions
of the Charter of the United Nations. Why do you
not specify those relevant provisions? “Relevant”?
Let us know what they are. This only confuses the
issue. Why are you afraid to specify those relevant
provisions? This is a word that should have been
explained by quoting the Charter, not by dismissing
it as “relevant”.

provide armies and shed their blood. On whose behalf?
On behalf of a few, comparatively speaking, on behalf
of hundreds, perhaps thousands of Portuguese exploiters. It has happened in other empires that the people
of the metropolitan
State not only provided men to
fight in defense of those narrow interests for the benefit
of a few thousand but were also taxed and had to engage
in warfare against colonial people. They paid in blood
and treasure and this article 1 was enunciated after
several years of debate with the metropolitan Powers
before Portugal was admitted to the United Nations.
83. Some of us here say, ‘ ‘PortugaI is a small country,
we should use patience, we should not use violence”.
I see some members of the Council criticizing others
in an academic fashion about peace-keeping operations
and so on, in order to rationalize their refusal to act
in a manner that will lead to the liberation of those
people living under the yoke of a foreign country on
the European continent.

78. And then theusual thing: “Requests the President
of the Security Council and the Secretary-General to
follow closely the implementation
of the present
resolution”. What can the President of the Council
or our illustrious Secretary-General or anyone else do
while they sit here in New York, whether they are
permanent members or those who are present by
rotation? They sit academically on this question.

84. Is there no solution? Of course there is a solution.
What am f here for, just to tell you the things you
know? There is a solution, but I dare the Council to
put in a paragraph about that solution. It is not too
late, but I am sure it will refuse. What is the solution?
The solution is very simple, it is not even conceptual,
it does not need exploration. All you have to do is
to use common sense and be faithful to the principles
of the Charter. We know very well that Portugal is
a member of NATO, an alliance. In Europe there is
NATO and there is the Warsaw Pact. We are told
that the r~ri.snn
c/‘&e
of NATO is to defend Europe.
I am not going to tell you from whom, you know who
it is. But does membership of NATO mean that its
members can commit acts of aggression against territories abroad? What kind of club is this? Since Portugal is a member of that club called NATO, if it errs,
we will chastise it by words and we will allay the fears
of those simple Africans. They are young and
immature,
we will appease them; they are goodhearted. I have known them and they are very goodhearted and trustful, but they are beginning to be a
little foxy. Those Africans do not rely on empty promises. The Asians passed through that stage of being
good-hearted
with the colonists, but our African
brothers are learning the hard way not to believe in
empty promises.

79. This watered-down draft resolution has no teeth
in it and you think you will thereby allay the fears
not only of the people of Guinea but of all suppressed
peoples, whether they be in Namibia, Guinea (Bissau).
Angola, Mozambique, or any other territory or enclave
where colonialism prevails?
80. If YOU will bear with me, I should just like to
refer you to the following international instruments:
none other than the International Covenants on Human
Rights. The first article of each of those Covenants
on Human Rights was worked out in the early 195Os,
and it was my privilege, together with my colleagues,
to elaborate those Covenants-in
the eariy 195Os, mind
you, before Portutal had become a Member of the
United Nations. What does article 1 of each of those
Covenants say? I am referring to the Intervention
Covenant on Civil and Political Rights, on the one hand,
and to the International Covenant on Economic, Social
and Cultural Right,s, on the other-which were opened
simultaneously to the signature of States.
81, Article 1 of the International
Covenant on
Economic, Social and Cultural Rights reads as follows:
“1. All peoples have the right of selfdetermination.
By virtue of that right they freely
determine their political status and freely pursue
their economic, social and cultural development.

85. If I were a member of the Security Council, I
would have a paragraph calling upon members of
NATO not to sit in judgement over Portugal but to
question it. After all, Portugal is a small State and
one should not pass hasty judgements on any State.
But why does not the United States, the most powerful
member of NATO, and our French colleagues, who
have also fought for the liberty of peoples under de
Gaulle- may God rest his soul in peace-interrogate
that country. At one time, before de Gaulle, France
also alleged that Algeria was a province of France.
I used to ask them in the 1950s: “What separates France
from Algeria-the
sand?” It took a man of the stature
of de Gaulle to change that. they do come like him
every day or every year or even perhaps in fifty years.
He was a man who stood for justice, who liberated

“2. All peoples may, for their own ends, freely
dispose of their natural wealth and resources without
prejudice to any obligations arising out of international economic co-operation . . ,“2 etc.
82. Are the people under the yoke of Portugal freely
disposing of their natural wealth and resources or are
they being exploited? I maintain that not only are these
African people being exploited but the people of Portugal are also being exploited because they have to
z See General Assembly resolution 2220 A (XXI), annex.
9

have been liquidated. Why does the Security Council
not think of putting some life into the Trusteeship
Council? And through the NATO member& and also
members which have economic
ties with Portugal-they need not be NATO members-say,
“You
cannot keep the lid on those millions arid millions of
Africans. Why do you not abdicate your alleged responsibilities towards the people? Why do you not bring
those Territories within the pale of the Trusteeship
Council, conjointly with other trustees?” We do not
want Portugal to be expelled from Africa. Let it be,
a co-trustee of those Territories. Let there be some
African co-trustees; and some of our Scandinavian
friends, if they want to be neutral about them, or the
Swiss, for that matter, or the Austrians, to prepare
those Trust Territories for independence.

the Algerians who werefighting for their independence.
It fell to me to inscribe the Algerian item on the agenda;
I know about it, because I worked on that item. It
took a man like de Gaulle.
86. We do not think that the Portuguese have anyone
with charisma, with statesmanship nowadays, because,
after all, as I said, the Portuguese themselves are the
victims of their Government whidh conscripts and
sends them to fight and kill the Africans for the benefit
of a few thousand persons who are exploiting both
Africa and their own people.
87. All you would have to do, members of NATO,
would be to call on Portugal in a friendly manner and
tell it that a Mission was sent to Africa under the guidance and chairmanship of our illustrious colleague
and friend from Nepal, and say to Portugal, “Listen
here, there is an investigation going on. Is it true?”
They may say “It is not true”, but they cannot say
that much when they talk in private. The members
of NATO, including’ the United States, would be in
duty bound to report to the Council and tell us what
Portugal has told them. That is an effective way of
going to the root of the matter.

92. We should like to see Portugal benefit
economically, because it has had a long history and
an economic and political background. We do not want
to change it, but Portugal cannot claim that Mozambique, Angola and Portuguese Guinea are mere provinces. For our friends from Spain would say, “Well,
we will go back to the twelfth and thirteenth centuries
and claim Portugal as a province”. The Spanish preceded Portugal. No, you will not do that, because the
Spanish are content with their country.

88. Why has no one thought of inserting a paragraph
like that, to ask the NATO members to call on the
representatives of the Government of Portugal and discuss this alleged aggression-and
I say “alleged”
because I am not a judge sitting on a tribunal. We
will still give them the benefit of the doubt regarding
this “alleged” aggression against Guinea.

93. In conclusion, there are two things: first, NATO
should investigate the question and report to the Council; secorldly, the Council should seriously negotiate
through NATO to see whether it would be feasible
to put those Territories under Trusteeship on the
understanding that Portugal would be one of the cotrustees. Then there would be no friction. There would
be no aggression one day against Guinea, and another
day against Senegal, or a third day against someone
else in Africa.

89. Secondly, another important paragraph could
have mentioned something else. Either NATO is solely
defensive or it has a dual role: to defend itself from
outside aggression and to perpetrate aggression if that
serves its interests. If a member of NATO, a body
which is dedicated to self-defence, errs, it should be
brought to task and should be disciplined just as the
doctor in the medical association is expelled if he does
not obey the code. A lawyer in the Bar Association
or in an association of lawyers would be expelled in
a similar case. But we should not be too hopeful that
we shall reach the second paragraph which I am suggesting. Let us first ask our friends, the members of
NATO, to call on Portugal quietly and confront it with
the report of the Mission that was sent to Guinea and
let it answer and let the members of NATO which
sit on this very Council tell us what happened.

94. That is the role that the Security Council, I humbly submit, should play. For if we do not take any
new action of that kind we shall become repetitious,
Also we may expose ourselves to the whole world
as being ineffectual. And I am afraid, from what I saw
in the 193Os, during the era of the League of Nations,
that this Organization which should maintain not only
peace, but peace with justice and equity, will then
founder. There is no alternative to the United Nations
and we might just as well know that and repeat it.
But, at the same time, if the United Nations becomes
anaemic, then it will dissolve. Therefore we should
see to it that we strengthen its sinews not by engaging
in violence but by trying every ingenuous method to
make it a going concern.

90. This would be an effective way of dealing with
the situation. We should not endlessly condemn.
People have become thick-shinned like crocodiles.
They do not care about condemnation. “Deplores”,
“condemns,”
the same rubrics, the same stereotype
phrases in the preamble as well as in the operative
part of resolutions.

95. MR. TERENCE
(Burundi) (iizterpr.etation fvolll
~renclz): Mr. President, the destiny of the highest body
of the United Nations has been entrusted to You ia
circumstances painful for the Organization of African
Unity, since the dignity of one of its most valiant Mew
bers has been injured by an act of infamous aggression
from abroad. Nevertheless if the present situation
causes us bitterness, we do have reasons for ComPeasatory pride. The Security Council is called upon to
m&e good the wrong done to a sovereign State by

91. But this is not all. We seem to have forgotten
that our Charter has a chapter which deals with Trusteeship. Nowadays we use the Truteeship Chamber
for meetings of the Committees
of the General
Assembly, because fortunately most of the colonies
10

Mwaanga. Their report, based on a variety of sources,
illustrates the professional approach and real skill with
which these pilgrims of peace discharged objectively
and impartially the important, deIicate and complex
mission that was entrusted to them.

Portugal, at a time when the Council’s presidency is
held by one of the most ardent advocates of the liberation of African peoples. The major part played by the
Soviet Union, for more than a decade, in the decolonization of our continent, compels the admiration and
commands the gratitude of those that have benefited
from this active friendship. As for yourself, Sir, your
diplomatic seniority and great political experience, the
fruits of a hard-working career stretching over some
twenty years, have left their clear imprint on the history
of the international community. To those trump cards
we should add other human qualities that are not less
appreciated: your simplicity and your affability, which
have won you the wide popularity you enjoy in all
diplomatic circles in the United Nations and which
invariably put you in the thick of things.

103. The
success of the Special
Mission,
nevertheless, cannot be referred to without being
directly linked with the crucial role played by the
Ambassador of Syria, whose far-sightedness we must
thank for the judicious choice of the members. As president of the Council for November, Mr. Tomeh displayed both energy and effectiveness, those two
criteria being imperative in the circumstances created
by the Portuguese aggression. We are very grateful
for the skill with which he conducted the Council’s
proceedings.

96. In the course of this year you have on many occasions, particularly last January, during my presidency
of the Security Council, and on 13 October 1970 during
your impressive statement on the strengthening of
international security at the 1738th meeting of the First
Committee, you had the generosity to emphasize the
contribution of my country, Burundi, to international
peace and security, despite its modest size.

104. Secretary-General U Thant, who had a lion’s
share in this healthy precedent in the annals of the
Council, is entitled to our unreserved gratitude and
our limitless esteem, which he has so greatly deserved
thanks to his unflinching dedication to the cause of
Africa.
105. Cynicism carried to the point of frenzy: the testimony and the facts, which flooded in from all quarters, impute to Portugal the invasion of which the
Republic ofGuinea was the Victim. Whereas diplomats
representing opposed ideologies and even antagonistic
interests, persons belonging to different professions
such as a Belgian professor and a Yugoslav doctor,
official authorities and ordinary citizens of the Republic
of Guinea, prisoners and captured mercenaries, newspapers whether favourable or hostile to the Guinean
Idgimc, neighbouring countries whether or not friends
of the Republic of Guinea, foreign circles whether
admirers or detractors of the Guinean Head of State,
Powers outside Africa sympathetic or indifferent to
the fate of the Guinean people, partisans or opponents
of African unity, all agree as to the authenticity of
the report contained in document S/l0009 and Add.
1, of the Special Mission, while the Lisbon Government
alone disputes its veracity-that
is brazenness carried
to the point of frenzy by the devious Portuguese.

97. My delegation, in turn, is happy to express its
gratitude to you for the encomiums addressed to its
country, and pays tribute on behalf of the Government
of Burundi to the Soviet Union for its dynamic role
in the struggle for the emancipation of Africa.
98. May your great country, side by side with Africa,
hasten the death-blow directed against the bastions of
colonialism on our continent. The some five million
citizens of Burundi, under the prestigious leadership
of His Excellency Mr. Michel Micombero, President
of the Republic, will continue to play the part incumbent on them in working for the peace and security
of nations.
99. These past weeks we have seen an aggressor
caught red-handed. At the time of its previous attacks
on African countries, the Portuguese Government
never confessed its crimes or admitted its guilt for those
crimes. It tried instead to exculpate itself by making
declarations as fallacious as they were evasive.

106. Even caught in the very act, Portugal has the
audacity to add insult to injury by bravingthe unanimity
of eye and ear-witnesses.

100. The objective of the Security Council Special
Mission, in addition to establishing that an independent
State’s national sovereignty had been violated, was
to unmask Portugal’s falsification of the facts, a falsification which has become its sole legal recourse before
this distinguished body.

107. Everything goes to prove that Portugal prepared,
planned and executed the plot to attack a sovereign
State in violation of the United Nations Charter, in
particular Article 2, paragraph 4, which prohibits the
threat or use of force against the national sovereignty
or political independence of any State.

101. In its blindness, Portugal cannot grasp the fact
that the Security Council, wearied of Lisbon’s impostures, resolved to remedy these by the dispatch of a
mission whose members have distinguished themselves
both by their moral rectitude and by their political stature and diplomatic skill.

108. Despite this mass of evidence and proof against
Lisbon, the Portuguese leaders alone endeavour not
only to call in question but even to challenge the credibility and integrity of the Special Mission and the Security Council and of all the most prestigious international
figures, from all circles, even to the l’ery ranks of Portugal’s allies, who directly or indirectly, in one form

102. My delegation would like here to salute Mr.
and Mr.
Khatri,
the Chairman of the Mission,
Espinosa,
Mr. Jakobson, Mr. Kqaga
and Mr.
11

or another, have ventured to recognize the overwhelming proof that Portuguese armed forces, were landed
from warships and overran the territory of a free country to besiege its capital.
109. This is a crushing indictment. Let us suppose
that the reality were such as Lisbon would have us
believe. According to that argument Portugal is the
target of false accusations which, this time at least, are
not the doing of the fanatical Afro-Asian Group acting
in connivance with the socialist States that are bitter
enemies of “great democracy”, incarnated in a rkgime
which is in every respect fanatically fascist, but rathel
the result of a world conspiracy. It is dumbfounding
that Portugal, placed in the dock in such a concerted
manner and facing such a crushing indictment, should
confine its defence to the circulation of notes verbales
in the United Nations and the publication and circulation of mere communiquCs in Lisbon. The Portuguese
Government, setting aside its partner in Pretoria, is
of course the most delinquent Member of our
Organization. The representatives and leaders of a
country whose behaviour is diametrically opposed to
the ideals and principles of the Charter, both in its
aberrant colonialism and its shocking aggressiveness,
would surely not dare to appear before the international
tribunal.
1IO. The picture we have painted in our statement
calls more than ever for recourse by the Security Council to Articles 41 and 42 of the Charter. If the provisions
contained in these Articles are not applied, notwithstanding the repeated brazen challenge of Lisbon to
the well-meaning resolutions adopted in the past, it
will be vain to pretend that the punishment inflicted
on the Portuguese Government is proportional to the
enormity of its aggression against a State Member of
the United Nations.

114. To return to more detailed examination of the
report, as we did in our last intervention on Friday
11559th meet[ng], we have been informed that the Special Mission was offered the possibility of interviewing
all seventy or so prisoners of war captured by the Guinean army, but that it decided, quite rightly, to interview instead a sample of them. That testimony is
included in the addendum to the report. The full details
of the campaign were given by some of those prisoners.
It has been admitted by the Government of Portugal
that one of the key witnesses was an officier of the
Portuguese armed forces. It should also be noted that
another of the key witnesses before the Special Mission
was the United States Ambassador to the Republic
of Guinea, a man of obvious integrity who was
interested in giving only facts and not political opinion,
115. The complicity of the Portuguese Government
is demonstrated by the fact that the white Portuguese
prisoners who were in Guinea have now arrived in
Lisbon. The racialism and hypocrisy of the Portuguese
Government when it speaks of racial brotherhood is
demonstrated again by another fact, that is, that the
Portuguese invaders freed the white Portuguese prisoners in Conakry during the raid and left behind the
black Portuguese African prisoners, who had served
them equally and had been captured by the liberation
movement led by Mi. Amilcar Cabral.
116. The draft resolution states, in the third paragraph
of its preamble:
L‘Gru~ely concerned that the invasion of the territory of the Republic of Guinea on 22 and 23 November 1970 from Guinea (Bissau) was carried out by
naval and military units of the Portuguese armed
forces, and by the armed attack against the R&public of Guinea on 27 and 28 November 1970. ”

1 I 1. The PRESIDENT
(trarzsla ted j&7 Russian): I
thank the representative of Burundi for the kind words
he has spoken about the Soviet Union and about the
President of the Security Council.

117. Members will note that the invasion was found
to have beeg launched from Guinea (Bissau) and that
this was established by the fact-finding Mission. A certain section of the international press has tried to place
the origin of the invasion in Sierra Leone. They have
tried to confuse the issue and deflect the beam of condemnatory light from Portugal. They have failed. The
Governments of Sierra Leone and the Republic of
Guinea have had a long history offriendship, buttressed
both by family ties and by continuing affection, which
will remain and be strengthened ‘long after the last
arrogant, imperialist Portuguese invader has been driven from the shores of the African continent as they
were from the Indian subcontinent.

112. Mr. NICOL (Sierra Leone): My delegation, in
sponsoring the draft resolution contained in document
S/10030 of7 December 1970, would again like to thank
the Chairman of the Special Mission, Ambassador
Khatri of Nepal, and the other members, for their
report which was produced under such clifficult circumstances. We should also like, Mr. President, to thank
your delegation and the other delegations on the Council and those which have been invited to speak for
the strong support they have given to the spirit of the
draft resolution.

118. The PRESIDENT
(t~atzsl~~tetf~onz Russim): 1
have no more speakers on my main list. If no other
members ofthe Security Council or representatives who
have been invited by the Council to participate in the
discussion of this item wish to take the floor, we shall
consider the general debate concluded.

113. My delegation would never accuse this body of
any kind of prejudice. But we are inclined to wonder
whether, if the aggressor had not been a member of
the North Atlantic Treaty Organization or if the country attacked had not been a black African country,
and one committed to socialism, events in the Council
would not have taken a different trend in speed and
substance when the matter was first reported.

119. The next stage of our work today is to vote
on the draft resolution in document S/10030. Before
we proceed to a vote, however, I shall give the floor
12

to those members of the Security Council who have
asked to speak in explanation of vote before the vote
is taken.
i

in others it would have gained had it been more
thorough. Some of the indications it contains seem
to be affirmations of principle rather than testimony.
However, the report does represent an important contribution in determining the facts.

120. Mr. JAKOBSON (Finland): In the consultations
ivhich the sponsors of the draft resolution held yesterday with other members of the Council, my delegation,
along with several other delegations, put forward some
suggestions designed to make the draft more widely
acceptable. Our main purpose in making those suggestions was to make it clear that the Security Council
would not be committed in advance to considering any
recurrence of an armed Portuguese attack against an
independent African State as a situation requiring the
measures envisaged in Chapter VII of the Charter. We
believe the Council should be free to consider each
situation on its merits without being either bound in
advance to one particular set of measures or precluded
from using any of the possibilities offered by the
Charter. In practical terms, the members of the Council
in any event freely determine, separately in each case,
whatever course of action they reg,ard as appropriate.
We are grateful to the sponsors of the draft resolution
for taking into account those suggestions, which were
made by several delegations, and for submitting a text
which we believe implies no advance commitinent
of
the kind I have mentioned. Accordingly, my delegation
will vote in favour of the draft resolution.

125. One point at least seems to be clear: the Republic
of Guinea was the subject of an armed attackbypersons
coming from Guinea (Bissau). We formally condemn
that aggression. Even though the attack took place
in conditions which have not been made entirely clear,
we believe that in one way or another the responsibility
of the Government
of Portugal is involved. The
Government of Portugal is responsible for what happens on a territory over which it claims sovereignty;
consequently it is responsible for undertakings that are
fomented from such a territory. As soon as news of
the events of 22 November reached us, and the Security
Council was convened, my delegation, while denouncing that attack, endeavoured to demand its immediate
cessation, the withdrawal of foreign troops and the
sending of a special mission.
126. My country has always protested, and protests
now, against any attack on the sovereignty and territorial integrity of a State, against any outside support
for internal subversion, against any interference in the
internal affairs of a country. That is true on whatever
continent it may happen, whatever the size, political,
economic or social rkgime of the country in question.
But it is particularly grave when what is at stake is
the fate of a country whose independence is still comparatively recent.

12 1. Mr. KOSCIUSKO-MORIZET
(France) (interfrom French): The French delegation did
not participate in the general debate and this should
surprise no one since, as is known, the factual part
of the report of the Special Mission-that
is, the verbatim records of the meetings and the written statements-have not been published in French. That is regrettable, not only for my delegation, but also for all
French-speaking
delegations, particularly
those of
Africa, who have been unable to take cognizance of
this important document. This is all the more bizarre
since most of the statements which appear in the document were made in French, and most of the hearings
were conducted in that language.
pretation

127. The ,Council will understand how we feel concerning the case of Guinea. We were first to recognize
its right to independence and we gave it, as we gave
all the countries we administered, the possibility freely
to choose their own road. Allow me to express our
sympathy to the Republic and people of Guinea and
also to its President, whose passion for the well-being
of Africa and whose uncompromising
dignity I have
kn.own personally for a long time.
128. We are most happy that the Government of
Conakry was able to repel the attackers and has the
situation under control. While we rejoice at the happy
outcome of the affair, we should nonetheIess remain
vigilant and we do not intend to accept any undertaking
which might jeopardize the independence, sovereignty
and integrity of the Republic of Guinea.

122. That practice is not new, but it is most shocking.
At the very least it reflects a defect of organization.
There would have been no translation problem, since
there was nothing to translate. Out of consideration
for our African friends, we did not wish to slow down
or halt the work of the Council. We shall, however,
adopt a less conciliatory attitude if such methods are
repeated.

129. It is in this spirit that my delegation intends to
look at the draft resolution before us. Some of its paragraphs are very acceptable and we would be prepared
to pronounce ourselves in favour of them. Other paragraphs seem more questionable. We cannot, in particular, associate ourselves with certain formulations,
nor with certain assertions in regard to which much
remains to be clarified. We are grateful, of course,
to the sponsors for having deleted any reference to
Chapter VII of the Charter. Nevertheless, several provisions of the text still prompt legal,reservations on
our part, which we already have had occasion to
express in regard to similar resolutions.

123. We therefore regret that we have been unable
to study the report of the Special Mission as thoroughly
as we would have wished, and to be able to give only
rather general views on it. We first tyish to pay a tribute
to our eminent colleagues, who have accomplished a
praiseworthy task in the confining conditions and
limited time of which we are aware, and in particular,
we pay tribute to their Chairman, our colleague from
Nepal.
124. It is, nevertheless, difficult for us to endorse
the report submitted to us. In some parts it is obscure;
13

130. It is in view of those considerations that we shall
not prevent the adoption of the draft resolution and
we shall abstain.

oral evidence received, taken together with strong ci,..
cumstantial evidence, justifies the general conclusiobs
presented by the Special Mission in its report.

131. Sir COLIN CROWE (United Kingdom): Mr.
President, since this is the first occasion on which I
have spoken this month, I wish to take this opportunity
to join my colleagues in welcoming you to the presidency of the Council, an office which you have filled
so excellently before. I know you will do so again
and I assure you of the co-operation of my delegation.

138. We deplore these events and the behaviour ~f
those responsible for them. As my Government hna
said many times, we cannot condone the use of force
in such circumstances, whoever may use it. In the
present case the facts as established by the United
Nations Special Mission justify strong condemnation
of the Portuguese authorities for this attack.

132. I should also like to pay a tribute to our outgoing
President, the representative of Syria, for the distinguished manner in which he so ably carried out his
duties last month. We are most grateful to him.

139. This was an exceptionally grave incident. Bnt
it cannot ultirnately profit anyone to let accusations
outrun the facts. Many speakers in the debate have
sought to widen the discussion from the specific inci.
dents involved to impute motives and actions to others
for which there is not only no evidence in the present
case but no foundation in fact. I refer in particular
to allegations that have been made against NATO and
its members as perpetrators of “crimes” against Africa
and as “tha worst enemies of Africa”. Such accusations are quite unjustified and I must reject them
entirely.

133. I must begin by expressing the sympathy of my
delegation to the Government and people of Guinea
for the loss of life and property which they have suffered as a restilt of the attack which they underwent
on 22 November. I should also like to express my
appreciation to this Council’s Special Mission, for the
devotion and speed with which they worked.
134. The draft resolution now before us is the outcome of the report of the Special Mission, and so
perhaps I should turfi to the sending of the Special
Mission first and say a few words about that.

140. NATO is a defensive alliance to preserve the
freedom and independence of the countries which
belong to the alliance within the NATO area, which
does not include any part of the African continent,
NATO has no responsibility for the defence outside
its area of the overseas territories of any of its members;
in other words, it has no responsibility for the defence
of Portuguese overseas territories. NATO as such does
not supply arms or military aid to Portugal; any arms
supplied to Portugal are on a bilateral basis.

135. On 22 November-or,
to be strictly accurate,
in the early hours of 23 November-the
Council quite
rightly decided to address itself first to trying to establish the facts of the situation. This was the obvious
and logical thing to do first and it is the approach that
my delegation has always recommended in such cases.

141. As regards the United Kingdom Government,
for which alone I can speak on this issue, no arms
or military equipment have been supplied by US for
use in Portuguese overseas territories since the adoption of Security Council resolution 180 (1963) on 31
July 1963. In spite of the loose accusations that are
often made, no evidence has ever been advanced that
arms supplied to Portugal by the United Kingdom in
recent years are being used in its African territories.
Paragraph 6 of this resolution in fact reflects just our
policy.

136, The method chosen, namely the dispatch of a
Special Mission of selected members of the Security
Council, has been warmly endorsed as though it were
a new departure. In fact, of course, there are many
precedents for the Security Council appointing subcommittees or commissions of its members to examine
evidence and report back to the Security Council, just
as there are many precedents for the Security Council
asking the Secretary-General to send a special representative or representatives to examine and report.
Our procedure on this occasion recognized both the
role of the Secretary-General and the authority of the
Security Council and its members. I hope that those
who see this as an encouraging new departure will
be equally ready not to put obstacles in the way of
other peace-keeping operations when they come to be
considered.

142. With regard to the draft resolution, I should like
to place on record the position of my delegation concerning the references in the fourth preambular paragraph and in operative-paragraph 5 to “a serious &eat
to the peace and security of independent African
States”. Paragraph 5 in particular goes beyond the
scope of the report of the Special Mission and these
references are at most descriptive expressions which
respond to the understandable concern and apprehension of States in this region.

137. As I have already said, we are all indebted to
those of our colleagues who agreed to serve on this
Special Mission. I should also like to pay a tribute
to the hard-working members of the Secretariat who
deserve congratulations for the speed and efficiency
with which the report was produced, at least, that is
to say, in English. In such cases it is never easy to
establish facts in precise detail after the event. The
Mission was not able to conduct a judicial inquiry as
such. Nevertheless, my Government considers that the

143. By this wording these paragraphs do not constitute, either separately or together, a determination
of the existence of a threat to the peace in the technical
sense of Article 39 of the Charter. Neither of them
embodies the positive and definite assertion of the existence of a threat to the peace which that Article emis14

ages. The first is a preambular statement of concern
and the second is couched in the terms of a declaration
rather than a determination.
144. As regards paragraph 8, my delegation considers
that, in the event of the circumstances referred to,
the Council is free to proceed under whatever provisions of the United Nations Charter it considers
appropriate to the case.
14.5. I should also like to mention the reference in
paragraph 9 to “obligations under Article 25”. We do
not, for the reasons which I hhve explained earlier,
interpret this reference as applying to the present
resolution or as suggesting that this resolution itself
involves a decision under Chapter VII.
146. To sum up, therefore, my Government is glad
that steps were first taken to establish the facts of
the situation. We accept the general conclusions of
the report of the Special Mis’sion. We agree that a
severe condemnation by the Security Council of those
concerned in the attack on the Republic of Guinea
is justified. Wedo not agree, however, that the situation
in question justifies a determination of a threat to the
peace in the terms of Chapter VII of the Charter. In
our view, the draft resolution does not do this; but
the wording of certain paragraphs is obscure. There
are also certain other elementi in this draft resolution
which seem to go beyond what is reasonably justified
by the Mission’s report.
147. For these reasons we shall abstain on the draft
resolution.
148. The PRESIDENT
(tr’anslatedfiom
Russian): I
thank the representative of the United Kingdom for
his remarks about the President.
149. Mr. DE PINIES (Spain) (interpretation
from
S~~n/zislz): Mr. President, my delegation wishes to congratulate you, on your accession to the presidency of
this lofty body. You are a veteran of the United Nations
and have held your present office on several occasions
in the past, and the debates over which you have presided and those you are conducting at this session are
proof of the objectivity which guides your actions. My
delegation, therefore, on congratulating
you, also
wishes to state that in the discharge of your duties
you can always count upon our co-operation.
150. I also wish to congratulate the representative
of Syria, my illustrious friend Ambassador Tomeh. It
was he who guided our debates during the past month,
and, like my other colleagues here, I wish to pay tribute
to him for the way he discharged his duties. He knows
that in my country we deplore the fact that an important
part of Syria remains under foreign occupation, and
we most earnestly hope that this will be brought to
an end.
151. My delegation has studied with due attention
the report of the Special Mission-although
we have
not had the text in Spanish. In view of response to
the appeal made by you, Mr. President, I only wish

to place on record this minor oversight and I should
like to take this opportunity to express our gratitude
to the Mission for the work it accomplished. TO the
Government of Guinea we also wish to offer our deepest condolences for the considerable
number of
casualties, when Guinea had to confront the gravest
situation ever experienced in the history of its country.
We were impressed by the statement made by Mr.
IsmaelTour&, Minister of Finance, before the members
of the visiting Mission of the Security Council. It contains a dramatic recollection of the facts, together with
an entire philosophy regarding the inability of this
Council to act with the required swiftness at times
when aggressions are committed
against Member
States. Perhaps the Special Committee
on Peacekeeping Operations will, in the light of this grave
experience, devise some formula which, in due course,
will make it possible for this body to act with the necessary effectiveness it lacks today.
152. The visiting Mission, in our opinion, while staying in Guinea, arrived at the conclusions set forth in
section III of its report, document S/10009. Perhaps
a longer stay and broader contacts wouId have made
it possible for the Mission to lay a more solid foundation
for its conclusions. In any case, my delegation
repudiates any foreign invasion or interference in any
State. Nevertheless, in our view, the draft resolution
perhaps goes rather beyond what we would have
wished, and my delegation therefore feels compelled
to abstain.
153. The PRESIDENT
(tmnslated.fiom
Russian): I
thank the representative of Spain for his words of welcome to me as President of the Security Council.
154. I should like to inform the CounciI that the list
of those wishing to speak before the vote is now
exhausted, I shoudl also like to state that, before proceeding to,the vote, a number of delegations expressed
the wish to speak in explanation of their votes after
the vote.
155. I now call upon the Security Council to vote
on the five-Power draft resolution sponsored by the
delegations of Burundi, Nepal, Sierra Leone, Syria and
Zambia, which has been circulated to the Council as
document S/10030. The representative of Burundi was
kind enough to read out the full text of the draft yepterday and since no changes have been made in the text
since then, I see no reason for it to be read out again;
eveyone is quite familiar with it. I therefore request
the Council to proceed to vote on the draft resolution.
A vote was taken by show of hands.
1n favour: Burundi, China, Colombia,
Finland,
Nepal, Nicaragua, Poland, Sierra Leone, Syria, Union
of Soviet Socialist Republics, Zambia.
Against:

None.

Abstaining:
Great Britain
of America,

France, Spain, United Kingdom
of
and Northern Ireland, United States

The drait resolution was adopted by 11 votes to none,
with 4 abstentions.”

forces which were present not only off our coast, bbt
on our very soil and in our capital.

15’6. The PRESIDENT
(translatedfiom
Russinn): I
now call on those delegations wishing to explain their
votes.

164. The Government and people of Guinea hav,
learned through inspiring and convincing experience
that no invading force can overcome the strength and
resistance of a people that is resolved to defend its
freedom and the territorial integrity of its country.

157. Mr. KHATRI (Nepal): I apologize for the delay
and inconvenience caused by this intervention, but I
have asked to speak in order to express my deep personal gratitude to my colleagues, the members of the
Special Mission to the Republic of Guinea-Ambassador Espinosa of Colombia, Ambassador Jakobson
of Finland, Ambassador Ku,Yagaof Poland, and Ambassador Mwaanga of Zambia-for the kindness and consideration they have shown towards me. I feel honoured and privileged to have been associated with such
distinguished and widely respected members of the
Security Council and I have greatly enjoyed working
with them in the fulfilment of the mandate entrusted
to the Special Mission under paragraph 3 of Security
Council resolution 289 (1970). Each of those esteemed
colleagues displayed objectivity, responsibility and
personal integrity of the highest order.
158. I should also like to pay a tribute to the Secretariat staff, whose advice and assistance were invaluable to the Special Mission in the performance of its
task.
159. The Security Council has endorsed the conclusions in the report of its Special Mission. To each
member of the Mission this, I am sure, is a source
of great satisfaction.
160. Finally, on behalf of the members of the Special
Mission, I should also like to thank all delegations
which were kind enough to express their satisfaction
at the work of the Special Mission.
161. The PRESIDENT
(translatedfiom
Russia/l): 1
give the floor to the representative of Guinea.

165. The Mission that was dispatched to the Republic
of Guinea, despite all the diversionary manoeuvres
attempted by the eternal enemies of Africa, was able
to establish the facts and realities of the situation. It
was also able to carry out its mandate with the co.
operation of the Government of the Republic of Guinea
which, despite the very tragic circumstances, did not
hesitate to make available to your Mission all the
facilities at its disposal which it thought necessary,
166. The conclusions contained in the Mission’s
report, have been the subject of doubts and challenges’
in certain obvious quarters, whose only attitude in the
face of the truth is to deny it.
167. The debate which has just taken place goes far
beyond my own little country. The events that took
place in Guinea are a final warning to the Security
Council, the organ primarily responsible for safeguarding international peace and security. Must the African
countries consider that their defence and their security
will be taken into account only to the extent that they
enjoy the ,sympathy and esteem of those that unconditionally support Portugal? Portugal has committed an
act of flagrant armed aggression against the sovereignty
and integrity of a Member State. The Charter of the
United
Nations-our
Charter-in
Chapter VII
stipulates the appropriate sanctions in such cases; but
since it is an African State, certain members of the
Council have felt that to invoke Chapter VII went
beyond whatever decisions or measures could be taken
when it was an African State that found itself the victim
of aggression.
168. ‘The Republic of Guinea paid for this; it takes
note of the fact. Africa paid for this; it is aware of
the* fact; it takes note of it, for tomorrow Africa meets
in Lagos, in the light of the decisions that you have
taken here.

162. Mr. TOURE
(Guinea) (inteF:pretation from
French): The Security Council has reached the end
of its debate-a debate which began almost two weeks
ago, during a most tragic time for the people of Guinea.

169. We should like to believe that all the tokens
of sympathy given us here are indicative not of sympathy for the Government of Guinea, its President
Ahmed Sekou Tour& or the people of Guinea, but
far more for the shining cause in whose defence the
Republic of Guinda fell victim. This cause is inseparable from international peace and security. The resolution does not state that if an African country is the
victim of a flagrant act of open armed aggression by
a Member State, that constitutes a threat to peace and
security; it merely says it is a threat to the security
of the African States.

163. The Security Council, as soon as it received the
appeal addressed to it by the Guinean Head of State,
Comrade Ahmed Sekou Tour&, thought fit to dispatch
a mission to the Republic of Guinea-a mission which
some speakers have described as being unique in the
history of the United Nations and of the Security
Council. May I say here that the Government and
people of Guinea, during those tragic hours through
which they were passing, had placed enormous trust
in the United N.ations. May I also say how quick was
our disappointment
at the response to our tragic
appeal-which was supported by our faith in the United
Nations-for
the dispatch of United Nations forces
to the Republic of Guinea because of the considerable

170. Must we then conclude that the Security of African States is inseparable from world security? Or rather
that the African States are Member States, but on a
lower level, and that the sanctions that should be

’ Seeresolution 290 (1970).
16

imposed on aggressor countries like Portugal depend
on the colour of the victim’s skin or on the continent
from which he hails? We refuse to believe such things.

to Portugal can shoot in only one direction (he did
not say in which direction, but that is well known),
and that they are not shooting at Africa. Experience
shows that they shoot in the direction of Africa just
as in any other direction. As the representative of Saudi
Arabia has brilliantly demonstrated here, weapons cannot be divided into those that shoot in one direction
and those that shoot only in another. Weapons are
weapons, and in the hands of the aggressor they are
directed against the victims of aggression. The Security
Council will expect this appeal, which is addressed
primarily to Portugal’s military allies, to be complied
with.by them. The whole of Africa, united in its noble
impulse of fraternal solidarity in defence of the rights,
interests and security of the Republic of Guinea which
has been the victim of unprovoked aggression, will
now be watching to see how this provision is carried
out.

171. But we should merely like to state before the
Security Council, as it concludes its debate, that Portugal has woken us up to the problem of our own survival, and has helped to teach us that the defence of
our liberty and independence can come only from ourselves.
172. Portugal has effectively helped to give concrete
shape to the active solidarity of Africa, because friendly
countries, brother countries, everywhere in Africa,
from the east to the west, from the north to the centre,
have mobilized themselves to defend what is dearest
to every one of us here: our freedom and independence.
173. We should like here before the Security Council
to express our deep gratitude to these friendly and
fraternal countries, to all those who in the debate have
expressed their active solidarity and sympathy with
the struggle being waged by the people of Guinea,
which is inseparable from the struggle we are waging
on the international level to defend peace, justice and
international security,

177. Accordingly,
the
provision
prohibiting
assistance to the Portuguese colonialists on the one
hand and the second of the provisions appealing for
assistance to the victims of aggression on the other
constitute an important aspect of the Security Council
resolution.
178. The resolution reflects-although
inadequately
and, I should say, weakly-the
just demand of the
African and Asian States that the presence of Portuguese colonialism in whatever part of the African
continent should be brought to an end.

174. The PRESIDENT
(tr’nrzslatedjkm
Russian): I
should like, in my capacity as representative of the
SOVIET UNION,
to make the following statement
on behalf of the USSR delegation.

179. In the Council’s discussion of this item the Soviet
delegation strongly supported the position of the African and Asian States as set forth in the original version
of their draft, in which they called for a clearer and
more definite reference in the Council’s resolution to
the application of sanctions against aggression, against
Portugal as the aggressor, in accordance with Chapter
VII of the United Nations Charter.

175. The delegation of the Soviet Union notes with
satisfaction that in its decision the Security Council
strongly condemns the aggressor for the aggression
it has committed against independent and sovereign
African States. The Council has thus responded as
it should to the unanimous appeal of the African States,
many representatives of which have spoken here, to
the effect that Portugal, a State member of NATO,
should be censured and strongly condemned for its
aggression against a free and independent African
country. Those who have spoken have also rightly
observed that a mere condemnation is not enough. The
fact that Council resolution 290 (1970) includes a provision indicating that the aggressor bears material responsibility for the damage sustained should therefore be
regarded as a positive factor.

180. The Soviet delegation insisted that in its decision
on the application of sanctions against Portugal for
the aggression it has committed the Council should
take the action provided for in Article 41 of the Charter.
181. The aggressor has been officially unmasked by
the Council’s Special Mission. The fact of aggression
has been established, and the aggressor should be
punished. The Security Council should apply the sanctions against aggression provided for in Article 41 of
the Charter. The Soviet deIegation insisted on this.

176. The Security Council’s approval of this principle
of the responsibility of the aggressor is all the more
important because the fact that imperialist States are
continuing to commit or are supporting acts of aggression with impunity in various parts of the world has
encouraged and is encouraging colonialists and aggressors to commit similar acts against other newly independent States. It is also highly significant that in its
resolution the Council calls upon all States to refrain
from providing the Government of Portugal with any
military and material assistance, since it is only such
assistance that enables Portugal, an under-developed
country, to commit its international crimes and aggression against African countries. We cannot agree with
the United Kingdom representative who endeavoured
to prove that the weapons supplied by NATO countries

182. Furthermore, we proposed that if after such a
decision was taken the aggressor disregarded it and
committed another act of aggression, Article 42, which
provides for stronger action against the aggressor,
should be invoked.
183. Unfortunately,
the aggressor had fairies on its
side in the Security Council. According to myth and
legend there are both good and bad fairies. In the Security Council they took the form of two-headed Janus.
They were good towards the aggressor and bad towards
the Victims of aggression. As a result, the draft resolution was weakened and the Security Council had to
adopt that weakened version. The representative of
17

Guinea was quite right to express dissatisfaction with
the resolution which was adopted.
184. The Soviet delegation also notes with satisfaction that the Security Council has endorsed the conclusions of the report of its Special Mission. In those
conclusions, Portugal is unmasked and denounced as
the aggressor, no matter who attempts, or how, to
justify its actions or to defend it. It is true that there
were no open justifications, but attempts to justify the
aggression could be heard in certain statements. The
resolution which has been adopted views in the correct
perspective the question of responsibility for supervising its implementation.
It is unquestionably correct
that, under the United Nations Charter, supervision
of the implementation
of resolutions in such cases
should, first and foremo t, be exercised by the Security
Council itself, which b Bars primary responsibility for
the maintenance of international peace and security.
The resolution we have adopted entrusts that task to
the President of the Council and to the SecretaryGeneral. We are hopeful and confident that the
Secretary-General
co-operation in supervising the
implementation of the Security Council’s decision will
be as valuable and useful as was the assistance he
gave to the Security Council’s Special Mission to the
Republic of Guinea.
185. The United States representative, Ambassador
Yost, raised the question of peace-keeping operations.
Yes, it is high time we started making faster progress
towards the solution of this question. But the reasons
why we have not done so are well known. It has been
the practice, since the dark days of the cold war, for
these operations to be conducted along the lines of
the operations mounted in the Congo, which cost the
life of him who invited armed forces to come and help
him. To avoid the recurrence of such unfortunate
events, United Nations peace-keeping operations must
be conducted in strict compliance with the Charter,
This is the firm and unswerving position of the Soviet
Union.
1%. In the whole course of the work done by the
Special Committee on Peace-keeping Operations and
during the elaboration of the relevant models and provisions-concerning
who is to participate in peacekeeping operations, what contingents, who should
command them and how they should be organized-we
have firmly upheld the Charter and rejected the
shameful, anti-Charter and illegal practice established
during the co!d war whL;n all questions were settled
by the automatic majority vote without the participation of, and in circumvention of, the Security Council.
We strongly support the establishment of military contingents of the Security Council or the United Nations
which would be made available to the Council by
neutral, socialist and Western States, and not by specially selected States. We feel that the Council should
make a special appeal in that connexion to all States
without exception and not just to one particular select
group. We advocate that provisions should be thought
out and elaborated for financing these operations and
that a specic?lfund, independent of the United Nations
regular budget, should be established, and we are sub-

mitting a whole series of other proposals which we
insist should be adopted. There are some, however,
who prefer that these operations should continue to
be conducted along cold war lines. So long as the desire
to conduct such operations in this way persists, it will
be impossible for either the United Nations or the
Security Council to have effective armed forces, mi]itary contingents with which to render assistance quickly
to the victims of aggression.
187. Bearing in mind the decision taken on this important question by the General Assembly at its twenty.
fifth session [resolutiorz 2670 CXXV)], to the effect that
the Special Committee on Peace-keeping Operations
should.accelerate its work and submit specific proposals in the coming months, we hope that all members
of that Committee will heed both the wishes of the
General Assembly-it
is stated clearly in the Genera]
Assembly’s decisions that peace-keeping operations
should be conducted strictly in conformity with the
Charter-and
the instructive lesson to which the representative of Guinea referred here, i.e. Portugal’s aggression against Guinea; we hope that United Nations
armed forces will be established and that with respect
to their command, direction and operational supervision there will be strict compliance with the United
Nations Charter. Then they will be able to give effective and speedy assistance to any victim of aggression.
188. The Security Council is concluding its consideration of the question of Portugal’s aggression against
the Republic of Guinea. It has adopted a decision which
is basically the right one, although, for reasons which
are all too well known, it is a weak one. The important
thing is that the resolution adopted by the Security
Council, weak though it is, should be implemented
immediately and strictly. If Portugal or its protectors
impede the implementation
of this resolution in any
way, the Soviet delegation feels that the Security Council should reconsider what additional more decisive
and effective measures would be required to put the
resolution into effect and that such sterner measures
against the aggressor should be taken.
189. Mr. TOMEH (Syria): I have asked for the floor
in order to address my thanks to all representatives
who during this debate have expressed appreciation
towards myself and my country, Syria.
190. The PRESI’DENT
(translated from Russiarl):
There are no more speakers. Before adjourning this
meeting, I should like to point out to Council members
that paragraph 12 of resolution 290 (1970), which has
just been adopted, states that the Council: “decides
to remain actively seized of the matter”. I request
all members of the Security Council to keep that provision in mind.
191. I should also like to remind members that the
next meeting of the Security Council, at which it Will
consider the question of the United Nations operation
in Cyprus, has been scheduled for Thursday, 10
December, at 3 p.m. The documentation on this item
has been circulated by the Secretariat to the members
of the Council and I invite them to study it and transmit
any comments they may have to the Secretariat.
The meeting rose at 6.50 p.m.

18
~.ilhO in United

Naths.

New Yo,+

Price:

$U.S.

I.00 (or equivalent

in other

currencies)

82~180-May

19733,WJ
