S/PRST/2014/8

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
12 May 2014
Original: English

Statement by the President of the Security Council
At the 7171st meeting of the Security Council, held on 12 May 2014, in
connection with the Council’s consideration of the item entitled “Central African
region”, the President of the Security Council made the following statement on
behalf of the Council:
“The Security Council expresses its concern at the deterioration in the
security situation in parts of Central Africa within the remit of the UN
Regional Office for Central Africa (UNOCA), in particular the crisis in the
Central African Republic (CAR) and its growing regional impact, and the
threat of terrorism, including the expansion of Boko Haram terrorist activities
into countries in the sub-region. The Council also expresses its continuing
concern regarding maritime insecurity in the Gulf of Guinea, the illegal
wildlife trade and transnational organised crime.
“The Security Council pays tribute to the outgoing Special
Representative of the Secretary General (SRSG) for Central Africa and head o f
UNOCA, Abou Moussa of Chad, for his leadership in support of consolidating
peace and preventing conflict in the Central African region and important
accomplishments of UNOCA during his tenure, and welcomes the appointment
of Abdoulaye Bathily of Senegal as the new SRSG for Central Africa and head
of UNOCA.
“The Security Council reiterates its strong condemnation of the appalling
attacks, war crimes and crimes against humanity carried out by the Lord’s
Resistance Army (LRA) and its violations of international humanitarian law
and abuses of human rights, including the LRA’s recruitment and use of
children in armed conflict, killing and maiming, rape, sexual slavery and other
sexual violence, and abductions. The Council demands an immediate end to all
attacks by the LRA and urges the LRA to release all those abducted, and to
disarm and demobilise. The Council welcomes the progress made with regard
to ending LRA war crimes and crimes against humanity in Central Africa and
reiterates its resolve to maintain the current momentum until a permanent end
to the threat posed by the LRA has been achieved.
“The Security Council welcomes the diplomatic efforts of outgoing
SRSG Abou Moussa and African Union (AU) Special Envoy on the LRA Issue
Francisco Madeira to strengthen regional cooperation and facilitate continued
AU-Regional Task Force (AU-RTF) operations in the region. The Council
urges UNOCA, in its coordination role, as well as the United Nations political
14-33131 (E)

120514

*1433131*

S/PRST/2014/8

and peacekeeping missions in the region and other relevant United Nations
presences to enhance their efforts in support of the implementation of the
United Nations Regional Strategy to Address the Threat and Impact of the
Activities of the LRA (the UN strategy), as appropriate and within the limits of
their mandates and capacities. The Council encourages the Secretary-General
to optimise UNOCA’s efforts in this regard, including through the use of staff
and provision of support to anti-LRA efforts.
“The Security Council reiterates its strong support for the Afri can Union
Regional Cooperation Initiative against the LRA (AU RCI -LRA), and
commends the significant progress made by the AU-RTF. The Council notes in
particular the reported death in late 2013 of the LRA’s second -in-command
Okot Odhiambo, who was indicted by the International Criminal Court and the
capture of LRA mid-level commander Charles Okello in April 2014. The
Council welcomes the AU-RTF’s enhanced operations against the LRA in
recent months, which have increased pressure on the LRA command structure
and resulted in several significant defections of LRA fighters and the rescue of
women and children from the LRA’s ranks. The Council expresses its concern
at the creation of potential security vulnerabilities resulting from the increased
instability in South Sudan that could be exploited by the LRA. The Council
urges all regional governments to fulfil all their commitments under the AU
RCI-LRA and to provide the necessary basic provisions for their security
forces. In this regard, the Council welcomes the decisions of the recent AU
RCI-LRA to hold quarterly meetings as well as a Summit of RCI -LRA
Member States. The Council notes the importance of continued international
support for the AU-RTF’s operations, logistics, and headquarters. In this
regard, the Council welcomes the continued advisory and logistical support
provided by the United States as well as funding provided by the European
Union. The Council underlines the need for all military action against the LRA
to be conducted in compliance with international law, including international
humanitarian law, human rights law and refugee law, as applicable, and to
minimise the risk of harm to civilians in all areas of operation and to take into
account the association of children with the LRA. The Council also reiterates
its encouragement to deploy child protection advisers within the AU -RTF.
“The Security Council strongly encourages neighbouring states to
cooperate with the AU-RTF, in order to end the LRA threat. The Council
further encourages all states in the region to take measures to ensure that the
LRA is not able to operate with impunity in their territory. The Council takes
note of the statements in the Secretary-General report on UNOCA and LRA
(S/2014/319) that senior LRA leaders are believed to be based in the northeastern part of CAR and that credible sources suggest that the LRA leader
Joseph Kony and senior LRA commanders have recently returned to seek safe
haven in Sudanese-controlled areas of the Kafia Kingi enclave. The Security
Council expresses its continued concern that the instability and security
vacuum in the CAR continue to negatively affect counter-LRA operations. The
Council further notes with concern reports of LRA attacks, as well as
interactions between the LRA and other armed groups, in areas of the CAR
outside of the AU-RTF’s principal area of operations. In this regard, the
Council emphasises the need for strong coordination and information -sharing
between the AU-RTF and the African-led International Support Mission for the

2/5

14-33131

S/PRST/2014/8

Central African Republic (MISCA), as well as with the United Nations
Integrated Stabilisation Mission in CAR (MINUSCA), in the context of their
protection of civilians activities, human rights monitoring, and count er-LRA
operations, as appropriate.
“The Security Council welcomes the steps taken to deliver an enhanced,
comprehensive, and more regional approach to the humanitarian situation,
including assistance to victims of sexual violence and other attacks and urg es
further progress in this regard.
“The Security Council underlines the primary responsibility of States in
the LRA-affected region to protect civilians. The Council welcomes the efforts
undertaken by the Democratic Republic of Congo (DRC), the Republic of
South Sudan, Uganda and CAR, in coordination with the African Union, to end
the threat posed by the LRA, and urges further efforts from these countries, as
well as from other countries in the region.
“The Security Council welcomes the efforts by the UN Organisation
Stabilisation Mission in the DRC (MONUSCO) in tackling the LRA. The
Council notes continued reports of LRA attacks in the DRC, despite an overall
decline in LRA violence there. In this context the Council encourages further
and reinforced efforts by MONUSCO, working closely with the AU-RTF, to
address the LRA including through improved responsiveness to imminent
threats to civilians, increased and coordinated patrols, training and capacity
building of the Congolese Army (FARDC), support to the Joint Information
Operations Centre (JIOC), and implementation of the Disarmament,
Demobilization, Repatriation, Reintegration and Resettlement (DDRRR)
programme to encourage and facilitate further LRA defections.
“The Security Council urges relevant UN and AU missions in the region,
notably MONUSCO, United Nations Mission in the Republic of South Sudan
(UNMISS) and MINUSCA, to continue their efforts to combat the LRA. The
Council also notes the mandate of the United Nations-African Union Hybrid
operation in Darfur (UNAMID) to cooperate and share swiftly information
related to the regional threat of the LRA and the mandate of MINUSCA to
coordinate its operations with those of the African Union Regional Task Force
on the Lord’s Resistance Army, and share relevant information with the
AU-RTF and with non-governmental organisations involved in tackling the
threat of the LRA. In this regard, the Council urges these missions to collect
and share information on LRA movements with relevant partners, to enhance
cross-border cooperation, and to adopt Standard Operating Procedures, in
order to better anticipate LRA movements and imminent threats of attack.
“The Security Council strongly reiterates its calls for the UN, AU and the
Economic Community of Central African States (ECCAS), to continue to work
together, including through joint field assessments, to further develop and
maintain a common operating picture of the LRA’s current capabilities and
areas of operation, as well as to investigate the LRA’s logistical n etworks and
possible sources of military support and illicit financing, including alleged
involvement in elephant poaching and related illicit smuggling. The Council
expresses its concern at the link between illicit trafficking in wildlife and
armed groups in the sub-region, including the Lord’s Resistance Army, and, in

14-33131

3/5

S/PRST/2014/8

this regard, welcomes UNOCA’s efforts to support the sub -region to identify
collaborative approaches to address this issue.
“The Security Council urges MONUSCO, MINUSCA, UNMISS, and
other United Nations actors in the LRA-affected region to continue to work
with regional forces, national governments, international actors and
non-governmental organisations, as appropriate, to develop a common
approach to the promotion of defections and support for DDRRR efforts across
the LRA-affected area. The Council highlights the importance of programmes
in support of the release, return and successful reintegration of children
abducted by the LRA, in particular those that target community acceptance of
such children. The Council welcomes the defection in December 2013 of
19 LRA members, including 9 LRA fighters, which is the largest single
defection in over five years.
“The Security Council encourages the AU-RTF to maintain its operations
against all LRA groups, while working with the UN and non-governmental
organisations to expand the coverage of safe reporting sites and delivery of
information to assist LRA who demonstrate a genuine commitment to
demobilisation and disarmament via radio, leaflets, and other means.
“The Security Council commends efforts by international donors to
provide humanitarian assistance to LRA-affected populations in the CAR, the
DRC and the Republic of South Sudan. The Council reaffirms its call for all
parties to allow safe and unhindered humanitarian access, consistent with the
relevant provisions of international humanitarian law and the United Nations
guiding principles of humanitarian assistance.
“The Security Council notes the overall marked decline in the number,
intensity and violence of the LRA attacks, killings and abductions and the
significant decrease in UN OCHA’s estimate of the number of people displaced
by the LRA threat, from 420,000 in March 2013 to 160,000 in March 2014.
The Council encourages donors to increase funding for early recovery projects
to help affected communities restore stability and rebuild their livelihoods as
the LRA threat begins to recede. The Council requests that UNOCA work with
the AU, World Bank, the UN Development Program, the UN Children’s Fund
and other international experts to develop a development framework for
international efforts to promote the long-term stabilization of formerly
LRA-affected areas in South Sudan, the DRC, and the CAR, including through
early recovery projects and programs to strengthen community cohesion.
“The Security Council reiterates its call for the swift and full
implementation of the conclusions of the working group on children and armed
conflict concerning the situation of children and armed conflict affect ed by the
Lord’s Resistance Army. In this regard, the Council encourages those countries
affected by the LRA which have not yet done so to establish Standard
Operating Procedures for the reception and handover of LRA children to
civilian child protection actors.
“The Security Council recalls that the International Criminal Court’s
arrest warrants for LRA leaders, including Joseph Kony on charges of war
crimes and crimes against humanity, including murder, rape cruel treatment,
intentionally directing attacks against a civilian population and forced

4/5

14-33131

S/PRST/2014/8

enlistment of children, have yet to be executed, and calls upon all States to
cooperate with relevant national governments and the International Criminal
Court, in accordance with their respective obligations, in order to execute
those warrants, and to bring to justice those responsible.
“The Security Council requests that the Secretary-General keep it
informed on the activities of UNOCA, progress made in conducting
assessments of the LRA’s evolving area of operations and logistical and
support networks, and the efforts being undertaken respectively by missions in
the region and other relevant United Nations agencies to implement the UN’s
Regional Strategy, including through a single report on UNOCA and the LRA
to be submitted before 15 November 2014.”

14-33131

5/5
