S/PV.7472

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventieth year

7472nd meeting

Thursday, 25 June 2015, 10.20 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Ibrahim. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Malaysia)

Members:

Angola. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Chad . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Chile . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Jordan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Lithuania. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
New Zealand. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Nigeria . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Spain. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Moura Lucas
Mr. Mangaral
Ms. Sapag Muñoz de la Peña
Mr. Liu Jieyi
Mr. Lamek
Mrs. Kawar
Mrs. Jakubonė
Mr. Taula
Mrs. Ogwu
Mr. Iliichev
Mr. Oyarzun Marchesi
Mr. Rycroft
Mr. Pressman
Mr. Méndez Graterol

Agenda
Post-conflict peacebuilding
Report of the Peacebuilding Commission on its eighth session (S/2015/174)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

15-19386 (E)
*1519386*

S/PV.7472

Post-conflict peacebuilding

The meeting was called to order at 10.20 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Post-conflict peacebuilding
Report of the Peacebuilding Commission on its
eighth session (S/2015/174)
The President: In accordance with rule 39 of
the Council’s provisional rules of procedure, I invite
His Excellency Mr. Antonio de Aguiar Patriota,
Permanent Representative of Brazil and former Chair
of the Peacebuilding Commission, to participate in this
meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite His Excellency
Mr. Olof Skoog, Permanent Representative of Sweden
and Chair of the Peacebuilding Commission, to
participate in this meeting.
The Security Council will now begin its consideration
of the item on its agenda.
I wish to draw the attention of Council members to
document S/2015/174, which contains the report of the
Peacebuilding Commission on its eighth session.
I now give the floor to His Excellency Mr. Antonio
de Aguiar Patriota, Permanent Representative of Brazil
and former Chair of the Peacebuilding Commission.
Mr. De Aguiar Patriota: I wish to highlight some
specific elements from the report that I believe deserve
the particular attention of the Security Council.
First, the Commission’s work over the past
year has once again confirmed that its potential as a
platform leveraging the political weight of its members
in support of peace consolidation should be further
utilized. An example of how the Commission can
increasingly use its political strength was the collective
and determined position it took in the early stages of
the Ebola outbreak. The Commission helped spur the
international community and other parts of the United
Nations system to focus on the risk posed by the crisis
to the peacebuilding gains in the three most affected
countries. The terms of reference of the United Nationsled Ebola-recovery initiatives have therefore included
areas identified by the Commission that deserve special
attention in the overall recovery strategies and support
programmes.

2/21

25/06/2015

Secondly, the Commission is uniquely placed
to promote greater harmony among the subregional,
regional and international dimensions of post-conflict
response. One of the Commission’s key priority areas
in 2014 was therefore to actively engage with its
African members and to establish deep and dynamic
partnerships with Africa’s regional and subregional
organizations. Our experience from Guinea-Bissau to
Burundi and the Central African Republic confirms
that greater regional and subregional coherence is a key
factor in support of peacebuilding-related efforts. As
we continue to integrate the regional and subregional
perspectives into the work of the Commission, we
will further strengthen the relevance and weight of its
country-specific engagement.
Thirdly, in 2014 the Peacebuilding Commission
convened its first-ever annual session with a view to
exploring where broader intergovernmental policy
development is necessary to help countries reduce the
risk of conflict.
As the Commission continued to explore various
avenues for predictable financing for peacebuilding, its
focus on domestic resource mobilization and the fight
against illicit financial flows was a critical step towards
identifying possible policy areas requiring Member
States’ individual and collective action. The challenge
posed by illicit financial flows and similar systemic
gaps in intergovernmental policy related to financing
for peacebuilding highlights the interdependence
among security, institutional and socioeconomic
initiatives in the promotion of peace.
This was a common point made during the second
annual session, which took place two days ago and
focused on the challenges for securing predictable
financing for peacebuilding. We thank the Swedish
Foreign Minister for her presence at the closing
ceremony of that session. The Commission will
continue to position itself to promote further coherence
and synergy among policies and actions across the
political, security and developmental dimensions of
peace consolidation.
Fourthly, the gender dimension of peacebuilding
deserves our continuing attention and unwavering
commitment. While women endure the tragic
consequences of violent conflicts, they are also key
agents for societal transformation in post-conflict
societies. The special event that the Commission hosted
in collaboration with UN-Women in September 2014

15-19386

25/06/2015

Post-conflict peacebuilding

S/PV.7472

shed light on local peacebuilding initiatives led by
women in diverse contexts. This year, the Commission
will further explore practical ways of mainstreaming
the gender dimension into its country-specific
engagements.

forward relevant recommendations from the 2010
review of the peacebuilding architecture and initiated
advance preparation for the second five-year review,
called for by both principal organs, to be conducted
this year.

Fifthly, defining and improving the nature and
scope of its advisory function to the Security Council
and the General Assembly continued to be the
Commission’s main objective in 2014. The Commission
is uniquely positioned to complement their work by
ensuring that inclusive socioeconomic development
contributes to peace and security and reduces the risk
of the emergence of violent conflict or relapse into
it. The advisory function for both principal organs
should help to strengthen the integrated and longterm commitment of the United Nations and other
international and regional actors to countries emerging
from conflict, something that I stressed in several
statements I made on behalf of the Commission at
various Security Council briefings and debates in 2014.
In that connection, I believe the Council can draw more
practically and systematically on the Commission’s
advice, particularly when mandates of missions are
being revisited in the context of changing priorities or
of drawdown and transition. That crucial aspect of the
Commission’s advisory role deserves to be discussed
during the informal interactive dialogue to be held later
this afternoon under your guidance, Mr. President.

The purpose of the advance preparation was to
foster broader ownership of the review among Member
States through inclusive and extensive consultations
on the objectives, scope, methodology and modalities
for conducting the review. The advance preparation
reflected agreement among Member States that the
challenges facing the countries emerging from conflict
should be central to the 2015 review and thus proposed
that the review be grounded in specific country studies.
A commitment to help States avoid relapse into
conflict was the motivation for the creation in 2005
of the Peacebuilding Commission, the Peacebuilding
Support Office and the Peacebuilding Fund. Member
States agreed that the 2015 review needed to take that
original motivation as its point of departure. The terms
of reference for the review were initially developed by
and consulted within the Commission and subsequently
endorsed by the General Assembly and the Security
Council. They should help identify areas of progress
and remaining gaps in international assistance to
countries emerging from conflict.

Sixthly and finally, the section of the report on the
conclusions and forward agenda charts the course of
action for the Commission in 2015. The forward agenda
reflects the Commission’s determination to follow up
on key thematic and country-specific approaches that
were initiated in 2014, thus ensuring continuity in focus
and consistency in approach.

The two-stage design of the review, by which
an advisory group of experts would undertake
country studies and propose actionable and practical
recommendations for consideration by the General
Assembly and the Security Council, would hopefully
ensure that the two principal organs are able to take an
informed decision on the future of the United Nations
broader peacebuilding architecture. That architecture
includes the three components established in 2005, as
well as other relevant United Nations operational entities
that contribute to building lasting and sustainable
peace through a variety of political and programmatic
tools. We are looking forward to the imminent release
of the report of the advisory group of experts, under
the able chairmanship of former Ambassador Gert
Rosenthal of Guatemala, and to the initiation of the
intergovernmental stage of the review.

Pursuant to General Assembly resolution 65/7 and
Security Council resolution 1947 (2010), the Commission
has capitalized on the experience accumulated from its
mandated annual reporting to the General Assembly
and the Security Council on progress made in taking

I wish to conclude this briefing by acknowledging
the role of the Peacebuilding Support Office, of
Assistant
Secretary-General
Oscar
FernandezTaranco and his predecessor, Judy Cheng-Hopkins,
and their team in support of the Commission’s work

The members of the Commission that are also
members of the Security Council, such as Malaysia
and Chile, as well as the five permanent members
that are also permanent members of the Peacebuilding
Commission, are in a unique position to provide
leadership, guidance and sustained commitment in
order to further deepen and strengthen this advisory
function.

15-193863/21

S/PV.7472

Post-conflict peacebuilding

and activities in 2014. We will continue to count
on the Office’s support as we seek to pursue the
Commission’s objectives, as well as on its competent
management of the Peacebuilding Fund. Through the
work undertaken by the Commission and the Fund, the
synergy and complementarity between the political and
programmatic dimensions of peacebuilding can bring
greater effectiveness to our investment in the country
concerned.
The path to healing the scars caused by war and
rebuilding the institutions that deliver security, justice,
basic services and economic opportunity and that protect
fundamental rights is long and fraught with enormous
challenges. I am convinced that the efforts of the United
Nations in that area should remain people-centred. We
must listen actively to the voices of the people who are
the most affected by violent conflicts. We must learn
from and be guided by their experiences and needs. I
believe that in 2015, under the stewardship of Sweden
and with the unwavering commitment of its member
States, the Peacebuilding Commission can be the locus
of such partnerships. I also hope that the ongoing
review will generate practical recommendations and
the requisite political momentum to adapt and orient
the Commission to that end.
The President: I now give the floor to Mr. Skoog.
Mr. Skoog (Sweden): Thank you very much,
Mr. President, for the invitation, for convening this
meeting and also for the excellent contribution that
you presented on behalf of the Security Council at
the annual session of the Peacebuilding Commission
(PBC), held earlier this week. And I would like to
congratulate the Permanent Representative of Brazil,
Ambassador Patriota, for his very strong leadership
and commitment during his chairmanship of the
Peacebuilding Commission last year.
The world today is torn by more violent conflict
than it has been in a very long time, leaving in its wake
unprecedented suffering and displacement. The United
Nations High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR)
reported this weekend that more people fled their
homes last year than at any time since records began.
More than half the people displaced by conflict and
persecution are children.
It is against that backdrop that we are meeting
today, during this peacebuilding week. Peacebuilding
is about preventing relapse into conflict by holistically
supporting countries emerging from conflict on

4/21

25/06/2015

a path towards sustained peace. It is therefore
about establishing the nexus between security and
development. To that end, we need to be more effective
and coherent in United Nations activities that assist
national peacebuilding efforts.
The expert group report on the 10-year review of the
peacebuilding architecture is expected to be submitted
very soon. That review, conducted simultaneously with
the peace operations review and the high-level review
of Security Council resolution 1325 (2000), offers
a unique opportunity to strengthen the work of the
United Nations in peace and security. I am hopeful that
all three will reinvigorate our collective efforts to build
and sustain peace.
I would now like to turn to the work of the
Commission. I would argue that its vision and usefulness
remain as valid as ever. We have to be more effective in
addressing the challenge of helping countries transition
from war to lasting peace, including by improving
strategic planning in the United Nations system; helping
countries strengthen their national capacities, including
institution-building; ensuring predictable and flexible
funding; improving the coordination of international
post-conflict activities; and providing a diversified
intergovernmental forum that can help ensure greater
coherence of support and extend the period of political
attention.
I would now like to outline the focus areas of the
Peacebuilding Commission during the ongoing ninth
session. First, let me turn to peacebuilding in Ebola
recovery. The three countries most affected by the
Ebola disease outbreak — Liberia, Sierra Leone and
Guinea — are all on the PBC agenda. The Commission
has been instrumental in ensuring that peacebuilding
priorities are addressed as part of the recovery
efforts, including the need to accelerate support for
institution-building. We will continue to advocate for
this, not least at the upcoming high-level meeting on
Ebola recovery to be hosted by the Secretary-General
in a few weeks’ time.
Secondly, with respect to the Peacebuilding Review,
as previously mentioned, the work of the advisory
group is about to come to an end, since it will submit
its report in the next few days. We are eagerly awaiting
its analysis and recommendations, and look forward to
the findings, which will provide important input for
the intergovernmental negotiations. That review can
tie into the review of resolution 1325 (2000) on women

15-19386

25/06/2015

Post-conflict peacebuilding

and peace and security, as well as the review of peace
operations.
Thirdly, there will be a focus on continued support
for and coordination with regional organizations,
not least the African Union. By drawing on the work
initiated last year by my predecessor, Ambassador
Patriota, we will identify ways to deepen the dialogue
with regional organizations to see how our different
comparative advantages can best be utilized.
Fourthly, the Commission will consider the
recommendations emanating from the annual session
of 2015, held on Tuesday, focusing on the issues of
predictable financing for peacebuilding. In addition,
the Peacebuilding Commission will continue to move
forward with the cross-cutting issues of gender equality
and women’s empowerment in all peacebuilding
efforts. That is a crucial aspect of sustainable peace and
development.
I look forward to this afternoon’s informal
interactive dialogue on post-conflict peacebuilding. It
is an important opportunity for us to reflect on how the
relationship between the Peacebuilding Commission
and the Security Council can be strengthened. Against
the backdrop of the UNHCR report this weekend and
what we all know to be the untenable strains on the
humanitarian system as a whole, I believe we must unite
our efforts now to further enhance the effectiveness and
coherence of the international response to post-conflict
challenges and better support national efforts to avoid
conflict and sustain peace.
The President: I thank Mr. Skoog for his briefing.
I now give the floor to the members of the Security
Council.
Mr. Rycroft (United Kingdom): Let me begin by
thanking Ambassador Patriota and Ambassador Skoog
for their briefings today and for all their hard work,
past, present and future, in chairing the Peacebuilding
Commission.
I would like to take this opportunity to talk not
about peacebuilding in theory but peacebuilding in
practice, and in particular I will draw some lessons
about peacebuilding from a country that has played
a prominent role in my own career, Bosnia and
Herzegovina. Nearly 20 years ago I served in the
British delegation to the Dayton peace talks and
later as British Ambassador to Bosnia from 2005
to 2008. I witnessed the progress made in building

S/PV.7472

and sustaining peace following years of bloodshed.
Bosnia still faces challenges — dysfunctional politics
and high unemployment, to name but two. But as we
prepare to commemorate the twentieth anniversary
of the Srebrenica genocide, we should also recognize
the considerable progress that the country has made
since 1995, and we can learn wider lessons from the
international community’s experience there. I recognize
that every conflict is unique and solutions cannot be cut
and pasted from one context to another, but I believe
that as a Council we can draw four key lessons.
The first is that we need to do even more on conflict
prevention. In the Balkans the international community
failed to act early. We knew about some of the horrors
that were being committed, but lacked the political will
to take action. Today, we live in an age of immediately
accessible information. We should never claim that we
did not know a conflict was brewing. The challenge for
the Council, the Peacebuilding Commission and the
whole United Nations system is to find the political will
to act early. Early action can prevent enormous suffering.
It is also cost-effective. Our failure to prevent conflict
has contributed significantly to the $19.7 billion in
humanitarian needs and nearly 60 million refugees we
are now dealing with and has resulted in an $8.5 billion
peacekeeping budget.
No conflict-affected State has achieved any of
the Millennium Development Goals. As the British
economist Paul Collier has said, “War is development
in reverse”. Given global trends, our ability to eradicate
poverty will be wholly dependent on our ability to
reduce violent conflict. That is why Goal 16 of the
sustainable development goals is so critical.
The second lesson I took from Bosnia is the
primacy of a political process in building and
sustaining peace. The Dayton Peace Agreement is not
perfect, but it ended the war, which featured the worst
fighting in Europe since the Second World War, and it
gave the country a foundation on which to build. Just
as the recent peace operations review recommends,
our efforts on peacekeeping and peacebuilding must
all start and finish with a political process. For those
settlements to stick, they must be sustainable and
inclusive, with women’s involvement throughout, and
they must be properly funded. In 2012, only 4 per cent
of all overseas development aid to fragile States was
spent on promoting inclusive politics. The majority is
spent on reconstruction and service delivery. We need
to recognize that peacebuilding and State-building are

15-193865/21

S/PV.7472

Post-conflict peacebuilding

not the same thing. The comparative advantage of the
United Nations lies in forging and sustaining political
deals to create the space for effective State-building,
and that should be the primary focus of any political or
peacekeeping mission.
The third lesson is the need for sustained attention
and patience from the international community in
building a lasting peace. Nearly 20 years on from
Dayton, the Council, the European Union, NATO and
many others continue to support Bosnia’s transition
to a peaceful and prosperous State. Countries in the
region also have a constructive role to play. Too often,
however, our attention drifts. In 2011, Sierra Leone was
categorized as an aid orphan by the Organization for
Economic Cooperation and Development. International
aid fell away, and Sierra Leone was punished for its
success in reducing conflict. The spread of Ebola to
Sierra Leone last year showed how fragile peacebuilding
gains can be and how easily they are rolled back. So
we must learn that there are no shortcuts to building
durable, national institutions. It takes time. The World
Bank estimates that making meaningful improvements
to institutions takes between 10 and 17 years at a
minimum. Long-term, predictable support is crucial.
The United Kingdom is playing its part. We have
kept our promise to spend 0.7 per cent of our gross
national income on overseas aid, at least 30 per cent
of which will go to conflict-affected States. We are
the second-largest financial contributor to the United
Nations system, and we are the largest contributor to
the Peacebuilding Fund, having provided $82 million
since 2011.
My final reflection from Bosnia is that the
international community cannot want peace more than
the people themselves. Political elites must rise above
political, ethnic and religious divides and make tough
choices in order to consolidate peace and move forward.
Bosnia’s leaders still grapple with that challenge, as do
the leaders of many of the countries on the Council’s
agenda. But should they prove that they can overcome
their differences, the Council must be poised and ready
to give them its full support.
Mr. Oyarzun Marchesi (Spain) (spoke in Spanish):
I thank the Ambassadors of Sweden and Brazil for their
helpful briefings and for the report of the Peacebuilding
Commission (PBC) on its eighth session (S/2015/174),
which covers its work during 2014.

6/21

25/06/2015

I will speak only briefly, since the full text of my
statement will appear on the website of the Spanish
mission. I will therefore address two main points — first
what I found most interesting in the report, and then
the issues that Spain considers to be peacebuilding
priorities during its time on the Council — in other
words, how we can make a difference from our seat on
the Council.
The Ambassador of the United Kingdom said
rightly that peacebuilding takes time. That is true,
and it is very important. It can take years or decades.
I would add that it takes time and money. We need
significant financial resources in order to build
peace. I believe there is no better investment than an
investment in peacebuilding, because there is nothing
more expensive than a State’s relapse into conflict.
The best investment the international community can
make in a State is ensuring its stability. The worst
investment is failing to provide the necessary resources
and thus allowing a State to relapse into conflict once
more. Unfortunately, history is littered with instances
where, due to lack of investment or attention, countries
have relapsed into conflict. I therefore believe it is
vital that we find ways to create financing systems for
facilitating something that is fundamental, but very
difficult to achieve — financial predictability and
annual commitments. The Peacebuilding Fund must
have sufficient resources to address situations where,
for one reason or another, there is instability that could
lead to a State’s relapse into conflict.
That is my first point. The second, as I said, is
sharing with the Council some of Spain’s objectives for
its two-year membership of the Council, of which four
are key.
The first is strengthening preventive action. The
Council is aware that Spain, together with Turkey,
launched the Alliance of Civilizations, which has
functioned splendidly as an instrument of preventive
diplomacy. Next week, we will adopt a new resolution
on it by consensus, which should be a further step
forward in consolidating the Alliance’s role as a
powerful instrument for combating conflict situations.
Secondly, we will work to make greater use of
mediation. With Morocco, we launched a mediation
initiative in the Mediterranean region, and we recently
held a meeting in Madrid whose outcome will be
circulated to all of the States Members of the United
Nations so they can see the results in detail.

15-19386

25/06/2015

Post-conflict peacebuilding

Thirdly, we are one of the biggest supporters there
is of the concept of the responsibility to protect. Two
days ago, a meeting of focal points on the responsibility
to protect took place in Madrid.
Another of our goals is strengthening regional
factors. In our view, when a State is emerging from
conflict, there can be no better instrument for restoring
it and preventing its relapse into conflict than the region
itself. A region is able to help, to overcome obstacles
to trade and establish a protection mechanism that can
enable a State to definitively re-establish stability.
Fourthly, we believe in the importance of justice.
The fact is that we cannot conceive of peace without
justice, nor can reconciliation be achieved without it.
All of those concepts are closely intertwined, and that
is why Spain has always been a staunch defender of the
International Criminal Court. We will spare no effort to
promote its work.
A fifth goal that Spain will promote is working to
achieve the thoughtful convergence of four mechanisms
that are already established and under way. The first
is the peace operations review process, which must,
of course, include the vital component of an exit
strategy for peacekeeping operations. The second is
the Peacebuilding Commission’s review of its own
architecture. The third is the review of the important
resolution 1325 (2000), on which we are working very
productively with the delegation of the United Kingdom.
We hope that a new resolution will be adopted on
22 October. The fourth is the post-2015 development
agenda, which, we should remember, includes goals for
peacebuilding that we should be bearing in mind.
In conclusion, Spain will attempt to help, to
the extent possible, to promote the work of the
Peacebuilding Commission, because we consider it to
be the body that is best positioned to provide continued
support to post-conflict countries. It is therefore also
the best early-warning mechanism for preventing such
States from relapsing into conflict or instability.
Mrs. Ogwu (Nigeria): I want to thank you,
Mr. President, for convening this briefing. I thank
Ambassador Olof Skoog, Chair of the Peacebuilding
Commission (PBC) and Ambassador Antonio de
Aguiar Patriota for their very insightful perspectives.
We are greatly indebted to all the Chairs of the countryspecific configurations and the Peacebuilding Support
Office for their commitment to advancing the work of
the PBC.

S/PV.7472

Today’s briefing underlines the critical importance
of the PBC as an invaluable intergovernmental
mechanism for organizing and promoting international
support to countries emerging from conflict. It
highlights the several challenges that continue not only
to reduce the effectiveness of the PBC but also to hinder
peacebuilding efforts in countries on its agenda.
The Security Council has a role and indeed a
responsibility to support the PBC in implementing its
mandate. To contribute to that effort, there must be a
clear perception of the gaps and challenges in the PBC’s
support for the countries on its agenda. There are several
gaps in institution-building efforts, especially in such
areas as reforming the security sector, strengthening
the rule of law, supporting national dialogue, promoting
community reconciliation, encouraging disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration, enhancing women’s
empowerment and tackling unemployment.
The common thread that runs through these areas
is a lack of adequate, predictable and assured financing
for peacebuilding. That underscores the compelling
need for the PBC to continue to explore and develop
robust strategies for resource mobilization in order to
implement its very important mandate. This is why we
believe that the Commission’s second annual session,
held only two days ago, was critical for highlighting
measures at our disposal for mobilizing financing for
peacebuilding.
It is our view that domestic sources of financing for
peacebuilding can be improved by strengthening States’
capacities to effectively manage natural resources,
design and implement appropriate tax regimes and tax
collection, promote transparency and accountability
in the management of public resources and curb illicit
financial flows. While all of those measures imply
more responsibility for Governments, they would also
enhance their legitimacy. We encourage wider support
for domestic resource generation efforts through the
provision of the relevant technical training for experts
from those countries.
We believe it is unrealistic to expect that the
burden of financing peacebuilding should rest on
internally generated revenues from countries emerging
from conflict. They will clearly continue to count on
financial support from the international community
as a demonstration of its commitment to post-conflict
recovery.

15-193867/21

S/PV.7472

Post-conflict peacebuilding

Making financial contributions to pooled financing
mechanisms for peacebuilding is perhaps one way of
demonstrating that commitment. Nigeria reaffirms its
support for the Peacebuilding Fund as one such pooled
financing mechanism. We understand how critically
important it is to enhance the application of pooled
financing mechanisms, because they encourage aid
alignment behind Government priorities, foster greater
coherence of international responses to complex
situations, reduce transaction costs, share risks and
strengthen mutual accountability.
Experience demonstrates that national leadership,
ownership and inclusivity are central to post-conflict
peacebuilding and must be reinforced by the promotion
of the inclusive policies so essential to genuine national
ownership. We believe that where peacebuilding efforts
are rooted in inclusive consultative processes, the State
and its institutions have greater legitimacy and are more
trusted. On the other hand, the absence of inclusive
policies in the wake of conflict all too often results
in control of a State being contested and can lead to a
violent relapse into conflict.
There is no doubt that State legitimacy and the
rebuilding of State institutions in the aftermath of
conflict are vital and critical to the attainment of
sustainable peace. That is why, in our view, the security
sector and justice institutions must be accorded special
attention as organs for the protection of the population
and the defence of the State. We call on all partners
to support capacity-building for the police, improving
prison conditions and strengthening justice institutions
in States that are emerging from conflict in order to
ensure some measure of sustainable peace.
Nigeria welcomes the priority that the United
Nations gives to advancing women’s participation in
post-conflict, political and development processes. It
is significant that more women have been appointed
as mediators and special envoys by the SecretaryGeneral over the past five years. Since women are
disproportionately affected by conflicts and in
conflicts, it is appropriate that women mediators, who
can relate better to other women, are involved in the
search for peace.
As a keen contributor to global, regional and
subregional peacekeeping operations and peacebuilding
efforts, Nigeria is encouraged by the focus of the
ongoing 2015 review of the peacebuilding architecture.
We welcome the emphasis on strengthening

8/21

25/06/2015

relationships with the African Union and other
subregional organizations. I listened intently to the
statement of the Ambassador of Spain, who has so
eloquently highlighted this. I believe that enhanced
synergy between the PBC and regional and subregional
organizations would bolster our collective efforts.
It is our hope that the five case studies, all of
them on the African continent, will yield valuable
peacebuilding lessons derived from the experiences of
the countries concerned.
We want to affirm and reaffirm our strong support
for the PBC, and we remain fully committed to its
objectives. We urge Member States and all stakeholders
to strengthen their engagement with the Commission,
since doing so would greatly improve its capacity to
contribute to the building of a safer, more secure and
peaceful world.
Mr. Taula (New Zealand): We
representatives of Brazil and Sweden.

thank

the

New Zealand welcomes this opportunity to discuss
the annual report of the Peacebuilding Commission
(S/2015/174). We support the report’s recommendations,
in particular those focused on increasing the
interactivity between the Peacebuilding Commission
(PBC) and the Security Council. New Zealand believes
there is great value in improved information flows
between the two bodies, especially in order to improve
the management of United Nations mission transitions.
Most importantly, there should be more effective
cooperation and coordination by United Nations actors
on ground. We look forward to discussing these ideas
further this afternoon.
New Zealand also commends the report’s
recommendation that a strategy be developed to
strengthen gender perspectives in country-specific
engagement. We believe that broader engagement
with women will have far-reaching, positive effects on
peacebuilding efforts and that this should go beyond
extractive engagement.
There are important lessons to be learned from
recent and current drawdowns. We would like to
highlight four.
First, we believe peacebuilding is a process, not an
event, which must accompany and not simply follow
peacekeeping. The goals, milestones and priorities
should be aligned as much as possible.

15-19386

25/06/2015

Post-conflict peacebuilding

Secondly, effective transition planning must be
linked to peace operations mandates and therefore must
be considered at the earliest stages of mission planning.
Measurable benchmarks can play a helpful role in
objectively assessing progress, although those must be
jointly owned and flexibly applied.
Thirdly, missions tasked with targeted capacitybuilding can play an important role, but face challenges
in ensuring effectiveness and sustainability of
outcomes. There is much we can learn from recent
experience — for example, regarding options for rapidly
sourcing the necessary expertise as well as mechanisms
for enabling meaningful national ownership and more
sustainable outcomes.
Fourthly, transition management should proceed
in partnership between the United Nations and the
host Government in close consultation with bilateral,
regional and international partners and development
actors. The focus of such efforts has to be in-country.
Finally, we note the broader review of the
peacebuilding architecture and the reviews of peace
operations and resolution 1325 (2005). New Zealand
strongly supports those reviews and believes that
through them we can strengthen the United Nations
management of peace operations and peacebuilding.
Mr. Iliichev (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We thank the delegation of Malaysia for
organizing today’s meeting on peacebuilding issues.
We are grateful to the former and current Chairs of
the Peacebuilding Commission for their informative
briefings and skilful leadership of the Commission.
Peacebuilding support is one of the key instruments
the United Nations has for settling conflict effectively,
stabilizing post-conflict situations and preventing
relapses into armed conflict. We believe the principal
responsibility for setting priorities and implementing
reconstruction strategy lies with national Governments,
and the relevant international efforts should focus on
enhancing the institutional capacity of the affected
countries, with their consent and while respecting their
national sovereignty and political independence.
However, we must not limit peacebuilding to
State-building and rebuilding Government institutions,
because it is a complex and multifaceted process
that includes, beyond its political aspects, assistance
with economic development and the resolution of
acute social problems. Furthermore, we consider it

S/PV.7472

counterproductive, in the post-conflict context, to
overemphasize gender and human rights issues that
have no direct bearing on the root causes of the crisis.
Russia supports the Peacebuilding Commission’s
efforts to enhance the effectiveness and coordination of
international support to post-conflict countries by the
United Nations.
We take note of the Commission’s report on its
eighth session (S/2015/174). Last year was a busy one.
We note the new trend of holding information sessions
regularly, which, in our view, are open and informative
in nature. That confirms that the Commission’s unique
dialogue platform has great potential for enabling
intergovernmental discussion of urgent themes and
cross-cutting peacebuilding issues. However, we
believe that such discussion should not exceed the
Commission’s mandate by taking on issues that are
already being considered by specialized bodies within
the General Assembly structure.
We note the completion of the comprehensive
review of the peacebuilding architecture, based on the
modalities agreed on by Member States. We assume
that the expert group has conducted an objective
investigation and will submit, as soon as possible, a
balanced recommendation for inter-State consideration
that will help increase the effectiveness of the
Commission as an intergovernmental consultative body
playing a central role in the peacebuilding architecture
of the United Nations, while strictly respecting the
Charter-based prerogatives of the Organization.
The Commission has continued to work hard to
support the countries on its agenda, including through
its country-specific configurations. However, it would
appear that despite producing individual examples
of successful results, the Commission has not fully
realized its potential. The continued fragmentation
of peacebuilding support, including the financing of
efforts in post-conflict reconstruction, has had negative
effects in Burundi, the Central African Republic and
South Sudan. In particular, the early positive trend
in Burundi in addressing post-conflict issues of
peacebuilding to ensure peace, security and stability has
been threatened, including by the use of the financial
support for electoral processes as a lever for putting
pressure on the national Government. Other examples
of crises include the Central African Republic and
South Sudan, where there has been an unjustified and
often externally imposed re-alignment of peacebuilding

15-193869/21

S/PV.7472

Post-conflict peacebuilding

priorities, characterized by an irrational and excessive
disbursement of already limited resources.
The outbreak of the Ebola virus was a test of the
soundness of the foundation that the Peacebuilding
Fund had laid for peace and security in countries such
as Sierra Leone, Guinea and Liberia. In a very short
period of time it made use of its expert capacity, and
the Commission was able to adapt to the needs of those
States and contribute to international efforts to address
that crisis. We also note the coordinated financial
support by the Peacebuilding Fund to countries affected
by the Ebola virus.
Mrs. Kawar (Jordan) (spoke in Arabic): I would
like to thank Mr. Olof Skoog, Chair of the Peacebuilding
Commission (PBC) and Mr. Antonio de Aguiar Patriota,
its former Chair, for their briefings on peacebuilding in
post-conflict situations.
Recent changes and emerging challenges, along
with their impact in many areas of the world, have
required that the international community and the
United Nations acquire the necessary tools to deal
with them. Because challenges and threats continue
well after conflicts have ended, peacebuilding in the
post-conflict stage is an essential aspect of peace and
security operations at the national and international
levels. Signed peace agreements require the presence
of a solid mechanism to ensure that peace will last
and to deal with repercussions in the State concerned
and in the region, so as to ensure that the country does
not relapse into conflict and is in a position to recover
its capacity to manage its own affairs and assume its
responsibilities. None of that can be done without
the presence of a genuine partnership between the
international community and the national authorities
and communities within countries emerging from
conflict. Such cases require diplomacy more than
military intervention.
Since the current situation requires the review
and development of peacebuilding measures in postconflict countries, it is essential that peacebuilding
operations be adapted to the needs of individual States.
Furthermore, certain components must be put in place
so they can be responded to appropriately.
First, the training and the support of elements from
within the United Nations are needed, and capacities
required to meet unconventional challenges, such as
terrorism and cross-border crime, must be defined.

10/21

25/06/2015

Secondly, the clear differences that exist among
States, whether in relation to the nature of conflicts
or national capacities to respond to threats, mean that
we must ensure national ownership in peacebuilding,
that capacity-building can happen and that the national
resources exist to ensure countries’ medium- and shortterm development.
Thirdly, there is also the matter of building trust
between the United Nations and national authorities
and local communities, another important factor in
ensuring peacebuilding. It could take the form of
specific steps such as service-based projects to provide
resources to the country.
Fourthly, complex threats emerge during and after
conflicts and often cross national borders. They require
a multidimensional response in which governmental,
regional and subregional organizations should take
part in order to strengthen and ensure peacebuilding.
Despite the progress achieved in peacebuilding in a
certain number of countries such as Sierra Leone and
Burundi, such efforts still need to be aligned with needs
and with the efforts of the United Nations itself.
The United Nations should take a leadership role
in peacebuilding, particularly since that role is still
not sufficiently definted. For example, there is no
clear strategy for implementing peacebuilding. We
believe that the relevant context and political support
to national States are both essential, which means that
collective action based on clear plans is needed.
Moreover, the issue of mobilizing financial
resources remains a challenge for peacebuilding. The
United Nations, donors and international partners such
as the World Bank and the International Monetary Fund
must provide the necessary financial and technical
support and expertise for peacebuilding, which means
that certain elements must be included. Stability must be
created by ensuring the rule of law, guaranteeing human
rights, bringing criminals to justice and ensuringing
accountability. That means building the pillars needed
to enable previous international sanctions to be lifted,
if the conditions exist.
Complementarity between the processes of security
and development is also needed. That requires the
reconstruction of institutions, with priority accorded
to economic and social issues. It is also necessary to
mobilize resources by involving the private sector, to
ensure lasting development. Certain illegal financial
flows must be ended.

15-19386

25/06/2015

Post-conflict peacebuilding

Jordan accords great importance to the work
being undertaken by the Peacebuilding Commission,
including its advisory role for the Security Council,
and its positive participation that we have witnessed
in Liberia and Sierra Leone following the down-sizing
there of the role of peacekeeping. We reaffirm the
importance of providing support to all national, regional
and international players in order to further strengthen
the Peacebuilding Commission so it can meet the
challenges of peacebuilding in an effective way — not
after the withdrawal of peacekeeping operations, but
from the very beginning of a conflict.
We support the committee that is reviewing
peacebuilding and hope the result will be a strategic
vision for designing response and implementation
measures for security and development plans in all
their aspects.
Jordan expects that the consideration by the United
Nations of its commitment in the peacebuilding stage
will include sending expert missions to work in postconflict countries, with clear mandates defined by the
Organization.
Mr. Lamek (France) (spoke in French): I thank you,
Mr, President, for organizing this important meeting.
I would also like to thank Ambassadors De Aguiar
Patriota and Skoog for their illuminating briefings.
Since it was establishd 10 years ago, the peacebuilding
architecture has made undeniable progress — on the
one hand in the sense of a better understanding of the
specific challenges faced by countries emerging from
conflict, and on the other in improved coordination
of international efforts, particularly on the part of
United Nations entities. The report we are considering
today (S/2015/174) specifically illustrates the way in
which those efforts have made it possible to improve
situations on the ground. I am thinking in particular of
the partnership with the Peacebuilding Fund promoting
greater inclusion of women in Liberia, or of the support
provided to the establishment of the new Parliament in
Guinea.
Echoing Ambassadors De Aguiar Patriota and
Skoog, France would like to recognize the commitment
of the peacebuilding architecture in the fight against
Ebola, a crisis that gravely impacted three countries
on the Commission’s agenda. Forced to redirect its
priorities, the Commission made every effort to raise
awareness with respect to the multidimensional effort
needed to combat Ebola, which had public health,

S/PV.7472

social, economic,and political consequences. To have
been content with a medical response alone, however
crucial, would not have made it possible to adequately
address the very real challenges posed by a lack of
infrastructure, weak health-care systems and the
population’s lack of awareness of the public health
challenges. We are therefore pleased to see that the
peacebuilding architecture can make a difference and
can help countries to emerge from crisis.
Further progress can still be made in our collective
efforts. The ability to mobilize long-term resources
and coordinate among a range of donors to support
strategies defined by host States remains a challenge
that has yet to be satisfactorily addressed. The cases
of countries emerging from conflict that relapse into
crisis situations reveal the shortcomings on which we
still have more work to do.
With that in mind, France supports the review of
the peacebuilding architecture, whose linkage to the
strategic review of peacekeeping operations and the
review of the implementation of resolution 1325 (2000)
is vital. Those reviews allow a critical review of the
totality of United Nations peacekeeping endeavours
in countries in crisis or emerging from crisis, across
the whole spectrum of conflicts, from prevention to
post-conflict stabilization, including peacekeeping and
the management of transitional phases. Institutional
reconstruction, the re-establishment of functional
State structures, national reconciliation, transitional
justice and economic recovery are challenges that take
years, sometimes even decades, to deal with. Crisis
management is one thing; addressing such conflicts in
the long term is another, and in that regard we have
made enormous progress.
In that context, I would like to highlight several
points that we consider central. First, it is essential to be
firmly anchored on the ground, in specifics and in local
situations, in order to provide a tailored response and to
support national processes. Moreover, the real work of
the Peacebuilding Commission takes place in countryspecific configurations, which is where it can best be
achieved. Organizational reflection is important but
should always support country configurations. In that
regard, France welcomes the initiative of the Central
African Republic configuration, thanks to which a
donor mobilization meeting was held to support that
country’s elections.

15-1938611/21

S/PV.7472

Post-conflict peacebuilding

Secondly, it is critical that we develop our
thinking and efforts with regard to sequencing and
prioritizing international action. We must work on the
interrelationship among the different United Nations
missions and the forms of engagement, as well as on
mission succession. France is grateful to Japan for its
initiative on lessons learned in mission transitions.
Thirdly and lastly, we can only agree with the
Peacebuilding Commission regarding the importance of
the regional dimension. The States that are neighbours
of post-crisis countries are key players with whom we
must work closely, because crisis issues very often
transcend national borders. Cooperation with regional
and subregional organizations must also be enhanced,
and France welcomes the high priority given to that
area in the work this year.
The report of the High-level Independent Panel on
Peace Operations, chaired by President Ramos-Horta,
was submitted a few days ago, and we are awaiting
the imminent submission of the report of the Advisory
Group of Experts on the Review of the Peacebuilding
Architecture, coordinated by Ambassador Rosenthal,
and the submission in September of the report of the
High-level Advisory Group for a Global Study on
Resolution 1325 (2000). Those reviews are a unique
opportunity to consider the whole chain linking peace,
security and development in the context of the United
Nations summit to adopt the post-2015 development
agenda. We will collectively examine the results of
these strategic revieews and actively engage in the
implementation of the relevant recommendations.
Mr. Méndez Graterol (Bolivarian Republic
of Venezuela) (spoke in Spanish): We are grateful
for the convening of this meeting on post-conflict
peacebuilding and for the presentations of Ambassador
Antonio de Aguiar Patriota and Ambassador Olof
Skoog.
The Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela wishes
to acknowledge the work of the Peacebuilding
Commission in promoting and maintaining political
attention, mobilizing resources and fostering coherence
among the various agencies of the United Nations in
order to improve the stability and development of the
countries on its agenda. We note with appreciation
the report of the Commission on its eighth session
(S/2015/174). We would also like to recognize the work
of the Peacebuilding Fund in allocating $99.4 million to
16 countries in 2014. We note that since the Fund was

12/21

25/06/2015

established, it has distributed more than $500 million
to more than 20 countries, thereby contributing to their
security and development.
Peacebuilding requires long-term international
political, financial and technical support. Lack of
funding and political support in areas critical to
peacebuilding, with particular emphasis on the
underlying causes of crises, poses a significant
challenge to international efforts to prevent the relapse
of countries emerging from conflicts.
The case of South Sudan reflects the consequences
of a lack of sustained political, financial and technical
support. According to the Secretary-General’s report of
September 2014 on peacekeeping in the aftermath of
conflict (S/2014/694), “sustained international support
was lacking”.
“Successive United Nations missions and
the country team received limited support for
efforts to support the development of the State’s
institutional capacity and improve mechanisms of
governance. ... Successive attempts at disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration lacked sufficient
funding and political support as well as approaches
better suited to the political context.” (ibid., paras
17 and 18)
There is often a discrepancy between needs at the
national level and the actions of international donors.
National involvement in and ownership of peacebuilding
priorities, which must be defined by the host country
on the basis of political consensus, are essential. As
the Secretary-General points out in the same report
in relation to South Sudan, the fragmented security
sector interventions from international, regional and
subregional actors did not work properly because they
were not grounded in a national vision for State reform.
We are aware of the need to guarantee sustained
funding by the international community for
peacebuilding objectives, processes and institutions
throughout the continuum of post-conflict engagement.
We note, for example, in the Secretary-General’s 2014
report on peacebuilding, that the United Nations is
expanding its partnerships and collaboration with
international financial institutions, including regional
development banks, to support post-conflict recovery
and promote coherence and long-term financial
assistance. While we welcome the initiative, we can
only express a certain amount of caution on the basis
of our national and regional experience. We mention in

15-19386

25/06/2015

Post-conflict peacebuilding

that regard that, historically, funds from international
financial institutions have been accompanied by
conditions disadvantageous to States and that although
such funds can resolve short-term problems or financial
needs, they harm long-term development.
Venezuela emphasizes that all developed countries
must honour their governmental commitments in the area
of official development assistance. We also reiterate the
call for donors and institutions in the developed world
to undertake to provide more such assistance and more
unconditional debt-relief programmes. In particular,
the mechanisms designed to ensure that countries
receiving assistance use the funds in accordance with
national development policies must be enhanced. Such
assistance is essential to peacebuilding processes.
A new South-South development paradigm based
on cooperation, the sovereign equality of States,
complementarity and solidarity has resulted in
significant progress in financing for development and
could be effective in the funding of peacebuilding
processes. We therefore support such cooperation, which
we see as complementing North-South cooperation.
Venezuela agrees that the local capacity to
mobilize peacebuilding resources must be enhanced by
establishing national institutions for revenue generation
and financial management. A sustainable source of
resource mobilization and internal expenditure is
essential for establishing State legitimacy, but, like
South-South cooperation, it cannot replace North-South
assistance. Developing countries, particularly those on
the road to peacebuilding, need the sustained political,
financial and technical support of developed countries.
In that connection, it is absolutely essential that the
interests and priorities of host countries be protected in
the negotiation of contracts with multinational mining
companies. We therefore welcome the initiative of the
Development Bank of Southern Africa to establish a
fund of $22 million to assist African countries in the
negotiation of contracts in the area of natural resources.
That and much more is needed
My country looks forward to the report of the
Advisory Group of Experts on the Review of the
Peacebuilding Architecture, and trusts that that
process will result in substantive initiatives to address
the underlying causes of conflicts, including poverty,
inequality, the legacies of colonialism, foreign
interference, economic dependency, illegal exploitation
of natural resources, and power imbalances that affect

S/PV.7472

the negotiation of contracts for the mining of such
resources.
Ms. Sapag Muñoz de la Peña (Chile) (spoke in
Spanish): We would like to thank the former Chair of
the Peacebuilding Commission, Ambassador Antonio
de Aguiar Patriota, and of course the current Chair,
Ambassador Olof Skoog, for their presentations. We
value their assessment of the work and progress of the
Commission and the challenges facing it.
We have taken careful note of the line separating the
problems that the Security Council can and must address
from those that are not part of its responsibilities. In
that light, we feel that the Peacebuilding Commission
can play a useful role in such areas, complementing the
Council’s work.
Chile fully supports the work of the Peacebuilding
Commission precisely because it is capable of guiding
peace processes and supporting political transitions
and institution-building, and not just in the immediate
aftermath of conflict. The Commission can, at its full
potential, function as a tool for preventing conflicts and
their recurrence, thereby contributing to the work of
the Security Council. The re-establishment of the rule
of law and the strengthening of national institutions
and the role of civil society in peacebuilding through
processes intended for those purposes, funded by the
Peacebuilding Fund and supported by the country
configurations, make it possible to create conditions in
which the root causes of conflicts can be attacked.
The Commission can also function as an earlywarning tool. In practical terms, it could develop
preventive diagnostics that would enable it to address
the underlying causes of political, social and cultural
destabilization, all of them factors that can lead to the
outbreak and recurrence of conflicts. It is extremely
important that the Commission be able to identify
and address issues of social exclusion and economic,
political and cultural problems and those related to
gender and religion, as well as those stemming from
intolerance and violent extremism.
In 2015 Chile became a member of the Peacebuilding
Commission’s Organizational Committee for the fifth
time. This year we join it as a member of the Security
Council, enabling us to see the interaction between
the two bodies close up. In our view, it is vital that the
Council and the Commission support each other, and
we hope that the interactive dialogue to be held this

15-1938613/21

S/PV.7472

Post-conflict peacebuilding

afternoon will enable us to find opportunities for closer
cooperation while avoiding duplication of tasks.
We also hope that the report on the second review
process of the Commission’s architecture will provide
new insights that can help it to consolidate and deepen
its advisory and consultative role, while recognizing
the need for synergies between its review process
and those related to peacekeeping operations and the
Global Study on the Implementation of Resolution 1325
(2000), on women and peace and security. Chile is a
co-Chair of the Group of Friends of the Global Study,
and we hope its recommendations will be taken up by
the system.
In conclusion, and faced as we are with a complex
international scenario, we urge that we continue
working to coordinate the mechanisms that can enable
us to follow up the issues on the Council’s agenda. Our
longstanding relationship with the Commission has
shown us that progress can be achieved, but also the
limitations the Commission faces in reaching its full
potential. We believe it is a mechanism that deserves
our support, and in that regard, I am pleased to report
that my country hopes to continue its strong support
for the Peacebuilding Commission and Peacebuilding
Fund.
Mr. Liu Jieyi (China) (spoke in Chinese): I would
like to thank Ambassadors Patriota and Skoog for their
briefings.
Establishing a peacebuilding architecture has
been extremely important to the ability of the United
Nations to effectively fulfil its obligations under its
Charter. As the primary entity of that architecture,
the Peacebuilding Commission (PBC) has actively
coordinated the international community’s support
to countries emerging from conflict, intensified its
contributions to peacekeeping, supported the countries
of West Africa in responding appropriately to the Ebola
epidemic, promoted a comprehensive review of the
peacebuilding architecture and generally done a great
deal of productive work.
A couple of days ago the PBC successfully held
its annual session, during which there were in-depth
discussions on such topics as financing for peacebuilding,
and significant consensus was reached. Today we are
seeing traditional and non-traditional security threats
intertwined, with conflicts in some countries spilling
over to others in a major way, while some post-conflict
countries are dealing with the risk of relapse back into

14/21

25/06/2015

conflict. Consolidating the peace that has already been
achieved in such countries and attaining comprehensive
economic and social development — these are the
issues that the international community must reflect on
in depth.
At the beginning of this year, the Security Council
and General Assembly jointly launched a comprehensive
review of the peacebuilding architecture of the United
Nations, aimed at further improving our peacebuilding
efforts and promoting the PBC’s comprehensive
implementation of the mandates of the Council and
the Assembly. In that regard, I would like to make the
following points about our peacebuilding work.
First, it is essential that we insist on ownership
by the countries concerned, since that represents
the foundation of peacebuilding efforts and the best
way to ensure results. The international community
should respect the sovereignty and ownership of the
host countries, intervening only at their request and
supporting them in accordance with the priorities and
road maps formulated by them. It is important to focus
on strengthening communication with host countries
and to make timely adjustments that accord with their
views.
Secondly, it is important to tailor interventions
so they can adapt to changing circumstances. Postconflict countries can find themselves in many different
situations, and peacebuilding efforts should therefore
come up with strategies that are country-specific, based
on the circumstances and needs prevailing in individual
host countries. Social reconciliation and economic and
social development are key to ensuring lasting peace,
and should be a natural focus for peacebuilding. While
work can also be done in other areas, it should accord
with host countries’ needs and does not have to be allembracing, thus avoiding the mistakes of efforts that
are penny-wise and pound-foolish.
Thirdly, it is important to strengthen the PBC’s
coordinating role. The Commission’s work covers a range
of areas, including peace, security, development and
society, in which there are many important participants,
such as host country Governments, the various social
sectors, United Nations agencies — particularly the
Council, the General Assembly and the Economic
and Social Council — international and regional
organizations and international financial institutions.
There is a need for a division of labour as well as
coordination among the various participants. It is to

15-19386

25/06/2015

Post-conflict peacebuilding

be hoped that the PBC will strengthen its coordination
among the parties in the field of peacebuilding so that
they can play to their respective strengths, in accordance
with their mandates, and form synergies.
Fourthly, it is important to ensure that the
Commission’s advisory function is fully realized.
The PBC has a great amount of information at its
disposal, as well as a deep understanding of such
subjects as how to consolidate peace and strengthen
host countries’ capacities and institution-building. The
Commission should therefore continue to strengthen its
relations with the Council and provide it with active
advice. The Council, for its part, should also improve
its coordination with the Commission and its various
country configurations so as to arrive at the kind of
comprehensive understanding that will enable it to
provide guidance on its peacebuilding efforts.
Mr. Mangaral (Chad) (spoke in French): I would
like to congratulate the Malaysian presidency on its
organization of today’s meeting on peacebuilding and
to thank Mr. Antonio de Aguiar Patriota, the former
Chair of the Peacebuilding Commission, and Mr. Olof
Skoog, the current Chair, for their statements.
Chad takes note of the Commission’s report on its
work during 2014 (S/2015/174), welcomes its activities
and encourages it to continue to carry out its vital
functions. In that regard I have the following comments
to make.
Regarding the issue of financial resources, the
Commission should put greater emphasis on enhancing
public income and combating illicit financing flows so
as to promote the direct participation of the countries
concerned in peacebuilding efforts. In Liberia, for
instance, where the lack of financial resources and
insufficient national revenue base have continued to
hinder progress in the areas of the rule of law and security
sector reform, the Commission could work harder to
mobilize more significant support for managing the
country’s natural resources. We should establish global
policies aimed at limiting and mitigating the effects
that the illicit flight of capital can have on countries
and at supporting capacity-building in public finances
and the creation of national revenue. Ongoing support
in that area would allow those countries to generate
a more significant part of the financial resources
necessary for re-establishing economic infrastructure
and providing basic services. We note the areas in
which new policies could be designed to help countries

S/PV.7472

emerging from conflict, including the capacity to
negotiate contracts related to national resources; the
transparency and responsibility of mining companies,
and the tax regimes to be applied; the establishment
of international mechanisms to strengthen mutual
responsibility and international cooperation on tax
issues, against tax evasion and trade distortion; and the
fight against banking secrecy laws, which promote the
illicit movement of funds.
In terms of the national ownership of initiatives,
the Peacebuilding Commission (PBC) must focus the
international community’s attention on the priorities
of the countries concerned. In that way, it could
support the implementation of the Government projects
in Guinea-Bissau aimed at establishing a national
peacebuilding strategy and continue to promote the
coordination and harmonization of the support given
to the country’s priority goals. The Commission could
do the same in Guinea, since the Government has
made its priorities known with regard to peacebuilding
and human rights. In Burundi, the Commission could
focus on the continued enhancement of social cohesion
and the speedy implementation of the development
programme established by the Government. Finally,
in Sierra Leone, the Peacebuilding Commission could
continue to work to promote the country’s efforts to
ensure durable peace.
I wish to highlight the importance of regional
perspectives in the context of the work of the
Commission, because the role and functions of the
United Nations and regional actors are complementary
in nature. In that regard, countries that are neighbours
of those on the Peacebuilding Commission’s agenda, the
African Union and other organizations must be major
partners in political processes and the combat against
factors that promote instability. It is therefore vital that
the Commission enhance its cooperation and establish
closer ties with those countries and the African Union.
For example, the Central African Republic continues to
enjoy the region’s support for the peaceful settlement
of the crisis.
At the bilateral level, and in the context of a
subregional effort, Chad, along with other countries
members of the Economic and Monetary Community
of Central Africa, contributed on several occasions to
the payment of civil servants’ salaries in the Central
African Republic. The Commission could enhance its
support for regional initiatives promoting an ongoing
political dialogue that is open to all countries emerging

15-1938615/21

S/PV.7472

Post-conflict peacebuilding

from conflict, and cooperate in such efforts. We pay
tribute to the efforts of the African Union to deal with
the problems caused by financial flows, and we support
the adoption of a regional approach to deal with that
challenge. Chad also reasserts its support for the African
Union’s common position on the comprehensive review
of the peacebuilding architecture in 2015. We encourage
the review to strengthen the contribution made by
the United Nations peacebuilding architecture to the
African Union’s peace and development objectives and
to make recommendations in that regard.
Concerning the Peacebuilding Commission’s
advisory role for the Security Council, we encourage the
Commission to continue to look at ways of enhancing
that role and improving its relations with the Council,
particularly with regard to the issues of United Nations
missions in transition and repeated relapse into conflict.
We believe the Commission’s advisory role should be
seen in a strategic light and should enhance the political
strategy of the Council and the United Nations in given
situations. We also believe that the dialogue between
these two entities should be based on flexibility and
the absence of any formalities, with the participation
of ambassadors and Council country experts, as well
as the active follow-up of Council deliberations by
the PBC. We favour making informal contacts with
individual countries before the Council takes any steps,
particularly when reviewing mandates.
The Peacebuilding Commission should insist
on the participation of women in peacebuilding and
encourage the adoption of measures relating to their
economic empowerment. We look forward to the
recommendations of the comprehensive high-level
review on the implementation of resolution 1325
(2000), which will allow us to assess the progress
made in enhancing the role of women in post-conflict
peacebuilding and any obstacles that may remain.
In conclusion, given the negative impact of the
Ebola pandemic in Guinea, Liberia and Sierra Leone
in 2014, we call on the Commission to enhance its
capacity to mobilize resources and invite the countries
concerned to generate resources at the national level.
The Peacebuilding Commission, the Peacebuilding
Support Office and the Peacebuilding Fund were
created in 2005 with the promise that assistance would
be given to countries to prevent them from falling back
into violence. We therefore look forward to a review
of the progress achieved since 2005, the difficulties
encountered in managing post-conflict problems and

16/21

25/06/2015

the recommendations drawn from the review, which
should enable the three entities to do a better job.
We believe those recommendations should aim at
helping to prevent countries emerging from conflict
from relapsing into violence, since recent examples of
the resurgence of violence, as in the Central African
Republic and South Sudan, have made clear the gaps
that exist in terms of assistance to peacebuilding.
Mrs. Jakubonė (Lithuania): I thank Ambassador
Skoog of Sweden and Ambassador De Aguiar Patriota
of Brazil for their comprehensive briefings and
personal commitment to the work of the Peacebuilding
Commission (PBC).
Lithuania recognizes the critical importance of
peacebuilding as the foundation for sustainable peace
and development in the aftermath of conflict and highly
values the contribution of the PBC, the Peacebuilding
Fund and the Peacebuilding Support Office in support
of post-conflict recovery and peacebuilding in the
countries on the PBC agenda. Over the past year,
the PBC has further demonstrated its potential in
identifying gaps to peacebuilding and ensuring that
countries at risk of sliding back into conflict remain
on the international community’s agenda. The PBC was
especially instrumental at the beginning of the Ebola
outbreak. The Commission has actively utilized its role
as an advocate and in resource mobilization, and has
helped to draw the international community’s attention
to and focus on the risks posed by the Ebola outbreak
to the three most affected countries. Its advisory,
advocacy and resource mobilization capacity should be
further utilized.
Sustained and predictable funding for areas
critical to peacebuilding and consolidation is crucial to
international efforts to prevent a relapse into violence.
Investments in support of political dialogue and the
strengthening of security and rule-of-law institutions
are essential, both during violent conflict and in its
aftermath. Institutional capacity-building is a long-term
endeavour and requires targeted and sustained support.
We welcome the PBC discussions in that regard on ways
to enhance the predictability of peacebuilding funding.
National as well as regional leadership and
ownership are crucial to sustainable peacebuilding. We
commend the Commission’s active engagement with
African countries and Africa’s regional and subregional
organizations, in particular the African Union. It should
further promote established partnerships and enhance

15-19386

25/06/2015

Post-conflict peacebuilding

synergy, since that contributes to forging greater
regional coherence in the post-conflict response.
The PBC should remain actively engaged in
support of the political dialogue and other preparatory
processes during the electoral periods in the countries
on the PBC agenda. We welcome the active engagement
of the PBC Burundi configuration in that regard. As the
country is experiencing a severe pre-electoral crisis, it
is very important that the PBC configuration remain
vigilant over the developments in the country.
It is important to further promote the gender
dimension of peacebuilding, and we commend the
Commission’s continuing work in that regard. Women
and young people can and should play a very active
role both in conflict resolution and in peacebuilding
efforts. Women should be in a position to envisage the
path to empowerment with full-scale participation in
post-conflict social, economic, political and security
structures.
We support the advisory role of the PBC and
encourage exploring further ways of making better
use of the mutually beneficial links between the PBC
and the Security Council. The interaction between
the two bodies should remain mutually proactive. The
PBC should continue to draw the attention of Council
members, formally and informally, to emerging threats
in the countries on its agenda in order to reduce the risk
of emergence or relapse into violent conflict.
Peacebuilding is a long and delicate process
involving many actors and different stakeholders. We
trust that the ongoing peacebuilding review will draw
on past experiences and lessons learned and generate
concrete recommendations on how to strengthen the
international community’s response to the post-conflict
situation and build sustainable peace.
Mr. Lucas (Angola): We welcome Ambassador
Antonio de Aguiar Patriota, former Chair of the
Peacebuilding Commission, and thank him for
presenting the Commission’s report (S/2015/174). We
praise the work that Brazil has been doing for some time
as Chair of the Guinea-Bissau configuration and all of
the efforts that have been made to ensure a meaningful
process of peace consolidation in that brother country.
We also welcome and thank Ambassador Olof Skoog,
the Commission’s current Chair.
The Peacebuilding Commission has scored
undeniable successes in countries on its agenda.

S/PV.7472

However, we recognize that much remains to be done
and that further efforts will be needed to maintain postconflict gains in some of those countries.
The issue under consideration in today’s meeting
is critical to ensuring lasting and sustainable peace in
countries emerging from conflict. Last year, the United
Nations peacebuilding framework deployed substantial
resources in support of countries to help them move
towards peace consolidation and to strengthen the nexus
between security and development. The Peacebuilding
Commission pursues its activities based on advocacy,
mobilizing resources, strengthening partnerships,
forging coherence in policy development and ensuring
national ownership of the peacebuilding processes.
Additionally, the Commission must strengthen its
advisory function with regard to the Security Council
and the General Assembly and make its actions more
coordinated and incisive.
The Peacebuilding Commission plays a mediating
role between the United Nations and the international
community by helping countries in post-conflict
situations build their national institutions, strengthen
social cohesion and carry out structural, social and
economic reforms. The Commission also plays a
crucial role in helping them to overcome outstanding
challenges. In that regard, we mention the Commission’s
outstanding intervention in assisting Liberia, Guinea
and Sierra Leone, the three West African countries
most affected by the Ebola outbreak.
With regard to mobilizing resources, the
Commission plays a crucial role in assisting in the
consolidation of peace and stability. In the case
of Guinea-Bissau, for example, it is helping the
Government to implement its priority agenda. It also
contributed to holding a donor conference for GuineaBissau, which took place in March in Brussels with
remarkable success. That conference was an example
of how the Peacebuilding Commission can strengthen
partnerships by playing a key role in bringing together
the international community, regional organizations,
financial institutions and Member States to address the
needs and concerns of the countries on its agenda.
We welcome the Commission’s efforts to involve
women in peacebuilding processes and to empower and
include them in all peacebuilding efforts. Overlooking
the contribution of women and the crucial role they
can play in peacebuilding and social and economic
development is a mistake and a recipe for failure.

15-1938617/21

S/PV.7472

Post-conflict peacebuilding

Women, youth and civil society organizations are
powerful driving forces in peace consolidation
processes and in social development in general. The
review of resolution 1325 (2000) is an opportunity to
take stock of that reality.
As has already been said, the Peacebuilding
Commission must strengthen its advisory role with
regard to the Security Council and the General Assembly
on issues pertaining to post-conflict countries. For
instance, in countries with ongoing demobilization,
disarmament, reintegration (DDR) and security-sector
reform programmes, the Commission must provide
pertinent information to the Security Council on the
implementation and follow-up of such programmes in
order to ensure that ex-combatants are not excluded and
to create the best possible conditions for their better
integration into civilian life, which is a crucial element
in the peace consolidation process.
In countries where the Security Council intends
to terminate, draw down or reduce the personnel of a
peacekeeping mission, the Peacebuilding Commission
must draw the attention of the United Nations and the
Security Council to the appropriateness of such moves.
The peacekeeping operations review takes into account
that fundamental element in strengthening the advisory
role of the Commission.
We would like to share Angola’s experience as a
post-conflict country and to offer some views on aspects
that we consider essential to a successful peacebuilding
process.
In political terms, in taking into account the
principal of national ownership, peacebuilding demands
trust and good faith on the part of the main stakeholders
and requires that they work to achieve genuine national
reconciliation. In Angola, the peace and reconstruction
process required, first, the extension of the State’s
authority to the whole country, institution-building,
respect for human rights and the rule of law.
Social and political inclusion is a fundamental
feature of any peacebuilding process. The efforts
deployed by the Angolan authorities to reach out to
former adversaries and integrate them into society
are well documented, as is the restoration of State
institutions and economic life in general. That was a
determining factor in the success of our peace, national
reconciliation and reconstruction process. Furthermore,
the full participation of political actors, women, young
people, civil society and the media in the national

18/21

25/06/2015

debate led to the adoption of constitutional and legal
mechanisms associated with peacebuilding.
In social and economic terms, peacebuilding
required the reconstruction of all the infrastructure
destroyed by the war and especially the restoration
of basic services to the population — roads, bridges,
railroads, airports, ports, schools and hospitals. The
success of the disarmament, demobilization and social
reintegration of more than 100,000 members of the
military was pivotal to the consolidation of peace, which
laid the foundations for sound social and economic
recovery. A lot still remains to be done in social and
economic development, social democratization and
inclusion, but we can say that in general the country is
on the right track.
We fully support the review of the peacebuilding
architecture, adapting peacebuilding to the dynamics of
the situation in each post-conflict country and working
more closely with the Security Council, the General
Assembly, the United Nations system and regional and
subregional organizations in preventing relapses into
conflict and working in coordination with regional
organizations to consolidate peace and stability. The
review of the peacebuilding architecture offers a unique
opportunity for a clearer definition of the partnership to
be established with the African Union and the African
subregional organizations. However, the debate that has
been going on for quite some time in the African Union
has not yielded tangible results, a shortcoming that
we hope the present review will address. In addition,
we expect that this year’s review of peacekeeping
operations will afford a better understanding of the
related challenges and insufficiencies and lead to the
formulation of recommendations for rendering the
cooperation between the peacebuilding architecture
and the peacebuilding operations more effective.
Finally, we are of the view that the Security
Council, the Peacebuilding Commission and regional
organizations should establish a more complementary
and tangible partnership in securing peace and security
in the world by strengthening the nexus between
security and development.
Mr. Pressman (United States of America): I would
like to thank Ambassadors Patriota and Skoog for their
briefings earlier. I also thank Ambassador Patriota for
his work as the outgoing Chair of the Organizational
Committee of the Peacebuilding Commission (PBC),
especially during the outbreak of the Ebola virus in

15-19386

25/06/2015

Post-conflict peacebuilding

the three countries on the PBC’s agenda. I congratulate
Ambassador Skoog, who is doing important work as
the 2015 Chair of the Organizational Committee, and
the chairs of the country-specific configurations. We
are grateful for their efforts to rally support from the
international community to assist many of the world’s
most fragile States in recovering from conflict.
It is clear from the report of the Peacebuilding
Commission (S/2015/174) that we have made some
progress in preventing conflict and building conditions
for lasting peace in some places. The Commission
has played a critical role in assisting Guinea-Bissau,
helping focus donor engagement and building domestic
capacity in the security and health sectors. In Liberia,
the Commission’s engagement, specifically in the
justice and rule of law sectors, has helped build capacity
ahead of a planned drawdown of the United Nations
Mission in Liberia.
It is also clear that gaps still exist between our
collective aspirations for helping fragile States to
solidify peace and the realities in practice and on the
ground. The purpose for which the peacebuilding
architecture was created in 2005 — preventing relapse
into violent conflict — remains easy to talk about but
hard to do. And it is a challenge for all of us. In places
like Burundi and the Central African Republic we are
keenly aware of how important it is that the international
community sustain and increase our joint efforts.
The PBC has an important role in complementing
the work of the Security Council in post-conflict
countries on the Commission’s agenda — engaging
international financial institutions, raising the profile
of needs that are not being met and bringing to the
attention of Member States issues that could put peace
at risk. It is an art, not a science, and each case has
unique challenges and unique solutions. There is no
single prescription for how to ensure that peace is
sustained, but there are key factors that should be of
concern to the Peacebuilding Commission.
In the aftermath of the tragic outbreak of Ebola
in Sierra Leone, Liberia, Guinea — all countries on
the Commission’s agenda — the PBC played a critical
supportive role in bringing together all the relevant
actors to fight the disease, working in concert with
the efforts of the Security Council, the relevant United
Nations agencies, the United Nations Secretariat
and international partners. Weak national capacity
in the aftermath of conflict can have devastating

S/PV.7472

consequences, as the outbreak of the Ebola virus
demonstrated, and the Peacebuilding Commission must
apply itself urgently to bringing together the technical
and financial resources required to build post-conflict
countries’ capacity to meet the needs of their people.
The Peacebuilding Commission has played
an important role in refocusing the international
community on the immense challenges that remain in
the Central African Republic. We are optimistic that the
Bangui Forum helped advance that country on its path
towards peace. Yet as the Commission has highlighted,
the Central African Republic’s road ahead will remain
difficult, and it requires sustained and significant
support from international partners.
We echo the Commission’s call to all stakeholders
in the Central African Republic to help promote an
environment conducive to holding elections, and we
echo its concerns about the $21 million gap in the
funding for the election’s budget. We urge all partners
to consider making additional contributions to support
elections in the Central African Republic, advance
demobilization, disarmament and reintegration efforts
and address other urgent priorities essential to that
country’s stabilization. The Commission continues to
play an important leadership and convening role as the
Central African Republic advances towards stability,
and it must work to ensure that we remain focused on
the tasks at hand.
We appreciate the Peacebuilding Commission’s
special emphasis on engaging regional actors in fragile
settings, particularly the neighbours of those countries
on the Commission’s agenda. The Commission has
played a welcome role in encouraging Senegal’s
engagement in Guinea-Bissau, as well as in promoting
a dialogue in the dispute between the two countries
over the Casamance region. The Commission has also
engaged the members of the Economic Community
of West African States (ECOWAS) in their planning
for long-term stability in Guinea-Bissau, recognizing
the essential role of the ECOWAS security mission in
Guinea-Bissau in helping to provide stability on the
ground. That is critical work, and it should continue.
The Commission must ensure that women are
integrated into every step of post-conflict peacebuilding.
They must be empowered to make and invest in
choices about the future of their societies. Working
with the Government of Liberia, the Peacebuilding
Commission has ensured the greater involvement of

15-1938619/21

S/PV.7472

Post-conflict peacebuilding

civil society, including women’s groups, in the national
reconciliation process, in addition to promoting an
increased allocation of funds for gender issues from the
Peacebuilding Fund. As a result of the Commission’s
engagement, Liberia is one of the countries where the
allocation of the fund for gender-related issues is higher
than the 15 per cent target set by the Secretary-General
in his report on women’s participation in peacebuilding
(S/2010/466).
While we recognize that the Peacebuilding
Commission has had some successes over the past
year in meeting some of those challenges, it is also
critical that we understand the challenges facing it
and its work, including those outlined in the recently
released report of the High-level Independent Panel on
Peace Operations. As documented in that report, the
Peacebuilding Commission has not met expectations
that its focus would include, importantly, prevention.
By comparison with those provided once a
conflict is under way, prevention efforts often lack
the necessary attention and resources. Moreover, in
contrast to mediation and peacekeeping, the prevention
of armed conflict is approached in an ad hoc manner,
without cohesion among the actors — diplomatic,
political, development or economic. As the Panel’s
report clearly states, “Put simply, the international
community is failing at preventing conflict”. Failing
to prevent a relapse into crisis is costly, both in terms
of human lives and in the time and resources needed
after a country has relapsed. It is a failure we cannot
afford not to address. The peacebuilding architecture
must play a critical role in that effort. In that vein, we
welcome the five-year review of the United Nations
peacebuilding architecture currently under way as a
tool for addressing some of those challenges.
The year 2015 is a significant one for United Nations
peacebuilding as the international community focuses
on the need to pay close attention to the key components
of lasting peace after conflict — national ownership,
social and political inclusivity, institution-building and
predictable financing. We look forward to working
with the Peacebuilding Commission, the Peacebuilding
Fund and the Peacebuilding Support Office, as well as
other United Nations and international actors, on how
to best respond to the needs of countries emerging from
conflict and to solidify the gains made in countries as
they transition to a lasting peace.

20/21

25/06/2015

The President: I shall now make a statement in my
capacity as the representative of Malaysia.
I join the other Council members in thanking
Ambassador Olof Skoog, Permanent Representative of
Sweden and Chair of the Peacebuilding Commission
(PBC) at its ninth session, for his statement. I am
delighted to see Sweden at the helm of the PBC and am
confident that under Ambassador Skoog’s leadership
we will achieve further progress in the Commission’s
work. I would also like to thank Ambassador Patriota
of Brazil for his outstanding leadership of the PBC at
its eighth session. His statement and report (S/2015/174)
outline many important issues that will continue to
dominate our discussions. My appreciation goes to the
Peacebuilding Support Office for its unstinting support
for and cooperation with the PBC.
The challenges facing international peace and
security today are enormously demanding in terms
of political attention and the need for resources.
Since its establishment, the PBC has demonstrated
its contribution particularly in terms of its support
for institution-building and strengthening national
resilience in times of peace, as well as in providing
advice and accompaniment to countries dealing with
political difficulties in troubled times.
As a member of both the Security Council and
the PBC concurrently, Malaysia has assumed an
informal coordinating role between both bodies in
order to facilitate better mutual understanding and
relations. Today’s discussion underscores the need for
strengthening strategic partnerships in both bodies in
order to deal with, other things, issues such as transitions
and the emerging gaps between peacekeeping and
peacebuilding, and the engagement of international or
regional actors in preventing countries emerging from
conflict from relapsing into it.
At the same time, the review of the peacebuilding
architecture now under way presents a timely
opportunity for the members of the Commission and
the wider United Nations membership to take stock and
deliberate further on measures aimed at improving the
Organization’s peacebuilding architecture. We believe
that the review of the peacebuilding architecture and
its outcome should also take into consideration other
review processes, namely, the high-level review of
resolution 1325 (2000) on women and peace and
security, and the outcome of the United Nations peace
operations review. Malaysia believes that the outcome

15-19386

25/06/2015

Post-conflict peacebuilding

of those three processes is highly important to the
United Nations system. The reviews must be mutually
reinforcing if they are to have the desired impact.
We have followed closely the views of Council
members on the need for a sharper focus in peacebuilding
efforts and in the expertise and financial support
required. We look forward to the informal interactive
dialogue on that subject later today.

S/PV.7472

I now resume my functions as President of the
Council.
There are no more names inscribed on the list of
speakers.
The meeting rose at 12.10 p.m.

15-1938621/21
