S/2003/766

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
29 July 2003
Original: English

Letter dated 28 July 2003 from the Secretary-General addressed to
the President of the Security Council
By its resolution 1259 (1999) of 11 August 1999, the Security Council
appointed Carla Del Ponte as Prosecutor of the International Tribunal for the Former
Yugoslavia and the International Tribunal for Rwanda. In accordance with the
statutes of the two Tribunals, the term of office of Ms. Del Ponte will come to an
end on 14 September 2003. She is eligible for reappointment.
In accordance with article 16, paragraph 4, of the statute of the International
Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia, the Prosecutor of the International Tribunal for
the Former Yugoslavia is appointed by the Security Council on nomination by the
Secretary-General.
In accordance with article 15, paragraph 3, of the statute of the International
Tribunal for Rwanda, the Prosecutor of the International Tribunal for the Former
Yugoslavia also serves as the Prosecutor of the International Tribunal for Rwanda.
Pursuant to the responsibilities conferred upon me by those provisions of the
statutes of the two Tribunals, I have consulted with the members of the Security
Council regarding the appointment of the Prosecutor. In the light of those
consultations, I have formed the view that it is now time to split the positions of
Prosecutor of the International Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia and the
Prosecutor of the International Tribunal for Rwanda, so that they are occupied by
different people. As the two Tribunals move towards implementing their respective
completion strategies, it would seem to me essential, in the interests of efficiency
and effectiveness, that each Tribunal have its own Prosecutor, who is able to devote
his or her entire energies and attention to the organization, oversight, management
and conduct of the outstanding investigations and prosecutions before that Tribunal.
Adoption of this measure would require the amendment by the Security
Council of the statute of the International Tribunal for Rwanda. The amendments
which I would propose to this end are set out in an annex to this letter. In the event
that these amendments were adopted, the General Assembly would then be
requested to approve the related increase that would be required in the budget of the
International Tribunal for Rwanda.
Assuming that the Security Council were to adopt the amendments to the
statute of the International Tribunal for Rwanda that I have proposed, it would then
be my intention to submit to the Security Council the name of Carla Del Ponte as
my nominee for the position of Prosecutor of the International Tribunal for the

03-44502 (E)

290703

*
0
3
4
4
5
0
2
*

S/2003/766

Former Yugoslavia. In due course I would submit to the Security Council the name
of another nominee for the position of Prosecutor of the International Tribunal for
Rwanda. In the interim, it would be my intention to propose to the Security Council
that it decide that, once Ms. Del Ponte’s term of office has come to an end, the
current Deputy Prosecutor of the International Tribunal for Rwanda, Bongani
Christopher Majola, should act as the Prosecutor of that Tribunal, pending the
appointment of another person to that post.
(Signed) Kofi A. Annan

2

S/2003/766

Annex
Article 15
The Prosecutor
1.
The Prosecutor shall be responsible for the investigation and prosecution of
persons responsible for serious violations of international humanitarian law
committed in the territory of Rwanda and Rwandan citizens responsible for such
violations committed in the territory of neighbouring States, between 1 January
1994 and 31 December 1994.
2.
The Prosecutor shall act independently as a separate organ of the International
Tribunal for Rwanda. He or she shall not seek or receive instructions from any
Government or from any other source.
3.
The Office of the Prosecutor shall be composed of a Prosecutor and such
other qualified staff as may be required.
4.
The Prosecutor shall be appointed by the Security Council on nomination
by the Secretary-General. He or she shall be of high moral character and
possess the highest level of competence and experience in the conduct of
investigations and prosecutions of criminal cases. The Prosecutor shall serve
for a four-year term and be eligible for reappointment. The terms and
conditions of service of the Prosecutor shall be those of an Under-SecretaryGeneral of the United Nations.
5.
The staff of the Office of the Prosecutor shall be appointed by the
Secretary-General on the recommendation of the Prosecutor.

3
