United Nations

S/PV.6134

Security Council

Provisional

Sixty-fourth year

6134th meeting
Thursday, 4 June 2009, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Davutoğlu/Mr. İlkin . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Turkey)

Members:

Austria . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Burkina Faso . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Costa Rica . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Croatia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Japan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Libyan Arab Jamahiriya . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Mexico . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Uganda . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . .
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Viet Nam . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Mr. Mayr-Harting
Mr. Kafando
Mr. Liu Zhenmin
Mr. Urbina
Mr. Sanader
Mr. Lacroix
Mr. Okuda
Mr. Gouider
Mr. Heller
Mr. Churkin
Mr. Mugoya
Mr. Parham
Ms. DiCarlo
Mr. Le Luong Minh

Agenda
International Tribunal for the Prosecution of Persons Responsible for Serious
Violations of International Humanitarian Law Committed in the Territory of the
Former Yugoslavia since 1991
International Criminal Tribunal for the Prosecution of Persons Responsible for
Genocide and Other Serious Violations of International Humanitarian Law
Committed in the Territory of Rwanda and Rwandan Citizens Responsible for
Genocide and Other Such Violations Committed in the Territory of Neighbouring
States between 1 January 1994 and 31 December 1994
Letter dated 14 May 2009 from the President of the International
Tribunal for the Prosecution of Persons Responsible for Serious
Violations of International Humanitarian Law Committed in the Territory
of the Former Yugoslavia since 1991 addressed to the President of the
Security Council (S/2009/252)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the
delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room C-154A.

09-35926 (E)

*0935926*

S/PV.6134

Letter dated 14 May 2009 from the President of the International
Criminal Tribunal for the Prosecution of Persons Responsible for
Genocide and Other Serious Violations of International Humanitarian
Law Committed in the Territory of Rwanda and Rwandan Citizens
Responsible for Genocide and Other Such Violations Committed in the
Territory of Neighbouring States between 1 January 1994 and
31 December 1994 addressed to the President of the Security Council
(S/2009/247)

2

09-35926

S/PV.6134

The meeting was called to order at 10.10 a.m.
Expression of thanks to the retiring President
The President: As this is the first meeting of the
Security Council for the month of June 2009, I should
like to take this opportunity to thank and pay tribute,
on behalf of the Council, to His Excellency Mr. Vitaly
Churkin, Permanent Representative of the Russian
Federation, and to the Russian presidency for the
successful manner in which they presided over the
Security Council in the month of May 2009.
I also wish to recognize the presence of His
Excellency Mr. Ivo Sanader, Prime Minister of Croatia.
I extend a warm welcome to the Prime Minister.
Statement by the President
The President: Before we move on to the item
on our agenda, allow me to say a few words in my
national capacity.
As members of the Security Council know, this is
the first public meeting of the Council under Turkey’s
presidency. I am delighted to be here with you today.
When Turkey decided to run for a seat on the Council,
some five years ago, we did so with a clear vision of
the United Nations and of our possible role in the
Council. Indeed, we see the United Nations as the
principal embodiment of international legitimacy, and
the Security Council as the primary organ responsible
for maintaining global peace and security.
Turkey has been a responsible member of the
international community, deeply committed to
upholding the ideals and principles enshrined in the
United Nations Charter. Indeed, as a founding Member
of the United Nations, active involvement in the
policies and programmes of the Organization
constitutes one of the main pillars of our foreign
policy. This is why we thought our membership in the
Council could help amplify the constructive role we try
to play in our region and beyond. We also hoped that
our insight into the rather complex issues that the
Council is grappling with, especially those of our
region, might bring added value to the work of this
body.

positive inputs for our policies and initiatives. Now,
looking ahead, we are even more hopeful that our
active engagement with the members of the Council
and the entire United Nations membership will
continue to contribute to peace and stability in the
world.
I am confident that the busy programme of work
for June, which reflects almost the entire agenda of the
Council, will be a step in this direction. As the
President of the Council for this month, we will
certainly do our share.
In this vein, I am particularly pleased to start our
presidency with this meeting on the International
Criminal Tribunals for the Former Yugoslavia and for
Rwanda. The contribution of those two Tribunals to
international criminal justice and, consequently, to
reconciliation, stability and peace in the affected
countries is most commendable. As a country that is
deeply committed to the rule of law and as a firm
believer in the mutually reinforcing relationship
between peace and justice, Turkey greatly values the
important work carried out by those Tribunals.
Combating impunity and providing justice to the
victims of violations of international humanitarian law
are a priority for us.
However, the fulfilment of those objectives is not
and cannot be limited to the lifespan of the Tribunals in
the case of the former Yugoslavia and Rwanda. Thus,
as we near the closure of the two Tribunals, we have to
ensure that the culture of impunity will never resurface
and that the necessary mechanisms to that end are
firmly in place.
Since we will be dealing with this issue shortly in
more depth, let me stop here. Without further ado,
allow me to proceed with our formal agenda.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
International Tribunal for the Prosecution of Persons
Responsible for Serious Violations of International
Humanitarian Law Committed in the Territory of
the Former Yugoslavia since 1991

In retrospect, the five months since we assumed
Council membership have vindicated our vision. We
have benefited greatly from our deliberations on a wide
area of issues and have tried to translate them into

09-35926

3

S/PV.6134

International Criminal Tribunal for the Prosecution
of Persons Responsible for Genocide and Other
Serious Violations of International Humanitarian
Law Committed in the Territory of Rwanda and
Rwandan Citizens Responsible for Genocide and
Other Such Violations Committed in the Territory of
Neighbouring States between 1 January 1994 and
31 December 1994
Letter dated 14 May 2009 from the President of
the International Tribunal for the Prosecution
of Persons Responsible for Serious Violations of
International Humanitarian Law Committed in
the Territory of the Former Yugoslavia since
1991 addressed to the President of the Security
Council (S/2009/252)
Letter dated 14 May 2009 from the President of
the International Criminal Tribunal for the
Prosecution of Persons Responsible for
Genocide and Other Serious Violations of
International Humanitarian Law Committed in
the Territory of Rwanda and Rwandan Citizens
Responsible for Genocide and Other Such
Violations Committed in the Territory of
Neighbouring States between 1 January 1994
and 31 December 1994 addressed to the
President of the Security Council (S/2009/247)
The President: I should like to inform the
Council that I have received letters from the
representatives of Bosnia and Herzegovina, Kenya,
Rwanda and Serbia, in which they request to be invited
to participate in the consideration of the item on the
Council’s agenda. In conformity with the usual
practice, I propose, with the consent of the Council, to
invite those representatives to participate in the
consideration of the item without the right to vote, in
accordance with the relevant provisions of the Charter
and rule 37 of the Council’s provisional rules of
procedure.
There being no objection, it is so decided.
At the invitation of the President, the
representatives of the aforementioned countries
took the seats reserved for them at the side of the
Council Chamber.
The President: In accordance with the
understanding reached in the Council’s prior
consultations, I shall take it that the Security Council
agrees to extend an invitation under rule 39 of its

4

provisional rules of procedure to Judge Patrick
Robinson, President of the International Criminal
Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia; Judge Dennis
Byron, President of the International Criminal Tribunal
for Rwanda; Mr. Serge Brammertz, Prosecutor of the
International Criminal Tribunal for the Former
Yugoslavia; and Mr. Hassan Jallow, Prosecutor of the
International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda.
It is so decided.
The Security Council will now begin its
consideration of the item on its agenda. The Council is
meeting in accordance with the understanding reached
in its prior consultations.
Members of the Council have before them the
following documents: S/2009/252, which contains the
text of a letter dated 14 May 2009 from the President
of the International Criminal Tribunal for the Former
Yugoslavia addressed to the President of the Security
Council; and S/2009/247, which contains the text of a
letter dated 14 May 2009 from the President of the
International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda addressed
to the President of the Security Council.
At this meeting, the Security Council will hear
briefings by the President of the International Criminal
Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia, the President of
the International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda and the
Prosecutors of the International Criminal Tribunals for
the Former Yugoslavia and Rwanda.
I now give the floor to Judge Patrick Robinson,
President of the International Criminal Tribunal for the
Former Yugoslavia.
Judge Robinson: It is indeed an honour for me to
appear before you today in my capacity as President of
the International Criminal Tribunal for the Former
Yugoslavia (ICTY) and to do so under the presidency
of Turkey.
My remarks today will be brief, as the details of
the measures the Tribunal has undertaken to complete
its mandate are set out in my written biannual report
(see S/2009/252), which has been duly submitted to the
Council.
Since my most recent presentation before you, the
Tribunal has continued to focus its energy on
completing its work as expeditiously as possible. Three
appeal judgments have been rendered, including in

09-35926

S/PV.6134

some of our most complex cases, and seven trials are
being heard simultaneously in our three courtrooms.
Of the remaining caseload, the trial of two
accused, Stanišić and Simatović, will begin tomorrow,
5 June 2009, and that of Karadžić will commence in
late August 2009. Both Tolimir and the final case of
Mićo Stanišić and Stojan Župljanin will commence in
September 2009.
Our current estimates suggest that all but three of
our trials will conclude in 2010, two more in early
2011 and the final trial, that of Karadžić, in early 2012.
As you can see, our trial activity is entering the
final stretch. However, one serious hurdle remains: the
continued flight from justice of Ratko Mladić and
Goran Hadžić. The failure to bring these two men to
justice will leave a stain on the Security Council’s
historic contribution to peacebuilding in the former
Yugoslavia.
Allow me to turn to the current projection of the
remaining appeals, including those anticipated from the
ICTY and our sister tribunal, the International Criminal
Tribunal for Rwanda (ICTR), it being recalled that the
two Tribunals share an appellate function. Following a
detailed analysis, the Tribunal estimated that, absent a
redeployment of eight trial judges to the Appeals
Chamber upon the completion of their trial work, the
ICTY/ICTR Appeals Chamber would be occupied with
appellate work into 2015. However, with the
redeployment of four ICTY and four ICTR judges,
most appellate work will be completed by the end of
2012, with four cases spilling into the first half of
2013.
This proposal for deployment was presented in
the Tribunal’s biennium budget for 2010-2011 as part
of the Tribunal’s downsizing programme and is a
matter that is now formally before the Security Council
in the form of a request for an extension of the
mandates of the permanent trial and appeal judges and
the Tribunal’s ad litem judges. In this regard, I thank
the Austrian Chair of the Security Council Working
Group on the ad hoc Tribunals and the Office of the
Legal Counsel for their assistance in expediting the
consideration of these proposals to ensure that the
work of the Tribunal is not frustrated.
I note, however, that the heavy appellate
workload of the Tribunal is in part due to the failure of
rule 11 bis transfers from the Rwanda Tribunal to

09-35926

national jurisdictions. Rwanda was found not to have
sufficient capacity to try such cases, and in response
the international community is taking measures to
address this deficiency. But perhaps more troubling is
the lack of capacity or readiness to try such cases
present in European countries, where the ICTR had
also sought to transfer cases pursuant to rule 11 bis. I
consider this to be a critical issue that needs to be
addressed by the Security Council and the international
community. Surely, countries with highly developed
judicial systems could make a greater effort to accept a
limited number of 1l bis transfers. In so doing, they
would make a real contribution to the international
community’s efforts to bring the work of the Tribunal
to completion in full respect of due process.
It may be that the Security Council’s proscription
in paragraph 6 of resolution 1534 (2004), which
requested the Tribunal not to try cases involving
intermediate and lower rank accused, was inexorably
linked to the transfer of cases to the States of the
former Yugoslavia. However, with the blessing of the
Security Council, we could make a renewed effort to
transfer to a developed country one major case of a
senior accused. That move alone would save one trial
bench 14 months of court sitting, not to count the
required time for consideration of an appeal.
While the Tribunal continues to make every effort
to expedite its work, it has identified some factors that
may cause delays to its schedule, which need to be
more extensively addressed. First is the issue of
translation. Observing the United Nations standard of
5.5 pages per day per translator, the need for extensive
referencing and indispensable review process to ensure
quality translation requires significant time. The
situation is further aggravated by the extraordinary
demands made on our limited language resources.
Owing to the highly technical and often confidential
nature of the legal translation work required,
outsourcing translations has necessarily been restricted
in scope.
Efforts continue to identify ways of minimizing
the impact of the need for translation on trial and
appeal schedules and to identify and recruit qualified
translators. However, 20 vacancies remain in the
language service, and recruitment is hindered by the
completion strategy. In most cases, it takes at least
three to five months to recruit a suitable candidate. As
the ICTY is facing increasing competition in hiring
qualified language staff without retention incentives, it

5

S/PV.6134

is likely that the number of translators will decrease
rather than increase in the future.
Another matter which has had a negative impact
on the expeditious progress of trials is contempt
proceedings. I need only mention the Seselj trial,
which has been adjourned since March 2009. In light
of the impact of contempt proceedings on the
completion of our trials, I established a working group
to examine ways in which contempt may be dealt with
without delaying proceedings. That report will be
submitted to me shortly, and I am hopeful that it will
contain concrete measures that Judges may adopt when
faced with contempt issues during their trials.
Additionally, the Rules Committee is considering the
adoption of a rule to allow the admission of written
statements of witnesses who are kept away from trial
through intimidation.
Let me return to the issue of staff retention; it is a
difficulty which cuts across all areas of the Tribunal’s
operations. In the past three months, we have lost 82
staff members at a rough average of 27 per month.
Much has been said about the need for highly qualified
personnel for the orderly completion of our work. I
appeal to the Security Council to exercise foresight so
that concrete measures can be implemented now to
retain our staff. The only measure that has been taken
so far by the General Assembly is resolution 63/256,
adopted at its sixty-third session on 24 December 2008.
In paragraph 5 of that resolution, the General Assembly
requested the Secretary-General
“to use the existing contractual frameworks to
offer contracts to staff, in line with dates of
planned post reductions in accordance with the
relevant prevailing trial schedules, in order to
remove uncertainty with regard to future
employment with the aim of ensuring that the
Tribunals have the necessary capacity to
complete their respective mandates effectively”.
It is my intention to ensure the implementation of
the resolution as soon as possible, but even so I doubt
that this will be enough. I do not want to return here in
six months and be berated by the Security Council for
a report that indicates substantial delays in the
anticipated schedule I am presenting today due to the
continuing departures of our uniquely qualified and
experienced staff. I have a genuine fear that we will
soon find ourselves without sufficient staff, but it
appears to me that Member States that are in a position

6

to assist have adopted an attitude of uninterestedness in
this matter. I am not normally given to hyperbolic
comments, but if we continue to lose staff at the rate of
27 per month I fear that one day the judges may come
to work and find themselves alone.
The Tribunal is doing all it can to retain its staff,
but without appropriate assistance and concrete
measures it will not be successful. This is a matter that
I will continue to raise with the Secretary-General, the
Office of Human Resources Management and the
Controller, and the Security Council’s active support in
this matter would be very helpful.
That said, I note that all indications are that our
request for extensions of our judges consonant with our
remaining work load will not be granted by the
Security Council and that, at most, all judges will be
granted an extension until 31 December 2010. Now,
this is a political decision taken by the Security
Council, but I cannot impress on the Security Council
enough the signal such a piecemeal approach to
extensions of the mandates of our judges sends to our
staff. Such an approach only operates to enhance their
desire to secure other employment as soon as possible.
I would ask the Council to seriously reconsider the
wisdom of its approach to this issue.
I must thank the Security Council Working Group
on the ad hoc international tribunals and the Austrian
Chair, for their work on the residual mechanism. The
Tribunal is grateful to the Office of the Legal Counsel
for the extensive opportunities it gave the Tribunal to
provide input for the report of the Secretary-General on
the budgetary and administrative aspects of the residual
mechanism.
Let me close my remarks by stating, in the words
of Henry Wadsworth Longfellow: “Great is the art of
beginning, but greater is the art of ending.” In the very
near future, our cases will be completed. Provided that
the Security Council ensures that the Tribunal is given
sufficient resources to complete its work expeditiously
and fairly and provided that sufficient incentives are
adopted immediately to retain staff, great indeed will
be the art of our ending.
The President: I thank Judge Robinson for his
briefing.
I now give the floor to Judge Dennis Byron,
President of the International Criminal Tribunal for
Rwanda.

09-35926

S/PV.6134

Judge Byron: I would like first of all to wish the
new Turkish presidency the best of success for their
tour of office. I would also like to recognize the
presence of the Prime Minister of Croatia.
It was 15 years and two months ago, on 7 April
1994, that the Rwandan genocide started. Three months
later, at least 800,000 people had been killed, not to
speak of the number of victims of rape, mutilation and
torture and not to mention the psychological damage
done to millions. Only a few months after the end of
the atrocities, the Security Council created the
International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda (ICTR)
with high expectations and ambitious goals. The
Council was:
“Convinced that ... the prosecution of persons
responsible for serious violations of international
humanitarian law would ... contribute to the
process of national reconciliation and to the
restoration and maintenance of peace ... .”
(resolution 955 (1994), seventh preambular
paragraph)
I would suggest that the Tribunal has fulfilled many of
those expectations and we remain committed to
ensuring that our legacy will be satisfactory to all
Rwandans.
As I present the eleventh completion strategy
report to the Council today, I am mindful that I am here
not merely to report the achievements of the Tribunal,
but to acknowledge that the credit for those
achievements belongs to the Council. At no small
expense Council members have supported this
Tribunal, which marks a milestone in articulating and
protecting fundamental human rights without regard to
ethnicity, local politics or national boundaries. The
Council’s support of our efforts demonstrates its
commitment to the proposition that man’s inhumanity
to man cannot be excused as an inevitable trait of
human nature. It is a choice for which every
perpetrator of atrocities can be and must be held
responsible.
The ICTR has accomplished much since it was
established in November 1994. It has rendered
judgements concerning forty-four defendants in
complex cases under difficult conditions. Yet, equally
important, the Tribunal has established a judicially
verified factual record of the events in Rwanda that
will serve as a background for the remaining trials, a

09-35926

resource for historians and as a major contribution to
the process of reconciliation.
But we are not complacent. In the six months
since I last reported to you in December, the Tribunal
has rendered three judgements involving six accused.
Between now and the end of the year, we expect six
judgements in other single-accused cases. The first
months of this year have also seen the completion of
the evidence phase in two of the largest multi-accused
trials; the Butare trial and the Military II trial. These
two and the Bizimungu case are now all in the
judgement drafting phase, involving in total some 14
accused. In the fifth multi-accused case, the Karemera
trial, we are currently awaiting the decision of the
Appeals Chamber with respect to our order to sever
one of the defendants whose continued illness has
delayed the proceedings.
The maximum possible number of ten new cases
projected for 2009 during my last presentation to the
Security Council did become a reality. Four of these
ten new cases have commenced as of today and in one
of them the evidence phase has already been
completed.
The Tribunal continues with its efforts to improve
the management of the trials, from the pretrial stage to
the drafting of judgements. Nevertheless, the
commencement of several of the new trials had to be
adjourned for a variety of reasons, including disclosure
issues, the unanticipated resignation of counsel in three
cases shortly before the scheduled start of the trial, the
death of one of the defence counsels and the recusal of
a presiding judge. But despite those delays, we
continue to make all efforts to meet the projections and
to conclude the evidence phase by the end of this year
to the extent possible.
However, the delayed start of some of the trials
requires contingency planning for a possible spillover
of those hearings into the first months of 2010. The
delays could also affect the schedule for the judgement
drafting process, both in the new and the ongoing
cases, as the same judges will be in trial and in
deliberation for judgements. However, with a caveat
for the Karemera trial, we expect judgement to be
delivered in all of these cases during the course of
2010. It is in this context that we invite the Council to
approve the extension of the mandates for our trial
judges until 31 December 2010.

7

S/PV.6134

Three new ad litem judges joined the Tribunal in
January and are part of the bench in several new trials.
Our efforts to recruit a fourth additional judge from the
roster were not successful, and the roster has been
depleted. However, as evidence of our commitment to
downsizing wherever possible and to prevent further
delays that might be incurred by the nomination
process, we have decided to try the remaining new
cases with judges currently serving at the Tribunal and
not to request the appointment of additional ad litem
judges. At the same time, this decision undoubtedly
puts an additional burden on the currently serving
judges, who are all sitting in at least two and often
three cases in parallel.
The inequality between permanent and ad litem
judges with respect to certain entitlements remains a
major source of concern. Following resolution 1855
(2008), which abandoned the requirement for a
permanent judge to be included in each bench, the ad
litem judges are now nearly identical in authority to the
permanent judges and on equal terms regarding
responsibility and case load. Ad litem judges will
preside in several of the new cases. Addressing the
inequality in status is crucial not only to ensure the
motivation and commitment of those judges, but also
as a matter of simple equity.
The ICTR is faced with a turnover of staff that is
constantly increasing and is exacerbated by the
insecurity stemming from the short-term duration of
the contract currently being offered by the Tribunal.
Loss of experienced staff translates into loss of
institutional memory, which is not easily overcome by
engaging new staff. This fact emphasizes the need to
ensure that experienced staff members are retained as
long as their services are required.
Although much has been achieved, important
tasks remain. Fifteen years after the genocide, 13
fugitives are still at large, four of them earmarked for
trial before the Tribunal as high-level accused. I
reiterate strongly my call upon Member States to
cooperate fully with the Prosecutor’s efforts to ensure
their arrest and transfer to Arusha during this last
period of the Tribunal’s mandate. For an international
community committed to the fight against impunity,
letting those indicted for the most serious crimes
escape trial is not an acceptable option.
The cooperation and assistance of Member States
remains a cornerstone for the successful completion of

8

the Tribunal’s mandate in many respects. Two weeks
ago, I signed decisions for the transfer of a further nine
convicts to a Member State for the enforcement of their
sentences. The support of the international community
is still urgently required for the relocation of the two
acquitted persons remaining in Arusha. I would like to
reiterate my call for the Council’s cooperation in this
matter.
As the Council is aware, the Tribunal is currently
in the process of preparing budget proposals for the
2010-2011 biennium. The remaining work load is
enormous, and our ability to successfully complete it is
dependent on the adequacy of both financial and
human resources and is relevant to this discussion even
though the Security Council is not the forum for
discussing budgetary matters. Kindly allow me to seize
this opportunity to ask for the support of Member
States in ensuring that the Tribunal is provided with the
resources needed to complete its tasks. Even in these
difficult times of economic crisis, I am convinced that
all Member States remain committed to the goal of
delivering high quality justice to the victims of the
Rwandan tragedy. We can achieve these goals set for
our work by the international community only if the
necessary resources are provided.
While the Tribunal continues working at full
speed, preparations have to be made for the future after
the closing down of the Tribunal. The Secretariat has
been consulting the Tribunal extensively during the
preparation of the report to the Security Council on the
residual mechanisms and the archives. I am confident
that the report will provide a very solid and
comprehensive basis for the difficult decisions the
Security Council will have to make on these matters. I
trust that our joint goal of effectively avoiding
impunity for genocide, war crimes and crimes against
humanity committed in Rwanda in 1994 will be the
overarching principle guiding its decisions.
Let me conclude by expressing, on behalf of all
the judges and staff members of the ICTR, our sincere
appreciation for the continuous support of the esteemed
Governments represented on the Council. I would also
in particular like to thank the staff members of the
United Nations Secretariat for their invaluable advice
and support. I would especially like to single out the
Office of Legal Affairs in this regard.
Our joint efforts to bring to justice those who
committed the most atrocious crimes in Rwanda in

09-35926

S/PV.6134

1994 are sending a powerful message to the world.
Even if fifteen years have passed, even if it has been a
burdensome process containing challenges and flaws,
even if not all indictees have been arrested as yet, we
must and we will continue to fight against the culture
of impunity and for accountability and justice. The
goal of successful reconciliation and enduring peace in
the Great Lakes region will only be achieved if all
those concerned can trust the power of this message.
The President: I thank Judge Byron for his
briefing.
I now give the floor to Mr. Serge Brammertz,
Prosecutor of the International Criminal Tribunal for
the Former Yugoslavia.
Mr. Brammertz: I thank the Council for giving
me the opportunity to present the 11th report on the
completion strategy of the Office of the Prosecutor.
I will provide the Council with a brief update on
our judicial work, the cooperation of States, efforts
undertaken to support the work of prosecution services
in the former Yugoslavia and, importantly, the
organizational plans for my Office during the final
phase of the Tribunal’s existence.
It is expected that 2009 will be the last year of
full trial activity before the downsizing of the Tribunal
begins in 2010. During the last six months, the
Prosecution has made significant progress in achieving
the completion strategy goals. Since I submitted my
written report to the Security Council in the middle of
May, the Prosecution has completed its final arguments
in a trial of two accused — the Lukić and Lukić case —
and judgement is expected in the coming months.
There are at present six cases — and 19
accused — in trial. One of these cases, a complex
prosecution of seven accused persons charged with
crimes committed in Srebrenica, is now in its final
stages. The Prosecution’s final brief in the Popović et
al. case is due at the end of July and final arguments
are scheduled for the end of August.

case had to be adjourned as a result of difficulties in
securing the remaining witnesses’ evidence.
Significant progress has been made in the last
four cases currently at the pretrial stage. The Karadžić
prosecution team has been working consistently to
ensure the case is ready to start trial shortly. After a
lengthy adjournment due to Jovica Stanišić’s health
problems, the Stanišić and Simatović case is due to
recommence soon. The prosecution is ready to begin
the Stanišić and Župljanin trial, which is expected to
begin in September, and the Tolimir case should begin
trial in September as well. In order to ensure the
immediate commencement of new trials, we have
moved quickly by reassigning staff finishing the
Popović et al. and Lukić and Lukić trials.
Prosecution work on appeals cases remains
constant and is expected to increase significantly in
future months. By the end of 2009, the Appeals
Division will have a continuing inventory of
24 appeals case.
The cooperation of States with my Office remains
critical to the successful completion of our trial and
appeals work. We continue to request the assistance of
Bosnia and Herzegovina, Croatia and Serbia in a
number of areas, such as the provision of documents,
access to archives, ensuring that witnesses can testify
before the Tribunal, and assisting in locating and
arresting fugitives. I recently travelled again to those
countries, where I met with authorities at the political,
judicial and operational levels to raise all those
matters.
Since my last briefing to the Council, Serbia has
made additional progress in its cooperation with my
Office. The large majority of requests for assistance
have been complied with, including those for access to
documents and archives. As senior leadership trials are
ongoing and others will start soon, we hope that that
trend will continue.

The other cases in trial — the Đorđević and
Perišić trials — are well advanced into the prosecution
phase, while the Prlić et al. and Gotovina et al. cases
are now in their defence phase.

The search for and arrest of Ratko Mladić and
Goran Hadžić remain the central issue in relation to
Serbia’s cooperation. My Office remains in close
contact with the services in charge of tracking fugitives
and closely follows their activities. During my recent
visits to Belgrade, I had full briefings on their work.

Despite the prosecution’s efforts to move forward
through the trial schedule, some additional delays have
occurred. Most notably, in February 2009, the Šešelj

Developments at the political level in the past
year and the new leadership at the operational level
have led to an improvement in the professionalism and

09-35926

9

S/PV.6134

the efficiency of the activities to locate and arrest the
remaining fugitives. I hope that the political authorities
in Serbia will provide all necessary support to the
professional work done at the operational level.
Cooperation must continue and hopefully will lead to
further concrete and positive results.
In my report, I have also expressed my concern
with regard to recent negative statements by senior
Government officials about the Tribunal’s judicial
decisions. They seem to be in contradiction with the
level of cooperation on the ground.
With regard to Croatia, the remaining and only
outstanding issue is the prosecution’s request that
Croatia provide a number of key military documents
related to Operation Storm in 1995. The lack of success
of efforts by my Office over a considerable period of
time to obtain those documents has required the
prosecution to bring the matter before the Trial
Chamber.
Croatia was ordered by the Tribunal to conduct an
investigation into the missing documents. In response,
Croatia submitted several reports, providing, in its
most recent submission, additional information on the
administrative investigation and supplementary
information on the chain of custody of the missing
documents. A number of meetings, focusing on those
outstanding matters, were held with the authorities.
Unfortunately, progress in the lengthy investigation has
been limited and, to date, most of the military
documents have not been submitted to the Tribunal. We
have raised with Croatia our concerns about the focus,
manner and methodology of the investigation
conducted.
That matter remains pending before the Chamber.
The trial has now entered the defence phase and is
nearing its completion. It is therefore crucial that
Croatia continue to focus its efforts on locating and
providing those key documents. I will remain in close
contact with the authorities in the hope of achieving
further progress in the near future, but I would also like
to take this opportunity to thank the Prime Minister for
his personal interest and determination to resolve this
issue.
With regard to Bosnia and Herzegovina’s
cooperation, there are no specific outstanding issues in
relation to our trials. However, the judicial system of
Bosnia and Herzegovina continues to face serious
challenges, which could have an impact on its

10

cooperation with the Tribunal. I support all efforts
undertaken to strengthen its judicial capacity to cope
with the numerous unresolved war crimes cases. In that
regard, a national strategy for war crimes processing
was adopted last December and is a promising
development. Together with representatives of the
international community in Bosnia and Herzegovina, I
am in favour of maintaining an international presence
in judicial institutions, such as the Special Department
for War Crimes of the State Court of Bosnia and
Herzegovina.
Another priority of my Office is the support to
national jurisdictions prosecuting war crimes. Assisting
our colleagues in the former Yugoslavia in successfully
conducting war crimes prosecutions remains a key
component of the completion strategy. It is the best
way to ensure the successful continuation of our work.
In the next months, we will complete the process
of transferring investigative material to national
prosecution services. We are now ready to transfer
three cases involving 10 suspects to the Office of the
State Prosecutor in Bosnia and Herzegovina. The last
four cases, involving 11 suspects, will be transferred to
Bosnia and Herzegovina before the end of the year.
Responding to requests for assistance and making
available documents and archives are other important
aspects of that cooperation. We are providing such
information to prosecution offices, both within and
outside of the former Yugoslavia. In the past six
months, our transition team has handled over 90
requests for assistance. Interestingly, half of those
requests originated from countries outside of the
former Yugoslavia.
Although cooperation between prosecution
services is improving, national judiciaries continue to
face significant legal obstacles and challenges with
regard to the prosecution of war crimes cases.
Prohibitions on extraditing one State’s nationals to
another State and the legal barriers to transferring war
crimes cases between States threaten their successful
investigation and prosecution. All authorities
concerned should address those issues by establishing
the necessary legal frameworks. That appears to be the
only way to avoid an impunity gap.
My Office has participated in several conferences
with prosecutors from the region to strengthen
cooperation in judicial matters between States of the
former Yugoslavia. One important recent achievement

09-35926

S/PV.6134

in that process are databases and inventories of war
crimes cases in the region. Another important
development, which I announced during my last
briefing, is the establishment, with the support of the
European Commission, of a concrete cooperation
project that allows prosecutors from the region to be
integrated into our Office in The Hague. The first
liaison prosecutors are expected to start working in my
Office this month. That initiative, like others, reflects
the excellent interaction my Office has had with the
State and War Crimes Prosecutors’ Offices in Bosnia
and Herzegovina, Croatia and Serbia.
I would now like to briefly address the
organizational plans of my Office for the future. A
serious downsizing programme has been planned to
begin in 2010. In our budget proposal, which was
submitted to the Secretariat this week, we envisage,
over the next two years, a reduction of 60 per cent of
our posts and a 42-per-cent reduction in non-post items
in the Office of the Prosecutor. There will also be a
gradual redeployment of posts from the Trial Division
to the Appeals Division to meet their growing
workload.
While we are fully committed to the downsizing
process, I would like to once again stress the need to
retain our experienced and specialized staff members
in order to complete our work. In the present situation,
a considerable number of staff members have left my
Office and more could leave the institution because of
other opportunities elsewhere. It is therefore crucial
that their needs be taken into consideration and that
ways be found to retain our staff members until the end
of the trials. Together with the President and Registrar,
we will continue to address those issues with relevant
United Nations bodies and Secretariat offices.
Finally, I would like to thank the Council once
again for the continuing support provided to my Office.
The President: I thank Mr. Brammertz for his
briefing.
I now give the floor to Mr. Hassan Bubacar
Jallow, Prosecutor of the International Criminal
Tribunal for Rwanda.
Mr. Jallow: Since our last report to the Security
Council, in December 2008, intense activity has
continued at the International Criminal Tribunal for
Rwanda (ICTR) towards the implementation of the
Tribunal’s completion strategy, and we remain firmly

09-35926

committed to the expeditious and proper completion of
our mandate to bring justice to Rwanda in the light of
the genocide of 1994.
Within the past six months, the prosecution has
commenced the trial of four new cases, one of which
has just been completed, and gradual progress has been
made in respect of the other cases. The prosecution has
already closed its case in two of those cases after very,
very brief trials. In addition, the ongoing trials in the
multiple-accused case of Karemera et al. and the
single-accused case of Setako are moving towards
finalization. Of the six detainees currently in detention
awaiting the scheduling of their cases for trial, the
prosecution has prepared those cases and is ready to
proceed once they are scheduled.
During the same period, seven new cases and
appeals have also been filed with the Appeals
Chamber, and now there is a total of 11 such cases
pending appeal which are being dealt with by the
Office of the Prosecutor for hearing.
However, despite the intense activity of the ICTR
tracking team, no further arrests of any of the 13
outstanding fugitives have been secured in the past six
months. Our focus in the next six months will thus be:
the conclusion of the ongoing trials; the
commencement of the trials of the remaining detainees,
as and when they are scheduled and in respect of
which, as I have said, we are trial-ready; the
intensification of our tracking efforts, to secure the
arrest and transfer of the fugitives to the ICTR for trial
or for transfer elsewhere; renewed efforts for the
referral of some cases by the ICTR to Rwanda and to
other competent national jurisdictions; and the
exploration of new measures to preserve the evidence
for the trials of at least the four high-level fugitives
who have been earmarked for trial in Arusha, when
they are eventually arrested.
The arrest of Félicien Kabuga continues to be a
top priority for the ICTR. Council members have been
briefed regularly on the efforts to effect his arrest and
his transfer to the Tribunal. Incontrovertible evidence
collected by the Joint Task Force comprising Kenya
police and ICTR investigators indicates that Félicien
Kabuga entered Kenya in 1994 and was granted a
residence permit as well as a permit to carry out
business in that country. He, as a result, purchased
property; he registered businesses in his own name as
well as in the names of others; and he opened various

11

S/PV.6134

bank accounts in his name with various banks in
Kenya. The reports of the Joint Task Force also
document several reported sightings of Kabuga in
Kenya over a long period.
For several years now, the ICTR has been
engaged in securing the cooperation of Kenya in
arresting Kabuga and transferring him to the ICTR for
trial, and also in the freezing of his assets and
properties located in that country. This has involved
several missions to Kenya by ICTR officials, including
myself. My latest mission to Nairobi in this regard was
in March 2009. So far, one property — the family
residence of Kabuga in Nairobi, known as the Spanish
Villa — has been the subject of seizure by the Kenyan
authorities.
On 8 January 2008, the Director of Immigration
of Kenya wrote to the Joint Task Force to inform it that
Félicien Kabuga had left Kenya. All efforts, including
my recent mission of March 2009, to obtain from the
Kenyan authorities the particulars and circumstances of
his alleged departure from that territory, as well as
access to certain governmental records relating to his
assets and activities, have been fruitless, as the Kenyan
authorities have so far failed to comply with the
requests of the Tribunal.
Consultations are also ongoing with the
Government of the Democratic Republic of the Congo
in order to find ways of effecting the arrest and transfer
of the large number of ICTR fugitives in that country.
We continue to appeal to the Security Council to call
on Kenya, the Democratic Republic of the Congo and
all other States to cooperate with the ICTR in the arrest
and transfer of these indictees. The Tribunal’s legacy,
and by extension respect for the impact of international
humanitarian law, depends on the ability of the
international community to arrest and give a fair trial
to all those who have been indicted for these grave
atrocities against their fellow human beings.
The cooperation of Member States where
fugitives from justice have been located is critical.
Closure of the Tribunal without the arrest or without
the transfer of these fugitives offers the real danger of
maintaining an impunity gap that will be difficult to
fill. It is all the more urgent therefore that Member
States fully cooperate and that the international
community provide additional support — especially in
the case of the Democratic Republic of the Congo, and
pressure in the case of Kenya — to these Member

12

States to ensure the immediate capture of the fugitives
and their transfer to Arusha for trial.
Following the Appeals Chamber decisions
rejecting referral of cases to Rwanda for trial under
rule 11 bis of the ICTR Rules, the Government of
Rwanda is in the process of enacting — indeed, I am
advised that it has enacted — additional legislation to
meet the remaining concerns of the Appeals Chamber
in relation to the protection of witnesses and the
recording of testimony of witnesses who may be
reluctant to travel to Rwanda to testify. Once the law
comes into force and the capacity is established for
witness protection and video link facilities, my Office
will again consider making further applications before
the Trial Chambers in the course of this year for the
referral of cases of ICTR indictees to Rwanda for trial.
As the concerns of the Trial and Appeals
Chambers relate to legal as well as capacity issues, I
would urge the Council to call upon Member States to
redouble their efforts in support of capacity-building
for the Rwandan legal system. Rwanda has had the
onerous burden of dealing with the cases transferred
not only from the Tribunal but also possibly from other
national jurisdictions, as well as many other domestic
cases of genocide, war crimes and crimes against
humanity.
Rwanda, I must acknowledge, has also
accomplished much in this area: the abolition of the
death penalty; the incorporation of additional fair-trial
guarantees in law; the upgrading of facilities; and the
training of personnel, with the assistance of the
Tribunal. Those positive efforts for capacity-building
in the legal sector should be encouraged.
The continued and prolonged evasion of justice
by the fugitives also poses a challenge to the proper
administration of justice, even when those fugitives are
finally arrested and brought to trial. As shown by our
own experience with the current trials that are ongoing,
the longer the interval between the commission of
these serious crimes, in 1994, and the time of trial, the
greater the possibility that much of the evidence may
be lost due to the unavailability of witnesses for
various reasons — such as death, relocation or just
reluctance on the part of the witnesses to be involved
after such a long interval.
Yet, understandably, there are no time limits for
the prosecution of these offences. The indictees will be
prosecuted whenever they are arrested, for so long as

09-35926

S/PV.6134

there is evidence available. Some of the indictees are
of such a high level that it has been considered
appropriate for their trials to be conducted by an
international mechanism. The public interest in the
proper administration of justice requires that a fair and
proper trial not be subverted by the success of the
fugitives in evading justice long enough for the
evidence against them to possibly disappear, especially
where the bulk of the evidence is based on the oral
testimony of witnesses, who may no longer be
available.
Accordingly,
my
Office
has
proposed
amendments to the ICTR Rules which would enable
the Tribunal to preserve the testimony of witnesses in
the cases of the fugitives, and which would enable such
evidence to be available in any subsequent trial if the
witnesses are not available at that time. The rule
change, when adopted, will result in proceedings to
take special depositions next year from such witnesses
in at least four cases of fugitives. These proceedings
are expected to be very limited in duration, and they
should not have an adverse impact on the completion
strategy.
Building upon the conference of international and
national prosecutors held in November 2008, my
Office will be hosting the annual prosecutors’
colloquium later in the year to discuss the legacy of the
International Criminal Tribunals in relation to
measures against impunity for mass atrocities. The
colloquium will focus on drawing lessons from the past
in the administration of international criminal justice
and on reflecting on the future of that process at a time
when the ad hoc Tribunals are winding down. The
Tribunal is currently also focusing more attention on
residual matters relating to archives and public access
to documents, continuing support for national
prosecutions and appropriate administrative closure
and reporting.
We remain firmly committed to concluding the
trials of current detainees in a timely manner and to
making the referral of cases of some detainees and
fugitives a success. We do not underestimate the
challenges of doing so, in particular in the light of the
possible loss of experienced staff as the completion
strategy progresses. We nonetheless remain committed
to those goals.

09-35926

I would very much like to thank the Security
Council and all the organs of the United Nations for
their continued support for the work of the ICTR.
The President: I thank Prosecutor Jallow for his
briefing.
I shall now give the floor to the members of the
Security Council.
Mr. Sanader (Croatia): Allow me to begin by
welcoming President Robinson and President Byron, as
well as Prosecutors Brammertz and Jallow. After
carefully listening to their reports, I want to reaffirm
once more Croatia’s firm commitment to continue with
the implementation of our Constitutional Act on full
cooperation with the International Criminal Tribunal
for the Former Yugoslavia (ICTY).
(spoke in French)
I should like to underscore the importance that
my Government and I myself attach to the work of the
Tribunal, as well as the need to achieve the goals for
which the Council established the Tribunal. In both our
capacity as a member of the Security Council and as
one of the main proponents for the establishment of the
Tribunal, Croatia will continue to call for and provide
full support for the fulfilment of the Tribunal’s
mandate and for the prosecution of persons responsible
for crimes.
(spoke in English)
Indeed, the Tribunal is said to be the key force in
a process that respects victims by providing justice —
a process that, by providing justice, paves the way for a
better future, one of peace, security, reconciliation,
cooperation and prosperity.
Croatia has gone a long way in that regard. Along
that path, we have never forgotten our starting point.
We still remember Ovčara and the other 142 mass
graves across our country. We still have vivid
memories of the complete destruction of Vukovar and
the shelling of Dubrovnik, Osijek, Zadar, Gospić and
so many other cities and towns in Croatia. We regret
that some of the perpetrators of those crimes are still at
large. We regret that Goran Hadžić has not yet been
turned over to The Hague. We certainly regret that
Ratko Mladić is still at large. He and Hadžić are
responsible for the gravest crimes committed in Europe
after the Second World War, namely, the massacres in
Srebrenica and Vukovar. Most of all we regret that the

13

S/PV.6134

Milošević indictment came too late, and indeed without
a sentence. His death made it impossible for a sentence
to clearly outline the development of a policy that used
aggression and the systematic application of war
crimes.
Yet, our regret has not prevented us from looking
towards the future or from rebuilding our country on
the premises of respect for human dignity, the rule of
law and international justice. In Croatia we made the
choice to strengthen our democratic institutions, reform
our judiciary and develop a State where nobody is
above the law. With that belief and with our
commitment to fundamental democratic values, we
have succeeded in putting Croatia on the track towards
development, reconciliation and progress. We have also
strengthened our society internally and strengthened
our position in the world. We joined NATO and became
a full member of the Euro-Atlantic family of
democracies. One of the conditions for achieving that
goal was full cooperation with the ICTY.
We are glad that in his report (see S/2009/252)
the Prosecutor confirmed Croatia’s overall good
cooperation with the ICTY. With regard to a single case
pertaining to the delivery of documents, Croatia differs
with the Prosecutor’s assessment. While fully
cooperating with his Office, we also note that,
according to the ICTY rules of procedure, the
Prosecutor is a party during the judicial proceedings. It
is for that reason that, pursuant to the rules of
procedure of the ICTY, Croatia has submitted to the
Trial Chamber a request to confirm the fulfilment of
Croatia’s obligations in providing the requested
documents or establishing their chain of custody. In the
meantime, Croatia will continue to fully cooperate with
the Prosecutor’s Office.
Croatia will continue to support the Tribunal, in
the belief that the ICTY is serving the purpose for
which it was established by the Security Council. As a
member of the Security Council and as a member of
NATO and a future member of the European Union,
Croatia will actively support the achievement of those
goals, fully aware that they will be the measure to
define the Tribunal’s legacy. Croatia very much
appreciates and supports President Robinson’s and the
Tribunal’s efforts to ensure the early and orderly
completion of its work. The Tribunal has now entered a
critical period, in which it will be necessary to begin to
downsize while continuing to work on the remaining
cases and on the transition towards an appropriate

14

infrastructure that will take up the Tribunal’s residual
functions in the future.
Finally, let me repeat the message that I delivered
two years ago at the General Assembly. Everybody
everywhere should have no doubt that any and all
crimes against humanity will not be allowed to go
unpunished. That is our common responsibility. Only
then can we create a better world for posterity.
Mr. Mayr-Harting (Austria): At the outset,
Mr. President, I would like to congratulate you and
Turkey on taking over the presidency of the Security
Council for the month of June. I would also like to
thank the Presidents and Prosecutors of the
International Criminal Tribunal for the Former
Yugoslavia (ICTY) and the International Criminal
Tribunal for Rwanda (ICTR) for their briefings.
In my statement today, I will first say a few
words about our national position regarding the
completion strategies of the Tribunals. Secondly,
following the practice of my Belgian predecessor, I
would like to take this opportunity to give an update on
the activities of the Security Council informal Working
Group on international tribunals, which Austria has
chaired since the beginning of this year. I therefore ask
for the President’s forbearance, as I might need one or
two minutes longer than if I were to limit myself
exclusively to the national part of my statement.
Austria strongly supports all efforts to strengthen
international criminal justice, including through the
International Criminal Court, ad hoc or mixed tribunals
and truth commissions. We must ensure that those
responsible for the most serious crimes are held
accountable and brought to justice. We commend the
ICTY and the ICTR for their pioneering role in
combating impunity and for their contribution to the
development of international criminal law and
international humanitarian law.
Austria fully supports the efforts of the Tribunals
to complete their work at the earliest date and to
accomplish the completion strategy pursuant to
resolutions 1503 (2003) and 1534 (2004). We note that,
according to current projections, the Tribunals will not
be able to meet the date set forth in the completion
strategy but expect to complete their work by 2013. We
urge the Tribunals to take all possible measures to
complete their work expeditiously while maintaining
all standards of fair trial and due process.

09-35926

S/PV.6134

The arrest of the remaining fugitives remains a
top priority for the completion of the Tribunal’s work.
We call on all States in the region, especially those
where fugitives are suspected to be at large, to fully
cooperate with the Tribunals. Austria welcomes
Serbian efforts in tracking the fugitives Ratko Mladić
and Goran Hadžić and hopes that positive results will
be achieved in the near future.
We also welcome the efforts made by the
Croatian Government — in particular by you,
Mr. Prime Minister, and the Minister of Justice — and
hope that these efforts will lead to a further
strengthening of the constructive dialogue with the
ICTY Prosecutor. Allow me to add, Mr. Prime
Minister, that my Government is fully aware of your
long-standing personal commitment to full cooperation
with ICTY. We know that you have pursued this course
since you took office, and we also know that under
sometimes considerable difficulties, your commitment
was instrumental in locating Ante Gotovina and
transferring him to The Hague.
The referral of cases to competent national
jurisdictions is an essential part of the completion
strategy. However, it must be ensured that all referred
cases are administered in a fair, impartial and evenhanded manner. It is also essential that effective
measures be in place to protect witnesses, enforce
sentences and take action against those helping
fugitives evade justice. We note that the ICTR Trial
and Appeals Chambers have denied the transfer to
Rwanda of all five cases requested by the Prosecutor.
We hope that Rwanda’s efforts to improve its judicial
system and witness protection will enable the
Prosecutor to re-apply for a referral of cases.
I would now like to give a brief update on the
activities of the Informal Working Group on
international tribunals since the beginning of this year.
Since January 2009, the Working Group has held 12
meetings to discuss the establishment of a residual
mechanism or residual mechanisms to carry out certain
functions of the Tribunals after their closure.
Another meeting of the Working Group with the
Presidents and Prosecutors present here today will take
place this afternoon. There is agreement among the
members of the Working Group that the most senior
fugitives of the Tribunals must face international trial
by the mechanisms. We also agree that the legacy and
archives of the Tribunals must be preserved. It is

09-35926

further agreed that the mechanism or mechanisms will
have a trial capacity to try fugitives from the ICTY and
ICTR based on a roster of judges. The mechanism or
mechanisms is or are to be small, temporary and
efficient, commensurate with a reduced workload in
the post-completion period.
The Working Group has continued with an indepth examination of the eight residual functions
identified by the Tribunals as essential and to be
carried out after their closure: trial of fugitives; trial of
contempt cases; protection of witnesses; review of
judgments; referrals of cases to national jurisdictions,
including revocation; supervision of enforcement of
sentences; assistance of national jurisdictions; and
maintenance of archives. Discussions on whether all or
only some of these functions should be carried out by
the mechanism or mechanisms are still ongoing.
The Working Group has also discussed the
potential commencement date or dates of the
mechanism or mechanisms, as well as its or their
structure. This includes important issues such as
whether there should be one or two mechanisms, or
one mechanism with two branches, and the related
questions of the possible co-location of the Tribunals’
archives with the mechanism or mechanisms and its or
their location. The discussions were informed by
chairmen’s non-papers, with input by the Tribunals,
which were produced with the most valuable assistance
of the Office of Legal Affairs.
The members of the Working Group also had an
informal exchange of views with the members of the
Management Committee of the Special Court for Sierra
Leone. The Chair plans to convene informal meetings
with representatives of the States of the former
Yugoslavia and Rwanda and the host countries of the
Tribunals, the Netherlands and Tanzania.
The Presidents of ICTY and ICTR have made a
number of written requests related to the completion
strategies, including the enlargement of the Appeals
Chamber through the redeployment of trial judges, the
extension of the judges’ mandates and, as a temporary
measure, the appointment of an additional ICTY ad
litem judge in addition to the 12 ad litem judges
authorized by the statute. These requests are currently
being considered by the Working Group.
In its presidential statement of 19 December 2008
(S/PRST/2009/47), the Security Council requested the
Secretary-General to present a report on the

15

S/PV.6134

administrative and budgetary aspects of the options for
the possible locations for ICTY and ICTR archives and
the seat of the residual mechanism or mechanisms for
these Tribunals. It is my understanding that the report
has been finalized in substance and will be published
as an official Security Council document once it has
been translated into all official United Nations
languages. We intend to start discussing the content
and recommendations of the report in the Working
Group later this month. Subsequently, the Group will
resume negotiations on the draft Security Council
resolution to establish the mechanism or mechanisms.

According to their most recent projections, both
Tribunals will be conducting first instance trials
beyond the end of 2009 and appellate proceedings after
2010. While acknowledging that there have been
unexpected and uncontrollable factors that have caused
the delay of trials, my delegation is concerned about
the continuing lateness in transferring accused to the
custody of the Tribunals, and about the fact that all
requests made by the ICTR Prosecutor for referrals to
Rwanda have been denied and that both Tribunals are
faced with difficulties in retaining their current, highly
qualified staff.

In conclusion, I would like to thank the
Presidents, permanent and ad litem judges, Prosecutors
and Registrars of the ICTY and ICTR and all their staff
for their tireless efforts in the name of international
justice. Our special thanks go to the Office of Legal
Affairs, the expertise and assistance of which is
indispensable for our work.

In resolution 1534 (2004), the Security Council
expressed
its
determination
to
review
the
implementation of the completion strategies of the
Tribunals and to ensure that the time frames set out in
the completion strategies and endorsed by resolution
1503 (2003) could be met. While assessments and
decisions of the Council have been and will be made in
accordance with corresponding realities, we deem it
necessary to urge the Tribunals to take all necessary
measures to meet the requirements of the completion
strategies, and we call on all Member States to
cooperate fully with the Tribunals to help them achieve
an early completion of their work. We support all
efforts aimed at strengthening the competent national
judicial systems to facilitate the transfer of cases
involving intermediate and lower-rank indictees,
including the fugitives, from the Tribunals to national
jurisdictions.

Finally, I would also like to thank all the
members of the Working Group for their active and
constructive contributions to our discussions.
The President: I thank the Permanent
Representative of Austria for his extensive briefing,
and I thank him and his Group for the work that they
are doing.
Mr. Le Luong Minh (Viet Nam): First of all, on
behalf of the Vietnamese delegation, I warmly
congratulate you, Mr. President, and the Turkish
delegation on your assumption this month of Turkey’s
first presidency of the Council. In discharging your
important task, you and your delegation can rely on the
fullest cooperation of the Vietnamese delegation.
I would like to take this opportunity to convey to
Ambassador Vitaly Churkin and the Russian delegation
our sincere appreciation for their very effective
leadership of the work of the Council in May.
I thank the Presidents and Prosecutors of the
International Criminal Tribunal for the Former
Yugoslavia (ICTY) and the International Criminal
Tribunal for Rwanda (ICTR) for their briefings. We
thank the Tribunals for their very comprehensive
reports and for the amount of work they have been able
to accomplish, and note their commitment to
continuing their efforts to expedite the completion of
their mandates.

16

During the past 18 months, the Informal Working
Group of the Security Council on international
tribunals, under the chairmanships of Belgium and
Austria, has been intensively discussing a possible
residual mechanism to replace the ICTY and the ICTR
in their post-completion period. We support the efforts
made by the Working Group in this regard and consider
them to be important inputs for further informed
decisions by the Council on the completion strategies
for the Tribunals.
In conclusion, we are at a critical juncture of our
joint undertaking for the smooth and effective
completion of the Tribunals’ work. We need to ensure
that the two Tribunals receive all necessary guidance
and support, including sufficient resources to complete
their mandates and address their legacy issues as
advisedly as possible.

09-35926

S/PV.6134

Mr. Liu Zhenmin (China) (spoke in Chinese):
The Chinese delegation wishes to congratulate Turkey
on its assumption of the presidency of the Security
Council for this month. We also wish to express our
gratitude to the Russian Federation for its presidency
of the Council last month.
On behalf of the Chinese delegation, I wish to
thank President Robinson and Prosecutor Brammertz
of the International Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia
for their briefings on the activities of the Tribunal. We
also thank President Byron and Prosecutor Jallow of
the International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda (ICTR)
for their briefings on the activities of the Rwanda
Tribunal.
Since the completion strategies of the two
Tribunals were endorsed by the Security Council, they
have worked hard to implement the strategies and
continue to make progress, as borne out once again by
the advances achieved during the reporting period. We
express our appreciation and acknowledgement of that
progress, but given the trials still under way in the two
Tribunals, the schedules set out in the completion
strategies will have to be pushed back. Of course,
many factors have contributed to the delay. We hope
that the two Tribunals will be more proactive in
building on past work by intensifying their efforts and
adopting an innovative approach to improving their
working methods so that a breakthrough can be
achieved. All available resources must be fully utilized
to improve the efficiency of the trial process and
thereby accelerate it.
In the meantime, we continue to believe that the
transfer of cases and accused to national jurisdictions
is an important step in the implementation of the
completion strategies. We are pleased to note that the
Tribunals have reaffirmed that idea in their reports. The
ICTR Prosecutor has made very specific suggestions in
that regard. We hope that the two Tribunals, and the
ICTR in particular, will step up their activities in that
respect so that the concept can be effectively
implemented, ensuring the transfer of as many cases
and accused as possible.
The Informal Working Group has continued to
study the question of the legacy and residual functions
of the Tribunals. I wish to thank the Ambassador of
Austria for his concise but comprehensive briefing on
the work being undertaken. The presidential statement
issued by the Security Council on 19 December 2008

09-35926

(S/PRST/2008/47) referred to this issue, noting that the
proposed ad hoc mechanism should be small,
temporary, and efficient. That basic principle has
always guided the Working Group’s consideration of
the matter. We are in favour of identifying a feasible
and economical plan on that basis. We also favour the
provision by the two Tribunals of advice and proposals
to the Informal Working Group during the current
reporting period. Some of their proposals are
constructive and reflect innovative thinking. We
reiterate our readiness to adopt a positive approach to
the consideration of any plan that would help speed up
the implementation of the completion strategies.
The Secretary-General shall submit, upon the
request of the Security Council, a report on the
administrative and budgetary issues related to the
residual mechanism. We are confident that it will
facilitate the ongoing work of the Informal Working
Group. We understand that the preparation of the report
is no easy task. We thank the Secretariat for its efforts
and look forward to receiving that document at an early
date.
The completion strategies, as endorsed by the
Council, are an overarching goal and should be
pursued at every phase of the process. In recent years,
the two Tribunals have made some progress in the
implementation of the strategies, but the work ahead is
enormous. We expect the Tribunals to continue to work
in that direction.
Mr. Parham (United Kingdom): First, let me
congratulate you, Sir, on your assumption of the
presidency of the Council this month, and say how
much we look forward to working with you and your
Mission. We assure you of our support. I should also
like to thank Ambassador Churkin and his Mission for
their skilful presidency of the Council last month.
I welcome Presidents Byron and Robinson and
Prosecutors Jallow and Brammertz to the Council, and
thank them for their briefings on the implementation of
the completion strategies of the International Criminal
Tribunals for the former Yugoslavia and Rwanda.
These reports indicate that the work of the two
Tribunals is not now likely to finish until 2013, at the
earliest. My Government appreciates that both
Tribunals continue to face significant challenges in
completing their work. Some accused have been
arrested at a late stage. Both Tribunals still have heavy
caseloads, including complex multi-accused cases.

17

S/PV.6134

Trials have been delayed due to the ill health of some
accused, and there have been large numbers of
contempt cases. These are just some of the issues being
faced.
Nevertheless, the slippage in the completion
timeline is of concern. My Government acknowledges
the efforts which have been made so far by the
principals of the Tribunals and their staff to facilitate
completion, but we emphasize that it is vital that both
Tribunals continue to do everything possible to
minimize further delays in a manner consistent with
delivering fair trials for all the accused, including by
exploring and implementing further efficiency
measures.
We hope that the Tribunals will continue to
maximize the use of available judicial time and
courtroom space. At the same time, we believe that it is
important for the Security Council to support the
Tribunals and to take the necessary decisions to allow
them to complete their work, including by granting
appropriate extensions to judges’ mandates and
allowing the redeployment of judicial staff to the
Appeals Chamber.
We recognize the two Presidents’ continuing
concerns about staff retention as the Tribunals near
completion. These issues are not primarily matters for
the Security Council; however, we would encourage
the Tribunals to explore non-monetary incentives to
retain staff, particularly by awarding contracts in line
with completion time scales, as decided by the General
Assembly.
Full and effective cooperation from States is
critical to ensuring that the Tribunals are able to fulfil
their mandates. My Government warmly welcomes
Prosecutor
Brammertz’s
report
of
improved
cooperation by Serbia on access to documents and in
operational-level efforts to locate the fugitive indictees
Ratko Mladić and Goran Hadžić. Overall, my
Government believes that Serbia has now established a
strong record of cooperation which should be
recognized. So we regret that this record has on two
recent occasions been undermined by contradictory
public messages from Serbia accusing the Tribunal of
bias. We hope that the Serbian authorities will in future
avoid such remarks, which could otherwise negatively
affect the willingness of Serbian citizens to assist the
Tribunal as witnesses or by providing other
information.

18

My Government is disappointed, however, that
Croatia has still not been able to deliver a range of key
documents for Gotovina trial. We fully support the
Prosecutor’s efforts to pursue this issue. We call on
Croatia to maintain the search for missing documents
and for its administrative investigation to be backed up
by criminal charges where there is evidence of illegal
removal or destruction of documents. This remains an
area where further work is needed against a
background of otherwise solid cooperation.
As regards cooperation with the International
Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda (ICTR), we note with
concern Prosecutor Jallow’s oral report that problems
of cooperation with Kenya remain unresolved. It is
vital that all States where fugitive indictees are
suspected to be at large, particularly Kenya and the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, provide full and
immediate cooperation to facilitate their arrest and
surrender to the Tribunal. Those who have committed
serious crimes in Rwanda must face justice.
The two Tribunals have made an enormous
contribution to restoring peace and security in their
regions through combating impunity for the most
serious crimes. Their legacy must be preserved after
the Tribunals close their doors. A key element of this
will be the establishment of an effective and
sustainable residual mechanism to carry out core
residual functions, including the prosecution of
remaining fugitive indictees.
We look forward to intensifying our discussion of
these issues in the light of the forthcoming report of
the Secretary-General and with a view to reaching
agreement this year on the residual mechanism’s
structure and remit.
Mr. Churkin (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): Allow me to thank the leadership of both
Tribunals for their briefings and for the reports they
have submitted to the Security Council on their
completion strategies.
We note that the International Criminal Tribunal
for Rwanda (ICTR), notwithstanding existing
difficulties, has worked fruitfully over the past six
months. During that period, four judgments have been
rendered with respect to seven accused and, in six
cases featuring 14 accused, hearings have been
concluded. The Tribunal is also planning by the end of
2009 to complete the most labour-intensive and
protracted phase — the submission of evidence — in

09-35926

S/PV.6134

all outstanding trials of first instance with one
exception.
Regrettably, the results of the work of the
International Criminal Tribunal for the Former
Yugoslavia (ICTY) are unimpressive. In the reporting
period, only one judgment has been rendered, and that
was in a trial that ended in August 2008. In the ICTY
case files, there remain four cases in respect of six
accused for which hearings have not even begun. The
accused in these cases have been at the disposition of
the Tribunal since June 2003 — six years in custody
and yet hearings have not even begun. We consider that
situation unacceptable and a violation of civilized
standards of justice and commonly accepted human
rights norms. It is all the more difficult to understand
given that the ICTY has the legal option of transferring
cases to national jurisdictions.
We are also bewildered by the emerging practice
of suspending the main court proceedings until
contempt cases are resolved. The Tribunal put on a
heightened display of principle concerning the safety
of witnesses in the case of Vojislav Šešelj, in
connection with a book he published, whereas, in the
case of Ramush Haradinaj, the former Prime Minister
of Kosovo, in which the physical elimination of some
witnesses and overt intimidation of others were
involved, the Tribunal effectively turned a blind eye to
those problems. Protracting the main trials until
contempt of court hearings are completed has an
adverse effect on the implementation of the ICTY
completion strategy.
We cannot fail to be concerned by the
assessments in the report of the President of the ICTY
on tentative dates for completing first instance hearings
and appellate proceedings, extending to mid-2013.
At this stage, the task of ensuring a suitable
degree of cooperation between States — first and
foremost those of the region — and the Chief
Prosecutors of the Tribunals is of particular
importance. We have observed some progress in
maintaining interaction between the ICTY and Serbia.
This was borne out not only by the assessment of Chief
Prosecutor Brammertz, but also by the factual material
on the matter provided by the Serbian side to members
of the Security Council on the eve of our meeting.
One can detect a certain dynamic in relations
between the ICTR and the State and judicial
institutions of Rwanda. At the same time, the Russian

09-35926

Federation continues to be concerned by the instances,
referred to by the Chief Prosecutors, of the failure of
States to properly comply with their obligation to
cooperate with the Tribunals, including in the provision
of documents needed for investigation and tracking the
accused. Those factors not only hold up proceedings on
specific cases, but have a negative effect in general on
the Tribunal’s ability to reach objective verdicts.
In conclusion, I wish once more to reaffirm the
position of the Russian Federation that both Tribunals
should be guided by the time frames laid down by the
Security Council and do everything possible to ensure
that the bulk of their work is completed by the end of
2010. The failure to bring a number of accused before
the ICTR and the ICTY cannot be viewed as
justification for the unlimited extension of the
activities of those organs. Given the looming deadlines,
we will seek the best options for the proposed
mechanisms for the Tribunals’ residual functions. In
that context, we wish to thank Ambassador Thomas
Mayr-Harting for the effective Austrian chairmanship
of the Security Council Working Group on
international tribunals. We note progress in the
discussion of issues related to the forthcoming
completion of work of the Tribunals. My delegation
expects that by the end of the year, the Council will
manage to draft an agreed text of a resolution on the
parameters of the residual functions of those temporary
organs of international justice.
Mr.
Mugoya (Uganda):
My
delegation
congratulates you, Sir, and Turkey on assuming the
presidency of the Council for the month of June, and I
assure you of our delegation’s full cooperation and
support. I also wish to thank Ambassador Churkin and
the Russian delegation for ably steering the work of the
Council during the month of May.
We thank the Presidents and Prosecutors of the
Tribunals for their briefings. Uganda welcomes the
Secretary-General’s report on the administrative and
budgetary aspects of the options for possible locations
for the archives of the International Criminal Tribunal
for the Former Yugoslavia and the International
Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda (ICTR) and the seat of
the residual mechanisms for the Tribunals.
My delegation appreciates the tremendous work
that has been carried out so far by the Tribunals in
fulfilment of the relevant Council resolutions. We
attach great importance to the work of the Tribunals in

19

S/PV.6134

the delivery of justice and the fight against impunity
for heinous crimes against humanity, including
genocide.
Uganda welcomes the progress made by the
Tribunals in spite of the challenges they have faced.
From the Secretary-General’s report, we have observed
that some of the challenges include trial of contempt
cases and the protection of victims and witnesses,
which require the judicial capacity to sanction any
violations of the Tribunals’ orders.
Uganda welcomes the recommendation of the
Secretary-General that, as part of the completion
strategy, the residual functions be transferred to
residual mechanisms which would be adequately
supported by a structure that can facilitate the
fulfilment of the completion strategy. In that regard,
my delegation supports the recommendation that the
Tribunals refer further cases to national jurisdictions,
while strengthening national capacities.
In order to activate the residual mechanisms, it
will be necessary to adopt and use the roster of former
Tribunal judges, legal officers, prosecution and defence
counsel, and other relevant staff. This undertaking will
provide support for the institutional knowledge that is
essential to the ends of justice and the completion
strategy.
Uganda welcomes the recommendation for the
location of the residual mechanisms and archives both
in Europe and Africa, the regions where the crimes
were committed. The basis for this suggestion is that
the residual mechanisms will require access to the
regional records for each Tribunal, as well as new
records that will become available.
Both Tribunals have requested the extension of
the mandate of the permanent and ad litem judges, the
expansion of their Appeals and Trial Chambers, and
redeployment of trial judges. It is understood that a
number of cases have yet to be completed, some of the
judges have their terms coming to an end, and the
status of ad litem judges has raised issues that require
urgent attention. Since there is still-unfinished
business, Uganda supports these requests for extension.
The ad litem judges have made an invaluable
contribution to the functioning of the Tribunals and to
the completion strategy. They have been assigned
multiple cases and have of necessity been forced to
take up permanent residence at the sites of the

20

Tribunals. Their tasks and competencies are identical
to those of the permanent judges, and nearly half the
judges at the ICTR have served for more than six
years. Accordingly, Uganda calls for a review of their
terms and conditions of service.
Finally, I would like to thank the Presidents,
Prosecutors, judges, ad litem judges and the staff
members of the Tribunals for their work. and call on
the Council to render the necessary support to ensure
the early, smooth and orderly conclusion of the work of
both Tribunals.
Mr. Lacroix (France) (spoke in French): At the
outset, Mr. President, I would like to express our great
satisfaction in seeing you assume presidency of the
Security Council. We assure you of our support for the
Turkish delegation in the exercise of its presidency. We
also express our gratitude to the Permanent
Representative of the Russian Federation and his
delegation for the great skill with which they
stewarded the work of the Council last month.
I would like to welcome the presence of the
Prime Minister of Croatia, His Excellency Mr. Ivo
Sanader, in the Security Council today.
I would also like to thank the Presidents and
Prosecutors of the International Criminal Tribunals for
Rwanda and the former Yugoslavia for presenting their
six-monthly reports. These briefings clearly confirm
that the deadline laid down in 2003 and 2004 in the
completion strategy for the Tribunals will be missed
and that their work will continue beyond 2010.
Constraints of procedure, the vagaries of justice,
belated arrests of fugitives and, for the International
Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda (ICTR), the obstacles to
referring low-ranking indictees to national jurisdictions
explain this delay in the timetable. Whatever the case,
the Security Council must now take into account the
reality of a horizon for the completion of appeals
delayed until the first half of 2013 and draw the
necessary conclusions from that.
The first thing to be done is to equip the
Tribunals with the means to carry out the trials and
appeals as soon as possible, in full respect for the rules
of fairness and justice. In this regard, the joint request
of the two Tribunals concerning redeployment of trial
judges to the shared Appeals Chamber reflects to real
need and must be honoured.

09-35926

S/PV.6134

We also welcome the principle of extending the
terms of office of permanent and ad litem judges. The
Working Group on international tribunals will have to
propose modalities for this extension, but we hope that
the decision taken by the Council will clearly establish
its resolve to ensure that the Tribunals are in a position
to carry out their work to the very end.
Affording the Tribunals appropriate predictability
is a necessity, especially in order to maintain the
quality of staff, whose members, forced into a state of
uncertainty, are inevitably tempted to seek more stable
jobs. The success of the completion strategy obviously
depends on the participation of a qualified and
motivated staff, and the current attrition rate is
worrying in this regard. The President of the
International Criminal Tribunal for the former
Yugoslavia (ICTY) made that point earlier.
Once again, I would like to express to the
Tribunals and their staff France’s appreciation for the
considerable efforts that they will have to make in the
difficult phase of completing their work. I would
highlight with satisfaction the ongoing efforts to
improve the management of proceedings, which will
make it possible to intensify the rate at which the Trial
and Appeals Chambers work.
The activities of the Prosecutors are also
essential, especially with respect to tracking down
fugitives, whose arrest and transfer to the Tribunals are
a priority. The existence of fugitives from justice is one
of the main elements of uncertainty looming over the
completion strategy, but the mission of the Tribunals
will not be fully completed as long as those accused
have not been arrested and tried.
We are firmly committed to the principle that
those responsible for the most heinous crimes must be
tried by the International Criminal Tribunals. The
arrest of Mr. Karadžić was a major breakthrough for
the ICTY. We now await those of Mr. Mladić and
Mr. Hadžić, and we note with satisfaction Prosecutor
Brammertz’s positive assessment of the cooperation of
the Serbian authorities in this connection. Once again, I
would like to recall that full cooperation with the
ICTY, be it in the search for fugitives or the conduct of
proceedings, is an essential element of the stabilization
and association strategy vis-à-vis all the countries of
the region of the former Yugoslavia, which is a strategy
that the European Union is pursuing. We call on all of

09-35926

these countries to extend all necessary assistance to the
Tribunal.
With regard to the International Criminal
Tribunal for Rwanda, 13 accused, four of whom are
high-ranking indictees, are still at large. We call on all
States concerned to afford Prosecutor Jallow the
requisite cooperation. In particular, we call on Kenya
to honour its obligations to arrest and hand over
Félicien Kabuga to the ICTR.
We hail the efforts made by Rwanda to reform its
legislation in order to lift all legal obstacles to
transferring cases to its jurisdiction and allowing lowranking fugitives not to be tried by the Tribunal. I
would like to recall that if the fugitive issue is not
resolved quickly, it will have to be dealt with in the
context of managing the legacy of the Tribunals,
because it would be unacceptable for their closure to
represent impunity for fugitives. This function will fall
to the management mechanism for the essential
residual functions to be established after the Tribunals
are closed.
The Council’s Informal Working Group on
international tribunals has continued to work on this
issue under the efficient stewardship of Austria. The
past six months have made it possible for the Group to
deepen its consideration of the subject with the
participation of new Council members and the very
useful contribution of the Secretariat’s Office of Legal
Affairs. I would also like to thank the Presidents,
Prosecutors and Registrars of the two Tribunals for
continuing their excellent cooperation of the Working
Group.
The Permanent Representative of Austria made a
specific point a moment ago on the state of play in the
Working Group. I shall not dwell on that point. My
delegation would simply like to stress that my country
takes part in its work in the hope that the Council will
in due course adopt a decision conducive to fully
safeguarding the integrity of the Tribunals’ legacy. It
would be inadmissible for the United Nations to
neglect its duty to ensure that the residual functions
necessary to the administration of justice will be
guaranteed after the end of the Tribunals under its
auspices and in the context of an effective mechanism.
Various possibilities can be contemplated for
devising this mechanism, which will need to be
appropriately modest and lean. But it is essential that it
allow the judicial work of the two Tribunals to go on

21

S/PV.6134

uninterrupted and in respect for the highest demands of
fairness and justice.
The ICTY and the ICTR have embodied the
international community’s rejection of impunity for the
most serious crimes against the human conscience.
They must conclude their task soon, and it is up to the
Council to adopt decisions conducive to fully ensuring
their legacy.
Mr. Gouider (Libyan Arab Jamahiriya) (spoke in
Arabic): Let me assure you, Mr. President, of our
delegation’s full support for your leadership of our
work in the Council this month. We would also like to
pay tribute to the efforts to the Russian presidency of
the Council last month.
At the outset, allow me to welcome the presence
among us today of the two Presidents of the
International Criminal Tribunals, Judges Patrick
Robinson and Dennis Byron, and Prosecutors Serge
Brammertz and Hassan Bubacar Jallow. We thank them
not only for their comprehensive briefings but also for
the excellent work they have done and continue to
undertake with their teams.
We need not recall resolution 1503 (2003) on the
completion strategies for the two Tribunals, or remind
the Tribunals that they must take all necessary
measures to complete their trials by 2010, nor yet
underscore resolution 1534 (2004), which stresses the
importance of the full implementation of the strategies.
There is no doubt that the briefings we have just
heard attest to the tangible progress in implementing
the provisions of the strategies. That having been said,
we note that circumstances have arisen beyond the
control of the two Tribunals, leading to an
unprecedented increase in the workload of both
Tribunals that has important implications for the
timeframe of the completion strategies and the
resources needed for their full implementation.
Like other delegations, we wish to underscore the
importance of the Tribunals completing their work as
soon as possible without, naturally, undermining the
imperatives of justice. In our view, it is also necessary
to provide them with the financial and human resources
support they require. It is would also be desirable for
us to look favourably on the requests that they have
recently submitted along those lines. Indeed, it is clear
that implementing the completion strategies will
require extending mandates, expanding certain

22

Chambers and redeploying judges, while ensuring that
qualified administrative and judicial staff are working
in motivating conditions that are also satisfactory at the
contractual level, given the fact that the two Tribunals
are facing serious difficulties in retaining qualified
personnel.
Furthermore, we reiterate the need for ongoing
efforts to transfer or refer cases to national
jurisdictions in the context of the completion
strategies. We are fully aware of the obstacles
confronting the Tribunals’ efforts, in particular in the
case of the International Criminal Tribunal for
Rwanda, as the President of that Tribunal pointed out
in his remarks. Such referrals to national courts would
lighten the Tribunals’ caseload and facilitate the
transfer of their archives. The archives could well turn
out to be more important than the judicial proceedings
in framing the history of those events and facilitate
national reconciliation with respect to the events that
took place. In addition, the assumption of these cases
by national jurisdictions would reflect the principles of
the rule of law and fairness.
We are aware that circumstances have changed
since the two Tribunals were established at the end of
the last century. They were set up as ad hoc bodies in
the context of temporary measures aimed at restoring
and safeguarding peace and security in the countries
concerned. Today, those countries, which were the
scenes of crimes and remain the sources of witnesses
and evidence, enjoy peace and security. They have seen
their judicial capacities strengthen and their
legislations develop, allowing them to be seized of
such trials and cases within the framework and
principles of impartial justice that enjoys the support
and assistance of the international community.
In conclusion, implementing the completion
strategies for the Tribunals’ work is closely linked to
the need for the Council to decide as soon as possible
on the legacy of the two Tribunals and the remaining
trials following completion through well structured
international mechanisms whose future functions and
resources are clearly defined. The Informal Working
Group on international tribunals is working precisely to
that end under the chairmanship of the Austrian
delegation. We would like to underscore and commend
the excellent work being done by the Working Group
with the support of the Secretariat and, in particular, of
the Office of Legal Affairs.

09-35926

S/PV.6134

We also commend the praiseworthy efforts of the
two Tribunals. We greatly hope that those efforts bear
fruit and that we shall reach the best possible solutions
as soon as possible.
Mr. Kafando (Burkina Faso) (spoke in French):
Allow me at the outset, Mr. President, to welcome the
Minister for Foreign Affairs of your country and to
take this opportunity to congratulate you on Turkey’s
assumption of the presidency of the Security Council
for this month. I also wish to commend Ambassador
Churkin and his team for their effective conduct of the
presidency of the Security Council last month. I should
also like to welcome the Prime Minister of Croatia and,
of course, to thank the Presidents and Prosecutors of
the International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda (ICTR)
and the International Criminal Tribunal for the Former
Yugoslavia (ICTY) for their briefings and their very
eloquent advocacy. I would not want to fail to thank
Ambassador Mayr-Harting for the comments he has
just made with regard to the work of the Security
Council’s informal working group on international
tribunals, over which he so effectively presides.
Recent months have seen intense activity for the
ICTR and the ICTY, as well as for the Trial and
Appeals Chambers. The briefings that we have just
heard from the Presidents and Prosecutors reveal that
the Tribunals took practical steps that made it possible
to make tangible progress with regard both to the
treatment of issues and to the management of
procedures and staff and the use of judges. They have
done all that effectively and while keeping in mind the
demands of the deadlines set by the Security Council.
We encourage them to continue their outreach and
capacity-building efforts, in particular through the
establishment of information and documentation
centres.
Above all, we call on them to continue to work
along the same lines, given that the information
available to us indicates that, for instance, the ICTR is
currently facing an unprecedented rise in the volume of
its work. We believe that, in order to address that
workload, the ICTR should make every additional
effort necessary to send cases of lower ranking accused
to national jurisdictions. We believe that option to be
an important component in implementing the
completion strategy for the Tribunal that was adopted
by the Security Council.

09-35926

Likewise, the international community, and the
States of the subregion in particular, should provide
unwavering support and cooperation to the Tribunal in
finding and arresting the 13 remaining fugitives,
especially high-ranking accused, who must necessarily
be tried by the Tribunal. It seems crucial to us that the
primary persons responsible for the Rwandan genocide
should be tried by the Tribunal established for that
purpose.
Statistics concerning the ICTY indicate that the
Tribunal is far along in its completion strategy. We are
very pleased at the successful transfer of cases, not
only because of its impact on the implementation of the
completion strategy but also because it will make it
possible for lower ranking indictees not to have to wait
too long for decisions in their cases. We call on the
Prosecutor to continue to follow such cases very
closely.
Given the practical problems facing the Tribunal,
we hope that the reassignment of judges and the arrival
of an additional ad litem judge will enable the ICTY to
continue to intensify the pace of its work in order to
complete it within a reasonable time frame. To that
end, it is important that the Tribunal’s capacity be fully
utilized.
Although the deadlines set out by the Council are
no longer timely, the Tribunals must nevertheless keep
in mind the need for expeditiousness and must, in
particular, redouble its efforts with regard to speeding
up investigations and trials and reducing delays in the
pretrial process, without undermining the quality of its
work.
I would like in passing to raise the issue of the
status of ICTR ad litem judges, which is a clear
concern for the Tribunal’s President. Although ad litem
judges were in theory elected to serve on a temporary
and ad hoc basis under a three-year mandate, statistics
indicate that many of them have worked on a
permanent basis for five years or more. It would
therefore only be fair to address the issue of the
benefits associated with being a judge, which should
normally also apply to ad litem judges, given the
conditions of their service and the new responsibilities
that have been given to them by the Tribunal in
accordance with resolution 1855 (2008).
Burkina Faso is following with interest the work
of the Security Council’s informal working group on
tribunals, which has held intensive discussions

23

S/PV.6134

pertaining to the list of residual functions, the character
and structure of the residual mechanisms and the issue
of the Tribunals’ archives. It would now be desirable
for the possible options agreed by the group’s members
to be included in a draft resolution to be submitted to
the Security Council for a decision as soon as possible.
As to the size of the residual mechanism, we believe
that the working group’s discussions should, as a
matter of priority, consider the issue of two separate
mechanisms, or one mechanism with two distinct arms,
so as to take into account the basic differences between
the Tribunals and the level of implementation of their
respective completion strategies. In any case,
everything points to the fact that the discussion of this
issue will not produce a result unless the Tribunals first
take steps to reduce their tasks in line with the progress
made in their respective completion strategies.
We take note of the discussions pertaining to the
issue of the management of the Tribunals’ archives. We
believe that, although they are the property of the
United Nations, the archives also constitute historical
memory and, as such, are part of the patrimony of the
countries where the tragedies that led to the
establishment of the ad hoc Tribunals occurred. We
believe that the proposals of the working group with
regard to where the archives are to be housed should
take into account that basic point, as well the issues of
security and accessibility.
We believe that all the issues taken up by the
informal working group cannot be solved at once. It
would therefore be desirable to adopt a selective and
gradual approach, rather than a comprehensive one.
Mr. Heller (Mexico) (spoke in Spanish): At the
outset, Sir, allow me to congratulate you on your
assumption of the presidency of the Security Council
for this month. I should also like to commend
Ambassador Churkin of the Russian Federation for his
presidency in the month of May. We would also like to
say how honoured we are to have among us here today
in the Council the Foreign Minister of Turkey and the
Prime Minister of Croatia.
My delegation is grateful to the Presidents and
Prosecutors of the International Criminal Tribunals for
Rwanda and the Former Yugoslavia for their
introduction of their biannual progress reports (see
S/2009/247 and S/2009/252) on the status of progress
on their completion strategies. Both reports describe
the concrete measures that the Tribunals have taken to

24

complete their work within a reasonable time frame.
Mexico would like to acknowledge the efforts made by
both Tribunals to expedite their judicial functions in a
responsible and efficient way while also ensuring the
crucial goal of meting out justice and preventing
impunity for criminal acts over which they have
jurisdiction.
Despite such efforts, I should point out that both
reports detail for the Security Council the reasons why
it is extremely difficult to imagine that the Tribunals
will finish their work by the end of this year, as called
for by resolutions 1534 (2004) and 1824 (2008). In
these circumstances, Mexico believes that the Security
Council will have to maintain a pragmatic and flexible
approach with regard to the Tribunals’ completion
strategies. In both cases, they face the challenge of
striking a balance between attaining the objective for
which they were set up, that is, to judge and to prevent
impunity, to ensure efficiency in financial and
budgetary matters and to discharge their obligation to
uphold the fundamental rights of the alleged offenders,
the witnesses and the victims of the crimes under their
jurisdiction.
In this regard and as a result of the work carried
out by the informal Working Group on international
tribunals — our colleague from Austria has given us a
very precise and detailed outline of that work —
Mexico believes that the completion strategies must
continue to adhere to the following interconnected
principles.
The first is the gradual completion of the
Tribunals’ mandate. As mentioned in the reports before
us at this meeting, the task of guaranteeing a smooth
transition between the closing of the Tribunals and the
establishment of the residual mechanism requires great
care. In this regard, the deadlines for the conclusion of
work, which have been extended, must be realistic and
reasonable and must take into account the caseload and
the resources at the disposal of both bodies.
In the light of this, Mexico is of the opinion that
these deadlines should be viewed as desirable
indicative dates, subject to the realities facing the
Tribunals in the light of how their respective cases
evolve. Of course, this must not be construed as
meaning that we believe that the mandate of the
Tribunals must be extended indefinitely. We believe
that the Security Council must monitor the work of the
Tribunals very closely and adapt its decisions

09-35926

S/PV.6134

accordingly, so that it can support the gradual windingdown of their work in the most efficient, swift and
economical manner possible. We also believe that the
most appropriate course of action would be for the
Tribunals to conclude their work in the very near
future, but not on the basis of arbitrary dates.
The second principle is the referral of new cases
to local jurisdictions. One of the key actions for
dealing with the caseload of the Tribunals and
contributing to the development of capacities for the
administration of justice in the States concerned is the
referral of new cases to national jurisdictions.
However, to achieve this, it is essential for a
number of conditions to be met. One of these is that the
characteristics of new proceedings, such as the identity
and high rank of the alleged offenders and the gravity
of the crimes attributed to them, and the security
conditions for participating witnesses and victims
actually make that possible. In other words, we support
referrals to national jurisdictions except in those cases
when the implications are such that it may be necessary
to deal with these cases in the appropriate International
Tribunal.
Another condition is that there should be
certainty with respect to the will and capacity of the
local jurisdiction to carry out the trials. Regarding this
condition, it is important to underline the fact that the
report on the ICTR points out that there are still major
challenges before certain basic conditions can be
guaranteed in terms of national jurisdictions applying
international standards.
The third principle is to continue devising
mechanisms that make it possible to reduce the number
of judges and the staffing levels in other areas of the
Tribunals. In trying to ensure that the gradual windingdown of the work of the Tribunals responds to financial
and budgetary concerns, it is important to continue to
support the devising of mechanisms, such as those
already proposed, to reduce the number of judges on
the basis of the procedural stages in which most of the
trials currently stand. In this respect, Mexico
acknowledges the merit of the proposals put forth by
both Tribunals with respect to redeploying judges to
bolster the Appeals Chamber, which will be charged
with carrying out most of the judicial work in the near
future.
Lastly, on the establishment of the residual
mechanism or mechanisms that will take on the

09-35926

functions of the Tribunals, Mexico believes that
beyond the decision of the Security Council with
respect to establishing one mechanism for each
Tribunal or a common one — the latter being the
option we certainly support — we must continue to
consider very carefully and in detail the various aspects
of the establishment of such a mechanism, such as its
mandate, functioning, composition and budget.
Nonetheless, we wish to emphasize that, even
when it is in the midst of such painstaking
considerations, the Council should not fail to keep its
focus on the main objective, which is to guarantee that
justice is done vis-à-vis the perpetration of the crimes
and atrocities committed during the conflicts in the
former Yugoslavia and Rwanda and to combat
impunity for the most heinous crimes against humanity.
With these considerations, Mexico will continue
to work over the coming months to contribute to the
successful implementation of the completion strategies
of both Tribunals.
Mr. Okuda (Japan): Since this is the first time
that my delegation takes the floor in this Chamber
under your presidency, Mr. President, allow me to start
my remarks my congratulating you, Ambassador İlkin,
for your assumption of the presidency of the Security
Council. I would also like to take this opportunity to
express my appreciation to the Russian representative
and his staff for the very professional way in which
they conducted the work of the Council during the
month of May.
At the outset, I would like to express my
appreciation to the Presidents and the Prosecutors of
the respective Tribunals for briefing us on the most
recent developments concerning their completion
strategies. The contribution of the International
Criminal Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia (ICTY)
and the International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda
(ICTR) to the development of international criminal
law cannot be overstated. In this regard, we would like
to extend our appreciation to all the judges,
Prosecutors and staff members for exerting their
utmost efforts to ensure the fair and expeditious
operation of these important judicial bodies.
Today’s briefings clarified the estimated
timetables for future proceedings. Japan has been
expecting and strongly urging the Tribunals to
complete all judicial proceedings in 2010, in
accordance with resolution 1503 (2003). Based on

25

S/PV.6134

today’s reports, we have to admit that meeting these
goals is no longer realistic. Nevertheless, we strongly
encourage the Tribunals to continue their efforts to
complete their work as expeditiously as possible,
hopefully by the end of 2012 rather than the latest
estimated completion date of mid-2013.
We have heard that the Tribunals’ requests for
measures such as the extension of the terms and
redeployment of some of the judges, which are
necessary to accomplish the completion strategy in an
expeditious and cost-effective manner. Based on this
understanding, Japan is prepared to work on the
necessary measures to be taken by the Council at this
stage.
Resolving the issue of the fugitives is of
paramount importance for the success of the Tribunals.
It is regrettable that two suspects indicted by the ICTY
and 13 by the ICTR, including Kabuga, have yet to be
apprehended. We encourage the relevant States to
cooperate in order to arrest them as soon as possible. It
is also unfortunate that the transfer of cases to national
courts has not been completely successful. However, in
the light of further efforts to address this issue on the
part of the national courts, we expect that additional
transfers will be possible in the near future.
Given that the ICTY and the ICTR were
established by Security Council resolutions adopted
under Chapter VII of the Charter as exceptional
measures, they are facing challenges unique to ad hoc
Tribunals, namely, a residual mechanism after
completion, which was not fully anticipated at the time
they were established. Japan attaches great importance
to the rule of law and considers that impunity in cases
of the most serious crimes should not be condoned and
that the individuals involved should be brought to
justice in accordance with international standards. The
residual mechanism should serve to this end, while
efforts must be made to maintain as cost-effective a
system as possible.
Since January this year, there has been an
extremely useful and intensive discussion taking place
in the Informal Working Group on international
tribunals under the chairmanship of Austria, with the
assistance of the Office of Legal Affairs. We will
continue to take active part in the discussion, paying
due attention to the progress of the proceedings at the
Tribunals. We also take note of the briefings on the

26

necessity of staff retention for the work of the
Tribunals.
Ms. DiCarlo (United States of America): Let me
join others in congratulating you, Sir, on assuming the
presidency this month. You can be assured that you
will have the full cooperation of the United States. I
should also like to thank Ambassador Churkin and the
delegation of the Russian Federation for their skilful
stewardship of the Council in May.
I welcome Presidents Robinson and Byron and
Prosecutors Brammertz and Jallow to the Council
today and thank them for their briefings. Let me
commend them and the Tribunals’ judges, registrars
and staff for their dedication to justice.
We also note the importance of the Informal
Working Group on criminal tribunals, and I should like
to commend the work of its Chairman, Ambassador
Mayr-Harting of Austria, as well as the efforts of the
United Nations Office of the Legal Counsel.
The International Criminal Tribunals for Rwanda
and the former Yugoslavia have carried out the vital
tasks of fighting impunity and creating a lasting record
of atrocities not long past. We recognize the
importance of drawing down the Tribunals smoothly
and efficiently. We applaud the work that the Tribunals
have done thus far to create a durable residual
mechanism, and we urge both Tribunals to continue to
strive to complete their work at the earliest possible
date.
The goal of completing the trials by 2008 has not
been met, but we recognize that efforts are under way
to increase efficiency and to wrap up the work through
the use of ad litem judges, extensions and the
redeployment of trial judges to the Appeals Chamber.
My Government supports these initiatives. We believe
that the Tribunals’ requests to extend the terms of
judges should be honoured by the Security Council, at
least through the upcoming biennium.
Those indicted by the Tribunals for committing
some of history’s worst crimes should not be allowed
to escape justice. We must search vigilantly for the 15
indicted individuals who remain at large. The United
States calls on all States to fulfil their legal obligations
to fully cooperate with the Tribunals.
Let me pass on our concern about reports that a
fugitive from the Rwanda Tribunal, Félicien Kabuga, is
at large in Kenya. We are particularly troubled by the

09-35926

S/PV.6134

Tribunal Prosecutor’s assessment that the Government
of Kenya has not complied with requests set out in
March 2009, including calls for Government records
about Kabuga’s assets and details of the Kenyan
Government’s claim that Kabuga has left the country.
The United States calls on the Government of Kenya to
act immediately on the Tribunal’s recommendations
and to take additional steps to deny Kabuga access to
his networks of support.
We understand the Government Rwanda’s desire
to receive transfer cases from the International
Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda. We appreciate the
Tribunal Prosecutor’s support for that effort and we
commend the work done by Rwanda and other
countries to build up the capacity the Rwandan legal
system needs to make such transfers possible. Ensuring
that the Tribunal can transfer cases to Rwanda and
other States, as appropriate, is an important step
towards fulfilling the Tribunal’s strategy for
completing its work. The Tribunal transferred
information on some of its Rwandese Patriotic Front
(RPF) investigations to Rwanda’s domestic courts in
June 2008, and four RPF officers face trial. We ask the
Tribunal to share whether it expects any further cases
that deal with the RPF.
Regarding the International Tribunal for the
Former Yugoslavia, we once again call on States to
cooperate fully with its work. We recognize the
Government of Serbia’s efforts to apprehend and
transfer those indicted by the Tribunal, including the
capture of Radovan Karadžić last July. The United
States calls on Serbia to locate, arrest and transfer the
two remaining fugitives, Ratko Mladić and Goran
Hadžić. The arrest of those two fugitives is crucial to
completing the Tribunal’s mandate.
We also recognize Croatia’s efforts to fulfil its
obligations to cooperate with the Tribunal. The
Government of Croatia has facilitated the arrests of all
Croatian suspects and established a solid record of
cooperation with the Tribunal. We urge Croatia to
continue this record, and we remain hopeful that there
can be a swift, satisfactory resolution of the issues of
the documents sought by the Tribunal Prosecutor in the
Gotovina case.
We urge the countries of the region to continue to
improve cooperation among themselves. Balkan and
African States must share information better, allow the
transfer of war-crimes proceedings between States

09-35926

where appropriate, and break down the barriers that
obstruct the extradition of accused war criminals.
Regional cooperation is crucial to bringing such
criminals to justice.
Finally, the United States remains committed to
creating an efficient, cost-effective residual mechanism
that will ensure that war criminals cannot escape
justice. We thank the Presidents, Prosecutors, registrars
and their staff for their work to fight impunity, and we
urge this Council and the parties to work vigorously
together to fulfil the demands of justice and create an
enduring record of crimes that we dare not forget.
Mr. Urbina (Costa Rica) (spoke in Spanish): I
should like to start by welcoming the presence among
us of the Minister for Foreign Affairs of Turkey and the
Prime Minister of Croatia. I should also like formally
to welcome the Turkish presidency of the Security
Council and to reaffirm the support and cooperation of
my delegation for its work.
I would further thank the Russian Federation for
its organization and conduct of our work last month,
which was tarnished only by the discourteous and
antidemocratic attitude of its Permanent Representative
when he abruptly ended our meeting of 28 May, before
my delegation was able to respond to his unwarranted
rebukes of a statement I had made on the need to
improve the Security Council’s working methods in the
preparation of its missions. My delegation has no need
of his criteria for assessing the status of the permanent
and elected members of this Council, or for
appreciating the work of the Secretariat.
Today, I welcome the presence among us of
Presidents Patrick Robinson and Dennis Byron and of
the Prosecutors of the International Criminal Tribunals.
I thank them for their briefings and recognize the
efforts of both Tribunals to fulfil the completion
strategies, pursuant to resolutions 1503 (2003) and
1534 (2004). Costa Rica believes that the
establishment of the international Tribunals was a
fruitful decision, ratifying the Council’s intention to
put an end to impunity for violations of international
humanitarian law and human rights. It offered justice
to the victims of such crimes and created an important
deterrent.
The accomplishments of the Tribunals have
shown that peace and justice are not at odds with one
another, but that justice contributes actively to the
sustainability of peace. Furthermore, the establishment

27

S/PV.6134

of the Tribunals helped to raise awareness of the need
for a permanent International Criminal Court, which is
now a reality.

encourage the Tribunals to continue to carry out
reforms that will permit completion of the trials and
make the best use of available resources.

As we move towards the end of the Tribunals’
work, it is more necessary than ever for all Member
States, in particular those in the respective regions of
the Tribunals, to cooperate with them. Costa Rica calls
upon all States to strengthen their collaboration with
the Tribunals.

The President: I shall now make a statement in
my national capacity.

The primary legacy of the Tribunals in the fight
against impunity should be the strengthening of
national judicial systems. A sustainable justice system
is the best guarantee of lasting peace. Costa Rica
values the measures to build national capacity
undertaken by both international Tribunals. Those
measures will facilitate the referral of minor cases to
the competent national jurisdictions and enable the
Tribunals to focus their work on the indictment and
prosecution of high-level leaders suspected of being
the parties primarily responsible for crimes falling
within their jurisdictions.
Along those lines, we wish to ask Prosecutor
Jallow if he is considering beginning trials against
other parties that participated in the Rwandan conflict,
who are accused of crimes that took place during the
time period the Tribunal is charged with investigating.
My delegation considers it important that the continued
impartiality of justice be guaranteed and that all
citizens allegedly responsible for crimes be prosecuted
and brought to justice before the international justice
system.
With regard to residual functions of the Tribunals,
our delegation supports the Council’s presidential
statement issued as document S/PRST/2008/47, which
emphasized the reduced nature of those functions and
the need for a small, temporary and efficient
mechanism whose functions and size would diminish
over time. The residual mechanism must be authorized
to try known criminals who have yet to be brought to
justice.
For our delegation, it is important that both
Tribunals redouble their efforts to reduce the delays
vis-à-vis the original time frames. However, that
should not be to the detriment of the rights of the
accused to due process as provided in the statutes
governing the Tribunals. In that vein, my delegation
welcomes the establishment of judicial timetables and
working groups in order to speed up the trials, and we

28

I would like to thank the Presidents and the
Prosecutors of the International Criminal Tribunal for
the Former Yugoslavia (ICTY) and the International
Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda (ICTR) for their
introduction of the reports (see S/2009/252 and
S/2009/247). Turkey acknowledges the progress made
by both Tribunals in the implementation of their
completion strategies. We commend the strong
commitment by the judges, the Prosecutors and the
entire staff of the ICTY and the ICTR to meet the
timelines set by the Security Council. However, it is
clear that neither of the Tribunals is able to meet the
target dates envisaged in the completion strategies. We
thus encourage the Tribunals to continue their efforts to
expedite the proceedings, without prejudice to the
principle of a fair trial.
On the other hand, we should bear in mind that
speedy realization of the completion strategies does not
solely rely on the work carried out by the ICTY and the
ICTR. In particular, additional measures need to be
taken by the Security Council to match the judicial
capacity of the Tribunals with current circumstances.
Turkey is ready to support every step in that direction.
Cooperation is another essential element of the
successful completion of the Tribunal’s work. Despite
a certain amount of progress, we have regretfully noted
that the number of fugitives has remained unchanged
since the last biannual reports of the Tribunals. In that
regard, we wish to appeal to all States to fully
cooperate with the Tribunals, particularly in the pursuit
and arrest of fugitives. All those responsible for
violations of international humanitarian law in the
territories of the former Yugoslavia and Rwanda must
be brought to justice.
Finally, referral of cases to national jurisdictions
also plays an important role in the fulfilment of the
Tribunals’ mandates. Here too, we would like to appeal
to the international community to provide support,
wherever necessary, in order to strengthen the capacity
of national institutions of the countries concerned.
In conclusion, the Tribunals have so far made
important contributions to international criminal

09-35926

S/PV.6134

justice. However, as we are now approaching their
closure date, much needs to be done regarding legacy
and residual issues. In that regard, we very much
appreciate the dedicated work of the informal working
group on the international tribunals to resolve the
remaining outstanding issues in the coming months
under its Austrian Chair.
Once again, I would like to thank the Presidents,
the judges, the Prosecutors and all other officials of the
Tribunals for their determined work and their efforts to
end impunity.
I now resume my functions as President of the
Council.
I now give the floor to the Permanent
Representative of Serbia. Allow me to welcome him in
his new assignment and to wish him continued success.
Mr. Starčević (Serbia): Although I do not belong
to the membership of the Security Council, I wish to
congratulate you, Sir, and your country Turkey, on your
assumption of the presidency of the Council for the
month of June. I know that, under your wise guidance,
the Council will be able to effectively deal with the
problems on its agenda.
At the outset, I would like to express the gratitude
of Serbia to Judge Patrick Robinson, President of the
International Criminal Tribunal for the Former
Yugoslavia (ICTY), and to Mr. Serge Brammertz, its
Prosecutor, for the efforts they put into their
comprehensive reports (see S/2009/252). My country is
appreciative of the fact that the substance and thrust of
the reports are in agreement with our own assessment
of the level of cooperation achieved so far. Serbia’s
efforts to comply with its legal and moral
obligations — such as witness protection, provision of
documents to the ICTY Office of the Prosecutor and all
other means of technical assistance, along with the
commitment of the Serbian authorities to continue
addressing these issues — are recognized, while joint
efforts to ensure success in that cooperation are
pledged in the reports.
Such recognition is illustrative of the growing
belief in the political will and commitment of Serbia to
fulfil its obligations towards the ICTY and in its
resolve to apprehend the two remaining fugitives. The
growing belief in Serbia’s commitment to cooperation
with the ICTY came recently from the United States
Secretary of State in the form of recognition that Serbia

09-35926

is doing its best in this undertaking. Serbia remains
firm in its intention to fulfil its obligation to apprehend
Ratko Mladić and Goran Hadžić, as it remains
dedicated to foster the level of cooperation that has
been achieved in the preceding period.
In the last two weeks, following the publication
of the Prosecutor’s report, Serbia circulated a detailed
report on the Government’s activities related to its
cooperation with the Tribunal and informed the
diplomatic community about recent developments in
that regard, following Mr. Brammertz’s recent visit to
Belgrade.
Serbia continues to support the ICTY’s
completion strategy, defined by Security Council
resolutions 1503 (2003) and 1534 (2004). Proceeding
from that strategy, the ICTY has identified the 12 most
important functions of the residual mechanism to be set
up upon the completion of the Tribunal’s activities.
On the issue of the ICTY archives, described as
one of the most important of those functions, Serbia
presented its official position to the ICTY and to the
Security Council on 23 October 2008 and is interested
in participating in the ongoing dialogue on this
important issue. In addition, in relation to the ICTY
completion strategy, the Government of the Republic
of Serbia presented its views on the subject of the
residual mechanism to the ICTY and the Security
Council after the official position of the Government
was adopted on 13 March 2009.
In conclusion, allow me to reiterate once again
that Serbia’s commitment to full cooperation with the
ICTY will continue. The reports presented to the
Council also take note of that commitment, inviting
Serbia to continue to foster the level of cooperation
that has been achieved. Serbia will continue to make
every effort to see this cooperation through to a
successful end.
Let me also add our congratulations to Mr. John
Hocking on his appointment to the post of Registrar of
the Tribunal.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Bosnia and Herzegovina.
Mr. Barbalić (Bosnia and Herzegovina):
Mr. President, I would also like to congratulate you on
your country’s assuming the presidency of the Security
Council for this month.

29

S/PV.6134

Allow me at the outset to express my deep
appreciation to the Presidents and the Prosecutors of
both the International Criminal Tribunal for the Former
Yugoslavia (ICTY) and the International Criminal
Tribunal for Rwanda (ICTR) for presenting their
reports and their assessments. We can all agree that the
Tribunals’ work through the years has been and
remains of great importance, as they have emphasized
with each new judgement the role that they play in
creating a legacy for the future of international
criminal justice and international law as a whole.
Created as an ad hoc measure for restoring and
maintaining peace and fostering reconciliation in our
respective regions, the Tribunals have grown into very
complex institutions. Accordingly, the completion of
their mandates, as set forth in the relevant resolutions
of the Security Council, demands very careful
consideration. It is both necessary and important not to
undermine the work that has been done by the
Tribunals so far simply to meet the deadlines.
Bosnia and Herzegovina especially welcomes the
reports of both the President and the Prosecutor of the
ICTY, and their continuing positive assessment of the
cooperation between Bosnia and Herzegovina and the
Tribunal. Referral of cases to national jurisdictions
under rule 11 bis is a very important component of the
completion strategy and is taken seriously by the
judicial authorities of my country, proving once again
Bosnia and Herzegovina’s strong determination to see
that justice is served. The number of cases referred to
our national courts is significant compared to other
countries of the region and has had a positive impact
on the overall workload of the Tribunal.
The War Crimes Chamber of the State Court of
Bosnia and Herzegovina is fully operative, and our
judges, in cooperation with their international
counterparts, have created a positive environment as
well as the conditions within our judicial system
needed to meet the requirements of rule 11 bis. My
country has continued to grant access to Government
archives and provide the documentation requested by
the Tribunal. Moreover, relevant authorities have
adequately responded to assistance requests and have
facilitated the appearance of witnesses before the
Tribunal.
Closely linked with our cooperation with the
ICTY is a State Strategy on War Crimes Cases, adopted
in December 2008 by the Council of Ministers of

30

Bosnia and Herzegovina. The Strategy sets forth
criteria for distributing cases between national and
lower level courts, reflecting work done in the
cataloguing of crimes committed. The Strategy also
stresses the importance of regional cooperation in the
investigation of war crimes and calls upon all
authorities to urgently improve their cooperation in this
area.
Thus, speaking of regional cooperation, it is
unacceptable that the Government of the Republic of
Serbia through Interpol issued international warrants
for 19 citizens of Bosnia and Herzegovina for war
crimes alleged to have been committed in Bosnia and
Herzegovina. It is important to stress that the ICTY
remanded this case to the relevant courts in Bosnia and
Herzegovina. Because the war crimes were alleged to
have been committed on the sovereign territory of
Bosnia and Herzegovina by the citizens of Bosnia and
Herzegovina, it is clear that this case should be tried
before courts of Bosnia and Herzegovina.
My country also recognizes the efforts of the
Prosecutor, Mr. Serge Brammertz. Although his
dedication and determination have secured justice for
victims and peace for their families, the fact that two
fugitives remain still at large represents a serious
obstacle to the complete fulfilment of the Tribunal’s
mandate. These fugitives must be brought to trial
before the ICTY; they cannot be allowed to enjoy
impunity as a result of the end of the Tribunal’s
mandate.
In this regard, Bosnia and Herzegovina calls for
the immediate arrest of these two remaining indicted
war criminals — Ratko Mladić and Goran Hadžić.
These arrests must remain the Tribunal’s main priority,
which is the principal reason why the international
community should not declare the Tribunal’s mandate
completed until justice is brought to the victims and
their families.
For this reason, the implementation of the
completion strategy remains of great concern to us. We
all must keep in mind the fundamental reason why the
ad hoc tribunals were established. The strong
involvement of the international community through
the residual mechanisms in several important aspects
such as arrest and trial of remaining fugitives,
contempt
proceedings
and
supervision
and
management of prison sentences is thus very much
required.

09-35926

S/PV.6134

We duly note that the Tribunal’s commitment to
following its completion strategy is demonstrated
through the adoption of concrete measures for
enhancing the efficiency of the proceedings. However,
both the full support of the Security Council and the
international community and modification of the
deadlines already announced remain of crucial
importance. Ongoing delays in the arrest and transfer
of indictees jeopardize the timely implementation of
the completion strategies.
All of the issues that I have outlined require
careful consideration and present practical challenges,
as we strive, now more than ever, to develop principled
yet effective residual mechanisms. The cooperation and
support of all countries is greatly needed to ensure that
impunity not be an option.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Rwanda.
Mr. Ngoga (Rwanda): I thank the Council for the
opportunity to contribute to this debate. My delegation
wishes to thank the President and Prosecutor of the
International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda (ICTR) for
the presentation of their reports. We particularly
welcome their acknowledgement and recognition of the
cooperation extended to the Tribunal by my
Government.
In the period since the last year’s last briefing to
the Council, my Government has consistently extended
the cooperation and support necessary to enable the
ICTR to effectively execute its mandate. We have
continued to facilitate unfettered access to witnesses
for both the defence and the prosecution and assisted
the movement of witnesses to and from Arusha. I am
pleased to report to the Council that, in my
Government’s efforts to ensure the peace and stability
of our citizens, we have continued to ensure the
security of witnesses and responded to any issues that
have arisen on a case-by-case basis. My Government
has continued to support investigations initiated by
both the prosecution and the defence, without prejudice
to either.
My
Government
remains
committed
to
continuing its support for the ICTR’s completion
strategy as set out in resolution 1503 (2003). Despite
last year’s disappointing decision by the Trial and
Appeals Chambers to reject the Prosecutor’s request to
transfer cases to Rwanda, we remain prepared to
receive any future cases transferred to our competent

09-35926

jurisdiction by the ICTR and to address all of the issues
raised in the objections by the Chambers in their
respective decisions.
In this regard, we have undertaken a review and
proposed amendments to the law governing the transfer
of cases and the law abolishing the death penalty, and
we have established a witness protection unit within
the judiciary. These reforms are resolutely based on my
Government’s perspectives on the ICTR’s completion
strategy, and specifically with regard to the transfer of
cases rather than the maintenance of the status quo.
The decisions by the Trial and Appeals Chambers
have severely undermined my Government’s ability to
pursue and bring to justice those suspected of genocide
all over the world. Those decisions have in tone and
content diluted the efforts my Government has pursued
to reject a culture of impunity and have set back the
progress made in repairing our torn national fabric, not
only in the justice sector but in all aspects of national
reconciliation and reconstruction.
Those decisions, coupled with erroneous and
incorrect factual assessments and occasional deliberate
misrepresentations by otherwise useful human rights
organizations, such as Human Rights Watch, remain
solely responsible for the widening impunity gap that
we are currently experiencing. The challenge of
reversing the status quo is collective and has a direct
bearing on the legacy of the ICTR. However, we
remain confident that this situation will be reversed.
My
Government
has
repeatedly
and
unequivocally stated its view that the archives of the
ICTR should be transferred to Rwanda upon
completion of the Tribunal’s mandate. That conviction
is premised on the fact that those records constitute an
integral part of our history, are vital to the preservation
of the memory of the genocide and will play a critical
role in educating future generations to ensure the
prevention of genocide. We recognize the ongoing
process to determine the final destination of the ICTR
archives and remain hopeful that that destination will
be Rwanda, without prejudice to wider and unrestricted
access by the international community; nor does this
position constitute a dispute over ownership of those
archives.
We have completed ratification of the agreement
between the ICTR and the Government of Rwanda
regarding the serving in Rwanda of sentences handed
down by the ICTR, and the instruments of ratification

31

S/PV.6134

have been deposited. We have also recently signed an
agreement with the Special Court for Sierra Leone
regarding sentences handed down by that Court. We
believe that that is essential to dispel the perceived
mistrust of Rwandan institutions and that it will,
equally, contribute to the reconciliation process in
Rwanda.
In conclusion, Mr. President, allow me to thank
you again for the opportunity to contribute to this
dialogue and to reiterate my Government’s continued
commitment to supporting the work of the
International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Kenya.
Mr. Muita (Kenya): Let me begin by thanking
you, Mr. President, and the other members of the
Security Council for allowing me to participate in the
proceedings of the Council today. I also wish to extend
my appreciation to the Presidents and the Prosecutors
of the International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda
(ICTR) and the International Criminal Tribunal for the
Former Yugoslavia (ICTY), respectively, for their
comprehensive reports (S/2009/247 and S/2009/252)
submitted to the Council pursuant to the relevant
Security Council resolutions and for their stewardship
of the affairs of their respective judicial bodies.
In reference to the mention of Kenya, I would
like to report that my country has been and continues
to be an active player in the international criminal
justice system. I wish to reiterate that my delegation
stated last year that the ad hoc criminal Tribunals
established by the Council and the International
Criminal Court must provide and protect the proper
administration of justice by prosecuting those who
promote impunity. To that end and with regard to the
ICTR, Rwandan fugitives found within Kenyan
territory in the past were arrested and surrendered to
the ICTR. We have actually helped deliver the highest
number of genocide suspects to the Tribunal. That is a
demonstration of Kenya’s commitment to the Court’s
work and to the administration of international criminal
justice in general.
Concerning the fugitive Félicien Kabuga — who
is wanted by the ICTR for prosecution — regarding
whom the Prosecutor alluded to the possibility that the
fugitive is resident in Kenya, my delegation would like
to state again that the fugitive is not in Kenya. He was
in my country in the 1990s, but he is certainly not there

32

today. Kenya has no benefit in hiding the fugitive. In
any case, with the kind of reward on his head, no
Kenyan would allow him to run around the country
unreported.
The Government of Kenya has followed every
possible lead in this case and has come to a dead end,
and comprehensive reports to that effect have been
made to Arusha. The Prosecutor should widen his
search to include destinations where the money trail
leads and where the fugitive is said to own other
property.
Further, the Government of Kenya has been
engaged in consultations with the Prosecutor’s Office
through the Joint Kenya-ICTR Task Force; in
particular, the Tribunal is aware that the Kenyan
authorities are vigorously defending in the Appeals
Court a decision of a lower court to freeze transactions
relating to property registered in the fugitive Félicien
Kabuga’s name. Our commitment to the cause of the
ICTR is unquestionable, and should the fugitive ever
be found within Kenya’s territory, he will be
apprehended and surrendered to the Tribunal.
Before I conclude, I wish to indicate that the case
for additional ad litem judges, as has been elaborated
by the President of the ICTR, is one that contains
merits and that therefore my delegation supports. I
wish to end by reassuring the Council of Kenya’s
unwavering commitment to cooperate fully with the
Court in support of international criminal justice and
the eradication of impunity.
The President: I now give the floor to Judge
Byron, President of the International Criminal Tribunal
for Rwanda, to respond to questions and comments.
Judge Byron: I think that I need only say that the
International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda is in
general very pleased with the expressions of
confidence expressed by the States members of the
Security Council. I would like to reiterate our
commitment to work as hard as we can to honour the
mandates of the completion strategy and to bring the
trials completely to an end as soon as possible.
The President: I thank Judge Byron for the
clarification that he has made. I now give the floor to
Mr. Jallow, Prosecutor of the International Criminal
Tribunal for Rwanda, to respond to questions and
comments.

09-35926

S/PV.6134

Mr. Jallow: My thanks, Mr. President, go not
only to you but to all the members of the Security
Council for their support and their encouragement.
Turning to the last issue that was raised in
relation to Kabuga, of course I would like to
acknowledge the support that the International
Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda (ICTR) has received
from Kenya over the years in the form of the arrests of
several other fugitives in the late 1990s. But even at
that time, of course, Mr. Kabuga was one of the
indictees whose arrest we were seeking from that
country, and he was the only person to have escaped
arrest from Kenya in the late 1990s, when operations
were mounted jointly by the police force and our staff
to transfer indictees who were wanted in Arusha. Since
then, this has continued to be an issue. As I indicated
earlier, it is a simple matter; if the Kenyan Government
is saying categorically that he has left the country, we
would like to be advised of the circumstances of his
departure so that the case can be followed up
appropriately.
Regarding the matter of allegations against the
Rwandese Patriotic Front (RPF), we of course
recognize that this is a matter that falls within our
mandate, and we have been investigating those
allegations with the result that, last year, we were able
to reach an understanding with the Rwandans, who
wanted to prosecute the case that we had developed.
That was the Kabgayi case relating to the killings of
several clergy in Kabgayi by RPF soldiers.
As I have already reported to the Council, we
gave the Rwandan prosecuting authorities the
opportunity to proceed with that case against four
senior military officers for the killings of those clergy
and other civilians. At the trial level, two of them were

09-35926

convicted and two acquitted; that decision was
confirmed by the Appeals Court in Kigali. The trial
itself was monitored by staff from my Office. It was an
open and public trial, and other parties monitored the
proceedings, which, were, in fact, also video recorded.
The report of my monitors indicates that the standards
of fair trial were observed, and we have now received
translated copies of the judgements.
That is not the only case that has been prosecuted
in Rwanda with respect to allegations against the RPF.
At my request, the Rwandan military prosecutor has
been able to provide me with details of up to two dozen
senior military officers who, between 1994 and now,
have been prosecuted before Rwandan military courts
with respect to allegations against the Rwandese
Patriotic Front (RPF).
So, a lot of work has already been undertaken in
this area; indeed, the work is ongoing. What I can say
is that, at this stage, other than on those cases that I
have mentioned, my Office does not have an
indictment that is ready in respect of these allegations
at this particular stage.
The President: I thank the Prosecutor of the
International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda for his
clarifications.
There are no further speakers inscribed on my
list. The Security Council has thus concluded the
present stage of its consideration of the item on its
agenda.
May I take this opportunity, on behalf of the
Security Council, to thank Judge Robinson, Judge
Byron, Prosecutor Brammertz and Prosecutor Jallow
for taking the time to brief the Security Council.
The meeting rose at 1.15 p.m.

33
