United Nations

S/PV.5083

Security Council

Provisional

Fifty-ninth year

5083

rd meeting
Friday, 19 November 2004, 2.30 p.m.
Nairobi

President:

Mr. Danforth . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (United States of America)

Members:

Algeria. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Angola . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Benin . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Brazil . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Chile . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Germany . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Pakistan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Philippines . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Romania . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Spain . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . . .

Mr. Baali
Mr. Gaspar Martins
Mr. Adechi
Mr. Sardenberg
Mr. Landerretche
Mr. Wang Guangya
Mr. De La Sablière
Mr. Pleuger
Mr. Akram
Mr. Baja
Mr. Motoc
Mr. Denisov
Mr. Yáñez-Barnuevo
Sir Emyr Jones Parry

Agenda
The situation in Somalia

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the
delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room C-154A.

04-61875 (E)

*0461875*

S/PV.5083

The meeting was called to order at 2.30 p.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in Somalia
The President: The Security Council will now
begin its consideration of the item on its agenda. The
Council is meeting in accordance with the
understanding reached in its prior consultations.
I give the floor to His Excellency, Mr. Bethuel
Kiplagat, the Intergovernmental Authority on
Development facilitator, in accordance with rule 39 of
the Council’s provisional rules of procedure.
Mr. Kiplagat: Let me add my warm welcome to
you, Mr. President and members of the Security
Council, for coming to Nairobi and for agreeing to
discuss and to hear reports from us on Somalia.
First, we express great joy over the fact that two
years of work on peace and reconciliation and the
formation of Government have now been concluded
with the election of a President, the formation of
parliament and the appointment of a Prime Minister.
When we look back over these two years, we see many
obstacles that we had to face — perhaps the most
difficult and important of which was our own
scepticism, as Somalis, and that of the international
community since, it will be recalled, 13 previous
attempts had been made, all without success.
So everybody has been asking us the difference
between what we are doing now and what had been
done in the past. The only thing we can say is that
there are a number of factors that make us believe that
this time around we have a greater chance that the
peace agreement will be durable and stable.
One important factor was the presence of all the
major stakeholders during the two years of
negotiations, all the major faction leaders. We brought
in traditional leaders, who are here; leaders of the
people in the diaspora and of civil society; religious
leaders; and, more importantly, regional and
international actors. We believe, therefore, that the
presence of all these stakeholders augurs well for the
creation of a durable, stable Government.
So that is the first thing that we need to take note
of — the presence of these stakeholders. But I would

2

like you Mr. President to underline the importance of
the regional stakeholders — the member States of the
Intergovernmental Authority on Development. It was
their cohesion, their vision, their commitment to
working on the peace process that really brought us to
the position that we are in today.
The second thing to note is the way in which the
Parliament was selected. We believe this institution is
very important in the way it was crafted, with the
participation of all the major political groupings of
Somalia — not only clans, but also sub-sub-clans:
close to 89, representing all the regions of Somalia.
The process was not easy. It took time, but in the end
they came out with the names and the lists from their
sub-sub-clans. Again, I believe that this is good news
in the sense that there is representation right across the
board. It was a selection process, and the role played
by traditional and factional leaders, as well as by
political leaders, was very crucial in ensuring that we
have an all-inclusive Parliament.
The third aspect I wish to mention is that of the
election of the Speaker, other officials and the
President. This was carried out by the participants in a
very transparent manner. It took us a long time — in
some cases, 12 to 15 hours — of peaceful voting, and
we believe that the process not only reflected
participation but also ensured that the people who have
been elected enjoy the support of Parliament. We
cannot say that this is the same as enjoying the support
of the whole country, but their participation is
absolutely crucial to say the least.
Looking ahead to the future, those ingredients —
of Parliament being present, of the participation of the
traditional leaders and of the process of elections —
give us optimism and hope that we will be able to
stabilize the country. What is in store for Somalia in
the coming weeks and months? The first thing is the
continuation of the reconciliation process: the process
has not yet been completed. The message of hope from
Nairobi needs to be taken all the way to the ground.
The Somalis and IGAD, have therefore made the issue
of peace-building the priority, to ensure that everything
else will follow as a result.
Of course, there is also the reconstruction of the
State, and particularly of Somali democratic
institutions. All of this, however, will depend on
security. Security is absolutely crucial to enable the
Government to move forward. Hence, we believe that

S/PV.5083

it is of the utmost importance that the issue of security
for the Government be discussed and debated, and,
hopefully, that we will get the support of the Security
Council and that of the international community.
Let us hope that the scepticism of the past will be
left behind, and let us hold on to hope for Somalia.
That is what is needed today.
The President: In accordance with rule 37 of the
Council’s provisional rules of procedure, I now give
the floor to His Excellency Mr. Ali Abdi Farah,
Minister for Foreign Affairs, International Cooperation
and Parliamentary Relations of Djibouti.
Mr. Farah (Djibouti) (spoke in French): First of
all, may I congratulate Ambassador Danforth most
warmly on his assumption of the presidency of the
Council for the month of November. I would also like
once more to congratulate him on the crucial role he
played in the Security Council’s decision to hold these
special meetings in the region and to take up a matter
that is of considerable importance not only to the
region and to Africa, but also to the international
community as a whole. We are particularly grateful to
all the members of the Council, who agreed to include
on the agenda of these historic meetings the important
issue of Somalia.
This special meeting of the Security Council is
taking place just a little more than a month after the
Somalis, the region, the African continent and the
whole world celebrated the swearing in of the new
transitional President of Somalia, His Excellency
Mr. Abdullahi Yusuf Ahmed, who is here with us
today. That happy event was welcomed by Somalis and
by the international community. It was a tremendous
achievement,
made
possible
thanks
to
the
determination of the Somali people, who, enduring
many long and dark years, never stopped hoping and
working for real change in their lives. They understood
that, within the context of the peace process begun by
the Intergovernmental Authority on Development
(IGAD), the opportunity was provided to put an end to
the deep gloom of night and to lay the foundations for
institutions that would enable Somalia to be reborn.
This achievement was made possible also by the
perseverance of IGAD member States, which
committed themselves to developing a consistent,
agreed and collective approach, guided by a sincere
desire to act together in solidarity with the people of
Somalia.

I should like to take this opportunity to extend
our sincere thanks to the Government of Kenya and to
our Kenyan brothers and sisters, whose sacrifices and
commitment should be acknowledged. We also thank
the international community for its constant financial
and political support for our joint efforts, which was
decisive in enabling the process to be successful.
I cannot mention all those who contributed to this
success, but there are some I must mention because of
the crucial part they played and continue to play. The
African Union has been unfailingly committed to us
and has given momentum to efforts to prepare for the
deployment of a peacekeeping force in Somalia. We
pay tribute to the European Union for its political and
financial support; we are counting on it to help Somalia
jump start its economy, with a view to attaining
sustainable development. We are particularly
encouraged by the constant support of the United
States in this process. The contribution of the League
of Arab States was decisive at a critical stage of the
process, and it goes without saying that its material and
financial support will also be essential in the future.
And, of course, we must stress in particular the
constant commitment of the United Nations and the
resolve of the Secretary-General. We pay particular
tribute to the Security Council’s very significant
decision to come to the region to learn more about the
situation and to better understand the scope of the
challenges facing the new Somali Government.
The results of the Somali National Reconciliation
Conference, held at Mbagathi, must enable us to assess
the changes that have taken place and the prospects
they offer in terms of the emergence of an era of
stability, security and freedom in Somalia, the
beneficial impact of which will be felt throughout the
region. But much remains to be done before that
promise is realized. The road is fraught with pitfalls.
The challenges are huge. Continued support from
Africa and from the international community will
determine our success. Among those challenges, one
cannot emphasize enough the urgent need to find a
lasting solution to the problem of the mass circulation
of weapons in Somalia and to its grave security
consequences.
The negative effects that weapons have had at the
economic, social and political levels are immeasurable.
They have contributed to the emergence of a weapons
culture and to the establishment of an atmosphere of
fear. Those who possess them have a false feeling of

3

S/PV.5083

security, because they have the capacity to defend
themselves in case they are attacked by hostile forces.
Accordingly, the pressure to acquire weapons is even
greater on those who do not possess them. The result is
an arms race whose devastating effects — including
disease and poverty — are felt at many levels because
the resources mobilized to that end are immense and
could be allocated instead to vital sectors.
In particular, weapons proliferation poses a
serious threat to the results of the Conference —
particularly during the first six months, when the new
Government, to establish its legitimacy, must respond
to the immense expectations of the Somali population
and must promote visible and significant change. The
IGAD peace process is aimed at identifying the
underlying causes of the conflict in Somalia; finding,
to the extent possible, adequate responses to them;
signing a declaration on the cessation of hostilities; and
including all essential actors, including the significant
components of civil society — because it controls a
large quantity of weapons and militias — and
businessmen.
Thus, the transitional parliament is the institution
within which all clans, factions and interest groups are
represented, which is a first. However, the many
initiatives we have undertaken will be seen as weak
and poorly supported attempts unless they are
accompanied by a serious, viable and well-performing
programme aimed at disarming, demobilizing and
reintegrating the militias. The new Government cannot
carry out that task alone. It will need assistance from
the Security Council and the international community
in the form of the deployment of peacekeeping troops
to ensure a peaceful transition, which will permit the
emergence of a lasting peace, security and stability in
Somalia.
In that regard, we welcome the preparation efforts
of the African Union Commission, which has sent
several observation missions to Somalia. We note with
satisfaction the initiative of the African Union — in
partnership with IGAD, the Federal Transitional
Government of Somalia and all international actors
with expertise in this area — to organize a meeting of
military and political experts mandated with assessing
the security situation in order to complete the process
of preparing for the deployment of troops. It goes
without saying that such an initiative will require
immense resources. Experience justifies and reinforces

4

the basic premise that investment in peace is always
less costly than war.
Our common objective remains preventing the
outbreak of conflict through mechanisms of preventive
diplomacy. Many regions throughout the world
continue to be devastated by endless cycles of conflict
aggravated by a lack of serious attention on the part of
the international community. The consequences are
disastrous — the collapse of State institutions, poverty,
instability, social disintegration — and provide a
framework where one can freely mobilize allegiances
in terrorist networks and other Mafia-like structures
involved in transnational organized crime.
Therefore, it seems obvious that the Council must
demonstrate greater sensitivity towards poor countries
engaged in deadly and devastating conflicts. In that
regard, we encourage the Council to significantly and
decisively recommit itself in Somalia and to make
every effort to ensure that the great progress achieved
is not lost.
As we urge the Somalis to be vigilant and to
strive to consolidate the success achieved, we must
seize the opportunity offered to the international
community — particularly in the post-9/11 context —
to help the Somalis rebuild their nation and put
development programmes in place. We cannot allow
our many decisions and valiant efforts to lead to
lukewarm results, because that would undoubtedly be a
historic setback.
I am convinced that the United Nations, and the
Security Council in particular, will devote all due
attention to this issue so that Somalia can once again
find its place in the international community.
The President: I now give the floor to His
Excellency Mr. John Koech, Minister for East African
Regional Cooperation of Kenya, in accordance with
rule 37 of the Council’s provisional rules of procedure.
Mr. Koech (Kenya): I take this opportunity to
thank the Security Council for having decided to hold
this meeting in Africa, particularly in Nairobi. We
understand that this is only the fourth time that the
Security Council has met outside New York. That is
indeed a great honour for us as a country, and we
believe that it is in recognition of Kenya’s commitment
and role as a peacemaker in the region.
On
behalf
of
the
ministers
of
the
Intergovernmental Authority on Development (IGAD),

S/PV.5083

responsible for the Somali peace process, I take this
opportunity to thank the Security Council for
dedicating this meeting to the critical issue of peace
and security in Somalia. The Council’s decision to
include the issue of Somalia on its agenda in Nairobi is
a clear indication of the importance it attaches to the
maintenance of peace and security in Somalia and
further underscores the Council’s commitment in the
Horn of Africa.
I would like to report to the Council that the
Somali National Reconciliation Conference, which was
launched two years ago, has successfully concluded
with the election of His Excellency The Honourable
Abdullahi Yusuf Ahmed as President of the Federal
Transitional Government of the Republic of Somalia. I
would also like to inform the Council that the peace
process has achieved tremendous progress by
establishing an all-inclusive transitional federal
parliament and through the initial formation of a broadbased Government that saw the election of a President
and the appointment of a Prime Minister.
The IGAD member States, with the support of the
IGAD Partners Forum, have successfully steered the
Somali peace process. Despite those achievements, we
face the very critical and delicate situation of
stabilizing the security situation inside Somalia before
the Federal Government can relocate. I would like to
ask the Security Council to assist in the establishment
of an appropriate mechanism to facilitate the relocation
of the Federal Government of Somalia.
I wish to recall that in their statements to the
Council yesterday President Yoweri Museveni,
Chairman
of
the
tenth
Summit
of
the
Intergovernmental Authority on Development (IGAD),
and President Mwai Kibaki, facilitator of the Somali
peace process, appealed for assistance to help with the
relocation of the Somali Government from Nairobi to
Somalia.
I wish also to recall that the IGAD Special
Summit on Somalia appealed to the Security Council to
take immediate action to deploy a peacekeeping
mission in Somalia, to assist in securing the new
Government and to help train security forces for
Somalia. We appeal to the Security Council to support
the initiative being taken by the African Union in
conjunction with IGAD, to deploy a peace restoration
and protection force in Somalia.

We call upon the Security Council and the entire
international community to give consideration to
imposing sanctions on any person or group engaging in
activities that could affect the gains made by the peace
process so far and that could affect the functioning of
the new Government inside Somalia. Finally, we
request the Security Council to mandate all IGAD
member States to remain engaged in the process of
reconciliation, peacekeeping and peace-building in
Somalia until the situation has stabilized.
To enable us to achieve a comprehensive and
lasting solution to the Somali situation and to
consolidate the gains made by the peace process, there
is an urgent need for the deployment of a restoration
and protection force in Somalia to undertake
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration.
It is our hope, as a region, that the Security
Council will come up with a resolution on Somalia that
will assure the development of appropriate mechanisms
for the creation of an environment conducive to the
establishment of stability and peace in Somalia, in
order to enable the new Government to relocate inside
Somalia.
The President: In accordance with rule 37 of the
Council’s provisional rules of procedure, I now give
the floor to Her Excellency Ambassador Kongit
Sinegiorgis, representing the Minister for Foreign
Affairs of Ethiopia.
Ms. Sinegiorgis (Ethiopia): Thank you,
Mr. President, for giving me the opportunity to say a
few words on the question of Somalia. Actually, I do
not have much to add after the comprehensive
statements made by my senior colleagues, the
Ministers for Foreign Affairs of Djibouti and of Kenya,
but let me briefly add my voice by emphasizing that
Somalia today is at a critical stage, after having gone
through a devastating national crisis.
We are all aware that the situation of statelessness
for the last 14 years has had a devastating effect on the
people of Somalia, on the region and on the
international community as a whole. Therefore, what
has been achieved after a protracted peace process
should never be allowed to falter or be reversed.
Hence, it is highly important to realize that the tasks of
the reconciliation process are not over, and that we
cannot expect the going to be easy.

5

S/PV.5083

In that regard, the task ahead, to say the least, is
very daunting indeed. In our view, the major concern
of the new Government should be to establish itself
inside Somalia as speedily as possible. As was said by
the Ministers, and as I am sure is obvious to the
Security Council, that task can be accomplished only
with the continued and active support of the
international community. The new Government of
Somalia is faced with the Herculean task of rebuilding
the State from scratch; in that effort, the major hurdle
will be the security situation of the country. In that
regard, my delegation supports the statement of
Mr. Kiplagat.
Let me also add that in order to ensure the
security
of
the
country,
the
disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration of the various militias
is an absolute necessity. Therefore, the deployment of a
peace support and protection force is also absolutely
necessary.
There is also an immediate need to rehabilitate
the seat of the Government and its institutions, as a
whole.
In
that
connection,
although
the
Intergovernmental Authority on Development (IGAD)
and the African Union have their role to play, it is
imperative that, given the limited resources and
capacity at their disposal, the United Nations be more
engaged in Somalia than it has been in the past two
years.
The response of the international community to
the needs of Somalia has to be commensurate with the
gigantic nature of the challenge involved. At the
present stage, Somalia deserves a great deal of
attention from the region, the African Union and the
United Nations. In particular, the United Nations
should and must take a lead role in assisting the
Somalis to keep up the momentum of the process they
have now embarked upon in reconstructing and
re-establishing the Somali State from the ground up.
This is a crucial moment for the Somalis, the region
and the international community. It must be reiterated,
again and again, that the success of the Somali peace
process is in the direct interest of the international
community.
While we are all grateful for the support rendered
to the peace process during the past two years by the
international community in general, and by the
European Union in particular, we feel it is time that the
United Nations assumed greater responsibility. The

6

role we are expecting from the United Nations is not
that of an incremental engagement, but an active
involvement in helping the new Government establish
itself in the country. No doubt, that is a process that
should be led by the transitional federal Government of
Somalia, but the full and unswerving support of the
international community cannot be overemphasized.
In that regard, we are happy to note that the
international community, at the recent Stockholm
meeting on Somalia, recommitted itself to provide
structured diplomatic, political, technical and financial
support. Such structured engagement by the
international community is expected to be coordinated
by the United Nations. In the view of my delegation,
this should be supported and endorsed by the Security
Council.
I would like to conclude my brief remarks by
saying that it is a unique opportunity that the Security
Council is today discussing the situation in Somalia at
the place where the new Government was born. In the
past, the crisis in Somalia has been a source of
frustration for all of us, but now there is a ray of hope.
Let us all stand together to help Somalis help
themselves.
The President: I now give the floor to His
Excellency Abdullahi Yusuf Ahmed, President of the
Somali
Transitional
Federal
Government,
in
accordance with rule 37 of the Council’s provisional
rules of procedure.
President Ahmed: Allow me to congratulate
you, Sir, on your recent assumption of the presidency
of the Security Council. I have no doubt as to your able
leadership and wisdom in guiding the deliberations of
the Security Council to a fruitful conclusion.
I wish also to extend my thanks to your
predecessor for the excellent manner in which he
presided over the Council last month.
I am very glad that the Security Council is seized
of the Somali issue.
I wish also to take note of the appeal of the
Secretary-General, Mr. Kofi Annan, which is contained
in his report on the causes of conflict and the
promotion of sustainable development in Africa. In
that regard, I should like to commend the proactive
engagement of the Security Council in conflict-prone
areas of Africa. Let me encourage the Council to
continue and further that engagement.

S/PV.5083

We are equally thankful for the Council’s
continued interest in Somalia, and in particular for its
support to the Somali national reconciliation process.
The will of the Somali people was manifested in
the current all-inclusive political settlement and the
creation of the national federal Government. The
leaders of the armed factions are included in the new
Parliament.
We request the international community to assist
us in making sure that these leaders abide by their
commitments and national obligations. We have
succeeded in bringing about a political settlement and
we are in the process of establishing the basic
institutions of governance. However, the most difficult
challenges lie ahead.
Restoration of peace and security throughout
Somalia is one of the first challenges of the new
Somali Government. However, this new Government
possesses no trained army, no organized police or any
other security personnel at the moment. Based on past
experience, it is incumbent upon the new Government
to prepare a detailed plan for the mobilization and
deployment of a stabilization force and the
rehabilitation of the demobilizing militias. The
Government is working on the two main objectives of
consolidating reconciliation talks with the armed
groups and realizing a tangible peace-building plan. I
would like to reassure the Council that adequate
preparations will be taken to ensure the success of the
above-mentioned plans. In this context, we request the
Council to take the necessary steps to phase in a peacebuilding mission, including the deployment of a
stabilization force in Somalia, in the most immediate
future.
We made a formal request to the African Union
for a stabilization force, composed of 15,000 to 20,000
troops. The deployment of such a force is no way
intended to impose the Government’s will by force,
and the necessary parliamentary approval will be
sought by the Government at the right moment.
Concurrently, we need a national security force
composed of 20,000 to 30,000 troops, both police and
army. They will be recruited, trained and equipped to
take over from the peace-making force at the
appropriate time.
There are many regions in Somalia that live in
relative peace. A new Somali Government will work
hard to maintain and further peace and stability in

those areas. The Somali Government requests the
assistance of the international community in sustaining
reconciliation and reconstruction throughout the
country.
I would like to take this opportunity to express
our appreciation and thanks to member States of the
Intergovernmental Authority on Development (IGAD)
for their historic contribution to the success of the
reconciliation process. We make a solemn promise to
our IGAD brothers that we will work tirelessly to
maintain peace in Somalia. Special thanks go to all
IGAD partners in this forum that have contributed to
this endeavour.
All the above-mentioned tasks required to bring
about peace and security to Somalia would need
substantial resources. The deployment of peace-making
forces from brotherly countries and the creation of a
national security force will require funding from the
international community. Therefore, I would like to
appeal to the members of the Security Council to take
the necessary steps to raise the funding required. It is
not expected that the Somali Government will generate
revenue for some time. There is an urgent need for
financial resources for the Government to function. I
would like to request the Council to take the necessary
measures to provide the financial and diplomatic
support that is urgently needed. In conclusion, your
support is critical.
The President: Thank you, Mr. President, for
your statement. I now give the floor to His Excellency
Mr. Aminu Wali, Permanent Representative of Nigeria
to the United Nations and representative of the current
Chair of the African Union, in accordance with rule 37
of the Council’s provisional rules of procedure.
Mr. Wali (Nigeria): Once again, I thank you for
convening this meeting. I also thank the SecretaryGeneral, Mr. Kofi Annan, for his continued
engagement in conflict resolution in Africa and in
particular in the situation in Somalia.
The situation in Somalia continues to engage the
attention of the international community and our
organization since the early 1990s. We recall that in a
presidential statement, issued in July 2004, the
Security Council reiterated its firm support for the
Somali national reconciliation process and the ongoing
Somali National Reconciliation Conference in Kenya,
launched under the auspices of the Intergovernmental
Authority on Development (IGAD), and commended

7

S/PV.5083

the IGAD leaders and, in particular, the Government of
Kenya for their efforts in the search for peace in
Somalia.
The Council also commends the international
observers for their active engagement in the process.
The Council further welcomes the launching of Phase
III of the Somali National Reconciliation Conference,
and asks all parties to continue their efforts to move the
process forward and agree on a durable and inclusive
solution to the conflict in Somalia and the
establishment of a Transitional Federal Government of
Somalia.
The African Union reaffirms its support for that
statement. It is gratifying to note that the Somali
National Reconciliation Conference, with the support
of IGAD leaders, has succeeded in establishing a
Transitional Federal Government in Somalia. The
African Union commends this achievement and
reiterates its commitment to the peace process. We pay
special tribute to the President and leaders of the
Intergovernmental Authority on Development and
particularly to President Kibaki and the people of
Kenya. Their dedicated and tireless peace initiatives in
Somalia have led to the establishment of the
Transitional
Federal
Government.
We
also
acknowledge and commend the efforts and support of
the United Nations, the African Union, the League of
Arab States, the Organization of the Islamic
Conference and the European Union for this
breakthrough.
In this connection we recall the communiqué of
the eighteenth meeting of the Peace and Security
Council of the African Union, which welcomed the
election of Mr. Abdullahi Yusuf Ahmed as President of
the Transitional Federal Government of Somalia. We
call upon all Somali parties, including civil society, to
extend their full support to the new Somali
Government. We support the request by the new
Government to the European Union, the League of
Arab States, the United Nations and the international
community as a whole to provide all necessary support
to ensure its effective establishment in Mogadishu. In
particular, we welcome the call for assistance for the
disarmament, demobilization, rehabilitation and
reintegration programme, as well as for reconstruction,
in Somalia.
We call on the international community to assist
the Somali Government in finding its feet after many

8

years during which the country has suffered without an
established, credible Government. We also recall the
earlier appeal by the Assembly of the African Union in
its third ordinary session at Addis Ababa in July this
year for the Security Council and the international
community to support the Government of Somalia that
would result from the Nairobi conference, with a view
to the implementation of disarmament, demobilization
and reconciliation. We therefore call on the
Transitional Federal Government of Somalia and other
stakeholders to reach out to all Somalis to effect broad
national reconciliation. We believe that all Somalis,
who are stakeholders in the search for peace in their
country must put aside all factional considerations and
fully embrace dialogue.
On the issue of the humanitarian and
development situation in Somalia, the most recent
report of the Secretary-General (S/2004/804) is
disturbing. The cumulative effect of four years of
drought in the Sool Plateau in northern Somalia has
destroyed livestock belonging to the local inhabitants.
That has resulted in the decimation of livelihoods,
indebtedness and the general stagnation of the
economy. As a consequence, 667,000 people are in
need of urgent assistance. Of that number, 261,000 are
categorized as facing a humanitarian emergency and
more than 355,000 are considered to be facing a
livelihood crisis. These Somalis are likely to fall into
the humanitarian emergency category if external
assistance is not provided.
Although United Nations agencies and nongovernmental organizations have expanded their
humanitarian operations to the drought-affected areas,
much needs to be done. Increased international
assistance will enable the Transitional Federal
Government to address this humanitarian and
development challenge effectively. We therefore urge
the Security Council, particularly the international
community, to contribute and to fulfil their pledges to
the Somali Trust Fund, as that would ameliorate the
complex humanitarian situation in the country.
The African Union welcomes the activities of the
World Bank and the United Nations Development
Programme, particularly in the area of creating an
enabling environment for livestock and the meat
industry, as well as in capacity-building, governance
and support for urban sector improvement and city
planning.

S/PV.5083

We note with grave concern the gloomy picture
painted by the Secretary-General’s report that the
security situation in Somalia remains disturbing and
alarming. As a result, Somalis in Mogadishu and north
of the city continue to suffer as a result of violence,
despite the end of the hostilities. We appeal to the
parties concerned to lay down their arms and join the
Transitional Federal Government with a view to
rehabilitating their country.
Now that the United Nations and the international
community have come this far in their efforts to usher
in peace in Somalia, let us continue to lend our firm
support
and
encouragement
to
the
interim
administration. We call on the United Nations to
mobilize a massive peace-building, demobilization and
rehabilitation programme for Somalia and to make
adequate funds available for that purpose.
These are hopeful times for Somalia. The United
Nations and the international community have waited
for over a decade for this moment. We must not allow
this opportunity to slip away. Somalia must never again
be allowed to witness the horrors of the recent past. We
therefore call on all Somalis to bury the hatchet in the
spirit of reconciliation so as to ensure peace and
stability in their country.
Mr. Wang Guangya (China) (spoke in Chinese):
At the outset, I would like to thank you, Mr. President,
for having convened this open briefing of the Council
this afternoon on the question of Somalia. This attests
to the international community’s attention to and
concern about Somalia and demonstrates its valuable
support for the efforts to promote peace made by
Kenya and the Intergovernmental Authority on
Development (IGAD). This will help to exert a positive
influence over the peace process in Somalia.
I would also like to thank the IGAD facilitator
and the foreign ministers of Kenya, Djibouti and
Ethiopia, as well as the representative of the African
Union, for their statements. I would like to express
deep appreciation for their enormous contributions
aimed at the achievement of reconciliation and the
establishment of an effective Government.
Encouraging progress has been made recently in
the Somali nationalization process, as can be seen from
the establishment of the transitional federal parliament,
the election of the speaker and President and the
smooth process of appointing the Prime Minister. All
of these developments have provided a real

opportunity — and a solid basis — for achieving peace
and stability in Somalia. We hope and believe that all
the parties in Somalia take advantage of this
opportunity and keep up the momentum by assuming
their primary obligation and responsibility to restore
peace and security, thus creating a favourable
environment for the new Government.
We welcome the fact that President Yusuf
Ahmed, President of the Transitional Government, has
committed himself to the promotion of the nation’s
unity and reconciliation in a spirit of tolerance and
inclusiveness. We sincerely hope that the Transitional
Government, having overcome the many difficulties
and challenges facing it, will soon be officially
established and return to Somalia to begin the process
of national reconstruction and economic development.
The African Union has called upon the
international community to provide to the new Somali
Government all necessary assistance, including for
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration.
We believe that the international community
should respond actively to the appeal of the African
Union. We are pleased to see the convening of the
symposium by the African Union on the plan for
Somali stability in the transitional period, and we
welcome the convening of the meeting of donor
countries in Stockholm. We are in favour of the United
Nations playing a coordinating role to achieve peace,
and we look forward to the submission, at an
appropriate date, by Secretary-General Kofi Annan of
proposals to the Security Council.
China has been closely following the peace
process in Somalia. In recent years it has been the
facilitator in the Council on the question of Somalia.
We have worked hard to facilitate the international
community’s efforts in mediating the conflict in
Somalia. We have provided material assistance, within
our means, for the peace and reconciliation conference,
and have provided humanitarian assistance to the
people of Somalia and other supplies to the
Transitional Government of Somalia. We hope to see
national reconciliation, unity and the restoration of
peace, stability and security achieved at an early date,
and to that end we will work with the international
community in continuing to play an active role.
Mr. Pleuger (Germany): We greatly appreciate
this
opportunity
to
discuss
Somalia
with
representatives of the Intergovernmental Authority on

9

S/PV.5083

Development (IGAD) and the African Union (AU), and
we are grateful for the very useful briefings that they
gave us.
This is also an excellent opportunity to thank
IGAD for its outstanding and successful efforts in
moving the Somali national reconciliation conference
forward, as well as the AU for its willingness to
undertake planning for an observer mission in Somalia.
Somali leaders have of course also contributed to
the reconciliation process by their willingness to
cooperate and work towards the goal of rebuilding
Somalia. The formation of a transitional federal
parliament and the election of the transitional President
are a real breakthrough and a milestone on the road to
peace. That gives rise to the hope that with this new
momentum the reconciliation process can now be
implemented by the Transitional Government in
Somalia itself. We therefore very much welcome and
appreciate the presence of President Abdullahi Yusuf
Ahmed and Prime Minister Ali Mohamed Ghedi. It
gives us an opportunity to discuss the road from here to
peace in Somalia.
As our Ethiopian colleague has said, there are
still daunting problems to overcome. Security
throughout the country is a major concern, as is the
humanitarian situation. The Transitional Government
will be able to address those problems only if all
Somali leaders agree to lay down their arms and
cooperate with the Government in rebuilding the
country, its totally destroyed infrastructure, its
institutions and its economy. We therefore call upon
the Transitional Government and Somali leaders to
create an environment that will allow international aid
to commence. President Yusuf has already
acknowledged that the future political process will
have to be broad and inclusive. We also hope that
women will participate actively, and with adequate
representation, in that process.
Rebuilding trust in the political processes and
institutions will be necessary in order to deal
constructively with issues such as the future status of
Somaliland. The question of impunity and giving the
victims of war and humanitarian crimes a chance to
find redress are other problems that I am sure the
people of Somalia will want to address. The continuing
engagement of donors in the coming years, including
the United Nations and the European Union, will be
necessary to preserve and help along the progress that

10

has been made thus far. China has introduced a draft
presidential statement underlining the willingness of
the international community to prepare for that
engagement. We would like to thank the Chinese
delegation for introducing that text, which we fully
support.
Restoring the country will require the
commitment of the international community. Let me
therefore
conclude
by
reiterating
Germany’s
commitment to assist the peace process in Somalia as
well as regional and subregional efforts in that regard.
As a member of the Group of Friends of Somalia in the
Security Council, Germany will continue to support the
peace process through the European Union, which is by
far the largest provider of resources in Somalia, as well
as bilaterally by making available considerable
financial, human and humanitarian resources and, in
particular, by supporting the planned observer mission
in Somalia.
Mr. Baja (Philippines): The recent positive turn
of events in Somalia merits the Council’s attention and
consideration. We are grateful to the President for
convening this public meeting.
Today’s meeting here in Nairobi with the main
stakeholders in the Somali peace process not only
serves to enlighten us about the current state of affairs
in the country, it also challenges the Council with
regard to what it can do for Somalia. My delegation
welcomes our guests and thanks them for their insights.
We would also like to take this opportunity to
congratulate President Yusuf on his election to the
Somali presidency. We congratulate as well the
representatives of the key players in the Somali peace
process — the Foreign Minister of Djibouti, the
representatives of Ethiopia and Kenya, the
representative of the African Union and the facilitator
of the Intergovernmental Authority on Development
(IGAD) — for the successful Somali National
Reconciliation Conference and for the successful role
they have played in the Somali peace process. IGAD’s
patience and dedication in shepherding the process is
an example that we should all commend, recognize and
support. The political engagement of regional and
subregional organizations is invaluable to secure peace,
security and development. Those organizations
enhance the formulation of a regional vision of security
and participation in world affairs.

S/PV.5083

Work to assist Somalia needs to begin now, while
the Somali peace process is being fully completed, and
continue until a broad-based and inclusive Government
is set up and installed in Somalia. The international
community must support the Somali people as they
embark on reconciliation and reconstruction and the
re-establishment of peace and stability in their country.
At this time, the attention and assistance of the
international community should first be directed
towards the newly established Somali national political
institutions, for the viability of the Somali State
depends upon their proper and effective functioning.
Thus the support of the international community,
including the Security Council, is of paramount
importance in the consolidation and strengthening of
those institutions. The international community’s
support should also be fully felt on the ground. We
encourage donors to contribute to the rebuilding of
Somalia and look forward to the full realization of the
peace-building framework envisaged in the Security
Council presidential statement issued in February 2004
(S/PRST/2004/3).
After supporting IGAD’s efforts in the Somali
peace process, the international community must now
enlist the support of the African Union, particularly
with regard to its initiative to deploy a peace support
mission to Somalia. It will also be helpful to know
when the cabinet of the Transitional Government will
be fully constituted and whether there is a target time
frame for the relocation of the Transitional
Government to Somalia. As has been said, security is
the biggest obstacle preventing the Transitional
Government from relocating to Mogadishu. We have
heard what assistance is required from the Security
Council and the international community to that end. It
will also be helpful to know what steps the Transitional
Government is now taking on its own to address the
security problem in Mogadishu, as well as what impact
the arms embargo stipulated in resolution 751 (1992)
has on the security situation and on the disarmament,
demobilization, reintegration and repatriation or
resettlement programme.
Mr. Gaspar Martins (Angola): My delegation is
particularly grateful for and would like to express its
satisfaction with the recent positive developments in
the Somali peace process since the establishment of the
transitional federal parliament and the election of the
transitional President. We welcome this opportunity to
hear directly from the leaders of Somalia, in particular

from the President of the Republic, as we meet here in
Nairobi.
The Security Council’s meeting in Nairobi is very
timely. We are meeting at the right moment, as clearly
demonstrated by the presidential statement that we will
adopt later, as proposed by China. This meeting also
represents a boost to the Somali process and to the
countries of the Intergovernmental Authority on
Development (IGAD), whose cohesion has been
pivotal to the results achieved thus far.
The people of Somalia now face the most
challenging part of their long path to peace and
stability, which is the implementation of the agreement
in good faith. A number of speakers have stressed the
need for adequate support for the process. We would
like to join those speakers who indicated such a need.
In his report submitted to the Council last month
(S/2004/804), the Secretary-General underlined the
need for an expanded United Nations peace-building
role and presence to assist the process. President
Museveni also presented his view yesterday, of which
we took due note. There is, therefore, a clear
convergence of views on the need to support the
Somali peace process. This calls for coordination
between the African Union, IGAD, the United Nations
and the League of Arab States, taking into account the
responsibilities of each body. Furthermore, it can be
successful only if Somalis are themselves fully
involved. Particular attention should therefore be paid
to the planning efforts underway involving the
international community and the Somali people in
formulating a peace-building framework for a rapid
assistance package, as recommended by the Security
Council.
The development aspect of the process is also
fundamental for a long-lasting peace in Somalia. We
therefore welcome the operational activities in support
of peace being carried out by the United Nations,
which are the basis for the work to be performed by an
enhanced United Nations presence in that country. The
national reconciliation and unity of Somalia should
remain the backbone of these efforts.
Mr. Akram (Pakistan): Although my esteemed
colleague from the Philippines has already read my
notes, I will repeat some of those remarks. First of all,
Pakistan warmly welcomes the progress that has been
made in the Somali peace process. We commend the
Intergovernmental Authority on Development (IGAD)

11

S/PV.5083

for this success and believe that it is an example that
other regions can follow. We welcome the election of
the parliament and the election of the President and the
appointment of the Prime Minister.
We welcome President Abdullahi Yusuf Ahmed
to the Security Council. We would like to add that we
are very happy that the Council decided to discuss
Somalia at this meeting in Nairobi; it is most
appropriate that we should devote attention to this
other critical conflict in this region.
We listened attentively to the statements by the
IGAD facilitator, by the Ministers for Foreign Affairs
of Djibouti and Kenya and by my friend, the Ethiopian
envoy, and have taken due note of these statements. We
hope that the presidential statement that the Council
will adopt will reflect the sense that has been conveyed
that we welcome the establishment of the Transitional
Government and reaffirm our full support to the peace
process.
It is obvious that security is a priority
consideration, and the President has rightly underlined
this aspect. Of course, a comprehensive security
strategy will involve the consolidation of peace at the
local level, the full process of disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration, the creation of the
national army and, perhaps most importantly, a process
of reconciliation that involves all Somalis, including
those who have thus far remained outside of the peace
process.
The President and other speakers have appealed
for Security Council support for a stabilization force,
and we note that the African Union’s response to this
has been positive. We hope the Council will be able to
hold consultations on this request and that a viable
response will be offered to give hope to the Somali
people, who are proceeding so boldly on the path to
peace.
Finally, Somalia must be given assistance to
make the new Government functional. Such assistance
should not wait for completion of the peace process but
should, we believe, proceed simultaneously. The
United Nations should assume an enhanced role
throughout Somalia, including in the process of
reconciliation and building bridges between all
Somalis, including those who are not yet involved in
the peace process.

12

Mr. Motoc (Romania): I would like to join my
colleagues in expressing appreciation for the
participation in this extraordinary Security Council
meeting of the President of the Somali Transitional
Federal Government, of representatives of the
Intergovernmental Authority on Development (IGAD),
of Member States Kenya, Djibouti and Ethiopia, and of
representatives of the African Union. Their statements
on recent developments in Somalia are very much
welcome.
Romania associates itself with the commendation
of the recent progress made at the Somali National
Reconciliation Conference, culminating in the adoption
of the Somali Transitional Federal Charter, the
establishment of the Transitional Federal Parliament,
the election of the Speaker of Parliament and the
President of the transitional federal Government and
the recent appointment of the Prime Minister. For those
remarkable advances, tribute is due to the States
members of the Intergovernmental Authority on
Development (IGAD) — in particular the Government
of Kenya — and to other countries and organizations,
mainly the European Union, the African Union (AU),
the League of Arab States and the United Nations
Political Office for Somalia. We encourage them to
continue their efforts in that regard. At the present
crucial juncture, Somalia needs our solidarity and our
dedication more than ever before.
As provided by the Transitional Federal Charter,
Somalia is now entering a five-year transitional period.
The stakes are high, and they must be matched by the
determination of all Somali parties towards peace and
by the investment of the international community in
support of their efforts. Prospects for a successful
transitional period should be secured from the very
outset. The most immediate task for the new Prime
Minister will be related to the ability to establish a
transitional Government that enjoys internal credibility
and is able to fairly distribute, with political wisdom,
the dividends of national reconciliation and
reconstruction.
The challenges lying ahead for the new
Government are certainly notable. In the short term,
there is an urgent need to improve and expand security
throughout the country, first and foremost through
effective
disarmament,
demobilization
and
reintegration (DDR) activities. Increased reconciliation
and reconstruction efforts, accompanied by concrete
steps aimed at building democratic institutions, would

S/PV.5083

then pave the way for national elections at the end of
the five-year transitional period.
Undoubtedly, the path leading to peace in
Somalia after long years of severe conflict will not be
easy to travel. However, the progress achieved thus far
gives us reason to hope. Today could see the dawning
of a new era for peace in Somalia. It is important to
sustain the momentum and to encourage all Somali
parties to assume their primary responsibilities in that
regard.
International support for Somalia remains crucial.
Romania welcomes and supports the decision taken by
the Peace and Security Council of the African Union at
its eighteenth meeting, held on 25 October, to
accelerate preparations for the deployment of an AU
military observer mission in Somalia upon request by
the President of the transitional federal Government.
We call on the African Union, in cooperation with the
Somalis and in close coordination with IGAD and the
United Nations, to explore the most appropriate
configuration and mandate for such a future mission in
Somalia in order to allow for the smooth progression of
DDR and other activities aimed at consolidating the
security climate throughout the country. The ultimate
aim of the mission would be to assist in confidencebuilding and to foster national dialogue and the
peaceful resolution of whatever disputes might emerge
during the disarmament process.
We followed with interest the proceedings of the
planning seminar on stabilization in Somalia during the
transition, convened by the African Union in
November in Addis Ababa. In particular, we agree on
the need for the conclusion of a ceasefire agreement
between the Government and other Somali forces and
armed groups and for the establishment of the
necessary legal, administrative and institutional
framework prior to the deployment of an AU mission.
We also join in the appeal to the donor
community to provide financial and material support to
the newly established Somali institutions to ensure
their functioning inside Somalia aimed at assisting in
reconciliation, reconstruction and DDR efforts. In that
regard, we commend the timely mobilization of the
donor community, particularly the convening of the
donor meeting in Stockholm on 29 October 2004.
In supporting efforts to rebuild the country, the
international community needs to be guided by the
expectations and needs of Somalis themselves. Somalis

themselves must therefore reach consensus on
establishing their own priorities and requirements for
assistance through the expeditious formulation of a
programme of action that contains concrete measures
and deadlines covering the transitional process.
National consensus must be accompanied by
consensus at the regional level. In that regard, we
encourage the establishment of a framework that would
provide for periodic consultations among members of
IGAD, other States of the region and relevant regional
and international partners as a viable opportunity to
achieve a regional vision of the stabilization and
reconstruction of Somalia. National and regional
consensus would then brighten the prospects for
increased international support and facilitate future
discussions between the new Government and the
United Nations aimed at exploring possibilities with
regard to an expanded peace-building role and
presence for the United Nations in Somalia.
Mr. Denisov (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We note with satisfaction the great progress
achieved with regard to a peaceful settlement for
Somalia, particularly the election of the country’s
President and the appointment of its Prime Minister by
the Transitional Federal Parliament. A unique
opportunity is being created to bring about the rebirth
of a country destroyed by a long internecine war. We
should like to pay tribute to the United Nations, the
African Union and the member States of the
Intergovernmental Authority on Development (IGAD)
for their important role in advancing the peace process
in Somalia. In the near future, we expect to see the
formation of a Somali transitional Government, which
will make it possible to swiftly re-establish a lasting
peace in the country, provide stability, strengthen
national reconciliation, develop civil society and
restore Somalia’s status as a full member of the
international community.
However, a breakthrough in the political sphere
must be underpinned by tangible progress in the area of
security. In that context, we welcome the African
Union’s intention to send a military observer mission
to Somalia. But we cannot fail to be concerned at the
periodic violations of the ceasefire agreement. For that
reason, strict observance of the embargo on supplying
weapons to Somalia remains urgent.
At this critical stage of the peace process in
Somalia, the international community must support the

13

S/PV.5083

efforts of the Somalis themselves to complete the
national reconciliation process. We are confident that
the scheduled donor conference will help to define the
best arrangements for international institutions and the
new Somali leadership to work together in the postconflict reconstruction of the country.
We believe that increasing United Nations
involvement in addressing serious post-conflict
problems in Somalia should be accompanied by a
strengthening of the positive results achieved in the
peace process. That will be possible, first and
foremost, if the Somalis honour the commitments that
they have made to the international community. We
view the Security Council presidential statement to be
adopted at the end of today’s meeting as a clear signal
to the Somalis of our readiness to support their efforts
to peacefully rebuild their country.
Russia, as a permanent member of the Security
Council and as a participant in the IGAD Partners
Forum, will continue to make a practical contribution
to the achievement of a comprehensive political
settlement and to the re-establishment of the State
sovereignty and territorial integrity of Somalia.
Sir Emyr Jones Parry (United Kingdom): This
is a very welcome discussion and our particular thanks
are due to the Intergovernmental Authority on
Development (IGAD) and the African Union, which
actually embody, in this afternoon’s discussion, why it
is that our relations with the African Union matter so
much. The Somali people deserve stability and
security, and we all have our collective interest in
creating a Somali State with institutions based on the
rule of law and the prospect of enduring stability and
prosperity. We should therefore welcome the progress
made recently with the appointment of a transitional
federal Government and the opportunity that is now
offered.
I very much appreciate the contributions we have
heard so far this afternoon. The starting point, of
course, is as close to zero as you can get. Trying to
build peace, establish stability and end conflict is
pretty difficult in most cases, and we have to recognize
that in the case of Somalia it is about as difficult as it
comes.
Listening to the request for a stability force, I am
struck, really, by the question: to stabilize what? And if
we have a peacekeeping force, what peace are we
going to keep? And that is not a question I ask lightly.

14

We have to think very carefully about deploying troops
to do that sort of job in today’s Somalia. I suspect,
therefore, that there is a precondition to the
deployment of a large force, and that is that a degree of
stability has to be restored — perhaps through a clanbalanced Somali security force, but in any case a
process of in-country dialogue needs to be established.
However, there should not be confrontation, but rather
cooperation, which will build upon and not undermine
the existing areas of tranquillity in Somalia,
particularly in Somaliland.
The key is a comprehensive ceasefire agreement
that is binding on all parties. Here, the Security
Council may well have a role to play in endorsing such
an agreement. It seems to me that if the Transitional
Federal Government can adopt the sort of positive and
constructive agenda we have heard spoken of, it will
deserve the strongest support from the international
community — a support that is tailored, of course, to
what is practical and possible on the ground. We
believe that the draft declaration of principles and the
proposed coordination of monitoring arrangements
discussed in Stockholm offer a sound potential
framework for engagement. They need to be discussed
with the Transitional Federal Government as soon as
possible.
I do not want to sound negative in what I am
saying because, fundamentally, this is one of those
cases where the United Nations has to take a strong
lead role, particularly on the ground, in the proposed
coordination arrangements for the international
community, and be in a position to deliver whatever
help is possible and is needed by the people of
Somalia. So I would concentrate at this stage on
providing maximum help for the observer mission, if
that is to be put in place by the African Union — as
much help as we can muster on the whole question of
reconstruction and development.
And I believe we should try to help the
Transitional Federal Government to move towards
establishing the institutions that it will need, and the
rule of law, in order to tackle the issues that are
associated with the rule of law in the context of a
growing stability and security. We should then look to
be as ambitious as possible, because the lesson of
history must be that failed States are something we
should avoid, and that where States are close to failure,
we must do our utmost to pick them up and give them
every assistance, especially when they are as prepared

S/PV.5083

to help themselves as the Transitional Government
appears to be.
Mr. Adechi (Benin) (spoke in French): We are
indeed pleased that the situation in Somalia is on the
agenda for our meeting. The process of national
reconciliation in Somalia was begun under the
Intergovernmental Authority on Development (IGAD)
and has now made significant progress in the last few
months. That has brought back hope for a restoration
of the Somali State with the establishment of the
transitional federal parliament and the election of a
new federal President. Those two national institutions
can indeed fill the gap that has existed since the
collapse of the central Government in the early 1990s.
We also salute the appointment of the Prime Minister.
We fully agree with the content of the draft presidential
statement proposed by the delegation of China.
Accordingly, I shall confine myself to just a few
comments.
We pay tribute to the coordinated efforts of IGAD
and the international community, which have made
possible this positive development in Somalia within
the context of political discussions. However, the
developments on the ground have not followed at the
same rate, and we deplore the continuing clashes
among the various protagonists. The critical security
situation is indeed still disturbing. The same difficulty
applies when it comes to building the people’s faith in
the institutions that are the necessary accoutrements of
any modern State.
In this connection, we urge strict compliance with
the arms embargo and the re-establishment of an
integrated national army. We also recommend
implementing
a
disarmament,
demobilization
rehabilitation or reintegration programme, which could
indeed enhance security throughout the country. We
also encourage initiatives, such as that of the European
Commission, geared towards preparing demobilization
programmes supported by community development
projects so that former fighters will no longer have any
incentive to continue fighting.
It is important that the new Somali President be
able to establish as inclusive a Government as possible
so that it can take over the functions now being carried
out by the international community. We support his
efforts in that context, and we would urge him to step
up dialogue with local players to ensure that the
conflict continues to be resolved by peaceful means

and so as to restore the process of national
reconciliation, which is essential to any national
development.
We listened with great interest to the assessment
of the situation offered by the ministers and the
representative from IGAD. The prerequisites for
stepping up the process are international support for
security and increased humanitarian assistance in
Somalia to stop the violence and help stabilize the
country by ensuring better protection for human rights.
Mr. Baali (Algeria): I would like first of all to
thank the ministers of Djibouti and Kenya, the
facilitator from the Intergovernmental Authority on
Development (IGAD) and the representative of the
current Chair of the African Union for the statements
they have made this afternoon. However, I would also
like to express our special thanks to President
Abdullahi Yusuf Ahmed for finding the time to come to
the Security Council and sharing with us his views and
his vision on the future of Somalia.
Algeria has always been firmly attached to a
comprehensive and lasting settlement of the situation
in Somalia based on respect for sovereignty, territorial
integrity, political independence and national unity. We
are therefore very pleased that, thanks to the tireless
and highly commendable efforts of IGAD, in the last
few weeks the Somali national reconciliation process
has made significant progress towards achieving peace
and security in Somalia, and in particular the
establishment of the transitional parliament, the
election of the President and the appointment of a
Prime Minister. We are hopeful that a broad-based, allinclusive and effective Government will soon be
established and that all Somalis will seize this historic
opportunity to make progress towards peace, stability
and reconstruction of the country. Now that legitimate
institutions are being put in place, it is imperative that
the international community provide political, financial
and economic support to Somalia. We are pleased, in
this regard, that the African Union has expressed its
readiness to assist in the transition process in Somalia,
including in the field of disarmament, demobilization
and reintegration, and we believe that the Security
Council also has a role to play and responsibilities to
assume in Somalia.
Together, we have to consider ways and means
for the Security Council to assist the new institutions
and the new Government to establish and exercise their

15

S/PV.5083

authority in the country. We believe that we should
agree on an expanded peace-building role and presence
of the United Nations, as has been recommended by
the Secretary-General in his last report.
I will conclude my remarks by thanking the
Ambassador of China for his leading role in keeping
the issue of Somalia on the agenda of the Council and
for introducing the presidential statement, which my
delegation strongly supports.
Mr. De La Sablière (France) (spoke in French):
My delegation is also pleased that this meeting has
been held, which has enabled us to listen directly to
President Ahmed Yusuf, the President of the Republic
of Somalia, as well as authorities from the region.
It seems to me that this meeting demonstrates that
there is growing interest on the part of the international
community in Somalia, surely, because despite the
great difficulties that we have been hearing about
today, there still is a sense that one can perceive light
at the end of the tunnel. So we view with great interest
efforts that have been undertaken by the
Intergovernmental Authority on Development (IGAD),
with full awareness of the dangers inherent in Somali
instability for the region and for the Horn of Africa.
Efforts by IGAD have made it possible to move into a
crucial stage. We would like to congratulate the
countries of the region, Kenya in particular, which
through IGAD have shown an outstanding commitment
and have played a major role in this process, which has
been painstakingly conducted and has required
patience and determination.
France is gratified to note the crucial stage that
has been passed with the election by the Parliament of
the President of Somalia and the appointment of a
Prime Minister. To be sure, we, like others, are
impatient to see the establishment of a broad-based
Government, and we would be happy to hear that its
composition will soon be announced.
We appreciate the security concerns that have
been expressed by President Ahmed Yusuf and the
Chair of the African Union. We are aware of the
problem, which should be given careful attention and
discussed together with the international community. It
could be addressed in various ways. That will be one of
the first tasks of the Government.
Let me add that, together with the European
Union, France stands ready to participate in rebuilding

16

Somalia, something that is crucial to stability in the
region. In conclusion, I would like to say that my
delegation would like to thank Ambassador Wang for
having led our discussions on this draft presidential
statement on Somalia, and I wish to convey to him that
my delegation gives its full support to the draft
presidential statement.
Mr. Sardenberg (Brazil): I thank all those
authorities who made presentations during this meeting
for the help they are giving us in our consideration of
the current situation in Somalia. Brazil has welcomed
the election of the Somali transitional President,
Abdullahi Yusuf Ahmed, who is among us, and I greet
him. And we welcomed also the nomination of the
Prime Minister of Somalia’s new Transitional Federal
Government. We hope those developments will be
followed by further steps along the path of
reconstruction of the frail State structures and legal
system.
Progress in the peace process would not have
taken place without the efforts developed by the
Intergovernmental Authority on Development (IGAD).
We value the role of IGAD and the relevant
contribution of neighbouring African countries, which
point to the strengthening of African conflict-solving
capabilities.
Nevertheless, despite all efforts, many roadblocks
are yet to be overcome before peace can prevail. The
security scene is a source of particular concern, and not
all military factions participated actively in the
negotiations leading to the transition. Consequently,
not all of them are committed to its success.
Businessmen and warlords continue to take advantage
of the present situation.
The African Union and member countries of
IGAD are already discussing possible courses of action
in response to the present crisis. We note that the
Somali Government favours the idea of the deployment
by the African Union of peacekeepers, who would help
with disarmament, demobilization and reintegration,
among other tasks. Brazil has consistently supported
reinforcement of African capabilities in peacekeeping,
and certainly my delegation will give friendly
consideration to the issue of possibly sending a
peacekeeping mission to Somalia.
The new President has also publicly manifested
his intention to work towards a peaceful solution of the
remaining conflicts. We hope he will persevere and

S/PV.5083

work as hard as he can to dissipate fears of a resort to
force. In our view, the Council must continue to lend
its clear, unequivocal message of support to the
national reconciliation process and to IGAD efforts. I
wish also to associate our delegation with the thanks
that were expressed to Ambassador Wang for the work
he has performed, and say that we support the
statement before us this afternoon.
Mr. Yáñez-Barnuevo (Spain) (spoke in Spanish):
Ten years ago, Spain was a member of the Security
Council, and I myself represented Spain at the time. So
I had occasion to follow closely the debates that were
held, and I also shared the frustration in the Council
over the tragic developments in Somalia. After ups and
downs, all kinds of difficulties, the Security Council
finally gave up, as we all know.
Somalia has since been abandoned to fate. The
Somalis have spent a decade in truly difficult
conditions — to put it mildly. They have been
marginalized by the international community, and have
been in an appalling humanitarian, economic and social
situation. Accordingly, we feel that the international
community owes a debt to Somalia. That is why we
wish to hail all the statements we have heard this
afternoon from leading players in the Somali national
reconciliation in process. As we have heard, that
process is being conducted by the Somalis themselves,
at different levels of social organization. With
difficulty, they have been struggling to re-establish
transitional institutions, with assistance first and
foremost from subregional and regional organizations
and with a United Nations presence. I would like to
note the presence of the Representative of the
Secretary-General, Mr. Winston Tubman. There has
also been assistance from donors; I would like
specifically to highlight the support provided by the
European Union.
This process has led to the establishment of
transitional federal institutions which, we hope, will
soon be followed by the establishment of a broadly
representative Government which will have the
technical capacity to restore the basic mechanisms of
an administration and of public services. Clearly,
international assistance and cooperation will be
required in that respect.
All of these efforts by the Somalis themselves, by
countries in the region and by subregional and regional
organizations, should be welcomed, acknowledged and

supported by the international community. The
Security Council already did this in its presidential
statement dated 26 October 2004 (S/PRST/2004/38).
We must remain ready to provide all possible
cooperation to the efforts under way on the ground.
Specifically, we welcome the African Union’s
announced readiness to undertake a monitoring task
and to deploy observers on the ground. But, as has
been said here, much remains to be done. The road is
not an easy one. And still to come is the crucial stage:
the establishment of the new institutions on Somali
soil. In our view, this must be achieved through
continuous dialogue and understanding among the
various sectors of Somali society. This is something
that cannot be imposed, and the Security Council must
stand ever ready to be politically and otherwise
supportive of the entire transitional process; it is
essential to re-establish the Somali State, so that
Somalia can resume its rightful place in Africa and in
the international community.
For those reasons, we wish to express our support
for the draft presidential statement that has been
prepared on the initiative of the Chinese delegation; it
has been worked out and is the subject of consensus
among Council members.
Mr. Landerretche (Chile) (spoke in Spanish): At
the outset, my delegation would like to express its
thanks for the statements made by States members of
the Intergovernmental Authority on Development
(IGAD), by the representative of the African Union
and by the IGAD facilitator.
For my country, the establishment of a
Transitional Government and Parliament in Somalia is
without question a very important step towards
restoring peace and security there, after more than 14
years without a central government. It is our hope that
the new transitional institutions will relocate to
Somalia as soon as security conditions permit. In that
regard, we regret that political progress has not been
accompanied by significant improvement in the
security situation prevailing in the country.
Moreover, the Somali reconciliation process still
has a long way to go; genuine reconciliation among the
parties still has yet to be achieved, and the original
causes for the civil war still need to be adequately
addressed.

17

S/PV.5083

We would like to take this opportunity to support
and to express our appreciation for the efforts made by
the IGAD members of the Intergovernmental Authority
on Development, in particular the steps taken by the
Government of Kenya with a view to resolving the
complex differences among the various Somali groups
thus facilitating the reconciliation process. In
particular, we would like to express our thanks for the
interesting and complete statement made by the
President
of
the
Transitional
Government,
Mr. Abdullahi Yusuf Ahmed. My delegation notes his
statement and thanks him for it.
Lastly, we would like to pay special tribute to the
work done for peace and reconciliation in Somalia by
the
Representative
of
the
Secretary-General,
Mr. Winston Tubman, and his team. We also
acknowledge the humanitarian and development
activities undertaken by the United Nations in Somalia.
In conclusion, we would like to thank the
delegation of China for introducing and carrying out
negotiations on the text of the draft presidential
statement, which my delegation fully endorses.
The President: I will now make a statement in
my capacity as the representative of the United States.
The United States supports the Somalia
reconciliation process led by the Government of Kenya
under the auspices of the Intergovernmental Authority
on Development (IGAD). This reconciliation process is
central to the re-establishment of stability and effective
governance in Somalia. It is the Somali transitional
officials who are ultimately responsible for
establishing governance inside Somalia and in whose
hands the prospects for future stability and peace rest.
We urge the Transitional Federal President, Prime
Minister and Assembly to focus on the immediate task
at hand: the establishment of an effective Government,
operating inside Somalia. The ability of the
Transitional Federal Government to relocate to
Somalia will depend largely on an ongoing process of
reconciliation and on Somali officials’ ability to reach
out to a wide range of individuals inside Somalia. The
transparent and inclusive selection of Government
officials and the development of a strategy and
timetable outlining the functional priorities of the
Transitional Federal Government are critical elements
of this task. After this strategy is presented, the
international community will be better able to
determine how best to support these efforts.

18

After 13 years, the possibility of re-establishing a
Government in Somalia may finally be on the horizon.
It will require sustained commitment, honesty and
good will from all Somalis. We urge all Somali
participants to focus on the needs of the Somali people,
while respecting the peace, governance and security
that exist in areas not currently participating in the
Somali National Reconciliation Conference.
I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.
I now give the floor to His Excellency
Mr. Abdullahi Yusuf Ahmed, President of the Somali
Transitional Federal Government, to respond to
questions raised by Council members.
President Ahmed: I would like to hear the
questions of the Council members. If I have specific
questions, I will be able to answer positively.
The President: Mr. President, I think a question
was raised by the representative of the Philippines.
President Ahmed: Our Prime Minister will
answer the questions posed by the Philippines. I would
like to thank you, Mr. President, as well as the
members
of
the
Security
Council,
the
Intergovernmental Authority on Development (IGAD)
ministers and other officials, and I would like to
express our delegation’s satisfaction at having
participated in this two-day Security Council meeting
in Nairobi on the Somali situation and how to solve
Somali problems. I assure you, Mr. President, along
with the rest of the Council, that I myself and the
Government of Somalia will do our utmost so that
Somalia will be at peace as soon as possible. We are
determined to do whatever we can, because our country
needs peace and reconstruction. We know that our task
is difficult, but that we are ready to face those
difficulties, and we are sure that Somalia will be at
peace as soon as possible.
The President: I now call on the Prime Minister
of the Somali Transitional Federal Government.
Mr. Geedi: I would like to express my thanks and
gratitude to the Security Council. I take this
opportunity to answer a few questions posed by
Council members.
The first question was about when the cabinet of
the Transitional Federal Government will be formed.
My answer is that I am consulting with all of the

S/PV.5083

stakeholders and am within the time frame of the
transitional charter of Somalia. So within the coming
two weeks or before the end of this month, I will come
up with my cabinet.
The other question was about the relocation or
return of the Government to Somalia. I think that my
President stated that we, the Government, will not
remain an exile Government. As soon as we form the
cabinet we will move to Somalia, probably by January
at the latest. The reason is that immediately after the
formation of the cabinet, we are planning to send a
mission of ministers and members of parliament to
travel all over the country. Therefore, on the basis of
their findings and assessments, the Government will
immediately relocate to the country.
Another question raised by speakers was how the
reconciliation process will be completed. That is a
priority of the Government, and the reconciliation
process will be completed through dialogue and in a
peaceful manner throughout all of Somalia.
Therefore, I want lastly to assure the Security
Council that we will be able to address the tasks ahead
of us. We believe that we have an environment
conducive to that among the Somali people and in the
parliament due to the inclusiveness of the
reconciliation process and the achievements made so
far with the support of subregional, regional and
international organizations.
The President: After consultations among
members of the Security Council, I have been
authorized to make the following statement on behalf
of the Council:
“The Security Council reaffirms all its
previous resolutions and the statements of its
President concerning the situation in Somalia, in
particular the statement by its President dated
26 October 2004.
“The Security Council reiterates its
commitment to a comprehensive and lasting
settlement of the situation in Somalia and its
respect for the sovereignty, territorial integrity,
political independence and unity of Somalia,
consistent with the purposes and principles of the
Charter of the United Nations.
“The Security Council welcomes the
progress made in the Somali national
reconciliation process, in particular the

establishment of the Transitional Federal
Parliament, the election of the Speaker of the
Parliament and the President and the appointment
of the Prime Minister, which provides a sound
and solid framework to achieve a comprehensive
and lasting solution to the Somalia situation. The
Council reiterates its expectation of the
establishment of a broad-based, all-inclusive and
effective Government inside Somalia that will
continue the reconciliation efforts with all Somali
parties.
“The Security Council stresses that it is the
responsibility of all Somali parties to work
together to consolidate the gains made so far and
to achieve further progress. The Council calls
upon them to seize this historic opportunity for
peace in Somalia by developing a programme of
action and timetable for the transitional period,
creating a favourable environment for long-term
stability and making determined efforts to rebuild
the country.
“The Security Council commends member
States of the Intergovernmental Authority on
Development (IGAD), in particular the
Government of Kenya, as well as other countries
and organizations for all their constructive efforts
to facilitate the Somali national reconciliation
process.
“The Security Council reaffirms its support
for the commitment of the African Union to assist
the transitional process in Somalia, in particular
the planning for a mission in Somalia, including
options for disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration.
“The Security Council encourages and urges
donor countries, regional and subregional
organizations to provide support for the future
Somali Government’s and institutions’ efforts to
ensure their ability to function inside Somalia and
to assist in the reconstruction of Somalia. The
Council encourages a dialogue between the
international donor community and the future
Transitional Federal Government on the
principles and modalities of international
coordination under discussion, including at the
Stockholm meeting of 29 October 2004, and
welcomes the United Nations lead facilitating

19

S/PV.5083

role in that dialogue and in the subsequent
coordination arrangements.

This statement will be issued as a document of the
Security Council under the symbol S/PRST/2004/43.

“The Security Council reaffirms its full
support for the peace process in Somalia and the
commitment of the United Nations to assist the
regional and subregional efforts in this regard.

The Security Council has thus concluded the
present stage of its consideration of the item on its
agenda.

“The Security Council expresses its
determination to continue to monitor the situation
closely.”

20

The meeting rose at 4.50 p.m.
