A /69/PV.58

United Nations

asdf

General Assembly

Official Records

Sixty-ninth session

58th plenary meeting

Friday, 21 November 2014, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Kutesa . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  (Uganda)

The meeting was called to order at 10.15 a.m.
Agenda item 110
Notification by the Secretary-General under
Article 12, paragraph 2, of the Charter of the
United Nations
Note by the Secretary-General (A/69/300)
The President: As members are aware, in
accordance with the provisions of Article 12, paragraph
2, of the Charter of the United Nations, and with the
consent of the Security Council, the Secretary-General
is mandated to notify the General Assembly of matters
relative to the maintenance of international peace
and security that are being dealt with by the Security
Council and of matters with which the Council has
ceased to deal. In that connection, the General Assembly
has before it a note by the Secretary-General issued as
document A/69/300.
May I take it that the Assembly takes note of that
document?
It was so decided.
The President: May I take it that it is the wish of
the General Assembly to conclude its consideration of
agenda item 110?
It was so decided.

Agenda item 28
Report of the Security Council
Report of the Security Council (A/69/2)
The President: I now give the floor to the President
of the Security Council, His Excellency Mr. Gary
Quinlan, to introduce the report of the Council.
Mr. Quinlan (Australia): Let me begin by
congratulating you, Sir, on behalf of all the members
of the Security Council, on your election as President
of the General Assembly. I thank you for arranging
today’s meeting.
As the President of the Security Council for the
month of November, it is my honour to introduce the
annual report of the Council (A/69/2), which covers the
period from 1 August 2013 to 31 July 2014.
The Charter of the United Nations entrusts the
Security Council with the primary responsibility for the
maintenance of international peace and security. Over
the past year, with the support of the full membership of
the United Nations, the Security Council has discharged
its responsibilities by supporting the peaceful resolution
of conflicts and undertaking a range of peacekeeping
and peacebuilding activities.
During the reporting period, the Security Council
held 238 formal meetings, of which 218 were public.
The Security Council adopted 55 resolutions and
26 presidential statements, while also issuing 113
statements to the press.

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of speeches
delivered in other languages. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only.
They should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

14-64287 (E)

*1464287*

A/69/PV.58

The Security Council also conducted two field
missions, one to the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
Rwanda, Uganda and Ethiopia in October 2013 and
another to Mali in February of this year.
During the reporting period, the Security Council
maintained its usual focus on the African continent.
Over the past year, there was some progress. The
mandate of the United Nations Integrated Peacebuilding
Office in Sierra Leone was completed. Substantial
gains were made by the Somali armed forces against
Al-Shabaab, with the support of the African Union
Mission in Somalia. Constitutional order was restored
in Guinea-Bissau. And the Force Intervention Brigade,
deployed as part of the United Nations Organization
Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, became fully operational.
The Security Council responded to conflicts in the
Central African Republic, South Sudan and Libya. The
Security Council reinforced the protection-of-civilians
mandate of the United Nations Mission in South Sudan
and established the United Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in the Central African
Republic.
The situations across the Middle East also featured
prominently on the Council’s agenda, in relation to Gaza
as well as to Iraq. The security situation worsened in
both Syria and Yemen. In September 2013, the Council
adopted resolution 2118 (2013), on the elimination of
Syria’s chemical-weapons programme, and adopted
resolutions 2139 (2014) and 2165 (2014) during 2014 to
address the humanitarian situation in the country.
The Yemen Sanctions Committee was established
pursuant to resolution 2140 (2014) to oversee the
imposition of sanctions on spoilers of Yemen’s political
transition.
The Council met frequently on the conflict in
Ukraine and responded quickly to the downing of
Malaysia Airlines Flight MH-17 in Donetsk province,
which resulted in the loss of 298 lives. The Council
adopted resolution 2166 (2014) to condemn that incident
in the strongest terms, to demand a full, thorough
and independent investigation and to stress that those
responsible must be held accountable.
The Security Council also adopted resolutions to
extend the mandates of a large number of peace and
stability missions. They included the United Nations
Assistance Mission in Afghanistan, the United Nations

2/29

21/11/2014

Stabilization Mission in Haiti, the United Nations
Interim Force in Lebanon, the United Nations Mission
in Liberia, the United Nations Interim Security Force
for Abyei, the United Nations Disengagement Observer
Force, the United Nations Peacekeeping Force in
Cyprus, the United Nations Office in Burundi, the
United Nations Support Mission in Libya, the United
Nations Mission for the Referendum in Western Sahara,
the United Nations Integrated Peacebuilding Office
in Guinea-Bissau, the United Nations Assistance
Mission in Somalia, the United Nations Operation in
Côte d’Ivoire, the United Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in Mali, the United
Nations Organization Stabilization Mission in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and the United
Nations Assistance Mission for Iraq.
Complementing that focus on country situations
on the agenda, the Council also paid close attention
to thematic, general and cross-cutting issues. The
Council held meetings on the protection of civilians, on
children and armed conflict and on women and peace
and security. The Council remained closely engaged
on non-proliferation, peacekeeping and peacebuilding.
During the reporting period, the Council adopted
significant resolutions on thematic issues, including on
small arms, women and peace and security, children
and armed conflict, security-sector reform and
peacekeeping.
Upholding the rule of law and accountability for
the most serious crimes remain significant topics of
interest for the Security Council. The Prosecutor of
the International Criminal Court briefed the Council
periodically. The Council also worked to ensure
close cooperation and collaboration with regional
organizations. That included two consultative meetings
with the African Union Peace and Security Council and
a briefing by the High Representative of the Union for
Foreign Affairs and Security Policy.
In conclusion, consistent with usual practice, the
introduction to the report was prepared by Rwanda,
which held the presidency of the Security Council in
July 2014. Members of the Council also contributed
to the preparation of the report. I extend thanks to
the Secretariat for compiling the report and to all
those involved in producing it. I look forward to this
morning’s discussion of the report by Member States
and will convey the views of members of the General
Assembly faithfully to my colleagues in the Security
Council.

14-64287

21/11/2014

Mr. Dehghani (Islamic Republic of Iran): On behalf
of the Non-Aligned Movement (NAM), allow me first
to express the Movement’s appreciation to you, Sir, for
holding this debate, which will provide the General
Assembly with an opportunity to examine, scrutinize
and evaluate the report contained in document A/69/2
and the activities of the Security Council.
The Charter of the United Nations stipulates in
Article 24, paragraph 3, that
“The Security Council shall submit annual
and, when necessary, special reports to the General
Assembly for its consideration.”
That provision was designed to help the General
Assembly, as the chief deliberative and representative
organ of the United Nations, to exercise its mandate
in addressing issues relating to the maintenance of
international peace and security.
While Member States have conferred on the Security
Council the primary responsibility for the maintenance
of international peace and security — pursuant to
Article 24, paragraph 1, of the Charter — in carrying
out its duties under that responsibility the Council acts
on their behalf. In that context, NAM stresses that the
Council should report and be accountable to the General
Assembly, in accordance with Article 24, paragraph 3,
of the Charter.
NAM underscores the need for States Members of
the United Nations to fully respect the functions and
powers of each principal organ of the United Nations,
in particular the General Assembly, and to maintain
the balance among those organs within their respective
Charter-based functions and powers. NAM also stresses
that the Security Council must fully observe all Charter
provisions, as well as all General Assembly resolutions,
that clarify its relationship with the latter organ and
other principal organs. In that context, we affirm that
Article 24 of the Charter does not necessarily provide
the Security Council with the competence to address
issues that fall within the functions and powers of
the General Assembly and the Economic and Social
Council, including in the areas of norm-setting,
legislation and administrative and budgetary matters,
and in establishing definitions, bearing in mind that
the Assembly is primarily tasked with the progressive
development of international law and its codification.
NAM reiterates its concern over the Security
Council’s continuing encroachment on the functions
and powers of the General Assembly and the Economic

A/69/PV.58

and Social Council through its tendency to address
issues that traditionally fall within the competence of
the latter organs. In that regard, I would like to draw
the General Assembly’s attention to the latest case,
namely, the Security Council briefing on the role of
policing in peacekeeping operations and post-conflict
peacebuilding (see S/PV.7317), which was held on
20 November 2014. As emphasized in my recent letter
dated 14 November 2014, written in my capacity as the
Chair of the coordinating bureau of the Non-Aligned
Movement and addressed to you, Sir, as President of
the General Assembly, to the President of the Security
Council and to the Secretary-General, NAM believes
that United Nations policing is an integral part of
peacekeeping operations. The Security Council should
therefore not act in a way that encroaches upon the
mandate of the General Assembly, especially the
Special Committee on Peacekeeping, as the only United
Nations forum mandated to review the whole question
of peacekeeping operations.
We furthermore express our concern over the
constant attempts by the Security Council to use
thematic issues under its consideration to expand
its mandate into areas that do not pose a threat to
international peace and security, and we further urge the
Council to confine itself to its mandate in accordance
with the Charter’s provisions. All organs and bodies of
the United Nations should carry only out those tasks
that have been established within their respective
mandates. In that regard, we reiterate that the principal
United Nations organs have distinct and separate roles,
in accordance with the Charter of the United Nations.
NAM urges all States to uphold the primacy of,
and full respect for, the provisions of the Charter of the
United Nations pertaining to the functions and powers
of the Assembly, and calls on the Presidents of the
General Assembly, the Economic and Social Council
and the Security Council to conduct regular discussions
and coordinate among themselves on the agenda and
programme of work of the respective principal organs
that they represent, in order to establish increased
coherence and complementarities among those organs
in a mutually reinforcing manner, respectful of each
others’ mandates and with a view to generating mutual
understanding among them. The members of the
respective organs that they represent have, in good
faith, vested in them their trust and confidence.
NAM also welcomes, as a step forward, the informal
meetings between the Council’s President in July and

14-642873/29

A/69/PV.58

Member States on the preparation of the annual report
of the Security Council, and calls for more regular
interactions each year between Presidents of the
Security Council for July and the wider membership of
the United Nations, which can help enhance the quality
of such reports.
For years, the Non-Aligned Movement has noted
that the annual reports of the Security Council continue
to be a procedural overview of the meetings, activities
and decisions of the Council. We call on the Security
Council to submit a more explanatory, comprehensive
and analytical annual report to the General Assembly,
assessing the work of the Council, including cases in
which the Council has failed to act, as well as the views
expressed by its members during the consideration
of the agenda items under its consideration. NAM
further calls on the Security Council to elaborate the
circumstances under which it decides to adopt different
outcomes, whether they be resolutions, presidential
statements, press statements or other statements to the
press.
Finally, we call on the Security Council to submit
special reports, when necessary, for the consideration
of the General Assembly, pursuant to Article 15,
paragraph 1, and Article 24, paragraph 3, of the Charter
of the United Nations. The Security Council should
ensure that its monthly assessments are comprehensive
and analytical, and that they are issued in a timely
fashion. The General Assembly may consider proposing
parameters for the elaboration of such assessments.
Mr. Mendoza-García (Costa Rica) (spoke in
Spanish): Costa Rica is a member of the Accountability,
Coherence and Transparency (ACT) group of the
Security Council, a transregional group comprised
of 23 States. We are honoured to speak on its behalf
with regard to agenda item 28, entitled “Report of the
Security Council”.
Allow me at the outset to thank you, Sir, for holding
this debate. We believe it is important that this year’s
debate has been scheduled with a certain distance, both
political and temporal, from the consideration of agenda
item 119, entitled “Question of equitable representation
on and increase in the membership of the Security
Council and related matters”. That will allow us to
conduct a more meaningful exchange of opinions on
each of the two items.
The ACT group would also like to express its
gratitude to Rwanda for its efforts and commitment

4/29

21/11/2014

in editing the report (A/69/2), and to Australia for its
comprehensive briefing. The report summarizes the
Council’s activities and sets forth its priorities, which
are embodied in those activities. In that regard, it is a
clear and well-organized document. However, while we
recognize the difficulty of producing a document that is
simultaneously comprehensive and concise, we would
have liked it to include more material for reflection
and analysis. A presentation that went beyond a mere
summary to include other elements, such as an analysis
of the decision-making processes of the Council, would
have assisted Member States in drawing their own
conclusions regarding the contents of the report and the
work of the Security Council.
ACT commends the Security Council’s efforts to
increase its transparency and effectiveness. In recent
years, the Council has interacted with a greater number
of external actors — civil society, non-governmental
organizations, academia and others — through a
range of innovative meeting formats, including the
Arria Formula and informal interactive dialogues. The
number of open debates, public information meetings,
wrap-up sessions and substantive reports to the General
Assembly has also increased. Moreover, greater and
more flexible use has been made of the entire range
of Council products, in particular press releases and
presidential statements, in response to developing
events. However, over the years, the Security Council
report and the debate on the report have become more
or less a ritual. As a result, it is of limited relevance.
In order to redress that situation, we urge both the
Security Council and the General Assembly to adopt
bold and innovative measures that will make better use
of the annual report. If such measures were adopted, we
could obtain more numerous and more tangible benefits
from the contents of the report and the relevant debate,
in the context of our shared resolve to strengthen
international peace and security in accordance with
the Charter of the United Nations, with full respect
for the work, mandate and competency of both the
General Assembly and the Security Council. With that
in mind, our group would like to make six specific
observations and suggestions with respect to the way in
which the annual report might be prepared, the nature
of its contents and improvements to the format for its
discussion.
First, we question the importance of the number of
open debates if different points of view and specific
proposals are not included in the report. In assessing

14-64287

21/11/2014

the impact of its consultations, the Council should
specifically include a selection of the opinions of
non-member States. Such a process should also accord
priority to the statements of groups that have made
specific suggestions for change on which States have
committed themselves to act.
Secondly, the Council’s adoption of its annual
report could provide an opportunity for an open debate
with members of the Council. The topics of such an
open debate could include decisions taken by the
Council and the positions of the various Member States
regarding their adoption; the challenges that the Council
faces in carrying out its mandate and its proposals for
addressing them; references to discussions in which
the Council did not reach consensus; the reasons that
led the Council not to take firm positions on important
issues regarding international peace and security; and
possible future strategies to promote a more preventive
and less reactive focus in the face of global crises. ACT
recommends that both retrospective and prospective
viewpoints should be taken into account during such an
analysis of the Council’s work.
Thirdly, the annual assessments of the work of
the subsidiary organs of the Council and the monthly
reports of the Council presidencies, which provide
more in-depth analysis than the annual report, should
be compiled and included as an integral part of the
annual report. Those assessments could play an
important role in making clear which issues have been
given priority by the Council, month by month. Any
responsibilities discharged with regard to the positions
of other members of the Council could also be included.
Fourthly, thematic issues should not be considered
as free-standing topics. On the contrary, they are an
integral part of the consideration of country situations.
Although not formally part of the agenda, both
underlying general themes and cross-cutting themes
related to the work of the Security Council should
therefore be linked by being cross-indexed to allow for
their timely consideration as part of the corresponding
country-specific analysis. Along those lines, we
particularly urge the Council to make a greater effort
to honour and involve other relevant actors within the
United Nations in all its thematic commitments.
Fifthly, the annual report should also be a useful
exercise in accountability in the area of the Council’s
working methods and should employ assessment tools
related to key areas of the Council’s work. A section

A/69/PV.58

of the report should therefore be devoted to that topic
and should include a record of the progress made in
the implementation of the presidential notes and other
working methods recommended by other Member
States and by ACT.
Finally, the adoption of the annual report should
provide an excellent opportunity not only to review
and evaluate the past, but also for all parties concerned
to take note of the lessons learned, with a view to
discussing options and strategies for the future. In
other words, what do we need to do differently in order
to better maintain international peace and security?
Any discussion on the Council’s annual report must
not be merely a formal exercise in retrospection, but a
forward-looking, reform-minded exercise as well. ACT
suggests a possible format organized around a series
of workshops clustered around country situations and/
or major thematic issues, or even a less formal setting,
such as Arria Formula meetings.
To conclude, allow me to say a few words on the
working methods of the Security Council. We would
like to highlight the increasing number of open debates
organized by successive Council presidencies. At
the same time, we recall that, although such debates
demonstrate a greater willingness for openness and
inclusion, they do not alone translate into meaningful
discussions. In that context, it is necessary to put
into practice the procedural changes that will make
debates less formulaic and more likely ultimately
to have a material impact. We welcome in particular
the possibility of making Council consultations more
spontaneous, vigorous and productive.
We commend the efforts led by France to establish
a code of conduct on the use of the veto, under which
the permanent members would commit to refrain from
using the veto in cases involving atrocity crimes.
During the period covered by the report, yet another
veto relating to the situation in Syria demonstrated
once again the importance of that initiative. As the
Council’s working methods become more collaborative
and accountable, we anticipate that support for that
proposal from all Member States will grow as well.
We
encourage
future
Security
Council
presidencies to strengthen efforts to enhance the
report’s impact — something that should be taken into
consideration from the report’s inception and developed
throughout the report’s finalization, formal submission
and discussion.

14-642875/29

A/69/PV.58

Mr. Barriga (Liechtenstein): At the outset, I would
like to thank the President of the Security Council for
having presented the report of the Council (A/69/2)
today. The report raises many important questions that
deserve to be addressed separately from the question
of Security Council enlargement. We are therefore
grateful to you, Sir, for holding this separate debate
today.
Liechtenstein is a member of the Accountability,
Coherence and Transparency (ACT) group and
aligns itself with the statement just delivered by the
representative of Costa Rica. Allow me, however, to
add a few thoughts on the use of the veto and on efforts
to regulate it.
As the report notes in its introduction, two vetoes
prevented the Council from referring the situation
in Syria to the International Criminal Court. No
reasonable person can deny that atrocity crimes have
been committed in that conflict: they have been amply
documented by the Commission of Inquiry and many
other credible sources. Such use of the veto means that,
for the victims of those crimes, justice will be delayed,
if not denied. That was the fourth draft resolution
regarding Syria blocked by a veto since that tragic
conflict began.
The veto forms a part of the Charter of the United
Nations, which all of our countries ratified. While some
may call for its abolition, nobody denies the existence of
that privilege granted to the permanent members. It is
important to note, however, that the Charter also obliges
the Council to act in accordance with its purposes and
principles. That obligation rests on the Council as a
whole, but especially on its permanent members, whose
privileged position comes with special responsibility.
It is for that reason that Liechtenstein and others have,
for some time now, advocated for rules on the use of the
veto, under which permanent members of the Security
Council would commit to refrain voluntarily from
using the veto if such use would block Council action
aimed at preventing or ending atrocity crimes. Other
Council members should similarly pledge not to vote
against such action.
We have worked with our partners in the ACT
group, as well as with France, to advance the discussion
towards a code of conduct. In March 2014, Liechtenstein
and France co-hosted a workshop at the International
Peace Institute to discuss that issue with a wider
circle of interested States and experts. We commend
the workshop summary to all those interested in that
6/29

21/11/2014

topic. We will continue to work within ACT to make
proposals to ensure the timely adoption of a meaningful
code of conduct.
What would make such a code of conduct
meaningful? It should contain a clear and unambiguous
commitment not to vote against draft resolutions
aimed at preventing or ending genocide, crimes
against humanity or war crimes. Given the irreversible
consequences of the crimes involved, it is crucial that
prevention be included. The code should refer to some
authoritative entity that can bring instances of such
crimes to the attention of the Council. We believe that
the Secretary-General is ideally suited to play that role,
given his competence under Article 99 of the Charter
and given his access to the early-warning capabilities
of the United Nations system.
On 15 March 2014, the Russian Federation vetoed
a draft resolution, sponsored by many countries,
including Liechtenstein, in the aftermath of the Crimea
referendum. That raises serious questions under the
second part of Article 27, paragraph 3, of the Charter,
which obliges parties to a conflict to abstain on
decisions taken under Chapter VI of the Charter. We
were surprised that that matter was not raised in the
Council. We believe that the time is ripe to re-examine
the application of that paragraph. We encourage a frank
discussion on the issue, and we would hope that future
reports of the Council will reflect a critical examination
of the applicability of Article 27, paragraph 3, in
relevant instances.
Mr. Mukerji (India): I thank you, Sir, for having
organized this meeting on the annual report of the
Security Council for the period 1 August 2013 to 31 July
2014 (A/69/2).
I would like to express my appreciation for the hard
work put in by Ambassador Eugène-Richard Gasana,
Permanent Representative of Rwanda, and his team in
preparing the annual report of the Security Council.
I also thank Ambassador Gary Quinlan, Permanent
Representative of Australia, for presenting the report to
the Assembly this morning.
The report of the Security Council is one of the
principal means of interaction between the General
Assembly — the most representative organ of the United
Nations — and the Council — its most empowered
one — on the substantive issues dealt with by the
Council. The Charter of the United Nations mandates
the Council to submit annual reports to the General

14-64287

21/11/2014

Assembly for its consideration. That clearly sets
forth the accountability of the Council to the broader
membership of the United Nations represented here
in the Assembly, which has agreed to implement the
Council’s decisions under Article 25 of the Charter. The
discussion of the Council’s report therefore warrants
that we, the Member States, pronounce ourselves on
not only the substantive issues but also the working
methods of the Council, as they have a direct bearing
on the issue of the timely reform of the Council, in the
terms of paragraph 153 of the 2005 Summit Outcome
(resolution 60/1).
The participation of Member States in the open
debates of the Council under rule 37 cannot be a
substitute for the debate we are having here. It is also
pertinent to point out that the Council resolutions or
presidential statements that are the outcomes of such
open debates are agreed to by the Council members
before the participation of the Member States. This
reduces our participation to mere tokenism, and, if it
is not checked in time, will defeat the principle of such
participation. Our first recommendation, therefore,
is that the Council should give consideration to the
suggestions made and views expressed by the members
in open debates before any outcomes are adopted.
The outcomes of the Security Council meetings
and actions of the Council are generally available to
the Member States through its website. However,
what would be helpful for Member States to know is
how these decisions were reached, the sensitivities
with which such decisions were taken, and whether
the working procedures of the Council were applied
consistently. It is in this context that the annual report
of the Council assumes greater significance. Member
States have repeatedly requested that the report be
more analytical and incisive, rather than being a mere
narration of events. Regrettably, however, the report
continues to be a statistical compilation of events and
listing of meetings and outcome documents. Our second
recommendation is that the Council’s reports should be
made more analytical in future.
Thirdly, we feel that having a larger number of
Member States in the decision-making process of
the Council will make it more transparent, credible,
legitimate and representative. That is directly linked
to the early reforms of the Council mandated by our
leaders at the 2005 Summit.
With regard to substantive issues, we note that
most of the Council’s work during the period in review

A/69/PV.58

centred around Africa, including the Central African
Republic, the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
Mali and Somalia, as well as on the situation in the
Middle East. The Council held many thematic debates
on various general and cross-cutting issues, including
threats to peace and security caused by terrorist acts
and peacekeeping issues.
In the context of mandates adopted by the Council
for peacekeeping operations, we would like to offer
the following concerns. First, we urge the Council to
consult the troop-contributing countries, as clearly
provided forunder Article 44 of the Charter of the
United Nations, while adopting the mandates of such
operations. It is not only the formulation of the mandates
but also the change of mandates midstream that is a
source of concern for us. This was evidenced in the
case of the United Nations Organization Stabilization
Mission in the Democratic Republic of the Congo
(MONUSCO) referred to in last year’s report (A/68/2).
Secondly, as a major troop-contributing country and
one with a substantial presence in both MONUSCO and
the United Nations Mission in South Sudan, India would
like to emphasize the need for an objective assessment
of the implications of robust mandates for the impartial
nature of United Nations peacekeeping. The provisions
of the Charter of the United Nations do not, in our view,
allow the misuse of our peacekeepers. Impartiality
and neutrality are key principles for ensuring the
effectiveness of United Nations peacekeepers.
Another related issue is how to deter threats to
United Nations peacekeepers posed by non-Government
forces or militias. The Council has asked for the
apprehension of those responsible for killing United
Nations peacekeepers, but the report does not shed any
light on what has happened to ensure that so far in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, South Sudan, Mali
or anywhere else.
Thirdly, the threats posed by non-Government
forces, militias and terrorists to United Nations
peacekeepers have to be taken seriously. Specific
examples in this case are attacks in the Golan Heights
and Mali. Unless effectively deterred, such threats will
increase in number and scope. In the case of the United
Nations Disengagement Observer Force, it has been
alleged that the foreign terrorist fighters who attacked
United Nations peacekeepers belong to the Al-Nusra
Front, which is a terrorist organization proscribed by
the Security Council, but the report does not give any
information on the steps taken by the Council to use

14-642877/29

A/69/PV.58

its authority to investigate, prosecute and penalize the
perpetrators of such terrorist acts. A clear obligation
of all Member States to act against foreign terrorist
fighters who attack United Nations peacekeepers
should become an integral part of the peacekeeping
mandates approved by the Security Council.
On the situation in Afghanistan, an agenda item
considered by both the Council and the General
Assembly, I am happy that yesterday the General
Assembly adopted resolution 69/18, which we
co-sponsored. We reiterate our full support to an
Afghan-led, Afghan-owned and Afghan-controlled
process of peace and reconciliation.
On the issue of counter-terrorism, we recall that
the Council adopted resolution 2178 (2014) on foreign
terrorist fighters in September, and presidential
statement S/PRST/2014/23 two days ago. We also
recall that it has endorsed a policy of zero tolerance
for terrorism. However, the report does not make clear
what working procedures are applied within the Council
when it deliberates on how to counter terrorism, which
is becoming the single biggest threat to the maintenance
of international peace and security. We feel that a
more detailed account in the report of how the Council
acts on information provided to it by Member States
would go a long way towards offsetting the widely held
perception that the Council uses different standards in
dealing with terrorism.
I wish to recall that, at the debate on 12 November
(see A/69/PV.49), a majority of Member States clearly
affirmed the need for an outcome on the early reform
of the Security Council by the seventieth anniversary
summit, to be held next year. I would like to urge that
while the Assembly takes note of the annual report of
the Council, it should also ask the Council to bear in
mind the suggestions made by Member States.
I conclude with the suggestion that the General
Assembly consider establishing a review mechanism
under your leadership and mandate, Sir, to list the
various valuable suggestions made by Member States in
this debate today, and ask the Council to submit a status
report on their implementation for the consideration of
our leaders at the seventieth anniversary summit, to be
held in September next year.
Mr. Masood Khan (Pakistan): Let me first thank
you, Sir, for convening this meeting on the report of
the Security Council (A/69/2). We are grateful to the
President of the Security Council, Ambassador Gary

8/29

21/11/2014

Quinlan of Australia, for presenting and elaborating on
the report.
The Security Council acts on behalf of all
States Members of the United Nations. That makes
it accountable to the general membership. We use
this yearly debate in the Assembly to comment on
the substance and procedures of the Council. The
purpose of our debate should be to initiate a two-way
communication and dialogue between the two organs.
During the period covered by the report,
ending in July, the Security Council conducted its
business efficiently. Despite daunting challenges, it
demonstrated vigilance, decisiveness and resilience in
responding to many escalating situations, especially in
regard to South Sudan, the Central African Republic,
Mali and the Malaysian airliner. We appreciate the
Council’s work on counter-terrorism in the areas of
ransom payments, measures against Al-Qaida and the
extension of the Office of the Ombudsperson. Many
of the Security Council’s meetings have remained
public. This is a healthy trend. This growing culture of
transparency should also be embraced by the Council’s
subsidiary bodies.
Increasingly, the Council is becoming more
efficient and responsive, but it needs to work more on
its effectiveness and working methods. The Council’s
propensity to rely heavily on Chapter VII measures
has been persistent. We believe that there should be
frequent resort to preventive diplomacy under Chapters
VI and VIII of the Charter of the United Nations.
Timely initiatives for negotiation, enquiry, mediation,
conciliation, arbitration, judicial settlement, and the
use of regional and subregional organizations and the
good offices of the Secretary-General could save the
world from many costly wars and conflicts.
The Security Council’s conscious reticence on the
situation in Gaza this summer was incomprehensible
and unacceptable. Had the Security Council prevented
the escalation in Gaza, the carnage that followed could
have been averted. The Security Council’s action or
inaction is watched by the media, especially by social
media, all around the world. The citizens of the world
ask probing questions about why the Council cannot
pronounce itself on developments that clearly imperil
peace and security and fuel aggression and violence. A
Council that is tongue-tied on certain issues reinforces
the perceptions of selectivity based on realpolitik. In
this day and age, the Council’s actions should also have

14-64287

21/11/2014

broad street credibility. The Council must be perceived
as a fair, unbiased and effective body.
The Council and the General Assembly should
work as partners in the maintenance of international
peace and security. The General Assembly should act as
a counterpoise in the discussion of particularly thorny
issues that do not yield to a solution in the Council.
It is a bit strange that the Council has not heard the
full deliberative voice of the General Assembly on the
escalating crises of Ukraine, the Islamic State in Iraq
and Syria and the Ebola epidemic. Diligent debates in
the Assembly on those vexing issues can help mobilize
world opinion to slow down a drift towards a new
Cold War, stem the emergence of a new psychopathic
ideology of hatred and revenge and prepare the health
systems of the world to deal with pandemics. Those
and other issues are as much the issues of the general
membership as they are of the Security Council.
When Pakistan, during its presidency of the
Council, revived the practice of holding wrap-up
sessions, there were some misgivings about its format.
Now we see that such sessions have proved their value
in taking stock of the month’s work in the Council.
United Nations peacekeeping is the most tangible
contribution by the Security Council to international
peace and security. Pakistan’s consistent and leading
contribution to United Nations peacekeeping is a source
of national pride for us and a testament to our abiding
commitment to global peace and security. We recently
contributed troops to the Central African Republic.
Pakistan fully understands the need to explore ways to
adapt United Nations peacekeeping operations to the
complex and dynamic nature of conflicts. However,
adaptations in policy must follow an extensive dialogue
among key stakeholders, including troop-contributing
countries (TCCs) and finance-contributing countries.
In that regard, we welcome the Secretary-General’s
ongoing strategic review of peacekeeping.
We acknowledge the fact that some steps have
been taken by the Council to improve its working
methods. They include interaction and dialogue with
non-members of the Council, consultations with
troop- and police-contributing countries (PCCs), the
appointment of more penholders from among the elected
members of the Council and the early appointment of
the Chairpersons of the subsidiary bodies.
We are also pleased to note the adoption of a proposal
initiated by Pakistan on intra-Council dialogue, albeit

A/69/PV.58

in a diluted form. More improvement in the Council’s
working methods is required. It is a bit awkward, 70
years after its creation, that the Security Council
continues to work using provisional rules of procedure.
The Council’s working methods need to correspond to
the globally accepted values of the twenty-first century.
Its work needs to be more transparent, participative and
responsive to the needs of the wider United Nations
membership. In that regard, I should like to offer some
suggestions.
There should be substantive collaboration between
the General Assembly and the Security Council based
on their respective agendas. The monthly meetings
between the Presidents of the General Assembly and
Security Council should be made substantive in order
to choreograph action by the two bodies based on their
agendas. Those meetings should not be only courtesy
calls or cursory exchanges of information.
The annual reports of the Security Council should
be analytical, and not merely a compendium of its
activities. As provided in the note by the President of
the Security Council of 12 December 2012 (S/2012/922),
the Security Council’s adoption of outcome documents
should follow discussions in open debates. In our view,
that should be done in a manner that allows the inputs
provided by the wider United Nations membership to
feed into the outcome documents.
Close collaboration between the Council and the
TCCs and PCCs, especially during the negotiations
on peacekeeping mandates, will make a mission’s
formation, force generation, deployment and operations
on the ground much more effective and productive.
The Informal Working Group on Documentation
and Other Procedural Questions could be convened in
an open meeting format — a suggestion made some time
ago by the United States in one of the intergovernmental
negotiations meetings.
The selection and appointment of expert panels and
groups should be made more transparent, balanced and
representative.
My final comment is that the Council may consider
collating the views expressed by Member States today,
circulating a synopsis of those views as an official
document and forming a joint committee with the
General Assembly to examine the implementation of
some of the recommendations being made today.

14-642879/29

A/69/PV.58

Mr. Patriota (Brazil): I thank you, Sir, for
organizing this debate. I would also like to thank the
Permanent Representative of Australia and President
of the Security Council for the month of November,
Ambassador Gary Quinlan, for presenting the annual
report of the Security Council (A/69/2), which covers a
period of intense activity in the domain of international
peace and security.
The transparency and accountability of the
Security Council to the general membership is a
matter to which Brazil ascribes great importance. We
therefore believe that the annual report, by providing
a comprehensive account of the Council’s activities to
the General Assembly, represents an important tool for
strengthening the Council’s accountability vis-à-vis the
178 Member States that do not regularly take part in its
deliberations.
We have also long been supportive of improvements
in the Council’s working methods aimed at making it
less opaque and more democratic. The report makes it
clear that attempts continue to be made to reach out to
the wider membership, and we note with satisfaction
the number of public meetings, open debates, wrapup sessions and consultations with troop- and
police-contributing countries being held. However, it is
essential to deepen and broaden that trend in order for
Council decisions to be more effective and legitimate.
During the period covered by the report, the
situation in the Middle East once again deteriorated
amid increasing tensions and threats to international
peace and security in various parts of the region. After
almost four years of conflict, fighting in Syria has
created a perverse combination of death, suffering and
destruction and has resulted in millions of internally
displaced persons and refugees. As the situation on
the ground further deteriorates, the Council’s chronic
inability to act promptly and substantively is seen
by many as an illustration of a worrisome pattern of
dysfunctionality.
It took 15 months for the Council to endorse the
Geneva communiqué (S/2012/522, annex), which had
been approved by consensus in June 2012, and has
since been considered to be the most rational road map
for a political settlement of the crisis in Syria. Similar
delays were involved in the adoption of resolutions 2139
(2014) and 2165 (2014), which allowed for humanitarian
aid to be delivered to the civilian population.

10/29

21/11/2014

Despite their irrefutable importance, those
resolutions fell short of dealing with some of the
most critical aspects of the Syrian conflict. While the
political process remains paralysed and human rights
violations are relentlessly being committed, the flow of
weapons to all belligerent parties continues, resulting
in more violence, instability and suffering. In other
words, the militarization of the conflict proceeds with
the tacit, or not so tacit, approval of Council members.
How long will it take for the Security Council to adopt a
common position against the continuing militarization
of the crisis?
In Iraq we are also witnessing a severe deterioration
in the security and humanitarian situations, with the
expansion of extremism and the spread of terrorist
activities. The crisis is a stark reminder of the
unpredictable consequences of unilateral actions, such
as those undertaken in 2003. It is our duty to support
Iraq in its efforts to overcome the crisis and combat
terrorism in a way that is fully and strictly compatible
with the Charter of the United Nations.
The brief hope that emerged from the resumption
of direct talks between Israelis and Palestinians in July
2013 quickly dispelled, owing to the parties’ failure
to deal with the essential elements of the conflict.
As a result, the international community witnessed
yet another devastating war in Gaza, the third in five
years. The conflict not only undermined the prospects
for talks, but also fed the cycle of violence and left an
intolerable legacy of civilian deaths, destruction and
displacement.
Let us not forget that the protection of civilians
must be implemented in a universal and non-selective
manner. The commendable emphasis placed by the
Security Council on the protection of civilians when
dealing with other items on its agenda cannot be
sidestepped when it comes to the responsibility to
protect the Palestinian people.
While the Security Council held a significant
number of meetings on the Middle East, including the
Palestinian question, its deliberations have had little
influence on the ground. Had its past resolutions on
the matter been fully implemented, illegal unilateral
actions might not have reigned with impunity, the
situation might not have become so tragic and the gap
between the parties might not have grown so wide.
Brazil expects the Council to play a leading role on
that issue, actively supporting and steering the peace

14-64287

21/11/2014

process, while positioning itself firmly against the
status quo.
As the recent deterioration in Jerusalem and
elsewhere shows, the current situation is neither
sustainable nor acceptable. Brazil condemns all acts
of terrorism, including the attack that took place
on 18 November in a synagogue in West Jerusalem,
which claimed the lives of five Israelis and left eight
people injured. We firmly believe that only through the
implementation of the two-State solution will Israel and
Palestine be able to achieve durable peace and security
and put an end to the suffering of the civilian population
on both sides.
I would also like to address the issue of the
relationship between the Security Council and the
International Criminal Court (ICC), especially the
referral and deferral mechanisms. The Security Council
should strive to preserve a balance between, on the
one hand, upholding the instruments of international
criminal justice, such as the ICC Statute, while, on
the other, responding with wisdom to requests that are
legally sound and meet with wide political support.
Brazil is convinced that there is institutional
space to defuse polarization, ensure respect for
international law and the rule of law and address the
legitimate questions being raised by regional groups.
In that context, the fact that in November 2013 the
Security Council failed to approve the deferrals of
the Kenyan cases proved to be an avoidable misstep.
That draft resolution, which would not have precluded
the proceedings but just postponed them, could have
represented a confidence-building manifestation, and
in that sense was a missed opportunity (see S/PV.7060).
On a more positive note, let me refer briefly to
the situation in Guinea-Bissau, where the Security
Council, working in partnership with the United
Nations team on the ground under the leadership of
former Special Representative of the Secretary-General
José Ramos-Horta and with the close attention of the
Peacebuilding Commission (PBC), contributed to the
restoration of constitutional order. As a close friend
of Guinea-Bissau, Brazil is encouraged to witness the
full re-engagement of international partners with the
country, which became clear at meetings held in New
York this week. We would like, once again, to express
our support for the efforts that are being undertaken by
the new authorities with a view to ensuring the stability,
development, institutional progress and prosperity of
Bissau-Guineans.

A/69/PV.58

As I have previously mentioned to the Council in
my capacity as Chair of the Peacebuilding Commission,
I believe that Guinea-Bissau provides us with a good
example of how constructive and complementary
the interactions between the Security Council and
the PBC can be. That relationship is certainly worth
strengthening in order for the Council to better take
advantage of the advisory and early-warning roles that
the PBC can and does play.
We are also pleased to note that Latin America
and the Caribbean can increasingly be portrayed
as an example of peace, sustainable development
and corporation — a region that fully engages with
the multilateral system of collective security. The
situation in Haiti — the only item relating to the
region that is inscribed on the agenda of the Security
Council — continues to evolve positively, as rightly
indicated in the Council’s annual report and the latest
report of the Secretary-General (S/2014/617). We hope
that, a year from now, when we meet again to discuss
the next annual report of the Security Council, we
will be able to institute a substantial drawdown in the
international military presence in that country within
our sights.
Finally, let me point out that one cannot discuss
the work undertaken by the Security Council without
mentioning the growing frustration among Member
States and civil society with the absence of a satisfactory
answer from the Council in response to some specific
crises around the world, such as the situations in
Syria, Ukraine and Palestine. The task of reforming
the structures of the Council remains urgent. As we
approach the watershed year of 2015, Brazil wishes
to call once again on Member States to embrace the
opportunity provided by the seventieth anniversary of
the Organization to finally adapt the Security Council
to the geopolitical realities of twenty-first century,
making it a more legitimate and representative body
that is capable of addressing contemporary challenges.
Before concluding, let me refer briefly to the
statement delivered by the Permanent Representative of
Costa Rica on behalf of the Accountability, Coherence
and Transparency group, and signal our interest in
further pursuing some of the suggestions regarding the
way the Council’s annual report could be drafted, the
nature of its content and how to improve its discussion
in the General Assembly.
Mr. Aboulatta (Egypt): At the outset, I wish to
thank you, Sir, for having convened this important

14-6428711/29

A/69/PV.58

meeting. I would also like to thank the Permanent
Representative of Rwanda for having prepared the
introduction of the annual report (A/69/2) on behalf
of the members of the Security Council, as well as
the Permanent Representative of Australia for having
presented the report.
As the Council is entrusted with the primary
responsibility for the maintenance of international
peace and security on behalf of the entire membership,
we stress the need for the Council to act on behalf of
the entire membership, as enshrined in the Charter of
the United Nations, by ensuring, to the fullest extent
possible, that the contributions of Members to its
decision-making processes are taken into account.
The authority of the General Assembly should be
fully upheld by ensuring that the Council acts in full
conformity with the Charter.
We welcome the holding of the debate on the report
of the Security Council independently from the larger
question of Security Council reform, with a view to
allowing more time for the General Assembly to discuss
and reflect on the Security Council’s work.
Egypt firmly believes that the work of the Security
Council should be based on transparency, inclusivity and
openness. We therefore call for increased interactivity
between the Council and the broader membership
throughout the reporting cycle. In that regard, I would
like to highlight a few points.
First, we urge the further strengthening of the
growing trend whereby the Council conducts a
substantial portion of its work in an open format — 218
out of 238 formal meetings held during the reporting
period were public. Hence, it is vital for future reports
to provide a better reflection of the contributions by the
broader membership to the Council’s work, including
the open debates.
Secondly, as highlighted in previous debates by
many speakers, there is a need for the report to be more
analytical, rather than merely a narrative compilation
of events.
Thirdly, part of the efforts invested in the report
should be allocated to assessment and evaluation. A
picture of the Council’s work is never complete without
a clear assessment of the results achieved, as well as the
shortcomings. We encourage the inclusion of monthly
assessments prepared by the monthly Presidents in the
annual report.

12/29

21/11/2014

Fourthly, as a considerable amount of the Council’s
work takes place in its subsidiary bodies, they should
also provide annual assessments of their work, and
they should be incorporated in the annual report of the
Council.
Egypt welcomes the continuous debate on the
Council’s working methods and will continue to
contribute to strengthening transparency, inclusivity,
openness and the democratization of the Security
Council’s work, as it is indispensable for the credibility
of the Council in carrying out its mandate and ensuring
its effectiveness and ability to address the rising
challenges.
Mr. Mendonça e Moura (Portugal): I wish to
thank you, Sir, for having organized this debate devoted
solely to the Security Council’s annual report (A/69/2).
We associate ourselves with the statement delivered
earlier on behalf of the Accountability, Coherence and
Transparency group by the representative of Costa
Rica.
The submission by the Security Council of its
annual report to the General Assembly, as called
for in the Charter of the United Nations, is the very
expression of accountability. It is therefore important
that we use this meeting to formally discuss the work
of the Security Council and the information provided
in its report, an exercise that, in our view, should seek
to strengthen the relationship between two principal
organs of the United Nations.
We thank the representative of Australia, this
month’s President of the Security Council, for the
presentation of the report. As we see it, the presentation
is in itself another opportunity to further underline the
main aspects of the Council’s work and to highlight its
main achievements and its shortcomings. For the future,
we could also use the presentation of the report as a way
of encouraging this debate to focus on selected aspects
related to the action of the Council or on particular
areas reflected in the report.
As we mentioned recently at the Security Council
open debate on working methods (see S/PV.7285),
annual reports serve two purposes: to provide statistical
records and to provide information. A considerable part
of the report is not meant to be read, but rather consulted.
That is the part with statistical data for the historical
record and future reference. The other part, which is
basically the introduction, should be informative. That

14-64287

21/11/2014

is where there is still much work to do. We think that it
is through the more informative monthly assessments,
particularly on meetings held during consultations, that
that part could be substantially enhanced.
Indeed, monthly assessments should try to
highlight in particular the developments that occurred
during consultations. We would thereby have a
clearer picture of the difficulties encountered and
the motivation for any action taken or the reasons for
inaction on the part of the Council. That should be done
without disclosing the elements that are understandably
confidential. That is why we believe that the Presidents
of the month should continue to be entrusted with the
leeway necessary to write their assessments, which
they are solely responsible for, notwithstanding the
courtesy and practice of consulting with other Council
members. A collection of more substantive assessments
would result in a more substantive introduction to the
report, and perhaps even in a shorter introduction,
as one could dispense with the detailed information
on public meetings, which repeats information in the
annexes and on which records are publicly available. In
sum, through better assessments one could have more
substantive introductions.
In future General Assembly debates on the
Council’s reports, such as this one, the Council
could also suggest particular areas of discussion on
which it would welcome comments and observations,
while, naturally, not preventing any delegation from
commenting on any subject they wish. One way of
bringing such focus to the debate would be for members
of the Council to raise particular areas relating to the
Council’s work or to the contents of the report itself at
the public meeting of the Council in October when the
report is adopted. Presidential note S/2010/507 indeed
suggests, in paragraph 74, that members of the Council
who wish to do so may, at the meeting in which the
report is adopted, comment on the work of the Council
for the period covered by the report. However, until
now, that opportunity has never been seized. We hope
that it will, because we believe that such a debate in the
Council could help inform and frame the debate here in
the General Assembly.
Consultations, together with private meetings,
account for more than half of the meetings. That
means that more than half of the work is done behind
closed doors, not to speak of the work of the subsidiary
bodies. We understand that consultations are useful and
that they are used across the United Nations system.

A/69/PV.58

However, in an organ with restricted composition that
acts on behalf of the general membership, transparency
is key.
We commend the Council for its efforts to hold more
public meetings in recent years. Public briefings are
now more frequent — or rather, such a format has now
become the rule for briefings. But we would suggest
that, as a next step, briefings could usefully evolve
to the format of debates, because it is important that
members of the Council be able to speak publicly and
for the record after the intervention of the briefer. That
would not prevent the Council from holding subsequent
consultations, if need be, for reasons of confidentiality
on particular aspects, the preparation of the ensuing
decisions and so on. But such an approach would
certainly reduce the time and possibly the number of
consultations, and would thus contribute to increasing
transparency and accountability.
We also welcome the recent efforts by the Council,
which we hope will become an established trend, to
promote interactivity during consultations, in line with
presidential note S/2012/402. We are sure that such
efforts will bear fruit in terms of saving time that could
be used for other important Council activities, such as
conflict prevention.
As we touch on conflict prevention, we welcome
the fact that the report mentions the recent practice
with regard to horizon-scanning. We think that that is
a commendable development, which finds its reflection
in this year’s report. There is broad consensus on
the importance of prevention in the maintenance of
international peace and security. Hence the need for the
Council to be kept apprised of early warnings relating
to situations that threaten to become conflicts, as
well as of new challenges that might threaten or have
a serious impact on peace and security, such as the
illicit trafficking in persons, drugs or arms, pandemics
or climate change. We saw recently how the Council
reacted to the Ebola outbreak, although the threat had
been already on the horizon for some time. We therefore
encourage the Council to devote more time to scanning
potential threats and new challenges, using appropriate
instruments such as horizon-scanning meetings, in
whichever informal setting best serves that purpose,
and also using the relevant subsidiary bodies to that
effect.
We note the work of the Ad Hoc Working Group
on Conflict Prevention and Resolution in Africa, as
described in the report, and we commend the launch

14-6428713/29

A/69/PV.58

of the very useful web page with materials related to
its work. We also welcome the report’s information
on the work of the Working Group on Peacekeeping
Operations, which we commend for holding organized
meetings open to the participation of relevant actors
and interested troop-contributing States. We believe
the Council would benefit from discussing the Working
Groups’ reports in greater depth.
We also note that, in some cases, the Council
resorted to interactive dialogues, as reflected in the
introduction to the report. While we encourage the
use of that tool, which opens new avenues for the
Council to amplify its dialogue, we would welcome
more information on such meetings. On the other hand,
Arria-formula meetings are not reflected at all in the
report, and we think they deserve mention, both for
their importance as informal and flexible open-format
meetings and for the relevance of the subjects they
cover. Such information would give us a better idea of
the concerns relevant to Council members and would
serve to highlight important aspects related to Council
activity.
Finally, I would like once again to commend
the Council for its work on improving its working
methods, particularly through the efforts of the
Informal Working Group on Documentation and Other
Procedural Questions, under the able leadership of
Argentina. We would welcome more information in the
report on that important area. Recently, for instance,
the Council adopted an important note on penholders
(S/2014/268), aimed at enhancing Council members’
participation and inclusion in the decision-making
process. It represents a breakthrough that has yet to be
fully reflected in Security Council practice, including
through the establishment of co-penholderships,
which should be encouraged. We hope the next report
will contain indications on penholderships, as well as
information enabling us to better understand how the
practice has evolved.
In conclusion, I hope the Security Council will
find today’s observations and input from the wider
membership useful. We appreciate the fact that the
President of the Council has taken the opportunity
offered by presidential note S/2012/922 and hope that
he will report back to the Council members on relevant
suggestions and observations raised during this debate.
Mr. Nduhungirehe (Rwanda): I would like to
thank you, Sir, for giving Rwanda the opportunity
to participate in this plenary debate of the General
14/29

21/11/2014

Assembly. I would also like to thank Mr. Gary Quinlan,
Permanent Representative of Australia and current
President of the Security Council, for his presentation
of the Council’s annual report, contained in document
A/69/2, covering the period from 1 August 2013 to
31 July 2014.
The report, as Ambassador Quinlan recalled, was
prepared by Rwanda in its capacity as President of the
Council for the month of July 2014. I would like to
take this opportunity to reiterate our gratitude to all
Council members for their invaluable contributions to
the report and to the Security Council Affairs Division
for its assistance. During the drafting process Rwanda
was guided by the need to ensure that the report was
made available as soon as possible in order to allow
its timely adoption in the Council (see S/PV.7283
and S/2014/750) and to enable a timely debate in
the Assembly. Consequently, the report is recorded
as having taken the shortest time to be agreed on of
any of the substantive annual reports of the Security
Council. That said and as stated by the representative
of the Islamic Republic of Iran, speaking on behalf of
the Non-Aligned Movement, we hope that in future the
Security Council will consider improving its annual
reports by introducing a section dedicated to the
assessment of its effectiveness during the reporting
period, with concrete recommendations on how it could
act better and faster while maintaining international
peace and security.
In his presentation of the report, the President
of the Security Council highlighted the Council’s
activities during the reporting period, including
meetings and presidential statements, which have
increased significantly by comparison with last year’s
annual report (A/68/2). Indeed, during the period under
review, the world witnessed unprecedented outbreaks
or escalations of conflicts. In Africa, we witnessed
conflicts in Mali, the Central African Republic, South
Sudan, the Democratic Republic of the Congo and
Libya. In the Middle East, we deplored conflicts in
Gaza, Yemen, Syria and Iraq, and the rise of a barbaric
terrorist organization, the Islamic State in Iraq and
the Levant (ISIL). In Europe, the crisis in Ukraine
reminded us that, 100 years after the start of the First
World War, that continent is not immune from relapsing
into regional conflict.
For most of those situations, however, the
Security Council shouldered its responsibility for
maintaining international peace and security and

14-64287

21/11/2014

adopted a number of resolutions aimed at addressing
the conflicts. Through those resolutions it deployed
peacekeeping missions with robust mandates, such
as the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated
Stabilization Mission in Mali and the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission
in the Central African Republic, and reinforced other
missions, such as the United Nations Organization
Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo (MONUSCO) and the United Nations Mission
in South Sudan. Regarding Syria, the Council adopted
three important resolutions — resolution 2118 (2013),
relating to the destruction of the Syrian chemicalweapons programme, and resolutions 2139 (2014)
and 2165 (2014), on the humanitarian situation in that
country. On ISIL, the Council was also active, holding
a summit in September on foreign terrorist fighters,
which was presided over by President Barack Obama
of the United States (see S/PV.7272), and adopting
resolutions 2170 (2014) and 2178 (2014).
However, Rwanda deplores the fact that the Security
Council, owing to deep divisions among the Permanent
Five members (P-5), continued to be gridlocked on
important crises, such as the conflicts in Syria, Ukraine
and the Palestinian territories, which all have a high
potential for regional escalation. We call on the P-5 to
be mindful of the unique responsibility entrusted to
them by the Charter of the United Nations and to ensure
that their decisions are always guided by the quest for
sustainable solutions to conflicts rather than their geostrategic interests. In that regard, Rwanda would like
to reiterate its support for the French proposal for a
code of conduct for the P-5 that would require them to
agree to refrain from using the veto in cases of mass
atrocities.
On 16 April, the Security Council unanimously
adopted resolution 2150 (2014), introduced by Rwanda
on the occasion of the commemoration of the twentieth
anniversary of the genocide against the Tutsi. That firstever Council resolution on the prevention of genocide
calls on States to recommit to preventing and fighting
genocide, and reaffirmed our collective responsibility
to protect. In that context, it is regrettable that those who
committed unspeakable acts in Rwanda 20 years back
are still active in the eastern Democratic Republic of the
Congo, where they continue to commit mass atrocities,
while MONUSCO, one of the biggest United Nations
peacekeeping missions, is unable to neutralize them
despite the clear wording of resolution 2098 (2013). We
hope that, since the 2 January deadline for the voluntary

A/69/PV.58

disarmament of the so-called Forces démocratiques
de libération du Rwanda (FDLR) is fast approaching,
MONUSCO and the Government of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo will take appropriate action to
neutralize that genocidal organization in accordance
with the provisions of resolutions 2098 (2013) and 2147
(2014).
Before concluding, I would like to recall the
increasing complexity of peacekeeping, which is faced
nowadays mainly with situations where there is no
peace to keep. As one of the top troop-contributing
countries and guided by our conviction that effective
peacekeeping requires regional partnerships and
sustainable funding, Rwanda introduced a draft
resolution, on 28 July, on peacekeeping that was adopted
unanimously as resolution 2167 (2014). Looking forward
to the recommendations of the Secretary-General’s
High-level Independent Panel on Peace Operations, we
stress the need for peacekeeping missions to improve
the implementation of their duty to protect civilians,
including against sexual- and gender-based violence,
in order to uphold our collective responsibility to
prevent mass atrocities. Most importantly, Rwanda
has always believed that the best way to achieve
protection is to prevent conflict by addressing its root
causes, strengthening post-conflict peacebuilding and
promoting preventive diplomacy in accordance with
Chapter VI of the Charter of the United Nations. We
therefore urge the Security Council to move away from
a culture of daily crisis management to one of effective
conflict prevention.
Allow me to conclude, Sir, by reiterating Rwanda’s
position on Security Council reform. As a member of
both the African Group and the L.69 Group and given
our two years of experience on the Council, we believe
more than ever that the Council should be expanded in
both categories, with the same rights and privileges,
including the right to the veto so long as it exists. In
the meantime, it is critical for the Security Council to
continue to improve its working methods with a focus
on transparency, effectiveness and fairness. Rwanda
will continue working towards that goal in the Security
Council and beyond.
Mr. Logar (Slovenia): I would like first of all to
thank you, Sir, for organizing the annual debate on the
report of the Security Council (A/69/2). I would like
also to reiterate my appreciation to the representative
of Australia for presenting the report to the General

14-6428715/29

A/69/PV.58

Assembly and to the Mission of Rwanda for preparing
this year’s report.
Slovenia is a member of the Accountability,
Coherence and Transparency group and, as such, aligns
itself with the statement delivered by Costa Rica on
behalf of the Group. Allow me to add a few thoughts in
my national capacity.
We are aware of the highly complex topics and
relations that the Security Council has tried to address
and mitigate during the period under review. We are
grateful for the dedicated efforts of its member States.
On the other hand, we also regret that on some occasions
the Council was unable to deliver — unable to deliver
in time or unable to deliver at all. The Security Council
should be based on transparent, accountable and
coherent procedures that should address the concerns of
the entire international community and should involve
all United Nations Members.
The number of decisions taken by the Council is
increasing, and we would like to encourage the Council
to add, during each session, a complete implementation
plan that could be regularly reviewed on occasions
such as today’s. New items are added to the agenda
of the Council, yet none of them is removed. While
respecting the responsibilities of the principal organs
of the United Nations, we believe that the Council also
needs to regularly address issues with potential security
implications, such as matters relating to human security
networks, food insecurity or public health.
We should bear in mind that the decisions taken by
the Council impact all of us. The privilege of being a
Council member also comes with the responsibility to do
the utmost to preserve international peace and security.
In that regard, we call for a voluntary commitment not
to use the veto in cases involving atrocities. We would
also like to see greater transparency in the preparation
of the annual report on the work of the Security Council,
which serves as a point of information on the work of
the Council and the major threats to international peace
and security. The report does not always fully reflect the
process that led to the adoption or blocking of certain
resolutions and decisions. The Security Council should
enable the entire membership to acquire the relevant
information about and participate meaningfully in its
work.
Slovenia welcomes the improvements in some of
the Council’s working methods, such as Arria Formula
meetings, public briefings and wrap-up sessions. We

16/29

21/11/2014

believe that the report should also reflect the views
and ideas presented by non-member States in open and
other debates. Such debates, which allow interaction
across the entire United Nations membership, have
already become an important instrument for achieving
increased transparency and coherence on the part of the
Council. Their minutes should therefore be part of the
report.
Let me conclude by saying that Slovenia will
continue to contribute to the work of the Council,
including to its primary goal of maintaining international
peace and security, and that we will remain engaged in
the valuable dialogue among Member States.
Mr. Isnomo (Indonesia): Let me first thank you,
Sir, for convening this important debate.
Through Ambassador Gary Quinlan, I would also
like to thank Australia, as the current President of the
Security Council, for presenting the Council’s report
(A/69/2) for the period covering 1 August 2013 to 31 July
2014. Our thanks also go to Rwanda for preparing the
report.
Indonesia associates itself with the statement made
by the representative of Iran on behalf of the Movement
of Non-Aligned Countries.
As the report notes, the situations in Syria,
Palestine, Libya, Yemen, Mali, Somalia, the Central
African Republic, the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, the Sudan, South Sudan and some other regions
required effective responses from the Council. There
can be no doubt that the Council attempted to meet
the challenges by undertaking peace missions and
other diplomatic measures, including peacekeeping
operations and the work of the sanctions Committees.
A total of 51 resolutions and 21 presidential statements
were issued during the period under review, and two
new missions were established.
Indonesia applauds the Security Council for
its efforts, as well as for convening important open
debates on children and armed conflict, women and
peace and security, the protection of civilians, postconflict peacebuilding and cooperation with regional
organizations, inter alia. While those debates have
served to enhance global normative frameworks, they
also highlighted the glaring need to further develop
a fully resourced, comprehensive and coordinated
approach to fostering peace from the outset of conflicts.

14-64287

21/11/2014

Reviewing the conflict cases that the Council
addressed during the reporting period, it would be
difficult to argue that a comprehensive, integrated
and fully resourced peace effort, with the active
participation of national stakeholders, has taken root.
Clearly, the factors that give rise to conflict are different,
and building peace is a long-term endeavour. However,
it is imperative to continue to work relentlessly and to
deepen national ownership. Indonesia would also like
to highlight its deep concern over certain issues and
cases of inaction by the Council. The Council’s failure
to meaningfully address the situations in Palestine and
Syria is not only extremely harmful to regional and
international peace and security, but it also negates the
core principles of the Charter of the United Nations and
of international law and humanitarian law, seriously
undermining the credibility and intentions of the
Security Council.
Echoing others, we would have welcomed a more
analytical report that described at reasonable length
the factors that led the Council to decide issues in a
certain way. In particular, when the Council has taken
no substantive action on a situation that threatens the
peace and security of a country or people and in which
casualties have occurred, it is crucial that all Member
States, which have entrusted the Council to act on
their behalf in order to maintain international peace
and security, have full knowledge of the reasons why
the Council did not act. We also support circulating a
record of the veto, detailing the specific rationale for its
use to all States Members of the United Nations.
Recognizing that at times the dynamics on the
ground in conflicts can render the best of the Council’s
decisions ineffective, a frank assessment in the annual
report of the impediments to the resolution of a conflict
would make the elements responsible clear to everyone.
That should also help to put a greater burden on the
more relevant countries, in particular, to play a more
responsible role in helping to resolve bottlenecks and
pave the way to peace. A more communicative Security
Council, openly sharing the rationales behind its
decision-making and consulting more freely with the
host countries of peace operations and those contributing
troops and police to peacekeeping operations, as well
as with the wider United Nations membership, will
improve everyone’s sense of ownership of the Council’s
decisions.
For its part, Indonesia will continue to play its role in
support of efforts to make the Council more responsive

A/69/PV.58

and accessible and more effective in defusing hostilities
in a timely fashion and in promoting sustainable peace
and well-being, while upholding the norms established
in the Charter of the United Nations, international law
and humanitarian law.
Mr. Kolga (Estonia): At the outset, I would like to
thank the Rwandan Mission for preparing the Security
Council’s annual report (A/69/2) and the Australian
Mission for presenting it. I would also like to thank you,
Sir, for your initiative in convening this timely debate
on the report. The very fact that this discussion is being
held in the Assembly is vital to enhancing transparency
and including the wider United Nations membership
in the issues discussed by the Council. I would also
like to thank you for holding this debate separately
from agenda item 119 on the question of equitable
representation on and increase in the membership of
the Security Council and related matters, thus allowing
Member States to better contribute to the discussion of
both items.
Estonia, as a member of the Accountability,
Coherence and Transparency (ACT) group, aligns itself
with the statement delivered earlier by the representative
of Costa Rica on behalf of ACT.
My delegation believes that enhancing transparency
in the actions of the Security Council, as well as in its
interaction with non-Council members and bodies, is
crucial to building greater trust in the institution that
bears primary responsibility for the maintenance of
international peace and security. The protection of
human life is the greatest responsibility and priority that
we, as the international community, have been given,
and the Security Council’s execution of that mandate
should be clear and understandable to us all. To achieve
that goal, we urge that the Council should normally
meet in public and that detailed records should be kept
and published, even for closed meetings. Furthermore,
the wider membership’s involvement should be a
continuous process from the very beginning right up
until a decision is implemented, since that would give
stakeholders more input into the decision-making
processes and enable them to contribute more to the
work of the Council.
The annual report summarizes past activities of
the Council and provides us non-members with an
overview of its priority areas during the reporting
period. But today’s debate is not just an opportunity
to evaluate or discuss the report as such; it is also a
broader opportunity to outline issues that we consider

14-6428717/29

A/69/PV.58

to be an important part of the Council’s work. Bearing
that in mind, I will focus on the issue of following up on
Security Council referrals to the International Criminal
Court (ICC). The Council and the ICC are, first and
foremost, connected through their common concerns
about crimes that threaten the peace, security and wellbeing of the world. The Court is available to its States
parties and to the Council, which has the power to refer
cases to the Court that would not otherwise fall under
the Court’s jurisdiction. Whenever there is evidence
that atrocity crimes are being committed with impunity,
the Council should refer the situation to the Court. The
Council should, however, do so in a way that fully
empowers the Court to fulfil its mandate and supports
the Court in its investigations and prosecutions aimed
at ensuring accountability.
The Council must take measures to ensure that
no doubt is left as to the support that the Council
and the United Nations give the Court in delivering
on its mandates. The reports from the Office of the
Prosecutor, in accordance with resolutions 1593 (2005)
and 1970 (2011), should lead the Council to reaffirm its
responsibility to support the Court and its recognition
of the Court’s work. The follow-up measures must be
implemented with resolve and determination, so as to
ensure that the decisions of the Court, including arrest
warrants issued, are executed. Furthermore, it should
be recalled that referrals by the Council are essential,
given the Court’s limited jurisdiction in the absence of
ratification.
Several attempts to adopt resolutions as part
of an effective international response ensuring the
accountability of perpetrators for atrocity crimes have
been blocked by permanent members of the Security
Council. Far too often, history has shown us how the
distinct privilege of the veto, or even just the threat of
using it, has been abused, leaving the Security Council
paralysed and passive on the sidelines in situations
where it is most needed. In the Charter of the United
Nations the permanent members of the Security Council
are given great power, but also great responsibility for
using that power in a responsible manner. Today, we
know that inaction is the biggest challenge there is to
maintaining and restoring peace, and that such inaction
will ensure that the Council’s legitimacy and credibility
quickly fade. We therefore gladly welcome and support
the French proposal to establish a code of conduct
on voluntary restraint on the use of the veto in cases
involving atrocity crimes, and we firmly believe that
such a step would help the Security Council live up to
18/29

21/11/2014

its mandate. In addition, convening horizon-scanning
briefings and Arria Formula meetings would raise the
preventive effectiveness of the Council’s work.
Regarding future topics on the Security Council’s
agenda, I would like to take this opportunity to
highlight the issue of the appointment in 2016 of the
next Secretary-General of the United Nations. We
would like to echo the calls for more transparency
and greater involvement of the General Assembly in
the appointment process, since the Secretary-General
represents the whole United Nations membership.
Making the process more transparent requires
widening the scope of consultations beyond the
Council’s permanent members and taking the views of
all interested Member States into consideration.
In conclusion, I would like to reiterate that, in
our view, efforts to achieve transparency should be
made more consistent, and more attention should be
paid to providing feedback from the Council to both
non-Council member States and the ICC, whether in
the form of holding open meetings or answering letters
addressed to the Council. It is only through such
feedback that we, the international community, can
better assess how best to contribute to the legitimacy
and effectiveness of the Security Council.
Mrs. Adnin (Malaysia): I wish to join earlier
speakers in expressing appreciation to Ambassador
Gary Quinlan, Permanent Representative of Australia,
which holds the presidency of the Security Council
for this month, for introducing the annual report of
the Security Council to the General Assembly, as
contained in document A/69/2. Malaysia also wishes to
recognize the delegation of Rwanda, which oversaw the
preparation of the present report during its presidency
of the Security Council in July.
My delegation associates itself with the statement
delivered by the representative of Iran on behalf of the
Non-Aligned Movement.
On a procedural note, Malaysia wishes to register
its support for your decision, Sir, to separate the General
Assembly’s consideration of the Council’s annual report
from the question of Security Council reform. Malaysia
continues to believe that that move will allow for more
a focused debate and exchange of views.
As an incoming member of the Security Council,
Malaysia continues to believe that there remains
significant room for improvement in terms of the
relationship between the Council and the other principal
14-64287

21/11/2014

organs of the Organization, particularly the General
Assembly. Malaysia further believes that the Charter
of the United Nations has clearly identified the scope
and roles and responsibilities of the principal organs
and that each organ should accord due respect to the
jurisdiction, roles and responsibilities of the others.
However, that should not be taken to mean that the work
of the principal organs is mutually exclusive; rather,
there should be better coordination and understanding
among the principal organs with a view to effectively
contributing to the work of the United Nations as a
whole. During its term on the Council, Malaysia intends
to work closely with other Council members, as well
as with all other interested partners and stakeholders,
towards that end.
Malaysia notes the activities, initiatives and
decisions taken by the Security Council during the
reporting period, as reflected in the report before us.
Malaysia is of the view that the Council has taken a
number of important decisions on a number of key
issues and situations that have posed and continue to
pose threats to international peace and security. That
said, the Council remains paralysed on a number of key
issues, including the Palestine-Israel conflict. Malaysia
notes that, while the Palestine-Israel conflict has long
been on the Council’s agenda and the Council remains
seized of the issue, including through the scheduled
quarterly open debates, that fact has arguably had
little impact in terms of resolving the conflict itself.
On that note, Malaysia would encourage the Council
to continue considering fresh approaches, and, as an
incoming member, Malaysia stands ready to contribute
towards moving the discussion forward.
Malaysia is also encouraged to note that the calls
for greater transparency, coherence and accountability
on the part of the Council by the wider membership
have, to a certain extent, been implemented or taken
on board by the Council. They have, inter alia, been
reflected in the various notes issued by the Council’s
presidencies over the course of the reporting period.
In addition, Malaysia is encouraged by the measures
taken by Council members towards making its work
more accessible and transparent, including through the
increased use of Arria Formula meetings, as well as
more regular and open briefings by the relevant special
advisers or representatives, rapporteurs and other high
officials of United Nations agencies, among other
steps. That said, more could be done in that regard. For
instance, Malaysia notes that, over the years since the

A/69/PV.58

adoption of the Council’s presidential note S/2002/199,
the introduction to the annual report has grown
significantly in terms of length. For instance, in the
current iteration of the report, the introduction stands
at 63 pages, slightly longer than the introduction for
the preceding year’s report. Malaysia believes that the
Council should address the call for the annual report
to be more accessible and concise, while at the same
time maintaining its comprehensiveness. In that regard,
the Council may wish to consider revisiting certain
elements, including the format and the structure of the
report, among other things.
In line with the relevant decisions taken by the
General Assembly, including resolution 68/307,
Malaysia believes that the preparatory process for
future annual reports of the Council could also
benefit from more consultations with the wider United
Nations membership. In conclusion, Malaysia wishes
to underscore the need for closer interaction and
better cooperation between the General Assembly
and the Security Council, with a view to ensuring the
effectiveness of the United Nations system, particularly
in the context of maintaining international peace and
security.
As a first step towards that end, Malaysia would
welcome and support all initiatives aimed at making
the Council’s annual report a more useful and valuable
resource.
Mr. Hilale (Morocco) (spoke in French): Allow me
at the outset to thank Ambassador Gary Quinlan for
his introduction of the report of the Security Council to
the General Assembly (A/69/2). I would also like to pay
tribute to the dedicated professionalism of the Rwandan
delegation, which took it upon itself this year to draft
the introduction of the report. Beyond its quality and
the comprehensiveness of its sizeable contents, the
report is also a useful tool for evaluating the activities
of that body, and it reflects the enormous responsibility
that falls on the Security Council, the United Nations
body responsible for the maintenance of collective
peace and security.
It is true that the Council is, at times, criticized for
its deficiencies, its composition, which is considered
unequal, and its working methods. Nonetheless, the
Security Council is currently the key body, if not the
only body, that we have in the multilateral context for
preserving international order, which, even with all its
imperfections, has enabled us to avoid major global
conflicts and has succeeded in some cases in mitigating

14-6428719/29

A/69/PV.58

and even overcoming conflicts of limited geographical
scope.
Indeed, thanks to its commitment to stability and
peace on our African continent, which monopolizes
70 per cent of the Council’s work and energy, the Council
has succeeded in bringing an end to conflict situations
and in assisting democratic transitional processes in
others, as well as in supporting reconstruction efforts
in post-conflict situations. Africa, which has made
remarkable progress towards stabilization since the
internecine conflicts of the 1990s and subsequent
crises, is still facing a combination of growing security
threats. Efforts to establish peace and development
continue to face many problems and challenges, and
it is imperative to respond to them collectively at the
national, regional and international levels.
Transnational organized crime, food insecurity,
the radicalization of youth, the sudden outbreak of
pandemics and the fear caused by terrorism and violent
extremism are all scourges that are mutually reinforcing
in afflicting fragile State institutions and crumbling
societies. In that regard, the region of the Sahel and
West Africa are two prime examples of the close
links between security problems, including political
instability, terrorism and transnational organized
crime, and their corollaries for development, including
food insecurity, health crises and the lack of economic
prospects.
Early on, the Kingdom of Morocco was aware of
the dangers threatening the Sahel region and concerned
by the increasing connections identified between
terrorism, trafficking in drugs, arms and human beings
and attacks against innocent civilians, humanitarian
workers and even United Nations personnel. Morocco
alerted the international community to the threat, calling
on it to shoulder its responsibilities and undertake
concerted preventive action against these scourges and
contain their already visible adverse effects.
My country is convinced that we will never
overcome insecurity and instability without addressing
the underlying causes of poverty, illiteracy and lack
of future prospects, especially for young people. We
therefore urged the States of the Sahel region and the
Maghreb to act together against these complex and
interconnected challenges. To that end, during its
membership in the Security Council, the Kingdom
of Morocco was the torch-bearer for the issue of
developing and implementing the United Nations
integrated strategy for the Sahel.
20/29

21/11/2014

The Kingdom of Morocco believes that no State
should presume that it can successfully fight alone
against the threats to stability in Africa and has
therefore always maintained that, without cooperation,
unconditional and unconstrained regional coordination
and a broad coalition of international actors in support
of the countries in the region, no one will be able to
overcome these threats. However, much remains to be
done to align the strategy with the region’s priorities.
Many challenges still lie ahead, including the fight
against
poverty,
marginalization,
employment,
education and the empowerment of women.
The impact of the United Nations strategy for the
Sahel certainly remains dependent upon the support
that the international community will provide to ensure
its success in the interest of peace, stability and the
strengthening of democracy and the rule of law in
the region. Above all, it will depend on the degree of
international commitment to combating terrorism and
terrorist groups and entities seeking to destabilize and
undermine the territorial integrity of the States of the
region. In recognition of this reality, on 14 November
2013 Morocco hosted, in Rabat, a ministerial conference
to strengthen security cooperation on the borders
between the countries of the Maghreb, West Africa
and the Sahel. The conference’s findings contributed
significantly to a coordinated and unified response to
the scourge of drug trafficking.
In addition, as part of its initial and ongoing
commitment to strengthening global efforts in the fight
against terrorism, particularly violent extremism, the
Kingdom of Morocco, which continues to take practical
and appropriate measures at the national level, has
never balked at sharing the know-how and experience
it has gained in this field by actively contributing to the
strengthening of bilateral, regional and international
cooperation.
Thus, at the meeting organized on 30 September by
the Security Council Committee established pursuant
to resolution 1373 (2001) concerning counter-terrorism,
the Moroccan experience in the fight against radicalism
and violent extremism was presented by eminent
Moroccan personalities and the representatives of
friendly countries that have benefited from Moroccan
cooperation in the matter. This event allowed us to
highlight in particular the decision by His Majesty the
King to train imams and preachers from several African
countries on the precepts of tolerance, moderation and
respect for others advocated by the Muslim religion.

14-64287

21/11/2014

Due to its rapid outbreak, the Ebola crisis, which
is still raging in some countries of West Africa,
provided a good opportunity for a precedent to be set
in the history of the Security Council. Indeed, it was
the first time that the Council qualified a health crisis
as a threat to international peace and security. The
Ebola epidemic requires an exceptional international
response commensurate with the task of dealing with
this exceptional health crisis and its broader threat to
peace and security.
In solidarity with African countries affected by
Ebola and the isolation and restrictions that have
been imposed on them because of the fear caused
by the pandemic in some countries, Morocco, on the
instruction of His Majesty the King, continues to
break through that isolation and the forced quarantine
imposed on those countries by maintaining air service
provided by its national airline, Royal Air Maroc.
At the same time, and in another show of solidarity,
Morocco, which has provided appropriate assistance to
those three countries, remains at their side to provide
them all necessary assistance.
The implementation of any sustainable strategy
for stability in Africa should be based on the crucial
role of subregional organizations. They are, for
us, the cornerstone of any strategy for stability
and development on the continent and the relevant
framework in which to undertake any effort for
economic integration or effective response to specific
crises in each of its subregions. It is in that light that the
Kingdom of Morocco is working, under the auspices of
His Majesty the King, to revitalize the Arab Maghreb
Union, give new impetus to the Community of SaheloSaharan States and develop interregional cooperation,
particularly with the Economic Community of West
African States and the Central African Economic and
Monetary Community.
The United Nations system, with the Security
Council in the lead, will always have in Morocco a
constant, committed and tirelessly determined partner
in efforts to strengthen and support its initiatives and
constructive action for Africa.
Finally, I wish to congratulate the new members of
the Security Council — Spain, New Zealand, Malaysia,
Angola and the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela — on
their election. We are confident that their work within
the Security Council will help strengthen the Council’s
effectiveness.

A/69/PV.58

Mr. Seger (Switzerland) (spoke in French):
Switzerland is a member of the Accountability,
Coherence and Transparency (ACT) group of 23
countries whose aim is to improve the working methods
of the Security Council. Switzerland therefore aligns
itself with the statement read by the representative of
Costa Rica on behalf of the ACT group.
I would like to thank you, Mr. President, for holding
this debate. Switzerland would also like to thank
Rwanda, which prepared the report of the Security
Council (A/69/2), and Australia, which presented it
today.
While the Charter of the United Nations confers on
the Security Council the primary responsibility for the
maintenance of international peace and security, the
establishment of a more substantial dialogue between
the General Assembly and the Security Council on
the latter’s annual report would have the advantage
of leading to greater ownership of the Council’s
decisions by all Member States. Since the opportunities
for interaction between the Security Council and
Member States that do not have a seat in that body are
infrequent, today’s meeting is important. Switzerland
feels that improvements in substance as well as in form
are needed to improve the effectiveness of the process
related to the annual report.
Therefore, first, with regard to form, there is no
doubt that Member States need to be involved in the
process at the earliest possible time. Since no informal
meetings to that end were held this year, Switzerland
calls on the Council to carry out such consultations prior
to the drafting of the next report. Such consultations
could be held as informal workshops, tackling a
series of country- or thematic-specific issues. We also
encourage the Council to organize an open debate before
finalizing the report in order to have time to listen to
the recommendations and points of view of Member
States. Council resolutions are generally adopted at the
beginning of the open debates, before Member States
have even spoken. Yet we deem it essential that the
Council provide responses to all Member States on the
suggestions made. That could be done in the context of
the annual report’s preparation.
Regarding the substance, the annual report should
not be limited to a retrospective view, but should also
enable the Council to look forward. In both instances,
we would like to see an approach that is more analytical
and thus more relevant. It would be interesting in

14-6428721/29

A/69/PV.58

that context to be able to present the lessons learned
or best practices in each of the areas covered. At the
time of the adoption of the Security Council’s report,
on 22 October, the representative of Rwanda suggested
the inclusion of concrete recommendations in the
introduction to the next report in order to increase
the speed and effectiveness of the Council’s work in
terms of its mandate to maintain peace and security. It
is worth noting that that meeting elicited no comment
from the other Council members, despite the note by
the President (S/2010/507) encouraging them to speak
out on the matter.
I would now like to briefly mention six specific
points of either a geographical or a thematic nature with
respect to the report presented today (A/69/2).
In its introduction, the report notes the number of
formal meetings held by the Council in the period under
review, but not the number of consultations, that is, the
Council’s informal meetings. However, Switzerland
notes with satisfaction that details are provided under
each country heading on the various consultations held.
In that case, it seems to us relevant to also make mention
of the number of consultations held by the Council in
the period concerned. Furthermore, the summaries of
the debates contained in the report are often incomplete
and do not reflect the discussions in the Council in a
precise manner. Switzerland would like, for example,
also to see the various products presented to the Council
but not adopted, including the reasons why they were
not adopted.
With regard to the veto, which Council members
used on two occasions in the period under review,
Switzerland feels that greater transparency on that
matter is crucial. We would therefore like to be able to
read in the descriptive section of the report the names
of the members that made use of the veto as well as the
reasons they gave for doing so.
With respect to peacebuilding, cooperation between
the Peacebuilding Commission and the Council is not
covered in the report. It would be desirable that the
Council give its evaluation on the following points,
inter alia, the relationship between the Council
and the Peacebuilding Commission, the usefulness
of the presentations of the Chairs of the country
configurations, and the role of the Commission itself.
In the Council meeting at which the report was
adopted (see S/PV.7283), the two visits carried out by
the Council in the period under review were given

22/29

21/11/2014

prominent mention, but they are not part of the report.
Switzerland would encourage the Council to include in
the annual report detailed information on such visits,
including the objectives, the implementation and the
results achieved.
Finally, the Security Council dealt with various
topics in the open debates. On the question of working
methods, the report notes that concrete proposals were
put forward. The nature of those recommendations
and their follow-up should, in our view, be elaborated
on in the annual report. Moreover, the question
of implementing the Council’s resolutions, and in
particular resolution 2122 (2013), on women and peace
and security, should also be analysed in the report. I
hope that our suggestions today will enable the Council
to continue its reflection on the process linked to
the annual report. As we all know, the drafting and
distribution of that document are key moments. It is
time to take full advantage of that exercise in our efforts
to improve the effectiveness of the Security Council.
With your permission, Sir, I would like to make one
last remark. Everyone should have at his or her desk a
small Swiss chocolate with a card that represents an app
that increases the transparency, not only of the Security
Council, but also especially of the General Assembly.
A number of years ago, we published a guide to the
General Assembly, and now that guide exists in the
form of an app for smartphones and tablets. To sweeten
the use of the guide and because we are about to have
lunch, we have placed that little gift on everyone’s
desk, for dessert. Members may use the guide for their
information and enjoy the chocolate at the same time.
We wish everyone a fine weekend.
Mr. León González (Cuba) (spoke in Spanish):
Cuba aligns itself with the statement made by the
representative of the Islamic Republic of Iran, who
spoke on behalf of the Non-Aligned Movement.
Our delegation thanks you, Sir, for having
convened this meeting to examine the annual report of
the Security Council to the General Assembly (A/69/2).
Unfortunately, every year we meet in this Hall to
consider similar reports from the Security Council,
which have not contained and continue not to contain
any real critical analysis of the work of the Council.
The report in question is limited once again to merely
describing the actions of that body.
The Charter of the United Nations provides, in
Articles 15 and 24, for the Council’s obligation to

14-64287

21/11/2014

submit annual reports and special reports on its work.
Unfortunately, the special reports continue not to be
submitted. The annual report this year repeats the
descriptive format of the matters considered by the
Council without an appraisal thereof that would enable
States Members of the United Nations to make a real
assessment of the causes and implications of the actions
undertaken by the Council in each case or of its failure
to take a decision when it had before it the analysis of
an issue regarding a threat to international peace and
security. The current exercise represents far less than
true Security Council accountability to the General
Assembly.
Cuba reiterates its concern at the growing tendency
of the Security Council to consider issues and assume
functions that do not belong to it, usurping the role
assigned by the Charter to other organs, particularly
to the General Assembly. We emphasize the need to
strike the right balance among the principal organs of
the United Nations in conformity with the Charter of
the United Nations. We again urge Council members to
review its agenda so as to align it with the functions to be
fulfilled by the Council in accordance with its mandate.
The Council must strictly observe the provisions of the
Charter and all resolutions of the General Assembly,
which is the chief deliberative, policy-making and
representative organ of the United Nations.
One of the main problems and challenges that the
United Nations is still facing, 69 years after its creation,
is its inability to carry out the Security Council
reform needed for it to become a truly transparent,
representative, democratic and efficient body. As long
as the Security Council does not submit to a thorough
reform process, the reform of the United Nations will
remain unfinished.
Cuba invites all Member States to work urgently
to ensure that consultations behind closed doors in the
Security Council are the exception, that the Council’s
membership is enlarged in both the permanent and
non-permanent categories in order to rectify, without
the use of selective or discriminatory criteria, the
inadequate representation of developing countries
in that body, and that the obsolete, undemocratic and
anachronistic veto is abandoned. Urgent changes
are required in the working methods of the Council
to enable meaningful participation on the part of all
Member States in the work and decisions of the Security
Council, including the formalization of its rules, which
have remained provisional for almost 70 years, with a

A/69/PV.58

view to generally increasing transparency and the level
of accountability.
The Security Council must immediately end
its usurpation of the functions of other organs. The
presentation of truly analytical annual reports on the
work of the Security Council and of special reports
pursuant to the Charter is essential, if the General
Assembly is to exercise its mandate with regard to
issues of maintaining international peace and security.
We are confident that a Security Council with greater
transparency will gain greater legitimacy and that a
more inclusive and accessible Council that truly takes
into account the opinions of the States Members of the
Organization will be a more effective Council.
Cuba will pursue its efforts towards improving
the work of the Organization in accordance with the
mandates provided in the Charter of the United Nations.
Mr. Moktefi (Algeria): I would like to express
my appreciation to you, Sir, for convening this debate,
which is providing Member States with an opportunity
to make their own assessment of the activities of the
Security Council through the consideration of its
annual report (A/69/2). I would like also to thank the
Permanent Representative of Australia for introducing
the report.
Algeria aligns itself with the statement delivered
by the representative of the Islamic Republic of Iran on
behalf of the Non-Aligned Movement.
Our consideration today of the Security Council
report is in accordance with the provisions of the Charter
of the United Nations. Indeed, the General Assembly,
as the chief deliberative body of the United Nations, is
exercising its mandate in considering issues related to
maintenance of international peace and security. It is
also important that Member States express their views
on the manner in which the Security Council conducts
its work.
Algeria wishes to stress the need to maintain
the balance among the principal organs within their
respective Charter-based functions and powers. In that
context, we reiterate our concern over the continuing
encroachment by the Security Council on the
functions and powers of the General Assembly and the
Economic and Social Council by addressing issues that
traditionally fall within the competence of the latter
two organs.

14-6428723/29

A/69/PV.58

All United Nations bodies should carry out only
those tasks that are established in their respective
mandates. In that regard, we reiterate that the principal
United Nations organs have distinct and separate roles
under the Charter. In order to address that issue, Algeria
calls on the Presidents of the General Assembly, the
Economic and Social Council and the Security Council
to conduct regular discussions and coordination among
themselves regarding the agendas and programmes
of work of their respective organs, with the view to
increasing the coherence and complementarity among
those organs.
Despite certain efforts, the contents of the annual
reports of the Council remain a procedural overview
of the Council’s meetings, activities and decisions. The
report continues to suffer from the lack of an analytical
perspective on the work undertaken by that organ.
For instance, in this year’s report we have observed
very few elements able to convey to the members of
the General Assembly an exact sense of the types of
debates that took place on the various agenda items. In
fact, there is no mention in the report of what took place
during the informal discussions.
The official record of the Security Council contains
no reference to the reality regarding various issues.
That lack of transparency could affect the credibility
of the work of the Council. In addition, the overview of
some specific issues in the report’s introduction is not
fully accurate and does not give the full picture. In that
regard, we call on the Security Council to submit to the
General Assembly a more explanatory, comprehensive
and analytical annual report that would assess the work
of the Council and reflect the views expressed by its
members during the consideration of agenda items.
The debate clearly proves that the issue of the
annual report of the Security Council is closely linked
to the need for a comprehensive reform of the Security
Council. The present structure and functioning of the
Council does not properly reflect either geopolitical
realities or the structure of the United Nations
membership in the twenty-first century. Therefore, in
order to maintain the Council’s authority and relevance
in maintaining global peace and security, its reform
must be undertaken and achieved. We support a
Council with greater representation, greater democracy,
greater efficiency, greater accountability and greater
transparency.

24/29

21/11/2014

The President: We have heard the last speaker in
the debate on agenda item 28, “Report of the Security
Council”.
Under paragraph 12 of the annex to resolution
51/241, the President of the General Assembly is called
on, inter alia, to assess the debate on this item and to
consider the need for further consideration of the report
of the Security Council (A/69/2).
This has been an important debate, during which
Member States have reiterated the importance that they
attach to the work of the Security Council. Many noted
with appreciation the relevance and complexity of the
issues but also questioned the methods used by the
Council. Many delegations highlighted the need for the
Security Council to carry out its work in a more efficient
and responsive fashion, while expressing appreciation
for the Council’s work on behalf of international peace
and security. Speakers called on the Security Council
to demonstrate greater decisiveness on the complex
issues that have appeared on its agenda. Others noted
the need for the Security Council membership to
evolve in order to better reflect the realities of today’s
geopolitical landscape, particularly with regard to the
use of the veto.
Representatives called on the Council to pay
greater attention to the role of preventive diplomacy
and to seek greater cooperation with regional and
subregional organizations, as reflected in the Charter
of the United Nations. Speakers advocated for
strengthened exchanges among the main organs of
the United Nations, in particular between the General
Assembly and the Security Council. Others called for
greater consultation and cooperation with troop- and
police-contributing countries on issues relating to
peacekeeping, while respecting the role of the Special
Committee on Peacekeeping Operations, also known as
the Committee of 34.
Representatives also stressed the importance of
the Security Council providing regular, comprehensive
updates to the General Assembly, so as to promote
greater accountability and transparency. Speakers also
called on the Security Council to pay greater attention
to the respective roles and mandates of each organ of
the United Nations. On the report itself, representatives
noted with appreciation the overall improvements made
in the quality of the report. However, many delegations
also stressed that the report should be even more
analytical and substantive in the future, so as to serve

14-64287

21/11/2014

its intended purpose as a means of communication with
the General Assembly.
Finally, some representatives stressed the need for
the creation of a synopsis on the comments and views
that had been expressed by Member States on the report.
I have listened carefully to the requests made by
many Member States for a follow-up to the suggestions
made in this statement. I will list those proposals and
follow them up with the President of the Security
Council so that we can discuss the implementation of
some of the necessary changes.
May I take it that the General Assembly takes
note of the report of the Security Council contained in
document A/69/2?
It was so decided.
The President: The General Assembly has thus
concluded this stage of its consideration of agenda
item 28.
Agenda item 116
Follow-up to the commemoration of the twohundredth anniversary of the abolition of the
transatlantic slave trade
Reports of the Secretary-General (A/69/93 and
A/69/281)
Draft resolution (A/69/L.19)
The President: Eight years after the adoption
of General Assembly resolution 61/19, entitled
“Commemoration of two-hundredth anniversary of
the abolition of the transatlantic slave trade”, we are
now just a few months away from the unveiling of a
permanent memorial to honour the victims of slavery
in the transatlantic slave trade. That memorial, “Ark of
Return”, will occupy a prominent place at the United
Nations and will be an important vehicle to educate and
inform current and future generations of the causes,
consequences and lessons of slavery in the transatlantic
slave trade. The memorial will also be a key component
of the educational outreach envisioned by resolution
61/19 and subsequent resolutions on the subject.
Allow me to take this opportunity to congratulate
the Permanent Memorial Committee on its efforts
thus far, aimed at realizing the construction of the
memorial. As we enter the next phase in the goal of
erecting a memorial, I encourage those Member States,

A/69/PV.58

individuals and other partners that have not yet done
so to consider contributing to the United Nations Trust
Fund for Partnerships — Permanent Memorial, and to
ensure that the project comes to fruition.
With draft resolution A/69/L.19 before us
today, the General Assembly takes note of the many
initiatives undertaken by Member States to reaffirm
their commitment to confronting the legacy of slavery
and restoring the dignity of its victims. The report of
the Secretary-General (A/69/281) highlights many
of the educational outreach and awareness-raising
activities carried out by Member States; by United
Nations entities, in particular, the Department of Public
Information and the Office of the High Commissioner for
Human Rights; by various civil society organizations;
and by other partners. I congratulate UNESCO on
the twentieth anniversary of the Slave Route Project,
which over the years has been a significant source for
research, pedagogy and public awareness on slavery
and the slave trade.
Those campaigns have provided an opportunity to
reflect upon the history and legacy of slavery, the slave
trade and colonialism. They have also contributed to a
global conversation that can help break down barriers
raised by discrimination, racism and intolerance.
The International Day of Remembrance of the
Victims of Slavery and the Transatlantic Slave Trade is
an important part of those outreach efforts. Given that
one of the priorities of my presidency is gender equality
and women’s empowerment, I am pleased to note that
next year’s commemoration will focus on women and
slavery. That theme will allow an exploration of the role
of women in preserving cultural heritage. The legacy
of slavery and the slave trade is a stark reminder of the
dangers of racism and prejudice, as well as a warning
against the devastating effects of modern forms of
slavery. By promoting awareness and tolerance through
education and outreach, we must reflect on the history,
lessons and consequences of that tragic chapter.
As the General Assembly adopts the draft
resolution today, we reaffirm the rights and freedoms
enshrined in the Charter of the United Nations and the
Universal Declaration of Human Rights. In doing so,
we renew our commitment to ensuring that everybody
has the right to a life of dignity, free from exploitation
and abuse. But above all, I think we should consider not
so much that slavery is a physical act but that we need
to free our minds from enslavement.

14-6428725/29

A/69/PV.58

21/11/2014

I now give the floor to the representative of Jamaica
to introduce draft resolution A/69/L.19.

welcome the constructive engagement of all States in
that exercise.

Mr. Rattray (Jamaica): Under agenda item 116, I
have the honour to introduce draft resolution A/69/L.19,
entitled “Permanent memorial to and remembrance
of the victims of slavery and the transatlantic slave
trade”. The draft resolution is of importance to my
delegation not only because we have had the privilege
of leading the Caribbean Community (CARICOM) and
African Group initiative to erect a permanent memorial
at the United Nations, but also because the historical
significance of slavery, its repercussions and ongoing
manifestations have had an immeasurable impact on
the present status and development prospects of my
country.

Jamaica thanks the Secretary-General for his reports
(A/69/93 and A/69/281) under this item. I also wish to use
this opportunity to commend the Department of Public
Information for its work in conducting the educational
outreach and public-awareness activities requested in
our recurring resolutions, up to and including resolution
68/7. The partnerships established over the course of
the past year and the expanded scope of the programme
have demonstrated a great degree of creativity and
professionalism. We hope that, moving forward, that
critical aspect of our efforts to address the history
and enduring effects of slavery will grow stronger and
extend its reach and effectiveness. Allow me also to
commend the United Nations Office for Partnerships
for its diligent stewardship of the United Nations Trust
Fund for Partnerships — Permanent Memorial, an item
on which I will shortly say a few words. I also thank
UNESCO for its invaluable support and commitment
to the project and congratulate Director-General Irina
Bokova and her team on the celebration of the twentieth
anniversary of the Slave Route Project.

Perhaps some may consider slavery and the slave
trade as strictly an unfortunate period of history, with
the emphasis placed on history. Countries like mine are,
however, faced with present realities that owe much of
their origin to the crime against humanity perpetuated
upon millions of our ancestors over centuries. The harm
caused to our societies by the abominable crime of the
transatlantic slave trade and colonialism has, in some
ways, become entrenched in our societal construct.
As the noted historian and Vice-Chancellor of the
University of the West Indies, Sir Hilary Beckles, said
at a CARICOM press conference in December 2013,
“The victims of those crimes and their
descendants were left in a state of social,
psychological, economic and cultural deprivation
and disenfranchisement that has ensured their
suffering and debilitation today”.
As a country, we are also confronted by
disadvantages in the global economic system, many
of which find their roots in the systemic inequalities
arising from the system of slavery and colonialism.
Such matters are sensitive subjects, but ones we should
face. Indeed, they are issues that we must address,
whether within ourselves or among us all, if we are
ever to break the persistent hold of slavery’s legacies of
racism, prejudice and discrimination.
Jamaica considers that the recently proclaimed and
soon-to-be-launched International Decade for People
of African Descent (2015-2024) provides an opportune
space and time to earnestly and practically address
those matters, within the comprehensive programme of
activities geared towards the further implementation of
the Durban Declaration and Programme of Action. We
26/29

We are, however, disappointed that, according to
the report on the outreach programme (see A/69/281),
only a few Member States have provided information
on their efforts to deal with the issue. It is perhaps
an indication of one of two things: either we have not
been doing enough as Member States, or we are not
sufficiently publicizing the positive things that we are
doing. I encourage all Member States to address those
matters, as appropriate.
One matter on which I can happily report is the
steady progress that we are making on the permanent
memorial initiative. As described in the draft resolution
before us, we have moved into the construction phase.
The architect and his team are currently fabricating The
Ark of Return off-site and are on track to deliver the
memorial in time for its unveiling early next year. I take
this opportunity to express thanks to the Department
of Management and the entire team working on the
Capital Master Plan, with whom we have collaborated
to ensure the smooth coordination between the work on
the memorial and the work now being completed on the
General Assembly podium.
We look forward to continued collaboration in
the remaining months as we move the memorial onto
the compound and install it at the Visitors’ Plaza. The
aim is to complete and erect the Memorial in time for
14-64287

21/11/2014

it to be unveiled on 25 March 2015, the International
Day of Remembrance of the Victims of Slavery and
the Transatlantic Slave Trade. It will also be one of the
first significant events of the International Decade for
People of African Descent.
I use this opportunity to appeal to Member States,
particularly those that have not yet done so, to make
a contribution to the Trust Fund for the Memorial.
The small gap that remains is not beyond our united
capacity to fill. We are grateful for the generous
contributions already made by Member States, civil
society and private individuals. With the project at its
current stage, the General Assembly cannot now afford
to falter. We are therefore pleased that the President of
the General Assembly will host a pledging luncheon
on 10 December, which will be an opportune moment
for Member States to pledge contributions. We urge
Member States to ensure that, with the imminent
completion of the project, they are counted among
those that contributed to our noble initiative.
In closing, allow me to emphasize that, while we
strive towards the completion of the memorial, the real
work does not end there. We should remain seized of
the need to continue to address the legacies of slavery,
even as we deal with stamping out its contemporary
forms. Until women are no longer forced to sell their
bodies, until children are no longer forced into the work
force, until every athlete of a minority race or ethnicity
can take the field of play and not be confronted by
racist chants in the stands, we must keep working. Until
our Afro-descendant minority populations can rise to
the fore and be seen, heard and valued, then we must
keep working. Until we succeed in rooting out Afropessimism and instilling value in our black heritage as
a mark of distinction, there is work to be done.
As we adopt the draft resolution, let us redouble our
efforts to ensure that we do not merely pay lip service
and repeat empty rhetoric; let us ensure that our actions
speak loudly and clearly, lest we forget.
Ms. Kiernan (United States of America): The
establishment of a permanent memorial to and in
remembrance of slavery and the transatlantic slave
trade and the strong leadership of the United Nations
system so as to break the silence on the slave trade will
ensure remembrance of our shared heritage borne of
that human tragedy. This year we also note the twentieth
anniversary of the UNESCO Slave Route Project and
embark on the International Decade for People of
African Descent to recognize the contributions that

A/69/PV.58

enslaved Africans made to the building of nations,
societies and culture. Those endeavours remind the
world that we must continue to study the history and
legacy of slavery and the transatlantic slave trade.
In the United States, students across the country
learn the lessons of that history so as to understand
the context of racism and discrimination in our
contemporary lives and the challenges that remain
around the world. The United States Library of Congress,
our National Archives and other institutions also have a
wide array of resources available for teachers, students
and others interested in further study about slavery and
the civil-rights movement. As a multicultural society,
the United States continues to press forward on the task
of eliminating discrimination within our own country
and seeks to join the global community in creating a
world that values diversity with freedom and equality
for all.
At the domestic level, we have worked with
UNESCO to establish the United States Coalition of
Cities against Racism and Discrimination. That effort,
led by 50 United States mayors, was launched last
years in Birmingham, Alabama, around the fiftieth
anniversary of the tragic events that marked the civilrights movement for racial equality.
Historical injustices, continued racism and
discrimination contribute to inequality, economic
disparities, marginalization and social exclusion. As
we move forward, we need to learn from and redeem
the past. We must recognize the moral courage of
those individuals throughout history who worked to
end slavery and joined together to stop all remaining
forms of discrimination and slavery through all means
possible.
Mr. Amihai Bivas (Israel): I thank you, Sir, for
having convened this meeting. We also thank the
delegation of Jamaica for their leadership and their
efforts to bring this important issue to the forefront
of the United Nations’ agenda and lead the drive
to formally honour the victims of slavery. We also
recognize the many other Caribbean and African States
that have lent momentum to that cause.
“Acknowledging the tragedy, considering the
Legacy, Lest We Forget.” That is the message to be
inscribed on the permanent memorial in honour of the
victims of slavery and the transatlantic slave trade.
By remembering the slave trade, we acknowledge the
tragedy and honour its victims. Lasting over 350 years,

14-6428727/29

A/69/PV.58

the transatlantic slave trade uprooted and relocated
30 million people, who were driven into cruel and
dehumanizing bondage. That period remains one of
the longest and most sustained assaults on the lives and
dignity of human beings in history.
In human terms, the cost was staggering. Many
perished on the trek to ports along the African coast,
while many more died on board ship in the so-called
“middle passage”. When the survivors reached the
New World, their situation was little better. Treated as
property rather than human beings, they were bought
and sold at auction, beaten and abused. Generation after
generation was born, toiled and died without knowing
freedom. But they live on, in our memory.
The Jewish people share the pain of slavery. The
Bible describes how the children of Israel emerged from
bitter enslavement in ancient Egypt to become a nation
in the land of Israel. Because we were born in slavery,
we understand the yearning for freedom. Because we
suffered from persecutions, we cherish the sanctity of
life and the value of human dignity.
Unfortunately, the long arm of slavery continues
to touch the modern world. Slavery’s legacy lives on
in discrimination and inequality, racism and prejudice.
The most fitting tribute we can pay to slavery’s victims
is to address those issues and commit ourselves to
fighting modern-day slavery, in all its forms. Wherever
a child is forced into hard labour, wherever a woman
is sold into prostitution, we must put into action the
responsibility that comes with memory. We cannot undo
the past. We can, however, ensure that the tragedies of
the past serve as clear lessons for the future. We can
honour slavery’s victims by remembering them and
what they endured.
In conclusion, Israel is proud to have played
its part in honouring the memory of the victims of
slavery by contributing to the Permanent Memorial
and by co-sponsoring the draft resolution before us
(A/69/L.19). We are grateful for that opportunity.
Mr. Mukerji (India): I should like to thank the
Secretary-General for his reports on the agenda item
(A/69/93 and A/69/281). The tragedy of the transatlantic
slave trade has undeniably been one of the most
inhumane chapters in recorded human industry. The
slave trade, which happened over a 400-year period,
completely altered the socioeconomic fabric of African
society, and its effects are still visible today. The legacy

28/29

21/11/2014

continues in the form of racism and prejudice, which
are an affront to human dignity.
We welcome, and are committed to continuing
to support, the various activities and programmes
undertaken by the Department of Public Information to
commemorate the International Day of Remembrance
of the Victims of Slavery and the Transatlantic Slave
Trade in March each year. Wide participation in those
events should lead to changed attitudes, with salutary
consequences for our global society. The International
Decade for People of African Descent, which will start
in 2015, will also provide an opportunity to showcase
the most valuable contributions that enslaved people
and their descendants have made to the societies that
forced them into bondage. It is important that regular
and adequate financial allocations be made to the
Department of Public Information for organizing those
events. The international community has an obligation
to build upon the positive momentum gained in 2014
and to foster greater awareness of the ethical, political,
socioeconomic and cultural dimensions of that history
and memory.
We welcome the initiatives undertaken to implement
paragraphs 101 and 102 of the Durban Declaration and
Programme of Action, which are aimed at countering
the legacy of slavery and contributing to the restoration
of dignity to the victims of slavery. Through education
and remembrance, we must build an understanding of
the causes, consequences and lessons of the slave trade
for future generations, so that the horrors of the past
are not perpetuated through racism and prejudice. We
should aim to reach a broader audience by strengthening
the involvement of academics and institutions of
learning.
The initiative to erect a permanent memorial at
the United Nations headquarters is a fitting tribute to
the millions of victims of slavery and slave trade. We
welcome the selection of the “The Ark of Return” as
the winning design for the memorial. India is proud
to be the lead contributor to the United Nations Trust
Fund for Partnerships — Permanent Memorial with
a contribution of $260,000. Our contribution reflects
our firm belief that the international community must
honour those who were the victims of slavery and the
transatlantic slave trade. While we played no part in
that trade, we are willing to share in the shouldering of
the responsibility that the international community has
for its remembrance. We are sure that others will not be
found wanting as well.

14-64287

21/11/2014

We are happy to co-sponsor, as we have been doing
since 2007, the text entitled “Permanent memorial to
and remembrance of the victims of slavery and the
transatlantic slave trade” (A/69/L.19).
Mr. Régis (Haiti): It is a great pleasure for me to
be here again in this Hall to participate in the followup to the commemoration of the 200th anniversary of
the abolition of the transatlantic slave trade. On behalf
of the Haitian Government, I would like to express the
profound gratitude of my country to all of those who
have contributed to making the educational programme
of action on the transatlantic slave trade, slaves and
slavery an enormous success.
Please allow me to thank the Secretary-General
for his report, entitled “Permanent memorial to
and remembrance of the victims of slavery and the
transatlantic slave trade: status of the United Nations
Trust Fund for Partnerships — Permanent Memorial”
(A/69/93), regarding the Trust Fund that will contribute
to the erection of a permanent memorial at United
Nations Headquarters, and for the report, entitled
“Programme of educational outreach on the transatlantic
slave and slavery” (A/69/281).
Two hundred and ten years ago, the Republic
of Haiti was established. This year, the topic for the
commemoration, “Victory over Slavery: Haiti and
Beyond”, was chosen to pay tribute to those who
combated slavery in countries throughout the world.
Haiti was the first country to achieve independence
after the victorious battles that men and women,
reduced to slavery, waged under the leadership of
Toussaint Louverture. The tribute was followed by a
whole series of cultural activities commemorating and
paying tribute to the Haitian author Daniel Laferrière
for his election to the Académie française in December
2013. I want also to mention Michaëlle Jean, UNESCO
Special Envoy for Haiti in the United Nations, who
recalled in her speech at the commemorative meeting
of the General Assembly (see A/68/PV.77) the role that
Haiti played in inspiring other nations to fight for the
abolition of slavery. On this occasion, allow me to quote
a short excerpt from her speech that is mentioned in the
report of the Secretary-General, “From Haiti came the
spark that lit the great cauldron of the right to abolish
slavery, particularly in the Americas” (A/69/281, para.
17).
I would also like to note the very valuable support of
the Department of Public Information, which included

A/69/PV.58

a cinematographic festival and an exhibit entitled
“Victory over Slavery: Haiti and Beyond,” at which the
Secretary-General, the Permanent Representatives of
Haiti and Jamaica, the Director-General of UNESCO
and the Permanent Observer of the African Union
gave stirring speeches. The commemoration was also
marked by the presence of other eminent personalities
and dignitaries, including that of Mr. Rodney Leon, the
architect of “The Ark Of Return”. His commemorative
sculpture was selected in a competition from among
310 entries from 83 different countries. In conclusion, I
would also like to express my profound thanks and pay
tribute to the civil-society organizations and Member
States for their awareness-raising activities carried out
through the United Nations information centres.
The President: We have heard the last speaker in
the debate on the agenda item 116.
The Assembly will now take a decision on draft
resolution A/69/L.19, entitled “Permanent memorial
to and remembrance of the victims of slavery and the
transatlantic slave trade”.
I give the floor to the representative of the
Secretariat.
Mr. Botnaru (Department for General Assembly
and Conference Management): I should like to announce
that, since the submission of the draft resolution,
in addition to those delegations listed in document
A/69/L.19, the following countries have become
sponsors of the draft resolution: Andorra, Austria,
Belarus, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Colombia, Cyprus,
the Czech Republic, Denmark, Finland, France, Georgia,
Germany, Greece, Hungary, Iceland, Indonesia, Ireland,
Italy, Latvia, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Mexico, Monaco,
Mongolia, Montenegro, Nauru, the Netherlands, New
Zealand, Poland, the Russian Federation, Samoa, San
Marino, Slovakia, Slovenia, Sweden and Uruguay.
The President: May I take it that the Assembly
decides to adopt draft resolution A/69/L.19?
Draft resolution A/69/L.19 was adopted (resolution
69/19).
The President: The General Assembly has thus
concluded this stage of its consideration of agenda item
116.
The meeting rose at 1.10 p.m.

14-6428729/29
