14,

General Assembly-Sixteenth Session

ANNEX
GENERAL PRINCIPLES GOVERNING THE ESTABLISHMENT AND
OPERATIONS OF A UNITED NATIONS CAPITAL DEVELOPMENT FUND

1. Assistance from the United Nations capital development
fund to under-developed countries should be directed towards
the achievement of accelerated and sel £-sustained growth of
their economies. In keeping with this objective, assistance
should be oriented towards the diversification of their economies,
with due regard to the need for industrial development as a
basis for social progress.
2. The provision of assistance shall be in conformity with
the purposes and principles of the Charter of the United Nations.
3. Operations of the fund should not serve as a means for
foreign economic and political interference in the internal affairs
of assisted countries and should not be influenced by considerations relating to the nature of their economic and political
systems.
4. · Assistance should be of a kind and in a form consistent
with the wishes of the recipients and should involve no unacceptable conditions for them, whether political, economic, military or other.
5. Assistance from the fund should be provided in such
forms and on such terms as are compatible with the continued
economic development of the assisted countries, taking due account of their balance of payments position and prospects.
6. Assistance from the fund should be given in a flexible
manner and not necessarily be limited to specific projects or
groups of projects. Assistance can also be given to support
general development plans, where such plans exist, or to meet
general development requirements.
7. Resources of the fund must be large enough to make a
significant contribution towards the achievement of accelerated
and self-sustained economic growth of the less developed
countries.
8. While funds should be derived from contributions by all
members, the bulk of the contributions to the fund should come
from the more developed countries in a readily and economically usable form.
9. The size and nature of the contributions of the less
developed countries to the fund should not be such as to hamper
the effective mobilization of their resources for their own
economic development.
10. Contributions to the fund should ensure the provision of
assistance on a long-term and continuing basis.
11. Resources available to the fund should be augmented by
a portion of any savings resulting from progress made in internationally supervised world-wide disarmament.
12. Every effort should be made to co-ordinate the assistance
rendered by the fund with assistance from other sources, so as
to achieve the maximum permanent beneficial effect on the
economies of the less developed countries.

1707 (XVI). International trade as the primary
instrument for economic development

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 623 (VII) of 21 December
1952, 1028 (XI) of 20 February 1957, 1324 (XIII)
of 12 December 1958, 1421 (XIV) and 1422 (XIV)
of 10 December 1959, and 1519 (XV) and 1520 (XV)
of 15 December 1960,
Having considered the report of the Secretary-General entitled "Wa"ljs and means of promoting wider
trade co-operation among States: trade relations between under-developed and industrially advanced countries"S and the comments thereon voiced in the Eco• Official Records of the Economic and Social Council, Thirtysecond Session, Annexes, agenda items 2 and 5, documents

E/3520 and Add.I.

nomic and Social Council, 4 and endorsing Council
resolution 846 (XXXII) of 3 August 1961,
Convinced that the economic development of countries
must be based primarily on their own efforts through
the utilization of all their productive resources,
Affirming that, for these national efforts to achieve
their objectives more rapidly, it is essential that countries should ensure the maximum expansion of their
trade and an increase in their foreign exchange income
as a result of growth in the volume and value of their
exports,
Considering that the importance of such an expansion
of trade, especially for under-developed countries or for
countries which depend on a narrow range of primary
commodities, calls for constant attention to protectionist
policies which are detrimental to the growth of international trade, with a view to the achievement of an
increasing degree of trade liberalization through the
modification of those policies and, where surpluses arise,
strict adherence to the principles of surplus disposal
recommended by the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nationsti in respect of any possible
effects on international markets,
Deeming it necesary that the economic policies of
regional and sub-regional economic groupings avoid the
introduction and facilitate the elimination of obstacles
and restrictons which may hamper the necessary expansion of the trade of the developing and under-developed
countries or discourage the indispensable growth of
their economies,
Observing that the practices of dumping and the unrestricted disposal of accumulated stocks on international markets impede the progress of countries in the
process of economic development, distort the most
effective structure of their industries, and depress the
levels of production and prices of primary commodities
and manufactures,
Recognizing that the developing and under-developed
countries have in recent years suffered from their unfavourable terms of trade with industrialized countries
and that this trend has resulted in a declining share of
the developing and under-developed countries in the
gains from international trade and in a chronic gap
between their exports earnings and import requirements
for development,
Bearing in mind that the instability in primary commodity trade of the developing and the under-developed
countries results in variations in their national incomes,
in their export earnings and their foreign exchange
earnings, and that this instability may often jeopardize
the development plans of many countries, which are designed on a long-term basis,
Noting the efforts made and the progress achieved in
the study of systems for compensating for the fluctuations in commodity trade, particularly the report of the
Committee of Experts on international compensation
for fluctuations in commodity trade and on the establishment of a development insurance fund, 6
Reaffirming that it is the recognized responsibility of
the more highly industrialized countries to make all
• Official Records of the General Assembly, Sixteenth Session,
Supplement No. 3 (A/4820 and Corr.2), paras. 191 and 192.
• Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations,
Commodity Policy Studies, No. 10, Functions of a World Reserve-Scope and Limitations (Rome, 1956), appendix III.
• International Compensation for Fluctuations in Commodity
Trade (United Nations .Dublication. Sales No.: 61.11.D.3).

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Second Committee

appropriate efforts to co-operate in accelerating the
economic development of the developing an:d underdeveloped countries,
Considering that a faster ra~e of economic growt~ is
in the interest of all countries and that the Umted
Nations together with other international bodies,. as
appropriate, should provide ways and mean~ o~ findm_g
and furthering effective solutions for achievmg this
purpose,
1. Urges the economically developed _Member States
to take into due account, when formulatmg and executing the.ir trade and economic policies, th~ interests. of
the developing and under-develope? _countries by mak~ng
maximum efforts to create condit10ns through which
they extend to these co~mtri~s adv,_mtages not . necessarily requiring full reciprocity to improve their economic situation, and to pursue as a m~tter of gr~at
urgency bilateral, multilateral an_d/or regio~a! negotiations-including where appropriate, negotiations conducted under the General Agreement on Tariffs and
Trade-to facilitate the necessary expansion of their
trade and to attain a satisfactory co-ordination of efforts
in the field of trade towards economic development;
2. Calls upon States Members of the United Natjons
and members of the specialized agencies, an1 especially
upon the more highly indus_trialized co~mtries and the
developed countries belongmg to regional and subregional economic groupings :
(a) To promote, through individual or_ collective
measures, the expansion of world trade, ~articular!); by
avoiding undue protection of their domestic production;
( b) To avoid measures detrimental to the prospe~ts
of international commodity trade for producers outside
their own countries or regions ;
( c) To make every effort to liberalize th~ re~tr!ctive
or discriminatory practices that unneces~a_rily hm1t_ the
consumption and importation of ~ommod1t1es, ~specially
those which have undergone rriaximum processmg, from
the under-developed and developing countries;
( d) To pursue policies which woul~ promote t~e
industrialization of the developing countries and to avoid
practices such as dumping and the unrestri_cted disposal
of accumulated stocks that may hamper this process;
3. Recommends that the Governments of Member
States, in recognition of the profound concern of normal
commercial exporters, pursue policies designed to avoid
the harmful effects on international markets that may
result from the disposal of surpluses and, to th~s end,
strictly adhere to the principles of surplus disposal
recommended by the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations ;
4. Commends the efforts made by the International
Monetary Fund to increase its activities with regard to
drawings and standby arrangements in helping the less
developed countries to meet seasonal and cyclical maladjustments arising from fluctuations in their expo:t
earnings, and expresses the hope that such efforts will
continue;
5. Notes 'U!ith satisfaction that the Commission on
International Commodity Trade, at its tenth session,
and, at their joint session, the Commiss~on on International Commodity Trade and the Committee on Commodity Problems of the Food and Agriculture _Organization will consider ways and means of solving the
problems created by fluctuations in the commodity
export earnings of the developing and under-developed

15

countries and urges the above organs to formulate at
these se;sions specific recommendations in this connexion;
6. Requests the Secretary-General to consult Governments of States Members of the United Nations and
members of the specialized agencie? and as~ertain ~heir
views on the advisability of holdmg an mtern~tlonal
conference on international trade problems relatmg especially to primary commodity markets. and, if t_hey
deem such a conference advisable, the topics that might
be considered for a provisional agenda ;
7. Further requests the Secretary-General, on t~e
basis of these consultations, to report to the Economic
and Social Council at its thirty-fourth session and to
the General Assembly at its seventeenth session.
1084th plenary meeting,
19 December 1961.
1708 (XVI). Planning for economic development
The General Assembly,
Convinced of the urgent need of the less developed
countries to establish and implement national, all-inclusive and well-integrated development plans to build
up their societies in accordance with their own individual precepts,
Realizing that to this end it is necessary to advance
further the development of planning techniques that can
be adjusted to the specific needs and problems of various
countries,
Taking into consideration the growing trend towards
the use of different forms of planning in the economic
policies of developing countries,
Realizing further that it is imperative that economists,
other social scientists and administrators, within and
outside government service, be trained without delay
in techniques and problems relating to planning so as
to permit not only the elaboration of plans but also
their execution,
Bearing in mind the initiatives already demonstrated
in this connexion, namely that:
(a) Some African States expressed their views in
the course of the resumed fifteenth session of the General Assembly in favour of the establishment, under the
auspices of the Economic Commission for Africa ar:d
with the assistance of the Special Fund, of an economic
development institute for Africa for the pu:J>Ose of
training suitable persons in the field of economic deve_lopment, in particular in the techniques of economic
planning and programming, 7
( b) The Economic Commission for Latin America,
in its resolution 199 (IX) of 13 May 1961, requested
the establishment, under its auspices, of an institute for
planning economic development which would provide
advisory services to Governments and engage in training,8
( c) The Conference of Asian Economic Planners,
held in New Delhi from 26 September to 3 October
1961 under the auspices of the Economic Commission
for Asia and the Far East, recommended to the Commission that it consider the establishment of an Asian
institute of economic development to overcome the
• Official Records of the General Assembly, Fifteenth Session,
Annexes, agenda item 88, document A/4?47, para. ~.
• See Official Records of the Economic and Social Council,
Thirty-second Session, Supplement No. 4 (E/3486), part III.
