162
Resolution

General Assembly-Thirty-fourth Session
Title

Code of Conduct for Law Enforcement Officials (A/34/783) ......... .
The right to education (A/34/829) .............................. •.
Regional arrangements for the promotion and protection of human rights
(A/34/829) ................................................ .
Measures to improve the situation and ensure the human rights and dignity of all migrant workers (A/34/829) ......................... .
Exchange of information on banned hazardous chemicals and unsafe
pharmaceutical products (A/34/829) ........................... .
Assistance to student refugees from Namibia, Zimbabwe and South Africa
(A/34/829) ................................................ .
Effective action against mass and flagrant violations of human rights
(A/34/829) ................................................ .
United Nations Trust Fund for Chile (A/34/829) ................... .
International co-operation in drug abuse control (A/34/829) ......... .
The right of amparo, habeas corpus or other legal remedies to the same
effect (A/34/829) ........................................... .
Human rights in Chile (A/34/829) .............................. .
Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination against
Women (A/34/830, A/34/L.61) .............................. .

34/172
34/173
34/174
34/175
34/176
34/177
34/178
34/179
34/180

34 / 24.

Implementation of the Programme for the Decade for Action to Combat Racism and Racial
Discrimination

The General Assembly,
Reaffirming its resolve to achieve the total eradication
of racism, racial discrimination and apartheid,
Recalling once again that, in its resolution 3057
(XXVIII) of 2 November 1973 and in the Programme
for the Decade for Action to Combat Racism and Racial Discrimination annexed thereto, it called for a continuing effort by all peoples, Governments and institutions to eradicate racism, racial discrimination and
apartheid,
Recalling its resolutions 31 /77 of 13 December 197 6,
32/10 of 7 November 1977 and 33/98 of 16 December
1978,
Taking into account its resolutions 33/99 and 33/100
of 16 December 1978,
Aware of the serious threat to international peace and
security resulting from the continued defiance by the
racist regimes in South Africa and Southern Rhodesia
of the resolutions adopted by the international community and of the will manifested by the latter to put
an end to the abhorrent policies of apartheid and racial
discrimination, the continuation of the illegal occupation of Namibia and the refusal to respect the right
of peoples to self-determination,
Recognizing in particular the serious plight of women
and children subjected to apartheid and racial discrimination,
Recalling the importance of the attainment of the
objectives of the Decade,
Expressing its satisfaction at the results of the World
Conference to Combat Racism and Racial Discrimination, held at Geneva from 14 to 25 August 1978,
Convinced that the Conference, which was held at the
mid-point of the Decade and constituted an outstanding
event therein, has made a valuable and constructive contribution to the achievement of the objectives of the

Date of adoption

Page

88 (c)
12

17 December 1979
17 December 1979

185
187

12

17 December 1979

188

12

17 December 1979

188

12

17 December 1979

189

12

17 December 1979

189

12
12
12

17 December 1979
17 December 1979
17 December 1979

190
191
191

12
12

17 December 1979
17 December 1979

192
192

75

18 December 1979

193

Item

No.

34/169
34/170
34/171

Decade by its adoption of the Declaration and the Programme of Action, 2
1. Proclaims that the elimination of all forms of
racism and discrimination based on race and the attainment of the objectives of the Programme for the Decade
for Action to Combat Racism and Racial Discrimination and of the Programme of Action adopted by the
World Conference to Combat Racism and Racial Discrimination are matters of high priority for the international community and, accordingly, for the United
Nations;
2. Strongly condemns the policies of apartheid,
racism and racial discrimination practised in southern
Africa and elsewhere, including the denial of the right
of peoples to self-determination;
3. Reaffirms once again its strong support for the
national liberation struggle against racism, racial discrimination, apartheid, colonialism and alien domination
and for self-determination by all means, including armed
struggle;
4. Invites all Member States, United Nations organs, the specialized agencies and intergovernmental
and non-governmental organizations to strengthen and
enlarge the scope of their activities in support of the
objectives of the Programme for the Decade;
5. Calls once again upon all the Governments which
have not yet done so to take legislative, administrative
and other measures in respect of their nationals and the
bodies corporate under their jurisdiction that own and
operate enterprises in southern Africa, in order to put
an end to such enterprises immediately;
6. Appeals to all States to continue to co-operate
with the Secretary-General by submitting their reports
to him in accordance with paragraph 18 (e) of the Programme for the Decade;
7. Commends the national liberation movements,
anti-apartheid and anti-racist movements and other nongovernmental organizations for their co-operation in international efforts for the attainment of the purposes
of the Decade;
2
Report of the World Conference to Combat Racism and
Racial Discrimination, Geneva, 14-25 August 1978 (United Nations publication, Sales No. E.79.XIV.2), chap. II.

VI.

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

163

1. During the second half of the Decade for Action to Combat Racism and Racial Discrimination, efforts should be intensified by all States, United Nations organs and intergovernmental and non-governmental organizations to achieve the speediest
attainment of the objectives of the Decade, aimed at the complete and final elimination of all forms of racism and racial
discrimination.
2. Particular attention should be paid to specific measures
designed to ensure the implementation of the main provisions
of the Programme for the Decade, of the Declaration and the
Programme of Action adopted by the World Conference to
Combat Racism and Racial Discrimination and of the other
pertinent United Nations resolutions on racism, racial discrimination, apartheid, decolonization and self-determination, of the
Lagos Declaration for Action against Apartheid, 5 adopted by

the World Conference for Action against Apartheid, held at
Lagos from 22 to 26 August 1977, the Maputo Declaration in
Support of the Peoples of Zimbabwe and Namibia, 0 adopted by
the International Conference in Support of the Peoples of Zimbabwe and Namibia, held at Maputo from 16 to 21 May 1977,
and the Programme of Action against Apartheid recommended
by the International Seminar on the Eradication of Apartheid
and in Support of the Struggle for Liberation in South Africa,
held at Havana from 24 to 28 May 1976, adopted by the General Assembly in resolution 31/6 J of 9 November 1976.
3. Every effort should be made to bring about the complete
isolation of the racist regimes and the strict application by all
States Members of the United Nations of sanctions against those
regimes, since any co-operation with them in the political, economic, militafY and other fields constitutes an impediment to
the liberation of southern Africa. Governments are duty-bound
to create the necessary conditions to ensure that transnational
corporations shall cease to grant any assistance or support to the
racist regimes of Pretoria and Salisbury or to exploit the peoples
of southern Africa and the natural resources of their countries.
4. The Security Council is requested to consider urgently
the possibility of imposing complete and mandatory sanctions
under Chapter VII of the Charter of the United Nations against
the apartheid regime of South Africa and the racist regimes in
southern Africa, in particular:
(a) The cessation of all collaboration with South Africa in
the nuclear field;
(b) The prohibition of all technological assistance or collaboration in the manufacture of arms and military supplies in
South Africa;
(c) The prohibition of all loans to, and all investments in,
South Africa and the cessation of all promotion of trade with
South Africa;
(d) An embargo on the supply of petroleum, petroleum
products and other strategic commodities to South Africa.
5. The efforts undertaken by the organizations of the United
Nations system should be intensified in order to keep public
opinion constantly on the alert against the evils of racism, racial
discrimination and apartheid through publications of the Centre
against Apartheid of the Secretariat, the dissemination of various brochures and the issue by the Universal Postal Union,
beginning in 1980, of a stamp to mark the Decade, etc.
6. The efforts of the Department of Public Information of
the Secretariat should be intensified in order to generate publicity and disseminate information with a view to mobilizing
public support for the goals and objectives of the Decade. An
annual report on the activities of the Department of Public
Information should form part of the report prepared by the
Secreta[Y-General in accordance with paragraph 18 (f) of the
Programme for the Decade.
7. All States, international agencies and non-governmental
organizations should intensify the campaigns organized to obtain the release of all political detainees imprisoned by the
racist regimes for their brave struggle against apartheid, racism
and racial discrimination and in defence of the rights of their
peoples to self-determination and independence.
8. The appropriate organizations of the United Nations system should continue their investigation of the policies and practices in occupied Arab territories, including Palestine, based on
various forms of racial discrimination against the peoples of
those territories.
9. The World Conference of the United Nations Decade for
Women: Equality, Development and Peace, to be held in 1980,
should contribute to the struggle against racism, racial discrimination and apartheid by recommending the adoption of other
measures aimed at ensuring the active participation of women
in the struggle against those evils.
10. The Secreta[Y-General should ensure the widest possible
dissemination of the study on the work of the Committee on the
Elimination of Racial Discrimination, 7 prepared pursuant to
Economic and Social Council resolution 2057 (LXII) of 12

a A/34/512, annex.
4 Resolution 2106 A (XX), annex.
5 United Nations publication, Sales No. E.77.XIV.2 and corrigendum, sect. X.

6 A/32/ 109/Rev.l-S/12344/Rev.1, annex. For the printed
text, see Official Records of the Security Council, Thirty-second
Year, Supplement for July, August and September 1977.
1 A/CONF.92/8.

8. Appeals to all mass media and educational and
cultural institutions to co-operate fully in the implementation of the Programme for the Decade;
9. Endorses the conclusions and recommendations
of the International Seminar on Children under Apartheid, held in Paris from 18 to 20 June 1979 ;3
10. Requests the Economic and Social Council to
submit to the General Assembly at its thirty-fifth session its report on the evaluation of the activities undertaken in connexion with the Decade, in accordance with
paragraph 18 of the Programme for the Decade, taking
mto account the results of the Conference set out in the
Declaration and the Programme of Action which it
adopted;
11. Adopts the four-year programme of activities
designed to accelerate progress in the implementation
of the Programme for the Decade, as set forth in the
annex to the present resolution;
12. Expresses its satisfaction to the Committee on
the Elimination of Racial Discrimination, the Special
Committee against Apartheid, the United Nations Council for Namibia, the Special Committee on the Situation
with regard to the Implementation of the Declaration on
the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and
Peoples, the Committee on the Exercise of the Inalienable Rights of the Palestinian People and the Commission on Human Rights, through its Ad Hoe Working
Group of Experts on Southern Africa and its SubCommission on Prevention of Discrimination and Protection of Minorities, for their contribution to the
implementation of the Programme for the Decade;
13. Invites in particular the Committee on the Elimination of Racial Discrimination to monitor the implementation of the provisions of articles 4 and 7 · of the
International Convention on the Elimination of All
Forms of Racial Discrimination4 in order to prevent any
incitement to racism and racial discrimination and to
promote understanding, tolerance and friendship among
nations and racial or ethnic groups;
14. Decides to consider at its thirty-fifth session, as
a matter of high priority, the item entitled "Implementation of the Programme for the Decade for. Action to
Combat Racism and Racial Discrimination".
69th plenary meeting
15 November 1979
ANNEX
Programme of activities to be undertaken during the second
half of the Decade for Action to Combat Racism and Racial
Discrimination

164

General Assembly-'lblrty-fourth Session

May 1977, and of the brochure 8 on the International Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Racial Discrimination,
prepared by the Committee as its contribution to the World
Conference to Combat Racism and Racial Discrimination.
11. Regional seminars should be organized on an annual
basis, at • the level of the regional commissions, on specific
subjects.
12. The United Nations should adopt other measures aimed
at improving the situation and ensuring the human rights and
dignity of all migrant workers, including the drawing up of a
convention on the protection of the rights of all migrant
workers.
13. Activities should be undertaken to encourage the effective contribution of youth to the struggle against racism,
racial discrimination and apartheid.
14. A week of solidarity with the peoples struggling against
racism and racial discrimination, beginning on 21 March, should
be organized annually in all States.
15. All States should adopt, as a matter of high priority,
measures to declare punishable by law any dissemination of
ideas based on racial superiority or hatred and to prohibit organizations based on racial prejudice and hatred, including
neo-Nazi and Fascist organizations and private clubs and institutions established on the basis of racial criteria or propagating
ideas of racial discrimination and apartheid.
16. All States should eliminate, through legislation and
administrative measures, all discriminatory practices against
members of immigrant communities. They should ensure that
immigrants and their families are gi-ven treatment which is no
less favourable than that accorded their own nationals in matters such as education, employment, acquisition of property,
health and housing facilities and travel within and outside the
country.
17. The main activities to be undertaken for the achievement of these objectives are set forth below. This implies that:
(a) The United Nations should provide adequate financial
and human resources according to the priorities established by
the General Assembly to combat racism, racial discrimination
and apartheid;
(b) The specialized agencies and other intergovernmental and
non-governmental organizations concerned must, within their
respective fields of competence, make an essential contribution
to the attainment of these ends. In addition to the preparation
of the report of the Secretary-General requested in paragraph
18 (j) of the Programme for the Decade, a certain number of
activities should be undertaken during the second half of the
Decade in particular.
18. In the light of paragraph 13 (b) of the Programme for
the Decade, a seminar should be organized in 1981 by the
Commission on Human Rights, in co-operation with the Special
Committee against Apartheid, in order to study the formulation
of effective measures to prevent transnational corporations and
other established interests from collaborating with the racist
regimes in southern Africa. The Commission on Transnational
Corporations and the Commission on Human Rights should
make a study in co-operation with the Special Committee against
Apartheid, the Special Committee on the Situation with regard
to the Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of
Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples and the United
Nations Council for Namibia with a view to enumerating specific measures whose application by all States, intergovernmental organizations, private institutions and non-governmental
organizations will make it possible to end all collaboration with
the racist regimes and prevent the supply of capital, loans,
credits, foreign currency and any other form of commercial,
financial and technological assistance to the economies of South
Africa, Southern Rhodesia and Namibia by private banks, Governments and international agencies, such as the International
Bank for Reconstruction and Development, the International
Finance Corporation, the International Monetary Fund and
similar institutions.
19. In accordance with General Assembly resolution 3377
(XXX) of 10 November 1975, the Commission on Human
Rights, in co-operation with the Sub-Commission on Prevention
8

''Towards a World without Racism" (OPl/613).

of Discrimination and Protection of Minorities, should undertake a study on ways and means of ensuring the implementation
of the United Nations resolutions on apartheid, racism and racial discrimination and submit its conclusions to the Assembly
at its thirty-seventh session through the Economic and Social
Council.
20. A study should be undertaken in 1980 by the Ad Hoe
Working Group of Experts on Southern Africa on ways and
means of implementing international instruments, such as the
International Convention on the Suppression and Punishment
of the Crime of Apartheid, including the establishment of the
international jurisdiction envisaged by the Convention.
21. The United Nations Institute for Training and Research
should organize an international colloquium in 1980 on the
elimination of apartheid, racism and racial discrimination and
the achievement of self-determination in international law, with
special attention to the principles of non-discrimination and selfdetermination as peremptory norms of international law.
22. A study should be prepared by the Secretary-General in
1981 on the links between the struggle against racism and the
struggle for self-determination in southern Africa.
23. A study should be prepared in 1981 by the Commission
on the Status of Women on the situation of women and children
living under the racist minority regimes in southern Africa,
especially under the apartheid regime, and of women and children living in the occupied Arab territories and other occupied
territories.
24. A study should be undertaken in 1981 by the SecretaryGeneral, in co-operation with the United Nations Educational,
Scientific and Cultural Organization, the Food and Agriculture
Organization of the United Nations and the World Health Organization, on the links between racial discrimination and inequalities in the fields of education, nutrition, health, housing
and cultural development.
25. Under the auspices of the United Nations Educational,
Scientific and Cultural Organization, a round-table of editors
of newspapers concerned in informing public opinion about the
evils of racism and racial discrimination, with wide circulation
and from the various geographical regions, should be convened
in the second half of 1980, on the basis of equitable distribution, to study the role of the mass communication media in
combating racism, racial discrimination and apartheid. A report
on the work of the round-table should be submitted to the
Economic and Social Council at its first regular session of 198 I.
26. An important feature of the second half of the Decade
should be the holding of a second World Conference to Combat
Racism and Racial Discrimination, preferably at the end of the
Decade, in order to review and appraise the activities undertaken during the Decade and to chart new measures where
necessary. In accordance with the mandate given it, defined in
paragraph 18 of the Programme for the Decade, the Economic
and Social Council would act, as it did in the case of the first
Conference, as a preparatory committee for this Conference.
27. The Economic and Social Council should plan to begin
considering the preparations for the Conference at its first regular session of 1980.

34 / 25.

Review and co-ordination of human rights
programmes of organizations in the United Na•
tions system and co-operation with other international programmes in the field of human
rights

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 33/54 of 14 December 1978
on review and co-ordination of human rights programmes of organizations in the United Nations system
and co-operation with other international programmes
in the field of human rights,
Noting that, pursuant to that resolution, the General
Assembly will resume discussion of the subject of review and co-ordination of human rights programmes
