S/PRST/2008/29

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
19 August 2008
Original: English

Statement by the President of the Security Council
At the 5959th meeting of the Security Council, held on 19 August 2008, in
connection with the Council’s consideration of the item entitled “The situation in
Timor-Leste”, the President of the Security Council made the following statement
on behalf of the Council:
“The Security Council welcomes the report of the Secretary-General on
the United Nations Integrated Mission in Timor-Leste (S/2008/501), as well as
the briefing by the Special Representative of the Secretary-General for
Timor-Leste, Mr. Atul Khare on 19 August 2008.
“The Security Council commends the political leadership and State
institutions of Timor-Leste for the rapid, firm and responsible manner that
respected constitutional procedures of the country, in which they responded to
the deplorable events of 11 February 2008. The Council acknowledges that
while progress has been made in the overall security situation in Timor-Leste
since the events of May-June 2006, the political, security, social and
humanitarian situation in the country remains fragile.
“The Security Council welcomes the continued efforts to foster dialogue
and national reconciliation in Timor-Leste through various mechanisms, in
particular the expanded High-level Coordination meetings, the Trilateral
Coordination Forum as well as the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General’s continued good offices. The Council also welcomes recent
progress in addressing the situation of the internally displaced people.
“The Security Council reaffirms the continued importance of the review
and reform of the security sector in Timor-Leste, in particular the need to
ensure clear separation of internal and external security roles and
responsibilities between the national police (PNTL) and the military (FFDTL);
to strengthen legal frameworks and to enhance civilian oversight and
accountability mechanisms. The Security Council recognizes efforts made by
the national authorities and UNMIT for the reconstitution of the National
Police of Timor-Leste (PNTL) and welcomes the report of the expert mission
on policing to Timor-Leste of 16 May 2008 (S/2008/329) and the necessary
steps taken to implement the recommendations of the report. The Council
underlines that the building of an independent, professional and impartial
national police service in Timor-Leste is a long-term process, that national
ownership is a central element in this regard, and that UNMIT has a key role

08-46607 (E) 190808

*0846607*

S/PRST/2008/29

in helping to ensure that PNTL is ready and able to resume its policing
responsibilities.
“The Security Council recalls the need for sustained support of the
international community to Timor-Leste to develop and strengthen its
institutions and further build capacities in the justice sector.
“The Security Council further reaffirms the importance of ongoing
efforts to reach accountability and justice, and underlines the importance of the
implementation of the recommendations of the United Nations Special
Commission of Inquiry report of 2006 by the Government of Timor-Leste. It
welcomes the conviction of the leaders of Timor-Leste on the need for justice
and their determination to act against impunity. The Council underscores the
importance of the promotion and protection of human rights.
“The Security Council recognizes the need to address socio-economic
challenges in Timor-Leste. In this regard, the Council welcomes the launching
of the National Priorities for 2008 by the Government of Timor-Leste,
including public safety and security; social protection and solidarity;
addressing the needs of youths; employment and income generation;
improving social service delivery; and greater transparency and effective
government. It also welcomes the signing between Timor-Leste and the
United Nations of the United Nations Development Assistance Framework
2009-2013, which can provide the country with an important instrument on its
path for development.
“The Security Council reaffirms its full support for UNMIT in its work
and appreciates the continued efforts by the Secretary-General and his Special
Representative to ensure the full implementation of the mandate of UNMIT. It
encourages UNMIT, in accordance with its mandate, to continue to cooperate
with the United Nations agencies, funds and programmes as well as all
relevant partners to support the Government of Timor-Leste. The Council
recalls its requests to the Secretary-General in consultation with the
Government of Timor-Leste to develop a medium-term strategy with
appropriate benchmarks to measure and track progress and to submit further
reports as and when he considers appropriate.”

2

08-46607
