UNITED
NATIONS

S
Security Council
Distr.
GENERAL
S/PRST/1994/42
10 August 1994
ENGLISH
ORIGINAL: FRENCH

STATEMENT BY THE PRESIDENT OF THE SECURITY COUNCIL

At the 3414th meeting of the Security Council, held on 10 August 1994, in
connection with the Council’s consideration of the item entitled "The situation
concerning Rwanda", the President of the Security Council made the following
statement on behalf of the Council:
"The Security Council remains extremely concerned at the situation, as
described in the report of the Secretary-General on Rwanda (S/1994/924) and
oral briefings by the Secretariat, in Rwanda and in the countries of the
region where millions of displaced persons and refugees are concentrated in
extremely precarious conditions from the standpoint of both food and
sanitation.
Bearing in mind the extreme seriousness of this situation, the
Security Council considers that at present the most immediate task is to
respond to the massive humanitarian crisis created by the population
movements. To this end, the Council expresses its appreciation to all
Member States, United Nations agencies, non-governmental organizations and
individuals who responded to this humanitarian challenge and encourages
them to continue and intensify their efforts, in particular in Rwandan
territory with a view to alleviating to the best of their ability the
situation of all those who have fled from their homes and villages.
The Security Council believes, furthermore, that the rapid return of
the refugees and displaced persons to their homes is essential for the
normalization of the situation in Rwanda. In this regard, the Council
strongly condemns attempts to intimidate refugees carried out by those who
are seeking to prevent them from returning to Rwanda. It urges the former
leadership of Rwanda and those who have assumed political responsibility in
the refugee camps to cooperate with representatives of the current
Government in reconciliation and repatriation efforts and cease forthwith
attempts and propaganda campaigns directed at destabilizing the situation
in Rwanda and inducing refugees to stay in exile.
The Security Council, moreover, welcomes the declared readiness of the
new Government of Rwanda to encourage the return of the refugees and
displaced persons, ensure their protection and their legal rights and allow
aid to reach those who require it anywhere in the country. It considers

94-32381 (E)

100894

100894

/...

S/PRST/1994/42
English
Page 2

that the new Government of Rwanda is responsible for the rapid
implementation of these commitments, which are essential for speeding up
the return of refugees to Rwanda.
The Security Council also calls upon the Government of Rwanda to
ensure that there are no reprisals against those who wish to return to
their homes and resume their occupations. To this end, the Council
encourages the Government of Rwanda to cooperate with the United Nations,
in particular with the Commission of Experts established by the Council in
its resolution 935 (1994), in ensuring that those guilty of the atrocities
committed in Rwanda, in particular the crime of genocide are brought to
justice through an appropriate mechanism or mechanisms which will ensure
fair and impartial trials in accordance with international standards of
justice. In this connection, the Council welcomes the recent statement by
the new Government of Rwanda supporting the establishment of an
international tribunal and welcomes the report of the Secretary-General of
26 July 1994 (S/1994/879) on the establishment of the Commission of Experts
and the appointment of its members (S/1994/906), and urges the Commission
to submit its conclusions as soon as possible.
The Security Council welcomes the Secretary-General’s intention to
adapt the practical tasks of the United Nations Assistance Mission for
Rwanda (UNAMIR) to the evolving situation within the framework of Security
Council resolution 925 (1994). The Council underlines that the full
deployment of UNAMIR will be important to establish a more secure
environment in order to accelerate the process of return of refugees and
displaced persons and to prevent further population movements, in
particular from the secure humanitarian area, which might exacerbate the
situation in neighbouring countries. For this reason, it is essential that
the contingents that are to be part of UNAMIR are deployed without further
delay and that the technical assistance that they require for this purpose
is provided to them as soon as possible.
The Security Council also notes the importance of the deployment in
Rwandan territory of civilian observers responsible for monitoring the
establishment of a more secure environment, and in this regard welcomes the
measures envisaged by the High Commissioner for Human Rights, within his
mandate, with the assistance of certain Member States.
The Security Council reaffirms, as the Secretary-General emphasizes in
his report of 3 August 1994 (S/1994/924), that the Arusha Peace Agreement
constitutes an appropriate frame of reference for promoting national
reconciliation in Rwanda. The Council reminds the Government of Rwanda of
its responsibility for bringing its people together again in national
reconciliation. In this context, the Council commends the countries
neighbouring Rwanda and the Organization of African Unity for their
commitment and assistance towards the solution of the conflict in Rwanda,
and encourages them to continue to promote stability in the country and the
entire region. The Council believes that, for their part, the neighbouring
countries are also responsible for ensuring that their territories are not
used for further destabilization of the situation."
-----
