TWENTY-SECOND

YEAR

st

MEETING: 24 MAY 1967
NEW

1,,“, t,ia

YORK

CONTENTS
Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/ 1341) , . . . . , . . . , , , . , . , . . , , . . , . . . . , . .

Pug;

Statement by the President , , . . . . . . . . , . . . . , . + . . , . , . . . , . . . . . . , . .

1

Expression of thanks to the retiring President and to the retiring members of the
Security Council, and welcome to the new members . . , . , . . . , . . . . . . . , .

1

Adoption of the agenda . . . . . , . . . . . . . . . , . , , . . . . . . . , . . . . . . . . , , .

1

Letter dated 23 May 1967 from the Permanent Representatives of Canada and
Denmark addressed to the President of the Security Council (S/7902)
....,.

6

S/PV.1341

NOTE
Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined with
Jgures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United Nations document.
Documents of the Security Council (symbol S/. . .) are normally published in quarterly
Supplements of the Official Records of the Security Council. The date of the document
indicates the supplement in which it appears or in which information about it is given.
The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a system
adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of Resolutions and Decisions of the
Sentn’ty Council. The new system, which has been applied retroactively to resolutions
adopted before 1 January 1965, became fully operative on that date.

THIRTEEN

HUNDRED

AND

Held in New York on Wednesday,
President: Mr. LIU Chieh (China).

FORTY-FIRST

MEETING

24 May 1967,

a-t 10.30

a.m.

addressed to me as your predecessor. &should also like to
take this opportunity to express my appreciation for all thr
efforts made by those who preceded both of us in the Chair
during the months of January, February and March. The)
all shared the responsibilities which I know fall upon the
President in peculiar fashion with regard to international
disputes and troubles. I would only add that I nlstj
appreciate the efforts which you have made through
consultations to bring about this meeting today.

Present: The representatives of the following States:
Argentina, Brazil, Bulgaria, Canada, China, Denmark, Ethiopia, France, India, Japan, Mali, Nigeria, Union of Soviet
Socialist Republics, United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland and United States of America.
Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/l 341)
1. Adoption of the agenda.

4. The PRESIDENT:
As this is the first meeting of the
Security Council in 1967, it falls upon me to express the
Council’s appreciation to those representatives who served
with great distinction to the end of 1966. I refer, of course,
to Mr. El-Farra of Jordan, Mr. de Beus of the Netherlands,
Mr. Corner of New Zealand, Mr. Kironde of Uganda and
Mr. Berro of Uruguay. They contributed greatly to SLIS.
taining the high traditions of this body, and we thank them
sincerely.

2. Letter dated 23 May 1967 from the Permanent Representatives of Canada and Denmark addressed to the
President of the Security Council (S/7902).
Statement by the President
1. The PRESIDENT: I should like to say how much I
regret that circumstances did not permit me to have fuller
consultations with my colleagues personally and individually, as I should have liked to do. In view of the
urgency of the request for a meeting and in accordance
with the precedents of the Council, I felt that I had no
alternative in the circumstances but to call a meeting this
morning. I hope that my colleagues will not consider my
action in any other light than as indicating my desire to
serve the Council to the best of my ability.

5. It is my further pleasant duty to welcome the IICH
members of the Security Council who are present today fcrr
the first official meeting since their eIection. They are well
known to all of us for their outstanding services in other
organs of the United Nations, and we look forward with
pleasure to having their support and co-operation in our
future work together. Let me bid a warm welcome to Mr.
Sette Camara of Brazil, Mr, Ignatieff of Canada, Mr. Tabor
of Denmark, Mr. Makonnen
of Ethiopia and Mr.
Parthasarathi of India.

Expression of thanks to the retiring President and to the
retiring members of the Security Council, and welcome to
the new members

Adoption of the agenda

2. The PRESIDENT: Before proceeding to the consideration of the agenda of this meeting, it is my privilege, in
accordance with the Council’s pleasant custom, to say a few
words of appreciation to my predecessor in the Chair, Mr.
Ignatieff of Canada. Although no meeting of the Council
took place during the past months, the world was not
altogether free from tensions and disturbing developments
jn April. Mr. Ignatieff’s vast*knowledge and experience in
world affairs have enabled him to steer us through many
hidden hazards. I had the privilege of knowing him for
many years, when I was posted in his great country. I count
myself among the many admirers of his great qualities,
which I am sure will again be brought to bear in our present
deliberations. On behalf of the Council, and on ‘my own
behalf, I wish to extend our grateful thanks to the outgoing
President, Mr. Ignatieff.

6. The PRESIDENT: This meeting of the Security Council
has been called at the urgent request of the representatives
of Canada and Denmark. They addressed that request to mc
yesterday evening in a letter which has been circulated as
document S/7902.
7. The provisional agenda of the meeting is contained in
document S/Agenda/l341,
which is before the Council.
Unless I hear any objection, I shall take it that the agenda is
adopted.
8. Mr, FEDORENKO
(Union of Soviet Socialist Republics) (translated from Russian): Fellow-members of the
Security Council, the Soviet Union delegation deems it
necessary, in the first place, to reaffirm the Soviet Union’s
fundamental position with regard to the Chiang Kai-shek
group’s illegal occupancy of a seat in the United Nations,
including the Security Council-a seat which by rights, of
course, belongs solely to the People’s Republic of China.

3. Mr. IGNATIEFF (Canada): I should like, first of all, to
thank you, Mr. President, for’the very kind words you have
1

_1’

resources of the United Nations Truce Supervision Organization had not enabled that organization to arrest these
activities.

9. The Soviet Union delegation also deems it necessary to
point out that it seesno adequate grounds for such haste in
convening the Security Council and for the artificial
dramatization of the situation by the representatives of the
Western Powers, which are obviously relying on the method
of piling up the stage effects. It is highly significant
that-not without suitable stage direction, naturally-it was
two NATO countries nowhere near the Middle East, rather
than any of the parties directly concerned, which took the
initiative in having the Security Council urgently convened.

15. In recent days statements have been made by the
President of the United Arab Republic and by the Prime
Minister of Israel which confront US with the possibility of
the danger of direct confrontation between the United
Arab Republic and Israel over the question of accessto the
Gulf of Aqaba.
16. In the face of this rising and dangerous state of
tension, the means for bringing influences of moderation to
bear in the area through the United Nations, far from being
increased, have actually been decreased, at the very
moment of crisis, by the withdrawal of the United Natiolls
Emergency Force.

10. The question involuntarily arises: is it not a case here
of a hidden desire to interfere in someone else’s business,
rather than a true concern for peace and security in the
Middle East?
11, The PRESIDENT: As the representative of the Soviet
Union is we11aware, this is not the first time that I have had
the honour of presiding over meetings of the Security
Council when important decisions have been reached, with
my participation. At this grave juncture of world developments, I shall not allow myself to enter into arguments over
a question that was very clearly pronounced upon by the
entire membership of the Organization only a few months
ago. There can be no question as to the right of the
Republic of China, as a Member State in good standing, to
send representatives to the competent organs of the United
Nations-and, in this case, under specific provisions of the
Charter.

17. The principal means now before us to balance this
deteriorating situation through the United Nations has been
the mission of the Secretary-General himself.
18. I believe, and I believe my Danish colleague shares this
belief, that at this stage the most useful contribution which
the Council can make in this grave situation is to reinforce
the current efforts being made by the Secretary-General to
preserve peace in the area. This is the purport of what we
are suggesting that the Council should proceed to do. We
should at the same time urge that no Member State of the
United Nations take any action which would either
prejudice the successof the Secretary-General’s mission or
worsen the situation.

12. Mr. IGNATIEFF (Canada): In answer to the remarks
which my Soviet colleague has just made as to the reason
for this meeting, I can be very brief in explaining why I, on
instructions from my Government, and my Danish
colIeague requested an urgent meeting of the Council to
consider what action should be taken in the present grave
circumstances in the Middle East. I need only refer
members of the Council to the Secretary-General’s report
of 19 May 1967, now before you, which states that “the
current situation in the Near East is more disturbing,
indeed, I may say more menacing, than at any time since
the fall of 1956” [S/7896, para. 191.

19. In taking this initiative of asking the Council to
convene, we are willing, I must stress, to consult with all
our colleagues, of course, as well as with the countries most
directly concerned, to try to l-lnd agreements which will
reverse the drift towards the worsening of the confrontation which now exists and which has been drawn to our
attention in so dramatic a way by the Secretary-General
and by his mission.
20. Therefore, in the face of the grave facts, in the face of
the mounting threats and the faits accornplis, how can the
international community discharge its collective duty unless
the full influence of the Security Council, which is charged
under Article 24 of the United Nations Charter with
primary responsibility for the maintenance of international
peace and security precisely “to ensure prompt and
effective action”-1 underline those words-is brought to
bear upon the seriously deteriorating situation in the
Middle East?

13. In calling for this Security Council meeting we are
suggesting that the Council should exercise its responsibilities under the Charter to deal with the kind of
threatening situation which the Secretary-General has not
only reported to the Security Copncil but has regarded as
sufficiently serious to require him to assume the responsibility for undertaking a personal mission to the area.
14. The situation, as the Secretary-General rightly reported to the Council, has shown signs of “increasingly
dangerous deterioration” [ibid., para, I] for some time. I
was only too keenly aware of this, Mr. President, when last
month I had the responsibility which you now have. Steady
reports of deterioration along the frontier’lines between
Syria and Israel were reported in correspondence which I
received and which I, as President, forwarded to my
colleagues. The efforts of General Bull to secure the
resumption of the United Nations Mixed Armistice Commission meetings on disputed cultivation problems reached
an impasse. Tension also grew as a result of sabotage and
terroristic activities on the borders of Syria and Israel, and
the Secretary-General reported that the functions and

21. That, in sum, is the aim of our initiative. Canada is a
friend of all the nations of the area and has always striven
to help, by whatever means we could employ, to maintain
peace and stability in the area and to assist those in trouble
and distress. That is my reply to the representative of the
Soviet Union as to our interest in this matter. What we now
ask is that the Security Council, and in particular all-and I
emphasize “all’‘-of its permanent members, who bear
special responsibility, add the weight of their influence
collectively by asking that no Member of the United
Nations take any action that would worsen the situation or
jeopardize the efforts of the Secretary-General to preserve
2

peace. That is what we ask the Security Council to do at
this stage. We believe that it can do no less.

32. The delegation of the People’s Republic of Bulgaria
believes that at the present time there &as realIy no need
for an urgent meeting of the Security Council, as our
colleague from Mali has just said and as was said earlier in
the statement made by the representative of the Soviet
Union, at the beginning of this meeting, The only purpose
of such a meeting, as of all the activity during the last few
days on the part of certain Powers and certain representatives, is the false dramatization of a situation which these
countries and certain of their representatives have helped to
create by their previous activities. For some time, we have
been witnessing events in the Middle East which have left
these countries and their representatives unconcerned and
even, apparently, quite cheerful. You are familiar with the
reports which we have received here, at least those
appearing in the Press. NPW that those events have met with
a response-as was to be expected-these same Powers are
seeking to create an atmosphere charged with excitement,
which will serve their interests and prepare the ground for
and perhaps camouflage future intervention in the affairs of
the peoples of the Middle East.

22. I of course reserve the right to intervene further in
regard to any specific proposals that may be put before the
Council.
23. The PRESIDENT: I call on the representative of the
Soviet Union on a point of order.
24, Mr. FEDORENKO (Union of Soviet Socialist Republics) (translated from Russian): We have just heard a
rather lengthy explanation by the representative of Canada,
who, instead of speaking on the substance of our remarks,
embarked on disquisitions on the substance of the problem,
all of which is contrary to the rules and procedure applying
in the Security Council. That Is my first point,
25, Secondly, the representative of Canada thought fit to
refer to a well-known statement of the Secretary-General,
U Thant, without in the least being bothered by the nature
of the mission in which the Secretary-General is now
engaged, and by his present whereabouts.

33. The delegation of the People’s Republic of Bulgaria
does not wish to be a party to these manoeuvres. Indeed,
our country has a particular interest in maintaining peace
and security in the Middle East. We are immediate
neighbours of that region, where the imperialist Powers are
now seeking to intervene under one pretext or another, in
one form or another. My delegation is thus opposed to all
these manoeuvres and we believe that holding a meeting of
the Security Council at this time will only serve the
interests of ,$hF*forces.of intervention and aggression in the
Middle East.

26. If the Canadian representative really attaches importance to the words he has quoted, the question arises as to
why he disregards even the simple fact that it would be
advisable to have first received the information deriving
from the Secretary-General’s mission once he has returned
to Headquarters,
27. All this sounds very paradoxical, and reminds us of the
Orienta proverb, “You point to the moon, but all he looks
at is your finger”.
28. Mr. KEITA (Mali) (translated from French): The
Republic of Mali wishes to make the best contribution it
can to the work of the United Nations, to whose noble
ideals it has subscribed.

34. My colleague to the left, the representative of
Canada-with whom I have, incidentally, been on friendly
terms ever since he came to the United Nations-has made
several references to the report by the Secretary-General. It
is, however, interesting to note that the Secretary-General,
whose report has been quoted here in this way, did not
himself request a meeting of the Security Council-as he
had the right to do-because he did not consider that the
situation called for such a meeting at the moment.

29. My delegation wishes, at this stage, to remind the
Council of the following, As all here know, the United Arab
Republic, a Member of our Organization, responded favourably to a request from our Organization by yielding to it a
part of its national territory for peaceful purposes. That
assent was lawfully withdrawn by the United Arab Republic as a sovereign State. Everyone knows also that the
Secretary-General of the United Nations took note of the
decision made by the United Arab Republic and in turn
took a lawful decision himself.

35. We were amazed also to hear the outgoing President of
the Security Council, who presided over the Council during
the month of April, tell us that he had received very
disquieting reports. We wonder why he did not take action
at the time when he received those disquieting reports and
when the situation, which certain Powers are now trying to
drama&e, was systematically building up. This is really
amazing. It is a further reason not to hold a useless
meeting-which might even be detrimental to peace-at this
time, when the seat of the President of this Council is
occupied, as we have said, by someone who represents
nobody, or, at least, does not represent the count?y which
he claims to represent.

30. In the opinion of my Government, it is doubtful
whether this abrupt convening of the Security,Council will
lead to any lessening of.tension in the region in question-if
that is really what we are concerned about. My delegation,
which is most anxious that the work of the United Nations
should be effective, therefore considers that holding a
meeting at this time can only be most inopportune.
31.

Mr.

TARABANOV
(Bulgaria) (translated from
At the very outset of its statement, the delegation
of the People’s Republic of Bulgaria would like to state its
position of principle, namely, that it regards the occupation
of the seat of the People’s Republic of China in the United
Nations, and in the Security Council in particular, by the
Chiang Rai-shek clique and its representatives as unlawful.

36. Mr. BARTHASARATHI (India): I should like to state
briefly the position of my delegation in the matter of the
representation of China in the United Nations.

Bench):

37. My country recognized the People’s Republic of China
soon after it came into existence. Ever since then, my
delegation to the United Nations-in the Security Council,
3

the General Assembly and other organs of the world
Organization-has
consistently supported the right of the
People’s Republic of China to be represented in the United
Nations. My delegation continues to adhere to that position
of principle.

42. My country shares the concern of members of the
Council at the recent developments in the Middle East. In a
statement on 21 May the Prime Minister of India drew
attention to the situation. We understand the measures of
preparedness taken by the United Arab Republic to fulfil
its obligations to assist another Arab country.

38. Mr. President, I should like to recall your kind words
of welcome to India on our taking our seat in the Security
Council, words for which I thank you most sincerely. In
this, my first intervention in the Council, I cannot but
quote some parts of a statement made by my Prime
Minister on 13 November 1966, two days after India’s
election to the Security Council. She said that India would
use its membership in the United Nations to promote peace
and peaceful coexistence in the world. Referring to the
struggle for freedom of African-Asian countries and the
repressive measures being adopted by colonial Powers, she
said: “We are on the side of those struggling for their
freedom and fighting for the right of sell”detennination.”
She continued by saying that all nations should aim
towards the peaceful settlement of international problems
and work towards renunciation of war. “We are willing,”
she said, “to join with any nation prepared to renounce the
use of force for settling disputes,”

43. At this stage we do not wish to go in any detail into
the causes of the present tension in the region. We should
prefer to await the report of the Secretary-General on his
trip to Cairo. We believe that the Secretary-General is doing
his best to maintain peace and we have confidence in his
dedication to the purposes and principles of the United
Nations Charter. As members of the Council are aware,
U Thant left New York only on Monday evening and
reached Cairo on Tuesday. Before leaving, he held extensive
individual consultations with members of the Council, in
particular with the representatives of the permanent members. He is thus fully aware of their views. Members of the
Council will agree that the Secretary-General has had so far
only a few working hours since his arrival in Cairo and he
could not have had any discussions in depth with leaders of
the United Arab Republic, We have had no official or
unofficial reports on those talks. My delegation is of the
view that the Council should await a personal report from
the Secretary-General before proceeding with discussion on
the agenda.

39. The Security Council is the principal organ of the
United Nations responsible for the maintenance of peace
and security. To be elected to it is a great honour; but in
the critical times we are passing through we are more
conscious of the responsibility that goes &h our membership. Our late Prime Minister, Mr. Jawaharlal Nehru, said in
an address to the United Nations in 1960:

44. In suggesting that procedure, our purpose is not to
minimize the potentially explosive nature of the current
situation but to suggestthe most logical and reasonable way :
of handling it. The Security Council, which bears the
primary responsibility for the maintenance of peace, is not :
inactive in the matter. Members of the Council are I
constantly in touch with one another. However, any
precipitate action by the Council at this stage, far from
being helpful, can only complicate the mission of the
Secretary-General.

“I do believe that the vast majority of people in every
country want us to labour for peace and to succeed.
Whether we are large or small, we have to face large
issues, issues vital to the future of humanity.“’
40. It is in that spirit of dedication to the cause of peace
that my delegation will endeavour to discharge its duties as
a member of the Council, with the co-operation of our
colleagues.

45. We must state, with the utmost confidence, that the
United Arab Republic, a founding Member of the United
Nations, has been and is a firm believer in co-operation with
the United Nations. It is also noteworthy that it so readily
agreed to receive the Secretary-General. Therefore the
Council should take advantage of the United Arab Republic’s spirit of co-operation and not undertake to air in
public the very matters which the Secretary-General is
pursuing through personal diplomatic contacts. Such airing
of issues is only likely to exacerbate the situation and
inflame passions. Moreover, the situation on the ground,
while potentially dangerous, is still not clear. No incidents-certainly no serious incidents-have been reported.
Therefore an urgent and immediate discussion is unwarranted. Thus my delegation would have preferred that
the Council first hear the Secretary-General’s account of
the results of his visit to the United Arab Republic before
proceeding further with the matter.

41. My colleagues from the Soviet Union, Mali and
Bulgaria, who have already spoken, have touched upon the
manner in which the decision to call this meeting of the
Council was taken, We note that it has now been correctly
pointed out that it is not merely a question of the
convenience of the members of the Council but there is also
the rather vital question of the political aspects of any
problem before the Council which may become clarified
through prior informal consultations, which invariably
precede the decision to hold any meeting of the Council. It
is for the latter reason that that practice has grown to be a
time-honoured
one in this Council. Naturally, we are
unhappy that there has been an attempt to ignore that
practice and bypass it. Let me say, so that the record may
be straight, that, had we been consulted, our advice would
have been against the holding of this meeting of the Council
this morning.

46. Mr. SEYDOUX (France) (translated from French):
Since the question of China’s representation in the United
Nations, and in this Council in particular, has been raised,
the French delegation wishes to state once again that, in the
opinion of its Government, only the Central People’s
Government of the People’s Republic of China is cornpetent to represent that country.

1 Official Records of the General Assembly, Fifteenth Session
{Part I), PIenary Meetings, Vol. I, 882nd meeting, para. 162.

4

47. Throughout the various informal consultations which
preceded the request ‘for a meeting of the Security Council
by the representatives of Canada and Denmark, my
delegation expressed doubts as to the usefulness of holding
an urgent meeting of the Council. In expressing this view,
my delegation is not seeking to question the role which the
Security Council must play in the matter which it is
proposed should be entered on its agenda. Our fear-our
only fear-is that, by engaging the Security Council in
public discussions at this stage, we might make the
consultations now taking place between the various countries concerned even more difficult. In the opinion of the
French delegation, we must avoid anything which might
only serve to aggravate the present climate. The main thing
is that the holding of consultations be allowed under the
least unfavourable conditions possible. We should therefore
not have been opposed to a request for an adjournment for
twenty-four hours or forty-eight hours, if such a request
had been made.

52. Mr. MAKONNEN (Ethiopia): Mr. President, I wish
first of all to thank you, in my name and in the name of my
delegation, for the kind and generous words of welcome
you were good enough to address to us. We can assure our
colleagues in the Council that the Ethiopian delegation will
spare no effort in discharging its mutual responsibilities
connected with the work of the Council,
53. I would also say for the record that our participation
in the meeting of the Council, under its actual presidency,
should in no way be prejudicial to the policy of my
Government with regard to Chinese representation in the
United Nations.
54. My delegation shares the regret expressed by the
representative of India that the traditional consultations of
members of the Security Council did not take place, the
kind of consultations that are usually held in important
matters having to do with the convening of the Council.
This tradition of prior consultation is not, in the view of
my delegation, a mere formality, but an exercise aimed at
seeking the co-ordination and harmonization so essential to
our work in the Council. However, should the Council wish
to take up this item, my delegation would not be opposed
to a discussion as such. But we must repeat that we would
have thought it best to allow time for consultations and for
hearing from the Secretary-General with regard to the talks
that he is having with the Government of the United Arab
Republic at the moment. To start a discussion at this stage
would seem to us only to lead to a situation where we
would run the risk of working in the dark. We would also
run the risk of working at cross-purposes with the Secretary-General in his present efforts in the Middle East.

48. Mr. GOLDBERG (United States of America): The
matter the Council has been convened to consider in
emergency session is clearly of such overriding urgency that
I do not intend to take up the time of the Council by
elaborating the views of my Government on the matter
which has been raised concerning the competency of the
President to occupy his seat. My Government continues to
hold that the Republic of China, a founding Member of the
United Nations named in the Charter, is properly represented in the Council by its distinguished representative,
Mr. Liu, and, furthermore, notes that, as is well known to
everyone here concerned, he has represented his country in
the Security Council with great distinction since December
1962, when his credentials were formally presented to the
Council and were not challenged,

55. That having been said, it is of course not for my
delegation to insist that discussions not be held. My
delegation is willing to abide by the wisdom of the Council
in any decision it takes. We can only appeal to all our
colleagues, and particularly to those who ‘are inscribed to
speak at this stage, to refrain from adding petrol to the fire
by making any statement or taking any position that will
make our task and the task of the Secretary-General more
difficult and complicated. That is the earnest appeal we
respectfully make to the Council.

49. Words have been spoken on the question of the
advisability of discussing this matter at this time in the
Council and, since they have been spoken, I shall say a brief
word on the subject. It has been said, for example, that one
of the possibly adverse effects of a discussion at this time
would be to dramatize a situation better left quiet. But this
Council would be burying its head in the sand if it refused
to recognize the threat to peace implicit in the develop
ments which have occurred since the Secretary-General left
New York two days ago.

56. Mr. ADEBO (Nigeria): I have but a short contribution
to make to the discussion at this stage. I wish to state for
the record that, in regard to this meeting, I find myself in
the same position as the representative of Ethiopia. I feel
that in the situation that exists just now in the Middle East,
everybody must show very great caution in what he does,
and, in particular, the organ of the United Nations which is
charged with the peace of the world must exercise great
caution in its own proceedings so that an act which is
intended to do good does not in fact result in doing harm.

50. It is precisely because of these developments, not
known to him or to any member of the Council, that we
have been called here today urgently to consider what the
Council ought to do in the discharge of its responsibility to
further his efforts-and not to impede them.
51. This Council meeting cannot dramatize a situation
which at this moment is at the centre of the stage of world
concern. It can, however, play a role, as we hope, in
drawing the curtain on a tragedy which potentially
threatens the peace and well-being of all the people in the
area and, indeed, of all mankind. And it is a reflection, if I
may say so, on the members of the Council to believe that
any member of this Council is so irresponsible that he
would want to say anything here that would in any way
militate against the Secretary-General’s mission or against
a pacification of the tense situation in the area,

57. Subject to that, the Nigerian delegation is very anxious
that the organ which is charged with the maintenance of
the peace and security of the world should be seized, as
soon qs possible, of this matter. We have held the view, in
the discussions in which we have participated, that this
organ could not possibly proceed to take any decisive
action in this matter until some sort of report had been
forthcoming from the Secretary-General. On the other
hand, we have always adhered to the principle that if any
5

member of the Council asks that a meeting of the Security
Council take place because, in his own view-correct or
not-the situation demands it, we should, having made our
own position clear, allow that discussion to go forward.

and-as a correlate to those powers-must accept particular
responsibilities.
66. The provisional agenda for today, as well as our
deliberations, demonstrate the primary responsibility of the
COUnCil
for
the maintenance of international peace and
security. We wish to assure the members of the Council that
they can always rely upon the full co-operation of my
delegation in this, as in all other tasks which will be
conferred upon us. Finally, we wish to assure you that as a
member of the Security Council Denmark shall seek to act
not in the interest or to the detriment o$ any given country
or group of countries, but will be guided alone by our
responsibility under the Charter, and, on the basis of our
own assessment of the merits of any particular case, will
endeavour to act to the best of our abilities in the common
interest of equity and reason,

58. I shall therefore end by joining in the appeal made by
the representative of Ethiopia that in these discussions here
today nothing should be done, nothing should be said, that
would in fact make the situation in the Middle East worse
than it is today, and that everybody should remember that
the objective of us all is to make things easier, not more
difficult, for the great servant of peace who is now dealing
with that matter in Cairo at this moment.
59. The PRESIDENT:
If there are no other comments,
and unless there is a formal request to the contrary, I shall
declare the agenda adopted.

67. I shall now turn to the item on our agenda for today:
the very serious situation prevailing in the Middle East. I
shall, implicitly or explicitly, reply to some of the remarks
made on the substance of the question during our discussion of the inscription of the item on the agenda.

The agenda was adopted.

Letter dated 23 May 1967 from the Permanent Representatives of Canada and Denmark addressed to the President
of the Security Council (S/7902)

68. I shall not go into a detailed survey of the long history
of the problems in the Middle East. We are all familiar with
the fact that the area has for a very long time been troubled
by conflict and strife, which twice within the last two
decades have erupted into open war. The last time when
this happened was in 1956. On that occasion the United
Nations, through energetic action, succeeded not only in
bringing an end to the hostilities, but also-by the establishment of a United Nations presence in the area, the United
Nations Emergency Force-in creating a certain stability
and balance. This, as we all know, did not imply that any
solution to the underlying political questions had been
found; neither did it bring a complete end to local incidents
and disturbances, But it was possible for a period of more
than ten years to contain those incidents and to prevent
them from leading to major military actions.

60. The PRESIDENT:
Letters dated 24 May have now
been received from the representatives of Israel [S/7903]
and the United Arab Republic [S/7904] requesting that
they be invited to participate without vote in the consideration of the matter that has just been inscribed on the
Council’s agenda,
61. In accordance with the usual practice of the Council, I
propose, with the consent of the Council, to invite those
representatives to take places at the Council table in order
to participate in this discussion without the right to vote.
At the invitation of the President, Mr. G. Rafael (Israel)
and Mr, M. A. El Kony (United Arab Republic) took places
at the Council table.

69. Last week, however, the function of the United
Nations Emergency Force was suddenly brought to an end.
In the words of the Secretary-General in his report of 18
May to the General Assembly, this has restored “the armed
confrontation of the United Arab Republic and Israel” and
has removed “the stabilizing influence of an international
force operating along the boundaries between the two
nations” [A/6669, para. 13].2 If anyone could have had
any doubts before as to the very useful role played by the
Emergency Force, that could hardly be the case any longer.
We do not wish to dramatize the situation, but I dare say
that this is not necessary because, since the beginning of the
withdrawal of the Emergency Force, the situation along the
borders between Israel and the United Arab Republic has
been constantly deteriorating, and at an alarming speed.
There has been a military build-up along the borders of
Israel and the United Arab Republic, and there is no way of
denying that the stage is set for a major military clash. The
development has now reached a point where it seems as if
the slightest miscalculation, the slightest misunderstanding

62. Mr. TABOR (Denmark): Since the question of Chinese
representation has been raised, I wish to state for the record
that in my Government’s view only the representatives of
the People’s ‘Republic of China are entitled to occupy the
seat of China in this world Organization.
63. I wish to thank you, Mr. President, for your cordial
words of welcome to Denmark as one of the new members
of the Security Council,
64. May I also take this opportunity to pay tribute to the
outgoing members of the Council and in particular to the
Netherlands. It is a privilege to succeed a State and a
representative whose constructive participation
in the
Council’s work gained such respect and confidence from its
members.
65. Since Denmark last served on the Security Council in
1953 and 1954, the membership of the Council has been
increased in order to make it more representative of the
different trends in the international community. We fully
realize, however, that this development in no way changed
the over-all balance of the composition of the Council, in
which the permanent members still hold particular powers

2 Same text as A/6730; see Official RecordsOf the General
Fifth Emergency Special Session,Annexes, agenda

Assembly,
item 5.

6

of one or the other of the opponent’s intentions, could lead
to large-scale hostilities.

which we fully support, cannot relieve this Council of any
of its responsibilities.

70. It was our hope that U Thant’s decision to go to the
area would in itself have had a pacifying effect. However,
we have to admit that the urgency and the danger of the
situation have become even more obvious since then. Only
two days ago the President of the United Arab Republic
declared that Israel ships and other ships carrying certain
cargoes to Israel would be prevented from passing through
the Strait of Tiran; and the Israel Government on its side
has stressed that it would consider such a move as an
attack.

73. For those several reasons my Government has considered it necessary, together with the Government of
Canada, to ask for an urgent meeting of the Security
Council. In doing so, it has not, of course, been our
intention to take sides in the conflict. We have not
prejudged the issue. Our only concern has been the
preservation of peace.

71. Now what should be our attitude in the face of this
grave danger? Should the Council just stand by, see what
happens and hope for the best? That is hardly, I believe,
what world public opinion would expect of us. It is, of
course, most helpful indeed that certain great Powers have
urged restraint. If, however, we believe in the United
Nations, can it then be disputed that a call expressing the
collective will of this body will carry even greater weight?
It is fortunate, indeed, that the confrontation between the
parties has so far not gone beyond the level of mutually
hostile declarations, but let us not forget that the most
important task of the Council is the preservation, not the
restoration, of international peace and security,
72. At this very moment our esteemed Secretary-General,
in whom we have absolute confidence, is making great
efforts to bring about an easing of the tension, Generally
speaking, it would have been preferable to defer any action
by this Council until we had before us the SecretaryGeneral’s report on his current efforts. However, we have to
live with the facts of life such as they are, and not as we
wish them to be. And the facts are that ,even since the
Secretary-General left New York there have been alarming
developments, and the mission of the Secretary-General,

74. The actual question before us, the dangerous trend in
the Middle East, represents only the latest phase in a long
development. Obviously it would have been preferable if
the Council could have had the possibility of tackling the
real political problems which underlie the tension in the
area. At the moment, however, we shall have to confine
ourselves to more limited tasks. But I take it that we all are
deeply concerned about the situation in the Middle East,
that we all wish war to be avoided, that we are all prepared
to reinforce the endeavours of U Thant and that we all here
accept the responsibility of the United Nations, and in
particular of the Security Council, in this matter. Would it
then be too much to expect the Council to express its full
support for the efforts of the Secretary-General to pacify
the situation in the Middle East and to request all States to’
refrain from any steps which might worsen the situation?
75. That would be, in our opinion, the first measure which
the Security Council could profitably take in order to ease
the tension. That would be an approach impartial and
limited in scope and, we feel, in the present situation the
minimum of our responsibilities.
76. We hope that other members will share our thoughts
and that it will prove possible for the Security Council to
act on the strength of a unanimous opinion.
The meeting rose at 1.15 p.m

, .

HOW

TO OBTAIN

UNITED

NATIONS

United
Nations
publications.may
the world.
Consulf
your bookstore
or Geneva.
COMMENT

SE PROCURER

PUBLICATIONS

be obtained
or write

from bookstores
and distributors
tog United
Nations,
Seller Section,

LES PUBLICATIONS

DES NATIONS

throughout
New York

UNIES

Les publications
des Nations
Unies rant en vente
dons les librairier
et ler agencer
diporiiairer
du monde entier,
Informer-vous
aupr&s de votre libroirie
ou odressez-vous
b:
Nations
Unies, Section
des venter,
New York ou Genive.

COMO

CONSEGUIR

PUBLICACIONES

DE LAS NACIONES

Los publicaciones
de lar Nacioner
Unidclr erttrn
en todar partes del mundo, Conrulte
a su librero
Ventas, Nueva York o Ginebro.

Litho

in U.N.

UNIDAS

en venta en librerlar
y cosas dirtribuidoros
o dirt/are
ar Naciones
Unidos,
Secci6n

Price: $c.S. 0.50 (or equivalent in other currencies)

ds

03649-November

1970-2,100
