A /77/PV.28

United Nations

General Assembly

Official Records

Seventy-seventh session

28

th plenary meeting
Thursday, 3 November 2022, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Kőrösi  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (Hungary)

In the absence of the President, Mr. Wallace
(Jamaica), Vice-President, took the Chair.
The meeting was called to order at 10 a.m.
Agenda item 36 (continued)
Necessity of ending the economic, commercial and
financial embargo imposed by the United States of
America against Cuba
Reports of the Secretary-General (A/76/405 and
A/77/358)
Draft resolution (A/77/L.5)
Ms. Dockery (Saint Kitts and Nevis): I have the
honour to address the General Assembly on behalf of the
Government and the people of Saint Kitts and Nevis and
to add our fraternal voice to this extremely important
debate on agenda item 36, “Necessity of ending the
economic, commercial and financial embargo imposed
by the United States of America against Cuba”.
Saint Kitts and Nevis aligns itself with the
statements made on behalf of the Caribbean Community,
the Group of 77 and China, the Community of Latin
American and Caribbean States and the Non-Aligned
Movement (see A/77/PV.26).
Saint Kitts and Nevis has traditionally had good
relations with the United States of America. It remains
one of our oldest, closest and strongest partners. We
respect the role that it plays in international relations and
in the establishment and promotion of the principles and
values of this organ. Saint Kitts and Nevis is proud to

be the birthplace of Alexander Hamilton, whose legacy
lends itself to the higher calling of respect and dignity.
It is for that reason that we welcomed the previous
steps taken by Cuba and the United States of America
to normalize their diplomatic relations, which included
the decision to remove Cuba from the list of State
sponsors of terrorism in 2015. That marked a historic
turning point in the easing of tensions between such
close neighbours and inspired a new dawn of economic
liberalization measures, peaceful coexistence and
people-to-people exchanges between the two countries
that were so meaningful and beneficial to the Cuban
and Caribbean people.
However, Saint Kitts and Nevis finds it regrettable
that several reversals were made since that brief
period of détente and the blockade is still a reality for
the Cuban people, and it denounces the imposition of
unilateral coercive measures against a sovereign State.
That unjust embargo drives a stake through the heart
of international law, makes a mockery of the principles
of sovereignty and non-intervention that govern
inter-State relations, which are protected by the Charter
of the United Nations, and severely impedes Cuba’s
ability to fully engage the international community, to
adequately provide basic public services for its people
and thereby to fulfil its aspirations for meeting the
Sustainable Development Goals.
The fact that we are addressing this item yet again
today underscores the indispensable role that the
United Nations plays as a vital interlocutor and leader
in international affairs. Saint Kitts and Nevis remains
ever grateful that, within these our United Nations,

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of speeches
delivered in other languages. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only.
They should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room AB-0601
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

22-67261 (E)

*2267261*

A/77/PV.28

there remains a space where Member States large and
small must work to protect the interests of the global
population; and where small island developing States
like Saint Kitts and Nevis and Cuba can continue to
find a place of shelter and succour, and large States can
be looked in the eye and urged to act with a sense of
responsibility and accountability.
We consider the financial, commercial and
economic embargo to be an extreme burden on the
development, well-being and stability of our brothers
and sisters in Cuba, and indeed the entire Caribbean.
The socioeconomic impact on the economy of that
small island developing State is quite profound and
unfair to the people of Cuba. In trying to achieve the
2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development, this is a
critical time for the world, given the cumulative impact
of two years of the coronavirus disease (COVID-19)
pandemic and the disproportionate and deleterious
impacts and risks presented by intensified geopolitical
hostilities in Ukraine and the global crises in food,
fuel and transportation it has fomented. The stability
of the international order is one predicated upon peace
between and among nations, and the economic blockade
of Cuba, for all intents and purposes, constitutes a
hostile act to regional and hemispheric cohesion.
That the continued extraterritorial application
of the Helms Burton-Act, including its Title III,
constitutes a major obstacle to the normal development
of Cuba is undeniable. The report of the SecretaryGeneral (A/77/358) documents and confirms the high
cost of that policy for the country and its people. The
millions of dollars in annual losses to critical sectors,
such as the health, education, energy and banking and
financial sectors, as a result of sanctions are also well
documented. The efforts that have been made by the
Biden Administration to ease the chokehold of some of
the more draconian measures imposed by the previous
Administration are commendable, but they do not go
far enough in addressing the more harmful aspects of
the blockade. Those coercive measures, coupled with
the harsh economic and social conditions caused by
the pandemic, have produced much despair among the
people and have led to a new migrant exodus from Cuba.
That is why Saint Kitts and Nevis once again calls
upon the United States to end the unjust embargo. It is
said that an unjust law is no law at all, and in the words
of one of America’s most notable founding fathers,
Thomas Jefferson, the international community not
only has a right to disobey it, but we are obliged so
2/25

03/11/2022

to do. For the moment, we choose only to express our
righteous indignation at its imposition.
In case anyone doubted our interconnection as
a human family who breathe the same air, have the
same oceans that are the lifeblood of our shared planet,
confront the artificiality of geographical boundaries,
or accept that trade and commerce are essential to
the viability and prosperity of every nation regardless
of its politics, COVID-19, with all its consequences,
presented us with a powerful reminder. It is that human
interconnection that compels every nation and every
person to be their brothers’ and sisters’ keepers, if
not out of magnanimity, then out of enlightened selfinterest — for in their security and well-being reside
our own. For us in the Caribbean and Latin America, the
economic, financial and commercial blockade against
Cuba most certainly runs contrary to our people’s
desire for peace, as enshrined in the proclamation of
Latin America and the Caribbean as a zone of peace.
As a globalized and interdependent global
community, we cannot afford for any country to be
left behind. This is a time for international cooperation
and for pooling resources to assist each other in facing
the challenges we have in common. It is undeniable
that during the global pandemic, Cuba proved itself
to be an exemplary and benevolent global citizen and
tangibly demonstrated its humanistic outlook. Cuba’s
benevolence was even further demonstrated through
its own contribution in the race to find a vaccine. Not
only did it develop five domestic vaccines; two of them
were eventually approved for international use and
offered to those nations unable to afford other, more
expensive doses.
In the face of such magnanimity, altruism and
compassion — which can be counted in the many lives
saved, not lost — how can Cuba justifiably continue to
be designated by the United States as a State sponsor
of terrorism? Surely, that unwarranted and even
neocolonial designation and the attendant sanctions
attached to it defies all logic, reason and, indeed, the
spirit of the United Nations.
Saint Kitts and Nevis has had a deep and enduring
relationship with the Government and the people of
Cuba and has benefited immensely from cooperation
in many areas, including but not limited to health,
agriculture and education. As a country just emerging
from a general election on 5 August, we have Cuba
to thank for providing a scholarship to an intelligent,
22-67261

03/11/2022

compassionate and honest young man of very humble
beginnings, who was able to beat the odds and obtain a
medical degree and become not only one of our nation’s
finest internists but also our country’s fourth Prime
Minister. As the newly appointed, youngest and first
female Permanent Representative of Saint Kitts and
Nevis to the United Nations, I too owe my ability to
deliver my speech from this platform to Cuba. It was
only five short months ago, in May of this year, that
I lay in the surgical ward awaiting surgery to remove
my right eyeball. It is only because of the highly
knowledgeable, gallant and dedicated efforts of my
Cuban optician, offering her services virtually free of
charge, that I was able to save my eye.
So again, I ask the question: What justifies
Cuba — a small, Caribbean nation that has had
such a disproportionately positive impact on the
global fight against the COVID-19 pandemic, and
whose internationalism and humanitarianism have
saved, impacted and empowered so many human
lives — continuing to be burdened and limited by an
outdated embargo?
Saint Kits and Nevis, which is among the smallest
States in the world, knows and understands the power
of one. One tree can start a forest. One smile can begin
a friendship. One hand can lift a soul. One candle can
wipe out darkness. One touch can show you care. One
life can make all the difference. So today we lift our
voices as one nation in solidarity with our friend Cuba
to support draft resolution A/77/L.5, in the hopes of
winning the unanimous support of 192 more countries
and the great United States to end, once and for all, the
unjust embargo.
Ms. Williams (Grenada): Grenada aligns itself
with the statements delivered on behalf of the
Caribbean Community, the Group of 77 and China, the
Non-Aligned Movement and the Community of Latin
American and Caribbean States (see A/77/PV.26).
At the outset, I acknowledge the presence of the
Minister for Foreign Affairs of Cuba, His Excellency
Mr. Bruno Rodríguez Parrilla.
This noble institution is nearing its eightieth
anniversary, a significant milestone that is worthy of
distinct recognition. As such, this is an appropriate
time to also renew our commitment to the principles of
the Charter of the United Nations and to the norms of
international law.

A/77/PV.28

The imposition of the trade and financial embargo
on Cuba is perilous to those norms and values,
which govern the peaceful coexistence of States,
and contradicts the purposes and principles of the
United Nations Charter to which we States commit
ourselves. Against that backdrop, as an advocate for
the principles of the United Nations Charter, Grenada
recognizes the sovereign equality of States and joins
with the rest of the General Assembly in its call for the
immediate removal of the financial and trade measures
against Cuba. Grenada is also satisfied that the removal
of the imposed economic, commercial and financial
blockade against Cuba will facilitate economic and
social change there. Additionally, we call for the
removal of Cuba from the list of countries that are
sponsors of terrorism.
This year’s report of the Secretary-General
(A/77/358), like previous reports on this matter, outlines
responses from an overwhelming majority of Member
States that share a common perspective on the continued
unilateral embargo against Cuba. Indeed, the report
of the Secretary-General also reveals the deleterious
effects of the embargo on the manner in which organs
and agencies of the United Nations system carry out
their mandates and provide support to Cuba.
In the midst of serious economic, financial and social
challenges, Cuba has always been willing to extend
a hand of friendship and solidarity to other nations
in the developing world, starting with its immediate
neighbours. Notwithstanding those hardships, the
herculean spirit of cooperation and humanitarianism
demonstrated by Cuba is essential to the genuine world
peace and stability will all so desire. We profoundly
thank Cuba once again for the solidarity and solid stand
it has taken in that regard.
Grenada maintains the position that constructive
engagement and renewed negotiations remain the only
acceptable means for advancing long-term peace and
stability. Grenada believes that the time has now come
when we must move to elevate solutions that would
create peaceful coexistence — one people, one world.
The time has now come, in our view, for continued
mobilization and demand for international support and
solidarity. We continue to believe that there is still hope,
with the support of multilateralism in this community
of nations, for a return to the normalization of relations
between the two Governments in the spirit of true
and sincere reconciliation, and that this unilateral
imposition will be a vestige of the past. Above all,

22-672613/25

A/77/PV.28

03/11/2022

only in unity can we earnestly fight to overcome the
similarly monumental difficulties of the world.

multiple crises that countries are facing as a result of
the coronavirus disease pandemic.

Mr. Mnguni (South Africa): South Africa aligns
itself with the statements delivered on behalf of the
Group of African States, the Non-Aligned Movement
and the Group of 77 and China, and joins others that
have expressed their overwhelming support for the
lifting of the blockade unilaterally imposed by the
United States on Cuba.

The continued illegal blockade of Cuba by the
United States and the extraterritorial application of
sanctions on third countries through the Helms-Burton
Act continue to severely curtail the potential of Cuba,
at great cost. The United States designation of Cuba
as a State sponsor of terrorism, together with the
continued full application of the Helms-Burton Act,
including the authorization to file lawsuits in United
States courts under its Title III, further hinders Cuba’s
economic, commercial and financial relations with
third countries. The designation is unfounded, and we
call for the removal of Cuba from that list, which is
aimed at imposing further punitive actions.

We wish to acknowledge the presence of His
Excellency Mr. Bruno Rodríguez Parrilla, Minister for
Foreign Affairs of the Republic of Cuba, and thank him
for placing before the membership the important draft
resolution A/77/L.5, which has unfortunately gone
unheeded despite the overwhelming support over the
past many years.
We welcome the Secretary-General’s report
(A/77/358), which has again highlighted the
immeasurable damage that has been caused to Cuba and
its people by the imposition of these unilateral coercive
measures. That is a violation of international law and
the principles of the Charter of the United Nations and
can never be justified.
South Africa remains forever grateful for Cuba’s
significant contribution, at great sacrifice, to the
liberation of our country. We will continue to honour
the fallen Cuban combatants who sacrificed their lives
for the attainment of the free and democratic South
Africa that we enjoy today. More importantly, many of
our young people have benefited from Cuba’s selfless
contribution to their education, which has changed the
lives of generations to come.
Moreover, Cuba continues to play a leading role
in championing the rights of developing countries
and helping countries in need, especially in Africa, in
various areas such as health, education and technical
expertise, to name a few. Many countries, including
our own, have benefited from Cuba’s unwavering
solidarity and internationalism. That is testament to
Cuba’s commitment to South-South cooperation and
epitomizes its selfless generosity.
South Africa reiterates its long-standing call for
the lifting of the embargo that continues to stifle the
socioeconomic growth and potential of the Cuban
people, causing immense hardship and denying them the
most basic of rights, including the right to development.
That injustice is even more acute in the context of the
4/25

The huge financial loss, to the amount of $3.8 billion,
reflects the intensified impact of the blockade on Cuban
exports and on its gross domestic product growth.
Similar losses in revenue are seen in other sectors of the
economy. Moreover, while it is stated that medicines
and food are exempt from the embargo, sanctions
imposed by the United States Office of Foreign Assets
Control on banking transactions do not allow Cuba to
purchase much-needed medical supplies, equipment
and medicine, resulting in the loss of lives that could
have otherwise been saved. That further hinders the
efforts of the people of Cuba to economic development
and full, equitable and fair participation in the global
economic and trade system from which they can benefit
and prosper.
Given all of the aforementioned — the list of
which is not exhaustive by any account — the embargo
remains an obstacle to Cuba’s efforts to achieve the
2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development, together
with its Sustainable Development Goals and targets.
South Africa remains unwavering in our support
for the legitimate struggles of the people of Cuba to
enjoy unobstructed freedom to develop, prosper and
provide its people with a life of hope and dignity,
which is the inherent right of all nations and peoples.
We reiterate our principled position to support for
the draft resolution and call once again on the United
States to heed the almost unanimous position of the
countries of the world to put an end to the blockade.
We also call upon all Member States that believe that
human rights are universal and inalienable, indivisible,
interdependent and interrelated, to join this cause
22-67261

03/11/2022

towards a new chapter of hope and prosperity for Cuba
and its people.
Mr. Vongnorkeo (Lao People’s Democratic
Republic): My delegation aligns itself with the
statements delivered by the representatives of
Azerbaijan, Pakistan and Singapore on behalf of the
Non-Aligned Movement, the Group of 77 and China
and the Association of Southeast Asian Nations,
respectively (see A/77/PV.26).
We would like to thank the Secretary-General for
presenting the report (A/77/358) on this important issue
and join others in extending our warm welcome to His
Excellency Mr. Bruno Rodríguez Parrilla, Minister for
Foreign Affairs of the Republic of Cuba, to this meeting.
Once again, we gather here in the Assembly to
reiterate our call for an end to the embargo posed on the
Republic of Cuba and reaffirm our unwavering support
and solidarity with the Cuban people. Throughout the
past six decades, the embargo imposed on the Republic of
Cuba, a sovereign State Member of the United Nations,
has severely impeded social and economic development
of the country and brought severe consequences and
hardship to the innocent people.
The Lao People’s Democratic Republic remains of
the view that the embargo contravenes the spirit and
key principles of the Charter of the United Nations
and international law. Moreover, with the current
multifaceted challenges the international community
is facing, including the lingering impacts of the
coronavirus disease pandemic, natural calamities,
economic and financial difficulties, and food and
energy crises, among others, the Lao People’s
Democratic Republic joins the overwhelming majority
of United Nations Member States in our call for the
immediate lifting of the embargo, as stipulated in the
various United Nations resolutions. It is more crucial
than ever for the international community to provide
all necessary support and conducive conditions for
Cuba, a sovereign and independent State Member of
the United Nations, and its people to fully determine
their own development path and put an end to needless
deprivation caused to the Cuban people. For that
reason, my delegation will continue to support and vote
in favour of draft resolution A/77/L.5, on the necessity
of ending the economic, commercial and financial
embargo imposed by the United States of America
against Cuba.

A/77/PV.28

In conclusion, my delegation urges all Member
States to redouble their efforts and commitment to
advancing equitable and sustainable development
and promoting the legitimate rights of the people, in
accordance with the purposes and principles enshrined
in the Charter of the United Nations, especially at
the time when all countries are facing multiple and
unpredictable challenges.
Mr. Razali (Malaysia): Malaysia aligns itself
with statements delivered by the representatives of
Singapore on behalf of the Association of South-East
Asian Nations, Azerbaijan on behalf of the Non-Aligned
Movement, Pakistan on behalf of the Group of 77 and
China, and Egypt on behalf of the Organization of
Islamic Cooperation (see A/77/PV.26).
Malaysia has been consistent in our position
opposing the imposition of unilateral coercive measures
against any country, including Cuba. Malaysia views
such measures as contrary to international law,
international humanitarian law, the Charter of the
United Nations and the norms and principles of peaceful
relations among States. Malaysia believes that such
unilateral coercive measures have severely restricted
Cuba’s ability to improve its economy and provide for
the basic needs of its people.
It is disheartening to learn that in the seven months
between August 2021 and February 2022 alone, Cuba
incurred more than $3.8 billion in losses. The blockade
strains the Cuban economy, affecting the country in
various ways, including service provision, food and
medicine shortages, and a decline in the consumption
levels and general welfare of the population. The
imposition of unilateral coercive measures is very much
against the spirit of leaving no one behind, as promised
by the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development and
its Sustainable Development Goals.
Malaysia is also of the strong conviction that such
unilateral embargoes will only cause social problems
and raise humanitarian concerns in the States targeted.
Therefore, we have always been supportive of the annual
General Assembly resolution submitted by Cuba, which
calls on the United States to end its unilateral economic,
commercial and financial embargo against Cuba.
Malaysia calls for the United States and Cuba to
resolve their differences through peaceful means and to
avoid any actions that could be detrimental to regional
peace and stability. Malaysia encourages both the

22-672615/25

A/77/PV.28

United States and Cuba to immediately normalize ties
and pursue renewed economic engagement.
Ms. Macchiavello Espinoza (Peru) (spoke in
Spanish): Peru aligns itself with the statements delivered
by the representatives of Argentina on behalf of the
Community of Latin American and Caribbean States,
Azerbaijan on behalf of the Non-Aligned Movement,
and Pakistan on behalf of the Group of 77 and China
(see A/77/PV.26).
We welcome the presence of the Minister for
Foreign Affairs of Cuba, Mr. Bruno Rodríguez Parrilla.
Every year, the General Assembly expresses its
steadfast position in favour of bringing an end to the
economic, commercial and financial embargo imposed
against Cuba. In 2021, 184 States expressed robust
support for the lifting of the embargo, representing
almost all Members of the Organization. That result
reflected their collective, legitimate determination,
aligned with the basic norms of international law upheld
by the General Assembly. It was also a clear and overt
sign that we must end such unilateral measures in order to
allow Cuba to advance on its path towards development
and to achieve the Sustainable Development Goals of
the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development.
The Secretary-General’s report of 21 September
concludes that
“Since 2019, the blockade has escalated
to a qualitatively more harmful and inhumane
level... Lawsuits filed under Title III of the Cuban
Liberty and Democratic Solidarity (Libertad)
Act of 1996 (Helms-Burton Act); the prosecution
of companies, ships and shipping companies that
send fuel supplies to the country; the arbitrary and
unjustified inclusion of Cuba on the United States
Department of State’s list of State sponsors of
terrorism; the attack on all sources of income and
foreign currency inflows to the country; and the
intimidation of third parties and greater pressure
on Governments, banking institutions and business
people around the world have become an essential
part of the United States strategy to isolate Cuba
and cause its economic collapse.” (A/77/358, p.1)
In monetary terms, the sanctions imposed on
Cuba have generated cumulative damage of $154,217.3
million over six decades, but in qualitative terms
they have impacted food security, the production and
distribution of medicine, the levels of consumption and
6/25

03/11/2022

well-being and the quality of life of the population.
They have affected and certainly continue to affect the
Cuban people’s enjoyment of their rights.
Peru does not agree with the imposition of
unilateral sanctions of any kind. The only legitimate
sanctions are those adopted by the Security Council
in the context of the exercise of its competencies in
the maintenance of international peace and security,
in accordance with Chapter VII of the Charter of the
United Nations. The Security Council recently adopted
2653 (2022), imposing sanctions on Haiti. In the
eighteenth preambular paragraph of the resolution, it
is noted
“that the measures imposed by this resolution
are not intended to have adverse humanitarian
consequences for the civilian population of Haiti”.
The resolution also affirms that the sanctions imposed
will be under continuous review and reassessment.
I draw attention to the phrase “adverse
humanitarian consequences” for the population,
because it is important to bear in mind, in the context of
the multidimensional crises we are experiencing, that
any situation that directly impacts the living conditions
of populations entails a reaction or consequence the
impact of which can be structural, multidimensional or
cross-cutting, or can amplify underlying causes. Any
measure taken by any State or nation that has adverse
humanitarian consequences for the population must be
eliminated or suspended immediately.
Peru shares the view held by almost the entire
international community that the embargo imposed
against Cuba runs contrary to the purposes and principles
of the United Nations Charter and international human
rights law. As noted in the Secretary-General’s report,
“[t]he blockade violates the right to life and health
of all Cubans” (op. cit., p.4). Consequently, Peru
affirms once again that it will vote in favour of draft
resolution A/77/L.5, “Necessity of ending the economic,
commercial and financial embargo imposed by the
United States of America against Cuba”, pursuant to
a State policy that has been continuously in place for
than 30 years.
Mrs. Mengesha (Ethiopia): At the outset, allow me
to extend our warmest greetings to His Excellency the
Minister for Foreign Affairs of Cuba.
Ethiopia aligns itself with the statement delivered on
behalf of the Group of African States (see A/77/PV.26)
22-67261

03/11/2022

A/77/PV.28

and would like to make the following remarks in our
national capacity

System, and Eritrea on behalf of the Group of Friends
in Defence of the Charter of the United Nations.

Unilateral coercive measures constitute a
flagrant violation of the principles of international
law, as set forth in the Charter and resolutions of the
United Nations. It obstructs friendly relations among
States and international cooperation in development,
security and human rights. The unilateral coercive
measures against Cuba that have unlawfully spanned
six decades have prevented the Cuban economy from
tapping into its potential. The economic and financial
embargo imposed has impaired the lives of the Cuban
people and constrained the Government’s efforts to
achieve development.

We thank and salute the presence of our brother
and comrade, His Excellency Mr. Bruno Rodríguez
Parrilla, Minister for Foreign Affairs of Cuba.

Cuba has recently been affected by unfortunate
incidents and natural disasters, including a hurricane.
Ethiopia sends its heartfelt condolences to the affected
and stands in solidarity with the Government of Cuba
in its efforts to address the impacts of those unfortunate
disasters. We are certain that the resilient people of
Cuba will overcome those challenges and redouble
their valuable contribution to socioeconomic progress
at the global level.
Unilateral coercive measures are deliberate acts
to stifle States into submission against the wishes
and needs of their people and the preservation of their
policy freedom. States subjected to such measures
are put at a disadvantage in facing global challenges,
including climate change, epidemics and transnational
security threats. Even with their level of resilience,
the unilateral embargo and the additional coercive
measures imposed on Cuba have had a heavy toll on the
well-being of the Cuban people and need to be halted. In
that regard, Ethiopia encourages open and constructive
dialogue between the United States of America and
Cuba to bridge their differences. We are hopeful that
the Government of the United States will repeat the
exemplary measure it took in 2015 and reinstate its
diplomatic relations with Cuba. Such measures should
pave the way for the swift lifting of the embargo.
Mr. Hermida Castillo (Nicaragua) (spoke in
Spanish): We associate ourselves with the statements
made by the representatives of Pakistan on behalf of
the Group of 77 and China, Azerbaijan on behalf of the
Non-Aligned Movement, Argentina on behalf of the
Community of Latin American States, the Dominican
Republic on behalf of the Central American Integration

Inconsistent with the spirit of the Charter of
the United Nations, there are States that continue to
impose illegal unilateral coercive measures with the
aim of punishing peoples and Governments that do not
kowtow to their interventionist measures or accept their
impositions. Faced with such systemic interference,
our peoples must unite their efforts and in solidarity
summon the political will to reject, condemn and defeat
those aggressions.
We must continue to condemn the criminal
economic, commercial and financial embargo against
the people and the Government of Cuba, which have
been blockaded in an inhuman, economic, commercial
and financial way by the United States over the course of
decades, hindering a people who have managed to resist
and move forward despite those attacks and blockades.
Nicaragua, like all developing countries and the
international community as a whole, rejects those
illegal unilateral coercive measures and a blockade
that, in times of pandemic, has become a crime against
humanity. We condemn all aggressive policies against
Cuba, such as the prosecution of companies, ships and
shipping companies that send supplies of fuel, food and
others to Cuba; the arbitrary and unjustified inclusion
of Cuba on the United States Department of State’s
list of State sponsors of terrorism; the attack on all
sources of income and currency entering the country;
the intimidation of third parties and the reinforcement
of pressures on Governments, banking institutions and
businessmen from all over the world.
Cuba has shown that, between August 2021 and
February 2022 — that is, in seven months alone — the
blockade caused record losses of $3,806.5 million,
amounting to $154,217.3 million total damages over
the six decades that this anachronistic policy has been
imposed. Faced with those adversities, the heroic people
of Cuba, always in the spirit of Martí and Fidel — and
even now as the blockade has intensified — is producing
and manufacturing vaccines so that the peoples can
overcome a pandemic that continues to cause pain and
death around the world.

22-672617/25

A/77/PV.28

It is admirable that Cuba — thanks to its conscience,
its revolutionary spirit of struggle, its conviction and its
socialist commitment to the world — has miraculously
managed to be on a par with the developed countries
that punish, block and attack it, and to produce vaccines
and help our developing peoples and even developed
countries. Cuba has stood up with its medical brigades
to offer solidarity. We celebrate and congratulate the
88 medical brigades and the thousands of collaborators
of the Cuban Henry Reeve International Medical
Brigade who, for 17 years under the great banner of
professionalism and altruism, have assisted populations
in 55 countries in all regions of the world in the face of
natural disasters or epidemics.
Recently, on 27 October, in the spirit of Latin
American and Caribbean solidarity, our National
Assembly issued a legislative declaration to once again
reject the criminal economic, commercial and financial
blockade that the United States Government has
maintained for more than 60 years against the people
and the Government of the sister Republic of Cuba.
The universal consensus of the peoples and the
Governments of the world has demanded an end to that
inhumane, illegal and criminal blockade, which affects
the Cuban health system and demonstrates a cruel and
genocidal nature aimed at suffocating the economy
of that brother country, violating all human rights
and undermining the efforts of the courageous Cuban
people to implement the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development and its Sustainable Development Goals.
The Government of the United States, by failing to
comply with the 29 resolutions of the General Assembly,
flaunts its disrespect for international law, the Charter
of the United Nations and the political will of the
universal consensus of the international community,
which demands an end to that anachronistic policy
against Cuba. It is an irrational attitude that clearly
expresses the supremacy and exclusive exceptionalism
of the United States power elite.
We share our message of love and brotherhood with
the Cuban people and Government, which march on
undefeated as exemplars of revolutionary dignity and
coherence. We commend their internationalism and
socialist convictions, their disinterested contribution to
all campaigns and social programmes in Nicaragua in
the areas of health, education, sports and many other
fields. I resolutely inform them that our peoples are and
will always be united, strengthening our revolutions
8/25

03/11/2022

and our projects for the common good, well-being and
happiness of our peoples, from victory to victory forever.
Nicaragua hopes that, once and for all, the numerous
United Nations resolutions on this issue will be
respected and complied with and that the United States
and the big countries will learn to respect the small
countries, uniting in their efforts to end poverty, hunger,
destitution and lack of health care and education. We
once again urge the United States to initiate a respectful
dialogue to resolve the pending bilateral issues with
Cuba on the basis of the equality of States, reciprocity
and respect for the sovereignty and independence
of Cuba. We are fully convinced that international
solidarity with Cuba will remain vigorous and that the
General Assembly today will once again condemn that
criminal blockade and all the extraterritorial measures
and ramifications that continue to be stepped up against
the dear Cuban people.
Finally, we share the following statement of our
Commander Daniel, President of Nicaragua:
“There has never been a blockade as criminal
as that which is being imposed against Cuba. Now
our brother Miguel Díaz-Canel is on the front line
at this truly terrible moment as the blockade has
intensified and difficult situations have arisen, even
with the hurricane that has just passed. Imagine this.
The country is blockaded and a hurricane blows in
with devastating power, bringing destruction and
death and affecting the entire population. Why?
Because even our energy sources were damaged
and impacted by the hurricane. But this is a heroic
people — a people that has resisted a thousand
battles and emerged victorious. And we are sure,
dear brothers and sisters, that Cuba will emerge
victorious again, with the solidarity of the peoples
of the world, in the face of these battle.”
Nicaragua, as it does every year, will vote in favour
of the draft resolution before us (A/77/L.5), and today
the General Assembly, by universally adopting that
draft resolution presented by Cuba, will be defending
multilateralism and the United Nations Charter, seeking
the longed-for understanding and peaceful coexistence
between nations, and promoting the culture of peace
that we all speak of and desire. All those actions result
in a historical and moral debt to our peoples, who
have demanded compliance with this resolution for
three decades.
22-67261

03/11/2022

Mr. Mouanda (Congo) (spoke in French): It is a
great honour for me to take the floor at this meeting
devoted to the consideration of agenda item 36,
“Necessity of ending the economic, commercial and
financial embargo imposed by the United States of
America against Cuba”.
As noted in the Secretary-General’s report
(A/77/358), this meeting is taking place at a time when
the combined effects of global, multidimensional energy,
food, environment and transport crises, on the one
hand, and the scars left by two years of the coronavirus
disease pandemic, on the other, have increased our
vulnerabilities. It is in that deleterious context that
Cuba continues to face the blockade imposed by the
United States, despite numerous declarations that for
decades have called for its unconditional withdrawal.
While endorsing the statements made by the
representatives of Pakistan on behalf of the Group of 77
and China, Azerbaijan on behalf of the Non-Aligned
Movement and Mozambique on behalf of the Group of
African States (see A/77/PV.26), my delegation would
like to make a few remarks in its national capacity.
The embargo against Cuba, which has lasted since
the middle of the last century, continues to inflict
untold suffering on the people of that country. The
aforementioned report by the Secretary-General sets
out the main consequences of the blockade observed in
Cuba between August 2021 and February 2022, as well
as certain additional information. It attests without any
doubt to the fact that the blockade constitutes a flagrant
and systematic violation of the fundamental rights of
the Cuban people.
In the light of the aforementioned report, it can be
seen that the blockade remains a major obstacle to the
well-being and prosperity of the Cuban people, who are
suffering intolerable suffering. It seriously undermines
the efforts of the Cuban Government for the economic
and social development of Cuba, as well as the
implementation of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development and its related Goals.
The Republic of the Congo notes once again that
the many resolutions adopted on this issue have still
not been implemented and reiterates its rejection of all
unilateral and unjust measures inflicted on the Cuban
people. My delegation reaffirms its solidarity with
the people and the Government of Cuba and therefore
resolves to support the draft resolution (A77/L.5)
under consideration.

A/77/PV.28

Mr. Vinito (India): India associates itself with the
statements made by the Chair of the Group of 77 and
China and the Chair of the Non-Aligned Movement
(see A/77/PV.26). We welcome the Foreign Minister of
Cuba, His Excellency Mr. Bruno Rodríguez Parrilla,
here today, and we also thank the Secretary-General
for his report (A/77/358) on this issue.
Every year, the Assembly has rejected the imposition
of laws and regulations with extraterritorial impact and
all other forms of coercive economic measures that
hurt the progress and prosperity of people the world
over. Last year, 184 member States voted in favour of
resolution 75/289, expressing their strong support for
the lifting of the embargo. The General Assembly has
also called upon all States to refrain from promulgating
and applying and to repeal and invalidate laws and
measures that have extraterritorial impact affecting the
sovereignty of other States, in conformity with their
obligations under the Charter of the United Nations and
international law. There is no doubt that the continued
existence of the embargo, in contravention of the
overwhelming opinion expressed by the Assembly,
undermines multilateralism and the credibility of the
United Nations itself.
As the world’s largest democracy with abiding faith
in multilateralism, India stands in solidarity with the
Assembly in its unambiguous rejection of domestic
laws having extraterritorial impact. Such embargoes
have the effect of impeding the full achievement of
economic and social development by the population of
the affected country, in particular women and children.
They also hinder the full enjoyment of human rights,
including the right to development, food, medical care
and social services, among other things.
The President took the Chair.
Successive reports of the Secretary-General have
established that the embargo, particularly through
its extraterritorial effects, has adversely affected
the Cuban people and the development efforts of the
country, with particularly devastating effects owing
to the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic
and the attendant shortages of essential commodities.
We acknowledge the notable socioeconomic and
development achievements of the Cuban people, in
particular the high Human Development Index ranking
of Cuba and its achievement of several Sustainable
Development Goals. Cuba’s expertise and contributions
in the health-care sector, despite the restrictive

22-672619/25

A/77/PV.28

conditions, enabled it to respond quickly and effectively
to tackle the COVID-19 pandemic.
In 2015, while launching the transformative 2030
Agenda for Sustainable Development, world leaders
again strongly urged all States to refrain from taking
any unilateral economic, financial or trade measures
not in accordance with international law and the Charter
of the United Nations. The continuation of the embargo
would severely impact Cuba’s ability to implement the
comprehensive 2030 Agenda.
There is no doubt that the people of Cuba can
contribute much to the needs of the global community
today. To enable that, the international community
needs to intensify its efforts to promote an environment
free from sanctions and embargoes. India hopes that
the embargo will be withdrawn at the earliest, and India
supports draft resolution A/77/L.5, introduced by Cuba.
Mr. Gimolieca (Angola): The Republic of
Angola aligns itself with the statements made by
the representatives of Mozambique on behalf of the
Group of African States, Azerbaijan on behalf of the
Non-Aligned Movement, Pakistan on behalf of the
Group of 77 and China, and Eritrea on behalf of the
Group of Friends in Defence of the Charter of the
United Nations.
The Republic of Angola welcomes His Excellency
Mr. Bruno Rodríguez Parrilla, Minister for Foreign
Affairs of Cuba, and his delegation to this meeting.
We thank the Secretary-General for the report
presented on this important subject (A/77/358) and
encourage all United Nations initiatives that may
conduce to stop the economic, trade and financial
embargo imposed against Cuba by the United States
of America.
As the Secretary-General stated in September with
respect to the defence of the United Nations Charter, the
challenges facing the world today seek the importance
of multilateral solutions to address and overcome those
challenges. He also stated that one of the tools for
preventing and solving those challenges is enshrined in
the Charter. However, the international community is
falling short of the values of those principles.
In June 2021, Angola voted in favour of
resolution 75/289, “Necessity of ending the economic,
commercial and financial embargo imposed by the United
States of America against Cuba”, to express its concern
to see that issue resolved once and for all. However, we
10/25

03/11/2022

are concerned over the fact that despite many resolutions
having been adopted by the General Assembly to end of
the embargo against Cuba for almost six decades, the
situation remains unchanged. We continue to witness
breaches of the principles established in the Charter
of the United Nations, including respect for sovereign
equality, non-interference and non-intervention in
internal affairs.
The financial and economic blockade of Cuba has
caused serious obstacles to the economic, cultural and
social development of the island, with a significant
negative impact on several sensitive sectors, such as
agriculture and public health services, affecting the
sustainable development of the country. In that regard,
we emphasize that the end of the economic blockade
and the unilateral measures and sanctions against
Cuba will grant the Cuban people the full enjoyment
and realization of their human rights, including to
food, health, vaccines and medical treatment, financial
services and education, and their right to decide their
own political and economic system.
To conclude, Angola reaffirms its commitment to
respecting, preserving and promoting the principles of
the Charter of the United Nations and the provisions
of international law, as they constitute the essence
of multilateralism and a collective effort to maintain
international peace and security, economic growth and
respect for human rights and fundamental freedoms.
Mr. Wallace (Jamaica): Jamaica aligns itself with
the statements delivered by the representatives of
the Bahamas on behalf of the Caribbean Community
and Pakistan on behalf of the Group of 77 and China
(see A/77/PV.26) on the necessity of ending the
economic, commercial and financial embargo imposed
by the United States of America against Cuba.
My delegation acknowledges and extends our
warmest welcome to His Excellency Mr. Bruno
Rodríguez Parrilla, Minister for Foreign Affairs of the
Republic of Cuba.
Jamaica takes the floor in its national capacity to
join the international community to express its solidarity
with the Government and the people of the Republic
of Cuba in the call for the removal of the decades-old
blockade on Cuba, which has only served to stifle the
development aspirations and the potential of the Cuban
people. We are grateful to the Secretary-General for his
reports on this important issue and for providing the
forum in which the multilateral perspectives enunciated
22-67261

03/11/2022

by each Member of the United Nations are brought to
bear on that unilateral policy, which is in violation of
international law and contrary to the purposes and
principles of the Charter of the United Nations.
Jamaica considers the protracted blockade
against Cuba to be contrary to the norms governing
international trade and navigation. It continues to be
the main deterrent to the growth, prosperity and the
realization of the just aspirations of the Cuban people.
The blockade has hindered progress on Cuba’s national
plan for economic and social development, as well as
the implementation of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development and the achievements of the Sustainable
Development Goals.
The embargo against Cuba has stymied economic,
commercial and financial activities, hindering regular
access to bilateral trade, the importation of goods
and access to financial mechanisms through formal
and institutional channels. The inclusion of Cuba on
the United States list of State sponsors of terrorism
further restricts entities from conducting business with
Cuba and continues to pose grave implications on how
third States engage with Cuba on development aid,
international cooperation on transnational organized
crime and technical assistance.
We continue to express our concerns about the
impact of the continuation of the blockade and the
extraterritorial application of United States laws
regulating transactions directly or indirectly. For far too
long, the people of Cuba have existed in an unjustified
and suffered in an undignified manner as a result of the
embargo. The undue hardship imposed has impacted
and affected every facet of the life and livelihood of the
Cuban people. The coronavirus disease pandemic and
its unprecedented challenges over the past two years,
compounded by natural disasters, alongside the current
multidimensional crises of food, energy and an increase
in the cost of living, have exacerbated the conditions
in Cuba and transformed the socioeconomic landscape
and realities of the Cuban population.
The international community has been seized
of this matter since the first introduction of the
relevant resolution at the forty-sixth session of the
General Assembly in 1991. Every year since 1992,
the international community has consistently and
resoundingly expressed support, as evidenced in the
overwhelmingly favourable voting outcomes, for the
need to end the blockade against Cuba.

A/77/PV.28

Notwithstanding recent positive developments in
the easing of some restrictions, those measures are
not far-reaching enough and are not a substitute for
the lifting of the embargo to allow the Cuban people
access to critical financial resources and their right to
development. In that context, Jamaica calls for renewed
dialogue between Cuba and the United States and
reaffirms its commitment to standing in solidarity with
the Government and the people of Cuba, in concerted
efforts with the majority of the Members of the
United Nations calling for the removal of the embargo
and for the full inclusion of the Republic of Cuba in the
international community. It is our fervent hope that this
will be the last time there is a need for a debate on this
draft resolution in the General Assembly.
Ms. Cano Franco (Panama) (spoke in Spanish):
At the outset, allow me to congratulate the Cuban
delegation, led by His Excellency Mr. Bruno Rodríguez
Parrilla, for again introducing for adoption the draft
resolution, contained this year in document A/77/L.5,
entitled “Necessity of ending the economic, commercial
and financial embargo imposed by the United
States of America against Cuba”, which in previous
years has enjoyed the almost unanimous support of
United Nations Member States.
Panama aligns itself with the statements made
yesterday by the representatives of the Dominican
Republic on behalf of the Central American Integration
System, the Argentine Republic on behalf of the
Community of Latin American and Caribbean States,
Pakistan on behalf of the Group of 77 and China, and
Azerbaijan on behalf of the Non-Aligned Movement
(see A/77/PV.26).
I wish to make the following brief remarks in my
national capacity.
Panama will vote in favour of the draft resolution
before us, once again expressing its conviction and
commitment to the Cuban people. Our country bases its
foreign policy on the principles framed in the Charter
of the United Nations and aspires to the inclusion of
all on the paths of development. We therefore advocate
the principles of peace and the friendly resolution of
conflicts, always inspired by frank and good-faith
dialogue, resulting in an end to the blockade, which
restricts the development of the sister Republic of Cuba.
The development of peoples is key to allowing them
to effectively enjoy opportunities in their own country
and on their own territory. Panama reaffirms its strong

22-6726111/25

A/77/PV.28

03/11/2022

commitment to multilateralism as the appropriate
instrument for resolving disputes among States. We
therefore reiterate our vote in favour, together with
all other countries committed to the lifting of the
economic, commercial and financial blockade against
Cuba, convinced that its elimination is imperative to
promoting the full development of the Cuban people.

believes that the embargo violates the basic principles
of the multilateral trading system and constitutes
an obstacle to achieving steady social progress and
sustainable economic growth in Cuba. It stifles Cuba’s
economy, limits its ability to provide decent living
conditions and welfare for its people, and hinders its
ability to achieve the Sustainable Development Goals.

Mr. Gaouaoui (Algeria) (spoke in Arabic):
My country’s delegation welcomes His Excellency
Mr. Bruno Rodríguez Parrilla, Minister for Foreign
Affairs of Cuba, to this meeting.

We therefore reiterate the inalienable right of
United Nations Member States to determine their
own development path. Any unilateral attempt by any
Member State to engage in political regime change
in other countries by exerting military, political,
economic, financial or any other form of pressure
is unacceptable in accordance with international
legitimacy. Algeria regrets that no tangible progress
has been made so far towards lifting the inhumane
embargo and ending the economic, social and human
suffering of the Cuban people.

My country’s delegation aligns itself with the
statements delivered on behalf of the Group of 77
and China, the Non-Aligned Movement, the Group of
African States, the Organization of Islamic Cooperation
and the Group of Friends in Defence of the Charter of
the United Nations respectively (see A/77/PV.26).
I am making this statement in my national capacity.
At the outset, we thank the Secretary-General for
his reports entitled “Necessity of ending the economic,
commercial and financial embargo imposed by the
United States of America against Cuba”, contained in
documents A/77/358 and A/76/ 405.
Believing in the need for States to respect their
international obligations under international law,
Algeria considers that the imposition on sovereign
States Members of the United Nations of unilateral
coercive measures that are not authorized by the
competent organs of the United Nations is completely
unacceptable and yields adverse results that are at odds
with the principles and purposes of the Charter of the
United Nations, in particular good faith, respect for the
sovereign equality of States and non-interference in
their internal affairs.

Mr. Biang (Gabon) (spoke in French): I reiterate
my country’s appreciation of and confidence in you,
Mr. President, in bringing the General Assembly
together for transformative solutions at a time when
the world is at a decisive turning point and faces
complex challenges.
The value that makes the greatness and nobility
of the General Assembly and this Hall where we
are met is that every nation matters and every life
matters. From the largest to the smallest, from the
wealthiest to the destitute, we are all links in the same
chain — that of humankind. We are the emanation and
the representatives of the peoples of the world.

Based on that principled stance in its foreign policy,
Algeria has consistently voted in favour of General
Assembly resolutions calling for an end to the unjust
economic, commercial and financial embargo imposed
by the United States of America against Cuba and its
people. In that context, Algeria has always expressed
its opposition to that embargo at every opportunity,
whether in regional forums or other international bodies.

As Members of the United Nations, we have joined
our destinies and made the choice to live together as
a community that collectively responds to threats and
challenges, while planning together the trajectory of
our co-prosperity and the dignity of each one of us. We
have chosen multilateralism, solidarity and respect for
the sovereignty of each nation, and we have rejected
unilateralism and the logic of domination and of zones
of influence, which are manifestly anachronistic. Based
on those vital choices, we proclaim every day that no
nation should punish another. No nation should exploit
another. No nation should enslave another.

We take this opportunity to express from this
rostrum our concern about the embargo, which continues
despite the support of an overwhelming majority of
Member States for the General Assembly resolutions
opposing it and calling for it to be lifted. Algeria also

The economic, commercial and financial blockade
imposed on Cuba for 60 years is a punitive act against
Cuba. It is an obstacle to the development of the
country and the region as a whole. The blockade creates
excessive difficulties for the Cuban people because of

12/25

22-67261

03/11/2022

the significant external pressure it exerts on its economy
and its constraints on the free movement of goods.
The blockade is iniquitous and must be lifted. We call
on the parties to engage constructively in peaceful
negotiations, which remain the most appropriate way
to normalize their relations. Given Cuba’s peaceful
and cooperative international position, my country
reaffirms its support for the Cuban people and their
aspirations to social and economic development.
We call once again for an end to an embargo that
fuels tensions and hostility between two neighbouring
countries and represents a constant source of concern
throughout our subregion. We are convinced that
the lifting of the embargo will lead to a significant
rapprochement between the two countries and have
a positive impact at the global level. We are deeply
convinced that without this punitive embargo, the
United States and Cuba together have inestimable
potential for cooperation and co-prosperity. It is in the
light of that conviction that Gabon has supported the
set of previous resolutions on this issue and will vote
in favour of the current draft resolution (A/77/L.5) on
the necessity to end the economic, commercial and
financial blockade imposed against Cuba by the United
States of America.
Mr. Ziyera (Zimbabwe): I thank you, Sir, for giving
Zimbabwe the opportunity to make a contribution on
this important agenda item on the necessity of ending
the economic, commercial and financial embargo
imposed by the United States of America against Cuba.
We acknowledge the presence in our midst of His
Excellency the Minister for Foreign Affairs of Cuba.
Zimbabwe aligns itself with the statements
delivered by the representatives of Mozambique on
behalf of the Group of African States, Pakistan on
behalf of the Group of 77 and China, Azerbaijan on
behalf of the Non-Aligned Movement, and Eritrea on
behalf of the Group of Friends in Defence of the Charter
of the United Nations (see A/77/PV.26).
My delegation is grateful to the Secretary-General
for his comprehensive reports on the matter under
discussion (A/76/405 and A/77/358). It is clear from
the reports that the interlinked crises that the world
is currently facing have not spared the people of
Cuba, whose plight has been further worsened by the
embargo. The reports augment the justified calls for
help by the people and the Government of Cuba, given
the increasingly difficult socioeconomic circumstances

A/77/PV.28

they are experiencing due to the embargo and the longterm impact of the coronavirus disease (COVID-19)
pandemic. We are therefore concerned that the embargo
has placed an unnecessary burden on the Cuban people.
Every year, we speak about the devastating impact
of the embargo on the people of Cuba, but we see
no effort to remove the restrictions. My delegation
underscores the need to end the embargo in accordance
with the principle of non-interference in the internal
affairs of other countries. The embargo undermines the
development of Cuba and its people and is impeding the
country from achieving the Sustainable Development
Goals. Zimbabwe and the majority of members of the
Assembly have repeatedly raised their voices in unison
at various international forums, calling for an end to
the embargo and the resultant inhumane consequences
it has had for the people of Cuba.
The embargo has served only to isolate Cuba, a
valued and respected member of the global family of
nations. Over the years, Cuba has deployed medical
teams to assist many countries, including Zimbabwe,
to develop their health systems and to combat the
COVID-19 pandemic, in spite of its limited capacity due
to the embargo. We are grateful to Cuba for cooperating
with Zimbabwe in the medical field.
A few weeks ago, Ms. Alena Douhan, Special
Rapporteur on the negative impact of the unilateral
coercive measures on the enjoyment of human rights,
in her report to the fifty-first session of the Human
Rights Council (A/HRC/51/33), observed that the world
faces an increase in the use of unilateral sanctions.
Ms. Douhan, who had visited Zimbabwe, which has
endured over two decades of sanctions imposed by
some Western countries, witnessed the devastating
negative impact of the measures on the country and its
people. My delegation therefore fully understands the
importance of lifting the unjustified embargo on Cuba.
Zimbabwe is committed to improving the
livelihoods of all the peoples of the world, including
the people of Cuba, through the development of strong,
resilient and sustainable economies and societies and
the maintenance of a global zone of peace. We believe
that free and unfettered relations between Cuba and
all countries, including the United States of America,
would be enhanced by ending the embargo.
In conclusion, I reiterate Zimbabwe’s call for the
lifting of the embargo on Cuba, particularly in the wake

22-6726113/25

A/77/PV.28

of the COVID-19 crisis, the global food, energy and
financial crises, and rising global inflation.
The President: I now call on the Minister for Foreign
Affairs of Cuba to introduce draft resolution A/77/L.5.
Mr. Rodríguez Parrilla (Cuba) (spoke in Spanish):
I express our heartfelt solidarity with the sisterly
Caribbean nation of Belize, which is today suffering
the devastation of a powerful hurricane.
More than 80 per cent of Cuba’s current population
was born under blockade.
Three decades have gone by since the Assembly
first started to demand, as it has continued to do
every year thereafter, the ceasing of the United States
policy against Cuba, which can be classified as an act
of genocide, has the effect of a permanent pandemic
or a never-ending hurricane, and has been universally
rejected. It is a deliberate act of economic warfare
intended to obstruct the country’s incoming revenues,
destroy the Government’s ability to attend to the needs
of the people, bring about the collapse of the economy
and create a situation of non-governability. As was
suggested by Deputy Assistant Secretary of State
Lester Mallory in 1960, the policy seeks to provoke
“disenchantment and disaffection”, “decrease... real
wages”, and “bring about hunger, desperation, and the
overthrow of Government”.
Since 2019, the Government of the United States
has escalated the siege around our country, taking it
to an even crueller and more inhumane level, with the
purpose of deliberately inflicting the greatest possible
damage on Cuban families. During the first 14 months
of Joseph Biden’s Administration, the damages caused
by the embargo were estimated at $6,364 million, that
is, over $15 million per day. Between August 2021 and
February 2022, losses amounted to $3,806 million, a
record figure for a period of only seven months. Had the
blockade not existed, our gross domestic product could
have grown by 4.5 per cent during that same period.
Damages accumulated over 60 years have been
estimated at $154,217 million dollars at current
prices; based on the price of gold, they amount to
$1,391,111 million. What would Cuba be like today
had it had those resources? What else could we have
accomplished? What would our economy be like?
It is impossible to quantify the anxiety generated by
blackouts and the instability in the electric power
system, supply shortages, long queues to buy essential
14/25

03/11/2022

goods, or the obstacles to the life projects of families,
particularly young people. The blockade also creates
conditions that incite irregular, disorderly and unsafe
migration and the painful separation of families.
It takes a toll on the lives of Cuban men and women
and contributes to transnational organized crime and
trafficking in persons.
During the coronavirus disease (COVID-19)
pandemic, the Government of the United States applied
temporary humanitarian exemptions to countries that
were victims of its unilateral coercive measures and
other sanctions. Why was Cuba excluded from that
temporary humanitarian relief? Worse still, while the
COVID-19 pandemic was claiming millions of lives
across the planet and filling Cuba with sorrow, the
blockade was further tightened, generating difficulties
and delays in the arrival in our country of the medical
inputs and equipment indispensable to confronting the
disease, particularly to the industrial scale-up of Cuban
vaccines. Even the purchase of medical oxygen in third
countries was hindered. When the blockade prevented
the supply of ventilators, Cuba developed them locally
with prototypes of its own.
How is it that a small country like Cuba has been
able to defeat the COVID-19 pandemic with resources
and vaccines of its own making? At the worst moment
of the pandemic and despite our limited resources, we
cooperated with other nations by sending 58 medical
brigades to 42 countries and territories, joining the
more than 28,000 Cuban health professionals who
at that time were already offering their services in
59 nations.
But the blockade also hampers the national
production of antibiotics, analgesics, hypotensive
drugs, medicines to treat cancer and cardiopathies, as
well as several other basic medications that had never
before been in such short supply in our hospitals and
drug stores. Cuban boys and girls suffering from retina
problems or glaucoma are not able to include in their
therapies the laser system manufactured by the United
States Iridex Corporation. Patients whose cases devolve
into more severe conditions run the risk of going blind.
Our children also have no access to United States-made
biological heart valves. Low birth weight babies have
to undergo open-chest surgeries because the ultra-low
profile catheters marketed by such United States firms
such Boston Scientific are not available in Cuba.
22-67261

03/11/2022

There is no way the United States Government can
justify the implementation of a policy that deprives
Cuban children suffering from cancer from receiving
the ideal chemotherapy to treat their condition.
Work to save and preserve life in the midst of such
difficult circumstances is possible only thanks to the
governmental and collective efforts that have been
made for decades to build a high-quality and robust
system of science and health of a deeply humanist
nature, accessible to all Cubans at absolutely no cost.
The blockade has also exacerbated financial
restrictions and limited access to credits to repair,
invest in and maintain the country’s thermal power
stations. Suppliers have significantly increased their
prices, citing the risk they incur when operating
in Cuba. After 26 years of uninterrupted work, the
German group Continental Reifen Deutschland GmbH
decided to terminate its relations with Unión Cuba
Petróleo. The French supplier CNIM notified us that
it could no longer continue to supply the spare parts
for the Antonio Guiteras Thermoelectric Power Station
because they were unable to operate with a country
under sanction.
Equally unceasing and obsessive is the prosecution
of investments and financial and commercial
transactions associated with our country. Between
January 2021 and February 2022 alone, foreign banks
reported 642 direct actions against the Cuban banking
system. In the course of last year, a significant number
of banks in third countries refused to process payments
to the suppliers of the Cuban food import company
Alimport. With permits subject to legal restrictions,
Cuba can buy, through regular commercial channels,
a limited amount of agricultural products in the United
States, but it is forced to pay in advance and without
access to credit, which is also extremely difficult
because our income sources are also blocked.
Under such financial siege, numerous efforts
are to be made by our Government to guarantee the
basic family food supply. More often than not, Cuban
entrepreneurs are denied the use of electronic payment
and trade platforms. Our nationals living in different
latitudes are not allowed to open personal bank accounts
just for being Cuban nationals.
The financial persecution has been further
reinforced with the arbitrary and fraudulent inclusion
of our country on the State Department’s unilateral list
of countries that allegedly sponsor terrorism, which

A/77/PV.28

exponentially increases the so-called country-risk
and forces us to buy any commodity at even twice its
price on the international market. Such action against
a country that has been a victim of terrorism; that is
still suffering because of the incitement to violence and
the commission of terrorist actions from United States
territory; and whose conduct in firmly rejecting and
prosecuting any form or manifestation of terrorism has
been impeccable and recognized, is inadmissible. That
lethal measure was imposed by the former Republican
Administration only nine days before leaving the White
House. The current United States President could
correct the situation with just a signature. That would
only be morally and legally right.
The extraterritorial impact of the blockade is also
harmful to the sovereignty of the countries that are
represented here. It violates their national laws, subjects
them to United States court decisions under Title III
of the Helms-Burton Act, imposes sanctions on their
business people and prevents access to United States
ports by third-country vessels that have docked in Cuban
ports. It also prevents subsidiaries of United States
companies in third countries from trading with Cuba.
It forbids export to Cuba of products manufactured by
any country if 10 per cent or more of their components
were made in the United States, and excludes products
manufactured in third countries if they contain Cuban
raw materials. Who could truthfully affirm that the
United States is one of Cuba’s trading partners?
We do not blame the blockade for all the difficulties
our country faces today, but those who deny its very
serious impacts or fail to recognize that it is the main
cause of the deprivations, scarcities and hardships
suffered by Cuban families would be failing to tell
the truth.
The United States controls the most powerful media
and hegemonic digital technological platforms and uses
them in a virulent disinformation and disparagement
campaign against Cuba. It resorts to the most diverse
methods of non-conventional warfare, using our
children, youths and artists as the targets of that
political and media bombardment. The United States
Government allocates tens of millions of dollars from
the federal budget and additional undercover funds and
recruits Government and private institutions to finance
the political operators who wage disinformation, hatred
and destabilization campaigns on the social networks
against Cuba.

22-6726115/25

A/77/PV.28

On 24 October, the United States transnational
companies Twitter and Meta (Facebook), one of whose
senior executives is the former campaign manager of
an anti-Cuban Republican senator, simultaneously
undertook actions of censorship against Cuban public
media and users. They targeted publications whose
reach on the networks had been limited and cancelled
accounts that were critical of the United States
destabilizing operations against our country. This was
a selective, well-coordinated action that violates the
right of Cubans to freedom of expression and reflects
the subordination of these companies to the designs of
United States politicians.
On 22 July, at the closing of the ninth session
of the National Assembly of People’s Power in its
Ninth Legislature, President Miguel Díaz-Canel
Bermúdez affirmed:
“Cuba’s track record in the development of
its foreign relations shows that the promotion of
peace, cooperation and solidarity are defining
characteristics of our international projection. We
have demonstrated this in our Latin American and
Caribbean region and in other parts of the world.”
The current United States Administration does not
have a Cuba policy of its own. It is acting on inertia and
has continued to implement the inhumane maximum
pressure policy established under the Donald Trump
Administration. In recent months, it has taken steps to
make adjustments to some of the irrational restrictions
imposed on United States flights to Cuba, remittances
and consular proceedings. Those are positive actions,
but very limited in their scope and implementation.
They in no way modify the policy or the economic,
commercial and financial measures.
The blockade, which has been tightened to the
extreme, continues to be the central element defining
the United States Cuba policy. The Cuban Government
is ready to move forward towards a better understanding
with the Government of the United States and to develop
civilized and cooperative relations based on mutual
respect and without detriment to our sovereignty. I
reiterate the appeal made by our Army General Raúl
Castro Ruz to the Government of the United States in
2017 to remove
“the obstacles that prevent or restrict relations
between our peoples, the families and citizens from
both countries. We should learn the art of coexisting
in a civilized manner despite our differences”.
16/25

03/11/2022

Even amid the inhumane limitations imposed on us
by the blockade, Cuba will never renounce its socialist
system of social justice, as confirmed by a free and
universal constitutional referendum in 2019. We will
always defend the full enjoyment of all human rights by
all of our citizens. We will never accept the attempted
imposition of alleged paradigms of democracy or any
other culture alien to the Cuban culture.
With the same energy with which we defend
the inalienable right of every country to choose
its own political, economic and social system, we
demand respect for ours. Faithful to the legacy of
Commander-in-Chief Fidel Castro Ruz, in Cuba there
will always be “a Government of the people for the
whole people” and “a revolution of the humble, with the
humble and for the humble”.
Undeniable evidence of that was the most recent
demonstration of a truly democratic, participatory
and inclusive exercise in our country. In a popular
referendum, the Cuban people voted in favour of a new,
modern and progressive Family Code, one of the most
advanced in the world, which is irrefutable proof of our
vocation of taking into account the views of all Cuban
men and women, without any type of discrimination.
Our country has not ceased to renew itself, based
on the principle of changing everything that needs to be
changed, in the construction of a sovereign, independent,
socialist, democratic, prosperous and sustainable nation
and in the development of our socialist, rule-of-law,
social justice, democratic, independent and sovereign
State. We advocate for an increased participation of our
young people and all citizens in general in the political,
economic, social and cultural processes of the country.
We are making progress in the decentralization of
the economy and the empowerment of State socialist
enterprises. Thousands of small and medium-sized
private and State companies have been created. We
are promoting science, technology and innovation,
the mass rollout of information and communications
technology in our society, and social communication
as the pillars of Government management. More
opportunities are being offered to foreign investors as
part of our development policy.
Cuba is being continuously renewed. What
remains unchanged, anchored in the past and isolated
is the United States blockade. We highly value the
support of numerous Governments, personalities,
solidarity movements and political, social and popular
22-67261

03/11/2022

organizations from all over the world in the face of the
injustice that is being committed against Cuba. We
deeply appreciate the commitment and the voices of
Cubans and people of Cuban descent in all latitudes,
even in the United States, raised in defence of Cuba’s
sovereign rights and against the implementation of
that policy.
We also thank all those who have expressed their
support for our country in the midst of the difficulties
resulting from our recovery from the grave trail
of destruction left by Hurricane Ian in the western
provinces in September. Hundreds of thousands of our
compatriots suffered the hurricane’s impact. A total
of 119,048 houses were damaged, huge farming areas
were destroyed and the power and communications
infrastructure was severely affected, among other
damage. We will continue to gratefully accept any
emergency assistance offered to our people without
any preconditions.
We appreciate the noble and humanitarian efforts
of United States organizations, movements and groups,
members of Congress and personalities, the solidarity
movement and civil society organizations who, in
the face of the magnitude of the ravages caused by
the hurricane, have asked President Joseph Biden to
temporarily lift the unilateral coercive measures against
our country and authorize the processing of donations
by United States banks and the purchase of materials to
rebuild the affected areas.
Millions of Cubans are watching right now what is
going on in this Hall. They have heard the statements
and will be closely following the voting. On their
behalf, I must express my gratitude for the statements
made against the blockade by numerous Heads of State
and Government and other dignitaries and speakers
in the debate on this item. In brief, when casting their
votes, representatives will not only be taking a stand on
a vital issue for Cuba and all Cubans. They will also be
voting in favour of the Charter of the United Nations
and international law. They will be taking a stand in
support of reason and justice.
Cuba must be allowed to live in peace. Cuba would
be better off without the blockade. Every Cuban family
would be better off without the blockade. United States
citizens would be better off without the blockade. The
United States would be a better country without the
blockade against Cuba. The world would be better off
without the blockade.

A/77/PV.28

I respectfully ask representatives to vote in favour
of draft resolution A/77/L.5, entitled “Necessity
of ending the economic, commercial and financial
blockade imposed by the United States of America
against Cuba”. I do so on behalf of the courageous
and noble people of Cuba, who, despite all adversities,
have not been and never will be defeated; on behalf of
our boys, girls and youths, who oppose the policies of
hatred but suffer their cruel effects; and on behalf of
the generations of Cuban men and women who have
been born or are yet to be born under the most cruel and
long-lasting system of coercive measures ever applied
against any country, which should be abolished for the
good of all.
The President: We have heard the last speaker in
the debate on this item.
We shall now
resolution A/77/L.5.

proceed

to

consider

draft

Before giving the floor for explanations of vote
before the voting, may I remind delegations that
explanations of vote are limited to 10 minutes and
should be made by delegations from their seats.
Ms. Borland (Belize): In our explanation of vote,
we align ourselves with the statements made yesterday
by the representatives of the Bahamas on behalf of the
Caribbean Community and Argentina on behalf of the
Community of Latin American and Caribbean States,
as well as the statements made by the representatives
of Pakistan on behalf of the Group of 77 and China and
Azerbaijan on behalf of the Non-Aligned Movement
(see A/77/PV.26).
We acknowledge the presence of the Foreign
Minister of Cuba and thank him for his kind words
towards Belize.
Belize
will
vote
in
favour
of
draft
resolution A/77/L.5, once again joining the resounding
call of the General Assembly for the immediate lifting
of the illegal financial, commercial and trade embargo
imposed by the United States of America upon Cuba.
Belize unequivocally condemns the imposition of
the embargo by the United States of America against
Cuba. Unilateral coercive measures, including
with extraterritorial application, constitute a gross
violation of the principles of sovereign equality and
non-interference in the internal affairs of States, as
expressed in international law and enshrined in the
Charter of the United Nations.

22-6726117/25

A/77/PV.28

03/11/2022

International law and the Charter of the
United Nations should not be selectively respected or
applied. The illegal embargo imposed by the United
States has deliberately caused extreme hardship on the
Cuban people, stifling economic growth, undermining
development and isolating Cuba from the international
financial system. The accumulated damage caused
by the embargo over its six decades of enforcement
amounts to over $1 trillion.

island States, which are increasingly at the mercy of
climate change, climate-induced sea-level rise or other
climate-related disasters. Crossing the half-century
mark, it has been 61 years since the embargo was
imposed on Cuba. That is 61 years of denial for a small
island nation. It is an exclusionary policy that deprives
Cubans of the right to exist freely, the right to food,
the right to development and the right to trade, among
other rights.

The calculated and continued imposition of
the embargo in the face of the coronavirus disease
pandemic, the climate emergency and catastrophic
natural disasters, such the recent Hurricane Ian, clearly
reveals its immoral, illegal and inhumane moorings.
Furthermore, Belize condemns the unjustified
designation of Cuba as a State sponsor terrorism.

We therefore call on all States to show continued
support for draft resolution A/77/L.5 in support of Cuba.

Notwithstanding the brutal policies directed at it
by the United States, Cuba has contributed immensely
and generously to Belize’s development through
its pioneering cooperation programmes in disaster
management, health care, education, sports and
culture. We can proudly and gratefully confirm that a
large segment of Belizean medical professionals have
benefited from Cuba’s training.
The Cuban spirit of resilience, generosity and
support for oppressed peoples everywhere continues
to inspire us in Belize. Belize stands in solidarity with
Cuba. We reiterate our call on the United States of
America to immediately and unconditionally lift the
illegal embargo imposed on Cuba.
Ms. Chand (Fiji): We thank the Government of
Cuba for submitting the annual draft resolution to the
General Assembly at its seventy-seventh session. I
wish to acknowledge the presence of His Excellency
Mr. Bruno Eduardo Rodríguez Parrilla, the Foreign
Minister of Cuba, for his presence during this
important vote.
Fiji remains concerned at the lack of progress by the
General Assembly with respect to ending the embargo,
despite the sustained efforts of an overwhelming
majority of States calling for an end to that inhumane
act against the friendly nation and people of Cuba. We
condemn all forms of unilateral coercive measures,
sanctions or embargoes of any kind that impede the
socioeconomic development of a friendly nation.
Speaking as a small island developing State, the
development challenges have only multiplied for
18/25

The President: We have heard the last speaker in
explanation of vote before the voting.
The Assembly will now take a decision on draft
resolution A/77/L.5, entitled “Necessity of ending the
economic, commercial and financial embargo imposed
by the United States of America against Cuba”.
A recorded vote has been requested.
A recorded vote was taken.
In favour:
Afghanistan, Albania, Algeria, Andorra, Angola,
Antigua and Barbuda, Argentina, Armenia,
Australia, Austria, Azerbaijan, Bahamas, Bahrain,
Bangladesh, Barbados, Belarus, Belgium, Belize,
Benin, Bhutan, Bolivia (Plurinational State of),
Bosnia and Herzegovina, Botswana, Brunei
Darussalam, Bulgaria, Burkina Faso, Burundi,
Cabo Verde, Cambodia, Cameroon, Canada, Central
African Republic, Chad, Chile, China, Colombia,
Comoros, Congo, Costa Rica, Côte d’Ivoire, Croatia,
Cuba, Cyprus, Czechia, Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea, Democratic Republic of the
Congo, Denmark, Djibouti, Dominica, Dominican
Republic, Ecuador, Egypt, El Salvador, Equatorial
Guinea, Eritrea, Estonia, Eswatini, Ethiopia,
Fiji, Finland, France, Gabon, Gambia, Georgia,
Germany, Ghana, Greece, Grenada, Guatemala,
Guinea, Guinea-Bissau, Guyana, Haiti, Honduras,
Hungary, Iceland, India, Indonesia, Iran (Islamic
Republic of), Iraq, Ireland, Italy, Jamaica, Japan,
Jordan, Kazakhstan, Kenya, Kiribati, Kuwait,
Kyrgyzstan, Lao People’s Democratic Republic,
Latvia, Lebanon, Lesotho, Libya, Liechtenstein,
Lithuania, Luxembourg, Madagascar, Malawi,
Malaysia, Maldives, Mali, Malta, Marshall Islands,
Mauritania, Mauritius, Mexico, Micronesia
(Federated States of), Monaco, Mongolia,
22-67261

03/11/2022

Montenegro, Morocco, Mozambique, Myanmar,
Namibia, Nauru, Nepal, Netherlands, New Zealand,
Nicaragua, Niger, Nigeria, North Macedonia,
Norway, Oman, Pakistan, Palau, Panama, Papua
New Guinea, Paraguay, Peru, Philippines, Poland,
Portugal, Qatar, Republic of Korea, Romania,
Russian Federation, Rwanda, Saint Kitts and Nevis,
Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines,
Samoa, San Marino, Sao Tome and Principe,
Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Serbia, Seychelles, Sierra
Leone, Singapore, Slovakia, Slovenia, Solomon
Islands, South Africa, South Sudan, Spain, Sri
Lanka, Sudan, Suriname, Sweden, Switzerland,
Syrian Arab Republic, Tajikistan, Thailand, TimorLeste, Togo, Tonga, Trinidad and Tobago, Tunisia,
Türkiye, Turkmenistan, Tuvalu, Uganda, United
Arab Emirates, United Kingdom of Great Britain
and Northern Ireland, United Republic of Tanzania,
Uruguay, Uzbekistan, Vanuatu, Viet Nam, Yemen,
Zambia, Zimbabwe
Against:
Israel, United States of America
Abstaining:
Brazil, Ukraine
Draft resolution A/77/L.5 was adopted by 185 votes
to 2, with 2 abstentions (resolution 77/7).
The President: Before giving the floor for
explanations of vote after the voting, may I remind
delegations that explanations of vote are limited to
10 minutes and should be made by delegations from
their seats.
Mr. Klíma (Czechia): I have the honour to speak
on behalf of the European Union (EU) and its member
States. The candidate countries North Macedonia,
Montenegro, Serbia and Albania; and the country of
the Stabilization and Association Process and potential
candidate Bosnia and Herzegovina align themselves
with this statement.
The economic, commercial, and financial embargo
imposed by the United States on Cuba has a damaging
impact on the economic situation of the country and
negatively affects the living standards of the Cuban
people. External trade and foreign investment could
play a crucial role in setting the country on a path
towards modernization, reform and sustainable growth,
and help it overcome the economic hardship caused
by the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic

A/77/PV.28

and deepened by the recent fires in Matanzas and the
terrible destruction caused by Hurricane Ian. The EU
considers therefore that lifting the embargo could make
economic reforms more effective and facilitate the
opening of the Cuban economy, to the benefit of the
Cuban people.
We are concerned about the human rights situation
in Cuba, in particular following the events of 11 and
12 July 2021, about the severe judgments issued by
Cuban courts so far, and as regards civil and political
rights. We therefore reiterate our call on the Cuban
Government to fully grant its citizens internationally
recognized civil, political and economic rights and
freedoms, including the freedom of assembly, the
freedom of expression and free access to information, to
release all political prisoners, to ratify the International
Covenant on Civil and Political Rights and the
International Covenant on Economic, Social, and
Cultural Rights, and to extend a standing invitation to
all United Nations special procedures to visit Cuba. We
also believe that empowering civil society is essential
for the promotion and protection of all human rights,
and call upon the Cuban Government to open spaces
for a constructive and inclusive dialogue, without
preconditions, with the whole spectrum of civil society
actors on the island. A broad spectrum of civil society,
both Cuban and European, should also be involved in
the implementation of the EU-Cuba Political Dialogue
and Cooperation Agreement.
The EU believes that positive change in Cuba is
best brought about by closer engagement at all levels:
Government, economy and civil society, but also
through people-to-people exchanges. We therefore
welcome the measures announced by the United States
Administration in 2022 to ease restrictions on family
remittances and travel to the island, and to fully resume
consular services. However, the redesignation of Cuba
as a State sponsor of terrorism by the previous United
States Administration, without presenting any new
facts, and its maintenance on the list, despite the fact
that members of the Ejército de Liberación Nacional
from Colombia have left the country, has introduced
obstacles to international financial transactions with
the island. Moreover, the embargo has restricted Cuba’s
ability to import pharmaceuticals, medical devices and
other medical supplies needed for the combat against
the COVID-19 pandemic.
Beyond the damaging impact of the embargo
on ordinary Cubans, United States sanctions and

22-6726119/25

A/77/PV.28

other administrative and judicial measures are also
negatively affecting EU economic interests. We have
firmly and continuously opposed any such measures,
due to their extraterritorial application and impact on
the European Union, in violation of commonly accepted
rules of international trade. We cannot accept that
such measures impede our economic and commercial
relations with Cuba.
The EU strongly rejects the United States
activation of Titles III and IV of the Helms-Burton
Act in April 2019. That breaches the commitments
made by the United States in the United States-EU
agreements of 1997 and 1998. We will draw on all
appropriate measures to address the effects of the
Helms-Burton Act, including in relation to our rights
and through the use of the EU Blocking Statute, which
protects against the extraterritorial application of those
United States sanctions to EU citizens, businesses and
non-governmental organizations operating in Cuba.
For the EU, international cooperation, dialogue and
closer — even critical — engagement are the way to
go with Cuba. The provisional application of the EUCuba Political Dialogue and Cooperation Agreement
is now in its fifth year. The agreement has put our
bilateral relationship on a new and solid legal footing
and sets out an agenda of critical engagement with
Cuba that will also allow us to support and accompany
Cuba on its path of reform and modernization. We are
enhancing dialogue and cooperation also on issues on
which we still have fundamental differences. To that
end, the Political Dialogue and Cooperation Agreement
has established a human rights dialogue as a key pillar
of our relationship. The fourth formal meeting of the
dialogue will be held in 2023.
Following the adoption of the country’s new
Constitution, and to overcome the current economic
and social crisis, we call on Cuba to ensure that its
reform agenda extends economic, judicial and social
reforms and is implemented in a manner that addresses
the key concerns of the Cuban population and meets
the legitimate aspirations of the Cuban people to
more opportunities to participate in the shaping of the
country’s future.
With the EU-Cuba Political Dialogue and
Cooperation Agreement, the EU offers Cuba a
consistent and reliable partnership to support it as it
seeks to reform its political and economic model, to
pursue sustainable development and to find common
20/25

03/11/2022

solutions to global challenges, while continuing to
advocate democracy and respect for human rights, in
the exclusive interest of all Cuban citizens.
It is our considered view that the United States
embargo does not contribute to promoting those
aims, but impedes their achievement. Against that
background, the States members of the European Union
voted unanimously in favour of resolution 77/7.
Mr. Nunes (Timor-Leste): At the outset, we wish to
take this opportunity to acknowledge the presence of His
Excellency Mr. Bruno Rodríguez Parrilla, the Foreign
Minister of Cuba, and we wish to thank the SecretaryGeneral for his report on this issue (A/77/358).
The vote we cast today in support of resolution 77/7
represents our great concern over the adverse effects of
the embargo on the well-being of the people of Cuba. We
are of the view that the embargo prevents the peoples of
Cuba from fully enjoying their human rights, including
the right to development, as it undermines the efforts of
Cuba to achieve the Sustainable Development Goals of
the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development.
As described in the report of the Secretary-General
on the issue, the embargo has affected the full potential
of Cuba to be a more active actor in international
trade and development and international cooperation.
In addition, we have also come to understand that
the embargo has directly and indirectly affected all
critical sectors of the Cuban economy, including public
health, nutrition and agriculture, as well as investment,
tourism and banking. Therefore, Timor-Leste joins
other delegations here in calling for the lifting of
the embargo, which will help the people of Cuba to
fully enjoy their human rights, including the right to
development, in accordance with the Charter of the
United Nations and the international law.
Mr. Kelley (United States of America): The United
States remains committed to the Cuban people in their
pursuit of freedom, prosperity and a future with greater
dignity. We are focused on the political and economic
well-being of the Cuban people and centre our efforts on
democracy, human rights and fundamental freedoms.
Cubans of all walks of life are speaking out for
fundamental freedoms, protesting Cuban Government
repression and advocating for a better future. In July
2021, the world witnessed tens of thousands of Cubans
across the island take to the streets to peacefully
demand freedom. The Cuban Government responded
22-67261

03/11/2022

to the demands of the Cuban people with crackdowns
on peaceful protesters, journalists and human rights
defenders. The Cuban Government has used harsh
prison sentences, even against minors, intimidation
tactics, arrests, Internet interruptions, Governmentsponsored mobs and horrendous prison conditions to
try to prevent Cubans from exercising their human
rights. Cuban security officials have also forced into
exile human rights activists and journalists who had
been either detained or warned about their activities.
We join international partners in urging the Cuban
Government to release political prisoners immediately
and unconditionally and to protect the freedoms of
expression and peaceful assembly of all individuals
in Cuba.
As we hold the Cuban Government accountable,
our support for the Cuban people is unwavering. The
embargo includes exemptions and authorizations relating
to exports of food, medicine and other humanitarian
goods to Cuba. We recognize the challenges the Cuban
people face. The people of the United States and United
States organizations donate a significant amount of
humanitarian goods to the Cuban people, and the United
States is one of Cuba’s principal trading partners.
Since 1992, the United States has authorized billions
of dollars of exports to Cuba, including food and other
agricultural commodities, medicines, medical devices,
telecommunications equipment, consumer goods and
other items to support the Cuban people. In 2021 alone,
United States companies exported over $295-million
worth of agricultural goods to Cuba, including food, to
help address the Cuban people’s basic needs.
Last month, following the devastating impact of
Hurricane Ian, the United States announced that it was
providing to the Cuban people critical humanitarian aid
through trusted international partners working directly
with Cubans whose communities were devastated by
the storm. The United States Agency for International
Development will provide $2 million in funding for
emergency relief to those in need in Cuba.
The United States opposes resolution 77/7, but
we stand with the Cuban people and will continue to
seek ways to provide meaningful support to them. We
encourage this body to urge the Cuban Government
to listen to the Cuban people and their demands to
determine their own future.
Mr. Matea (Solomon Islands): At the outset, I
wish to acknowledge the presence of His Excellency

A/77/PV.28

Mr. Bruno Rodríguez Parrilla, Minister for Foreign
Affairs of the Republic of Cuba, and extend our
appreciation to the Secretary-General for his reports
(A/76/405 and A/77/358).
In explanation of vote after the voting on agenda
item 36, I confirm that Solomon Islands voted in favour
of resolution 77/7, “Necessity of ending the economic,
commercial and financial embargo imposed by the
United States of America against Cuba”.
Solomon Islands commends Cuba for taking
the most peaceful path in seeking the unconditional
lifting of the blockade through the United Nations.
We continue to believe that each and every country
has the inalienable right to define and determine its
own political system and to participate in international
economic activities. Those are fundamental principles
of international law.
The 60-year embargo and blockade have resulted
in Cuba’s having to face severe difficulties by causing
economic harm and depriving Cuba of financial
resources and the fuel supply required not only for its
development, but also for the daily vitality of the Cuban
people. The adverse impact of the embargo on the
people of Cuba continues to impede the socioeconomic
development of the country and its progress in the
implementation of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development and the Sustainable Development Goals,
which is well reflected in the report of the SecretaryGeneral, contained in document A/77/358.
Solomon Islands and the General Assembly again
voted overwhelmingly in support of the resolution
on this item. For three decades since 1992, the
international community has consistently maintained
its affirmation in calling for the unconditional ending
to the economic, commercial and financial blockade
against the peaceful people of Cuba. Resolution 77/7
reaffirms Solomon Islands and the General Assembly’s
adherence and commitment to the principles of the
Charter of the United Nations, including respect for the
principles of sovereign equality among Member States,
non-interference and non-intervention in the domestic
and internal affairs of another State.
Solomon Islands continues to enjoy cordial and
friendly relations with both the United States and Cuba.
On this occasion, the Solomon Islands Government and
its people would like to thank the Government and the
people of Cuba for medical scholarships provided to
students from Solomon Islands and Pacific small island

22-6726121/25

A/77/PV.28

developing States. Since 2007, more than 100 Solomon
Islands doctors trained in Cuba have returned home and
are serving our people. We thank Cuba for its solidarity
and friendship to Solomon Islands and our subregion of
the Pacific.
In closing, Solomon Islands calls for the full
implementation of resolution 77/7 to bring an end to
the economic, commercial and financial embargo
imposed by the United States of America against
Cuba, and encourages the United States of America
and Cuba to renew their commitment to an open,
constructive dialogue based on a spirit of cooperation
and mutual respect.
Mr. Pieris (Sri Lanka): We were pleased to read the
contents of the Secretary-General’s report (A/77/358).
We were equally pleased to have with us Mr. Bruno
Eduardo Rodríguez Parrilla, Minister for Foreign
Affairs of Cuba.
Sri Lanka voted in favour of resolution 77/7,
“Necessity of ending the economic, commercial and
financial embargo imposed by the United States of
America against Cuba”.
It has been said numerous times in this forum and
elsewhere that we live in a world beset with multiple
crises. Such crises should ideally bring out the best in
us if we are to build back better. Is it not time that we put
history behind us an really commit ourselves to building
back better, including the Cuban crisis? That should
ideally begin by promoting the means for populations
to enjoy the full spectrum of their human rights. The
lifting of the economic embargo on Cuba, which is an
anomaly in the multilateral system, would contribute in
a substantial manner to enabling the Cuban people to
face up to the contemporary challenges confronting all
of us in this post-pandemic era.
We therefore commend the valiant people of Cuba,
who have, despite the odds of an embargo against them,
achieved an impressive degree of human development
for themselves, as shown in their social indicators. In
our view, the embargo constitutes a violation of Cuba’s
right to fully interact with the international community
and thereby hampers the avenues for the Cuban people
to fully enjoy their economic, social and cultural rights,
including the right to development.
We call on those concerned to lift the imposition
of unilateral coercive measures that are not authorized
by the relevant organs of the United Nations and
22/25

03/11/2022

are inconsistent with the principles of international
law and the Charter of the United Nations. We were
pleased, however, to have heard the representative
of the United States refer to the fact that there was
greater accommodation in United States policy in
this day and age, and we hope that we will see greater
accommodation in times to come.
The most problematic part of unilateral sanctions
is in the practice of most frequently resorting to
secondary sanctions aimed at universalizing the effects
of a sanctions regime, by seeking to avoid the flouting
of the unilateral sanctions by States and entities not
bound by the sanctioning State’s law. In essence, such
sanctions regimes aim at emulating collective sanctions.
That makes it clear that unilateral sanctions can never
achieve results similar to those of collective sanctions
without exaggerated claims to jurisdiction.
We must remember that sanctions, although a core
foreign policy tool, have two important implications for
multilateral and unilateral activity. One country may
well perceive the implications of sanctions differently
from another. Other countries may differ on the targets,
types and directions. If one looks at the bigger picture
carefully, unilateral sanctions have never had their
desired effect. It is therefore time to re-examine the
continuation of the sanctions against Cuba, which have
been imposed for so long.
We will recall the time when super-Power
antagonisms left little space for consensus. Everyone did
what they willed. They employed unilateral sanctions
in the guise of countermeasures whenever there was
a security need, while the Security Council lay silent.
Examples abound, including that of Cuba, starting in
the 1960s. We have come a long way since then, and
Sri Lanka believes that it is time that those sanctions be
withdrawn as the Assembly has a raft of mechanisms to
impose controls if the need arises. We cannot be seen
to abdicate that right to the whims and fancies of one
Member State, however powerful it may be.
While reiterating our commitment to the promotion,
preservation and strengthening of multilateralism,
my delegation would like to call for full respect for
the purposes and principles of the Charter of the
United Nations, particularly those referring to sovereign
equality, non-interference and non-intervention, which
are critical to the effective maintenance of international
peace and security. We therefore call for adherence
to the principles of impartiality, non-selectivity and
22-67261

03/11/2022

A/77/PV.28

objectivity in the promotion and protection of human
rights, inclusive of the treatment of Cuba in the postpandemic era.
Ms. Tsiode (Nauru): First, let me first convey
my delegation’s appreciation for the convening of this
very important meeting on the necessity of ending the
economic, commercial and financial embargo imposed
by the United States of America against Cuba.
Secondly, I recognize the presence of His
Excellency Mr. Bruno Rodríguez Parrilla, Minister for
Foreign Affairs of Cuba, and extend my delegation’s
warmest welcome.
I now take this opportunity to explain Nauru’s vote
after the voting. Nauru aligns itself with the statement
made by the representative of Pakistan on behalf of the
G77 and China (see A/77/PV.26).
For many years, Nauru has voted in favour of
the resolution on this item. In fact, the Assembly has
adopted this resolution every year for nearly three
decades with the support of almost all States Members
of the United Nations. Despite the near unanimous
agreement on the need to end the barbaric embargo
against the friendly people of Cuba, a developing
State — a small island developing State — the United
States has shunned the calls of the many, threatening
the lives and safety of the Cuban people in times
of hardship.
Mr. Wallace
the Chair.

(Jamaica),

Vice-President,

took

I thank the Secretary-General for his report
(A/77/358), which shows that multidimensional global
crises in the energy, food, environment and transportation
sectors, combined with the cumulative impacts of two
years of the coronavirus disease pandemic, have put the
Cuban economy under extraordinary pressure, leading
to a decline in consumption levels and the general
welfare of the population.
The Government of Nauru reiterates and reaffirms
its commitment to the purposes and principles of
the Charter of the United Nations, including the
fundamental principles of the sovereign equality of
States and non-intervention in internal affairs, as well
as to the freedom of international trade and navigation,
as established by international law.
Mrs. Mamesah (Indonesia): Indonesia would
like to align itself with the statements delivered by

the representatives of Singapore on behalf of the
Association of Southeast Asian Nations, Pakistan on
behalf of the Group of 77 and China, Azerbaijan on
behalf of the Non-Aligned Movement, and Egypt on
behalf of the Organization of Islamic Cooperation
(see A/77/PV.26).
Indonesia cast its vote in favour of resolution 77/7,
“Necessity of ending the economic, commercial and
financial embargo imposed by the United States
of America against Cuba”. The General Assembly
consistently rejects the imposition of laws, regulations
and all other forms of coercive economic measures
that hurt the progress and prosperity of people around
the world. However, for more than six decades the
Cuban Government and people have endured an
imposed embargo that has sidelined them from global
economic, trade and financial relations. The situation
has been worsened by the tremendous challenges
brought on by the pandemic, geopolitical tensions and
multidimensional crises.
In that regard, we reaffirm our principled position
to support and act on the resolutions of the General
Assembly for the immediate ending of the unilateral
embargo imposed by the United States against Cuba,
and would like to highlight three points.
First, Indonesia strongly opposes unilateral
embargoes and extraterritorial coercive measures
carried out against the sovereignty of other States.
Secondly, Indonesia is of the view that the
continued imposition of the economic, commercial and
financial embargo against Cuba contradicts the main
principles of international law, including the principles
of the sovereign equality of States, non-intervention and
non-interference in each other’s domestic affairs, and
respect for international humanitarian law, the Charter
of the United Nations and the norms and principles
governing peaceful relations among States.
Thirdly, the embargo has not only impeded the
economic growth of Cuba, but has also aggravated its
socioeconomic conditions, as the people of Cuba are
also facing serious global crises and the coronavirus
disease pandemic. The situation certainly undermines
the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development and
jeopardizes our shared goal of leaving no one behind.
Indonesia underlines the importance of enhanced
and constructive dialogue with a view to ending
the embargo imposed against Cuba and towards

22-6726123/25

A/77/PV.28

the normalization of relations through open and
constructive dialogue. Taking into account Indonesia’s
cordial ties with and support for the Government
and the people of Cuba, Indonesia would like to join
other members in calling for an immediate end to the
economic, commercial and financial embargo imposed
by the United States of America against Cuba.
The President: We have heard the last speaker in
explanation of vote.
The representative of Cuba has asked to speak in
exercise of the right of reply. May I remind him that
statements in the exercise of the rightly of reply are
limited to 10 minutes and to five minutes for the second
intervention, and should be made by delegations from
their seats.
Mr. Gala López (Cuba) (spoke in Spanish): The
debate on this agenda item should not be sullied by the
fallacious allegations of the United States delegation
now that the Assembly has, by an overwhelming
margin, sent an unequivocal message on the urgent
need to end the blockade against Cuba.
In his statement, the representative of the United
States Government referred to their concern over the
plight of the Cuban people. How can his Government
justify its use of the coronavirus disease (COVID-19)
pandemic to intensify its inhumane blockade against
Cuba and block our access to treatment and our
ability to purchase of basic products to manufacture
our own vaccines, pulmonary ventilators and even
medicinal oxygen?
The United States claims to advocate for individual
freedoms in Cuba, and yet it has not reversed restrictions
that are having a direct impact on Cuban entrepreneurs
in such areas as software development, hospitality
and other services. If the United States Government
truly cared for the well-being, human rights and selfdetermination of the Cuban people, it could lift the
embargo and join us in our international cooperation.
Cuba has been and remains the subject of a dirty
campaign directed by the United States Government
and by politicians in that country. Lying has been a
fundamental component of that campaign. It is false
to state that Cuba detained, prosecuted or punished
peaceful protestors on 11 July 2021. Those who
committed crimes during those disturbances were
brought to justice fairly and transparently, with all legal
guarantees. No one has been prosecuted for expressing
24/25

03/11/2022

their opinion. It is unacceptable for the United States to
call us out for defending our constitutional order when
it is actually that country that has detained over 800
people following the events of 6 January 2021 at the
United States Capitol.
Is the United States the only country in the world
with the right to defend its institutions, like any other
country would do? We will not allow the law to be broken
or the interests of an external regime change agenda to
subvert the constitutional order and the political system
that we Cubans have freely chosen. We will continue
to strengthen our institutional legal framework to
promote and protect human rights, including the right
of association, and we will continue to ensure the strict
application of and full respect for our laws.
Desperate to justify its hostility towards Cuba,
the United States is manipulating the issue of arrests
by focusing on minors. The Cuban authorities have
provided enough information to corroborate their
respect for due process in our country. They have made
it clear that we in Cuba do not, in any circumstances,
assign criminal responsibility to minors under 16
years of age. The only arbitrary detentions and lengthy
penal incarceration on Cuban territory are those being
carried out by the United States Government at the
Guantanamo naval base.
The representative of a country where there are no
ethical limits in electoral campaigns cannot talk about
democracy and elections. Hatred, division, egoism,
racism, xenophobia, slander and lies are promoted
in elections in that country. It is a country in which
money and corporate interests define who is elected
and who is not. Cuba needs no lessons on democracy
and human rights, much less from the United States.
We will not accept any such questioning, particularly
when it is used to justify a system of universal coercive
measures that is the most prolonged and wide-ranging
ever imposed against any country.
The United States Government should focus on its
own population below the poverty line, its repressive
policies towards migrants, and its repression of
minorities and reproductive rights. It should focus on
its own lack of gender equality, racism, discrimination
against persons of African descent, police brutality, the
more than 1,000 deaths per year in police shootings,
secret jails, extrajudicial arrests and the use of torture.
Allow me to cite just two specific examples from
that list.
22-67261

03/11/2022

The United States is the only country that is not
a party to the Convention on the Rights of the Child
and the only country where minors under the age of
18 are sentenced to life imprisonment without parole.
According to the Children’s Defense Fund, in 2021
alone between 600,000 and 700,000 minors were
arrested in that country. Institutional discrimination
and unrestrained police brutality against persons of
African descent, Hispanics, migrants, refugees and
minorities have reached alarming levels in the United
States. Persons of African descent represent only 13 per
cent of the United States population, but they represent
36 per cent of the total prison population. In 2021, a
total of 266 persons of African descent were murdered
by the police in the United States.
If the United States really wants to look out for the
well-being of the Cuban people, it should once and for all
and unconditionally lift the economic, commercial and
financial blockade against Cuba. Instead of promoting
cooperation and cordial relations with Cuba, the
United States seeks confrontation and overtly sponsors
political change in Cuba. In its 2022 budget, the Biden
Administration has asked Congress for $20 million for
programmes allegedly aimed at promoting democracy
in Cuba and for almost $13 million for the illegal
broadcasts of the ill-named Radio y Televisión Martí.
Such conduct contrasts with that country’s high
sensitivity over any attempt or suspected attempt at
interference in its domestic affairs, and is aimed at
fabricating political opposition in Cuba and breaking
down our constitutional order.

A/77/PV.28

The United States delegation is lying when it cites
extremely high levels of exports and humanitarian
assistance to our country. It is cynically using
multi-million dollar amounts from funds that the
United States Agency for International Development
allocates to subversion in Cuba and to stopping the care
packages sent, at great cost, by Cuban emigres to their
families or the modest donations that are made, despite
many obstacles, by non-governmental organizations.
There is irrefutable proof that the blockade blocks the
main channels for sending assistance to my country,
including from third countries. All this is occurring in
the context of the COVID-19 pandemic.
In conclusion, I reiterate a statement made just a
few days ago by Cuban President Miguel Mario DíazCanel y Bermúdez, who said:
“We have firmly and creatively faced the
imposition of the criminal economic, commercial
and financial embargo imposed by the United
States of America, which was opportunistically
intensified during the time of the pandemic. Nor
did the Cuban people cede to the subversive media
campaigns. No obstacle will suffice to weaken our
resolve to resist, to fight and to win.”
The Acting President: May I take it that it is the
wish of the Assembly to conclude its consideration of
agenda item 36?
It was so decided.
The meeting rose at 12.45 p.m.

22-6726125/25
