VI.

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

pation in the development process as agents and beneficiaries of development,
I. Notes with appreciation the organization of the
Interregional Seminar on National Experience Relating to
the Improvement of the Situation of Women in Rural
Areas, held at Vienna from 17 to 28 September 1984;
2. Requests the Secretary-General to compile the
observations and comments made on the report of the
above-mentioned Seminar at the World Conference to
Review and Appraise the Achievements of the United
Nations Decade for Women: Equality, Development and
Peace, to be held at Nairobi from 15 to 26 July 1985;
3. Also requests the Secretary-General to submit to the
General Assembly at its fortieth session the report of the
Seminar, together with the observations and comments
compiled in accordance with paragraph 2 above.
101 st plenary meeting
14 December 1984

39/127. Senior women's programme officers posts at
the regional commissions
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 33/188 of 29 January 1979, 35/
I 37 of 11 December 1980 and 37 /62 of 3 December 1982
and, in particular, its view that the appointment of senior
women's programme officers at the regional commissions
represents a valuable contribution to the implementation
of the goals of the United Nations Decade for Women:
Equality, Development and Peace,
Recalling also its resolution 38/106 of 16 December
1983, in particular the reference to the question of senior
women's programme officers posts at the regional commissions contained in paragraphs 2 and 3 of that resolution,
Reaffirming that questions concerning women should be
approached and dealt with as an integral part of overall
policies and programmes in the field of social and economic development,
Convinced that further efforts are needed to ensure the
maintena~ce and continuation, at the appropriate level, of
posts assigned to women's programmes at the regional
commissions,
Recognizing that these posts are integral to the successful outcome of national and regional programmes for
women,
I. Takes due note of the report of the SecretaryGeneral on the situation of senior women's programme
officers posts at the regional commissions; 151
2. Takes note of the decision of the Secretary-General
to continue posts through temporary arrangements during
1985; 152
3. Expresses deep concern that there has been a lack of
progress in regularizing senior women's programme officers posts at the regional commissions and that work with
respect to women's programmes is thereby seriously
impeded;
4. Stresses that the appointment of senior women's
programme officers at the regional commissions represents
a valuable contribution to the implementation of the goals
of the United Nations Decade for Women: Equality,
Development and Peace, and beyond;
5. Requests the Secretary-General, in consultation with
the executive secretaries of the five regional commissions,
I 51 A/39/569/ Add. I.
152 Ibid., para. 13.

219

to reassess all individual work programmes, with a view to
incorporating women's concerns at all levels in the overall
programme of work of each Commission;
6. Also requests the Secretary-General, in consultation
with the executive secretaries of the five regional commissions, to allocate sufficient budgetary resources to staff,
including, where possible, by redeployment, within the
context of the I 986-198 7 programme budget, in order to
regularize all temporary and permanent senior women's
programme officers posts at the regional commissions
before the end of the Decade, so as to allow the integration
of policies and programmes concerning women;
7. Further requests the Secretary-General to report to
the General Assembly at its fortieth session on measures
taken in implementation of paragraph 5 above.
101st plenary meeting
14 December 1984

39/128. Integration of women in all aspects of
development
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 3 7/5 7 of 3 December I 982, as
well as Economic and Social Council resolution 1984/ I 2
of 24 May 1984,
Recalling paragraphs 190 to 196 of the World Plan of
Action for the Implementation of the Objectives of the
International Women's Year, 153 in which the relevant
agencies of the United Nations and intergovernmental,
interregional and regional bodies were called upon to scrutinize all existing plans and projects with a view to
extending their sphere of activities to include women and
to develop new and innovative projects to include women,
Bearing in mind that development is one of the themes
of the United Nations Decade for Women: Equality,
Development and Peace,
Recalling paragraph 51 of the International Development Strategy for the Third United Nations Development
Decade, 154 which stated that appropriate measures should
be taken for profound social and economic changes and for
the elimination of the structural imbalances which compound and perpetuate women's disadvantages,
Looking ahead to the World Conference to Review and
Appraise the Achievements of the United Nations Decade
for Women: Equality, Development and Peace, to be held
at Nairobi from 15 to 26 July 1985, and foreseeing the
need to continue such achievements beyond the end of the
Decade,
Convinced of the importance of integrating women fully
into development in its political, economic, social, cultural
and other dimensions, both as agents and as beneficiaries,
Reaffirming the central policy and advisory role of the
Commission on the Status of Women within the United
Nations in considering matters relating to women, including the achievement of the objectives of the Decade,
Recognizing the efforts made by the specialized agencies
to integrate women into their ongoing programmes,
especially into the establishment of cross-sectoral
mechanisms,
Welcoming Economic· and Social Council decision
1984/ IOI of 10 February I 984, in paragraph 7 of which
the Council decided to select the question of women in
153 Re~ort of the World Confi•rence ,>f the lnlernalion~I Women's Year.
Mex,co C /IV. /9 June-2 July 19' I (United Nations pubhcat1on, Sales No.
E. 76.IV. I). chap. II, sect. A.
15 4 R~solution 35/56. annex
