V.

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Second Committee_____________l_4_5

establishing and improving national and regional early
warning systems;
20. Appreciates the measures taken by the World Food
Programme to ensure speedy and timely delivery of food
aid as well as the development of an information system
for the dissemination on a regular basis of all relevant
information on food aid to facilitate planning and operational co-ordination;
21. Urges the donor community to provide the necessary financial support for the effective implementation of
the programmes of action adopted by the FAO World
Conference on Fisheries Management and Development; 32
22. Urges the World Food Council, within the context
of its mandate, to mobilize and sustain greater efforts in
the struggle to overcome hunger, to continue to review and
report on major problems and policy issues, and to continue to serve as a co-ordinating mechanism in the field of
food and other related policy matters within the United
Nations system and, in this connection, notes that the
Council, in its report to the General Assembly, 33 addressed
the question of strengthening its effectiveness and other
related issues, and expresses the hope that necessary
action, as appropriate, will be taken in that regard;
23. Stresses the need to strengthen subregional,
regional and interregional co-operation for the promotion
of food security and the development of agriculture in
developing countries and, in this context, calls upon the
relevant entities of the United Nations system to accord
priority support to economic and technical co-operation
among developing countries in food and agriculture.

States, thereby contributing to the establishment of the
new international economic order;
3. Requests the Secretary-General to submit to the
General Assembly at its forty-fourth session, through the
Economic and Social Council at its second regular session
of 1989, a comprehensive and analytical report, in order to
ensure systematic and comprehensive consideration of the
implementation of the Charter of Economic Rights and
Duties of States, in accordance with the provisions of article 34 thereof;
4. Invites the organs, organizations and bodies of the
United Nations system to facilitate the implementation of
the Charter of Economic Rights and Duties of States in
their respective spheres of action.
119th plenary meeting
17 December 1985

40/183. Specific action related to the particular
needs and problems of land-locked developing countries

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 320 I (S-VI) and 3202 (S-VI) of
May 1974, containing the Declaration and the Programme of Action on the Establishment ofa New International Economic Order, 3281 (XXIX) of 12 December
1974, containing the Charter of Economic Rights and
Duties of States, and 3362 (S-VII) of 16 September 1975
on development and international economic co-operation,
which laid the foundations of the new international economic order,
Recalling also its resolution 37/204 of 20 December
1982 on the review of the implementation of the Charter
of Economic Rights and Duties of States,
Recalling further its resolution 39/ 163 of I 7 December
1984, in which it decided to establish an Ad Hoe Committee of the Whole to Review the Implementation of the
Charter of Economic Rights and Duties of States,
1. Takes note of the report of the Ad Hoe Committee
of the Whole to Review the Implementation of the Charter
of Economic Rights and Duties of States; 34
2. Urges all States to examine further the implementation of the Charter of Economic Rights and Duties of

The General Assembly,
Reiterating the specific actions related to the particular
needs of the land-locked developing countries stated in
United Nations Conference on Trade and Development
resolutions 63 (III) of 19 May 1972, 35 98 (IV) of 31 May
1976, 36 123 (V) of 3 June 1979 37 and 137 (VI) of 2 July
1983 38 and Trade and Development Board resolution 319
(XXXI) of 27 September 1985, 39
Recalling the provisions of its resolutions 31/ 157 of 21
December 1976, 32/191 of 19 December 1977, 33/150 of
20 December 1978, 34/ 198 of 19 December 1979, 35/58
of 5 December 1980, 36/ 175 of 17 December 1981 and
39/209 of I 8 December I 984 and other resolutions of the
United Nations relating to the particular needs and problems of land-locked developing countries,
Bearing in mind various other resolutions adopted by
the General Assembly, its related organs and the specialized agencies emphasizing special and urgent measures in
favour of land-locked developing countries,
Recalling the relevant provisions of the International
Development Strategy for the Third United Nations
Development Decade, 22
Recalling the United Nations Convention on the Law of
the Sea, 40 adopted on 10 December 1982,
Bearing in mind the report of the Ad Hoe Group of
Experts to Study Ways and Means of Improving Transittransport Infrastructures and Services for Land-locked
Developing Countries, 41
Recognizing that the lack of territorial access to the sea,
aggravated by remoteness and isolation from world markets, and the prohibitive transit, transport and trans-shipment costs impose serious constraints on the socio-economic development of land-locked developing countries,
Noting with concern that the measures taken thus far
have not adequately addressed the problems of landlocked developing countries,
1. Reaffirms the right of access of land-locked
countries to and from the sea and freedom of transit

32 See Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations, Reporr u/
the FAO World Conference on Fisheries Mana!(ement and De ..e/opmem.
Rome, 27 June-6 July 1984 (Rome, 1984).
33 Official Records of the General Assembly. Forlleth Sesswn. Supplemrnt
No. /9(A/40/ I 9).
34 !hid, Supplement No. 52 (A/40/52)
3 5 See Proceedings of the United Nations Conference on Trad,· und Development, Third Session, vol. I, Report and Annnes (United Nations publication. Sales No. E.73.ILD.4). annex IA
36 Ibid., Fourth Session, voL I, Report und Annnes (United Nation, publication. Sales No. E.76.ILD.10 and corrigendum). part one, S<'<·t I\

-17 Jina. Fl/ih Sessum, voL I. Report and Annexes (United Nations puMication, Sab No. E.79.ILD.14). part one. sect. A.
1 8 /hid. Snth Semon, voL L Report and Annexes (United Naltons puhl1ca1ton, Sales No. E.83.ILD.6), part one, sect. A.
39 See Olfina/ Records o( the Ucneral Assemhlr. fi>rti,•th Session. Supplement N,, 15 (A.'40-'15). vol. II. se<·t. L
40 Offinal Records of the Third ( 'mted Natwns ( ·onji-ro1et' on th,· 1,aK o(
the s,,a, vol. XVII (Umted Nations publication, Sales No. E.84.V.1). document Nt 'ONF.62/ 122.
41 Offinul Records ,fth,, Trad,, und Development Board. '! wentr-nuuh ,\e\·\/O'I. I nnnn. agenda ,tern 6, dr,rnment TD/B/1002

119th plenary meeting
17 December 1985

40/182. Charter of Economic Rights and Duties of
States

General As..embly- 1-'ortieth Session
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - ' - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -----------------------

146

through the territory of transit States by all means of transport, in accordance with article 125 of the United Nations
Convention on the Law of the Sea;
2. Appeals to all States, international organizations and
financial institutions to implement, as a matter of urgency
and priority, the specific actions related to the particular
needs and problems of land-locked developing countries
envisaged in resolutions 63 (III), 98 (IV), 123 (V) and 137
(VI) of the United Nations Conference on Trade and
Development, in the International Development Strategy
for the Third United Nations Development Decade, in the
Substantial New Programme of Action for the 1980s for
the Least Developed Countries 42 and in other relevant resolutions of the United Nations;
3. Urges all concerned countries, as well as international organizations, to provide land-locked developing
countries with appropriate financial and technical assistance in the form of grants or concessional loans for the
construction, maintenance and improvement of their
transport and transit infrastructures and facilities;
4. Urges also the international community and multilateral and bilateral financial institutions to intensify
efforts in raising the net flow of resources to all land-locked
developing countries to help offset the adverse effects of
their disadvantageous geographical situation on their economic development efforts, in keeping with the overall
development needs of each land-locked developing country;
5. Invites transit countries and the land-locked developing countries to co-operate effectively in harmonizing
transport planning and in promoting other joint ventures
in the field of transport at the regional, subregional and
bilateral levels;
6. Further invites the international community to give
financial, technical and other support to interested transit
and land-locked developing countries in the construction
of alternative routes to the sea;
7. Commends the United Nations Development Programme, the United Nations Conference on Trade and
Development and other United Nations agencies for their
work and the assistance they have provided to the landlocked developing countries, and invites them to continue
to take appropriate and effective measures to respond to
the specific needs of those countries;
8. Recommends continued and intensified activities
relating to the conducting of necessary studies and the
implementation of special actions and specific measures
for the land-locked developing countries, including those
in the area of economic co-operation among developing
countries, as well as those that have been envisaged in the
programme of work of the United Nations Conference on
Trade and Development, the regional commissions and
other programmes and activities at the regional and subregional levels;
9. Once again requests Member States to transmit to
the Secretary-General of the United Nations Conference
on Trade and Development their views and comments on
the report of the Ad Hoe Group of Experts to Study Ways
and Means of Improving Transit-transport Infrastructures
and Services for Land-locked Developing Countries:
I 0. Welcomes the report of the Secretary-General of
the Pnited Nations Conference on Trade and Development on progress in the implementation of specific action
related to the particular needs and problems of landlocked developing countries, 4 ' submitted pursuant to resol.ution 39 '20Q, and requests him to prepare another such
42 Report

of the l'rw,,d !liat,ons Confereme on the Leas/ Developed

Countne.<. Pam. i-14 Seprnnber 1981 (United Nations publication. Sales

No. E.82.1 81, part, 11e. st'CL A.

report for submission to the General Assembly at its fortysecond session.
119th plenary meeting
17 December I 985

40/184.

International code of conduct on the transfer
of technology

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 38/ I 53 of 19 December 1983,
Taking note of the decision adopted on 5 June 1985 by
the United Nations Conference on an International Code
of Conduct on the Transfer of Technology, at its sixth session, 44 in which it requested the General Assembly to take
the measures necessary for further action, including the
possible reconvening of negotiations on an international
code of conduct on the transfer of technology,
I. Notes that progress has been made in the negotiations on an international code of conduct on the transfer of
technology but that there are still important problems outstanding;
2. Further notes that at the sixth session of the United
Nations Conference on an International Code of Conduct
on the Transfer of Technology, progress was made in identifying common ground, as well as divergences, in respect
of the issues outstanding in chapter 4 of the draft code, on
restrictive practices, and in chapter 9, on applicable law
and settlement of disputes;
3. Believes that further work, continuing the genuine
efforts made by all parties concerned, is required in the
search for possible solutions to the outstanding issues in
order to complete successfully the negotiations on a code
of conduct;
4. Invites the Secretary-General of the United Nations
Conference on Trade and Development and the President
of the United Nations Conference on an International
Code of Conduct on the Transfer of Technology to consult,
as appropriate, with regional groups and Governments,
taking into account the need for balanced geographical
representation, with a view to identifying appropriate solutions to the issues outstanding in the code of conduct;
5. Further invites the Secretary-General of the United
Nations Conference on Trade and Development to report
to the General Assembly at its forty-first session on the
progress made in the consultations referred to in paragraph
4 above and decides to take, at that session, further action
on the negotiations on an international code of conduct on
the transfer of technology.
I 19th plenary meeting
17 December 1985

40/185. Economic measures as a means of political
and economic coercion against developing
countries
The General Assembly,
Recalling the relevant principles set forth in the Charter
of the United Nations,
Recalling also its resolutions 2625 (XXV) of 24 October
1970, containing the Declaration on Principles of International Law concerning Friendly Relations and Co-operation among States in accordance with the Charter of the
United Nations, 3201 (S-VJ) and 3202 (S-VI) of I May
1974, containing the Declaration and the Programme of
43 A/40/815. annex
44TD/C'ODE TOT14<l. sect. IV.
