United Nations

A/RES/65/97

General Assembly

Distr.: General
20 January 2011

Sixty-fifth session
Agenda item 50

Resolution adopted by the General Assembly on 10 December 2010
[on the report of the Special Political and Decolonization Committee
(Fourth Committee) (A/65/421)]

65/97. International cooperation in the peaceful uses
of outer space
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 51/122 of 13 December 1996, 54/68 of 6 December
1999, 59/2 of 20 October 2004, 61/110 and 61/111 of 14 December 2006, 62/101 of
17 December 2007, 62/217 of 22 December 2007 and 64/86 of 10 December 2009,
Deeply convinced of the common interest of mankind in promoting and
expanding the exploration and use of outer space, as the province of all mankind,
for peaceful purposes and in continuing efforts to extend to all States the benefits
derived therefrom, and also of the importance of international cooperation in this
field, for which the United Nations should continue to provide a focal point,
Reaffirming the importance of international cooperation in developing the rule
of law, including the relevant norms of space law and their important role in
international cooperation for the exploration and use of outer space for peaceful
purposes, and of the widest possible adherence to international treaties that promote
the peaceful uses of outer space in order to meet emerging new challenges,
especially for developing countries,
Seriously concerned about the possibility of an arms race in outer space, and
bearing in mind the importance of article IV of the Treaty on Principles Governing
the Activities of States in the Exploration and Use of Outer Space, including the
Moon and Other Celestial Bodies 1 (Outer Space Treaty),
0F

Recognizing that all States, in particular those with major space capabilities,
should contribute actively to the goal of preventing an arms race in outer space as
an essential condition for the promotion and strengthening of international
cooperation in the exploration and use of outer space for peaceful purposes,
Recognizing also that space debris is an issue of concern to all nations,

_______________
1

10-51836

United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 610, No. 8843.

*1051836*

Please rec cle

♲

A/RES/65/97

Noting the progress achieved in the further development of peaceful space
exploration and applications as well as in various national and cooperative space
projects, which contributes to international cooperation, and the importance of further
developing the legal framework to strengthen international cooperation in this field,
Convinced of the need to promote the use of space technology towards
implementing the United Nations Millennium Declaration, 2
1F

Seriously concerned about the devastating impact of disasters, 3
2F

Desirous of enhancing international coordination and cooperation at the global
level in disaster management and emergency response through greater access to and
use of space-based services for all countries and facilitating capacity-building and
institutional strengthening for disaster management, in particular in developing
countries,
Deeply convinced that the use of space science and technology and their
applications in areas such as telemedicine, tele-education, disaster management,
environmental protection and other Earth observation applications contribute to
achieving the objectives of the global conferences of the United Nations that
address various aspects of economic, social and cultural development, particularly
poverty eradication,
Taking note, in that regard, of the fact that the 2005 World Summit recognized
the important role that science and technology play in promoting sustainable
development, 4
3F

Having considered the report of the Committee on the Peaceful Uses of Outer
Space on the work of its fifty-third session, 5
4F

1.
Endorses the report of the Committee on the Peaceful Uses of Outer
Space on the work of its fifty-third session;5
2.
Agrees that the Committee on the Peaceful Uses of Outer Space, at its
fifty-fourth session, should consider the substantive items recommended by the
Committee at its fifty-third session, 6 taking into account the concerns of all
countries, in particular those of developing countries;
5F

3.
Notes that, at its forty-ninth session, the Legal Subcommittee of the
Committee on the Peaceful Uses of Outer Space continued its work, 7 as mandated
by the General Assembly in its resolution 64/86;
6F

4.
Agrees that the Legal Subcommittee, at its fiftieth session, should
consider the substantive items and reconvene the working groups recommended by
the Committee, 8 taking into account the concerns of all countries, in particular those
of developing countries;
7F

_______________
2

See resolution 55/2.
The term “disasters” refers to natural or technological disasters.
4
See resolution 60/1, para. 60.
5
Official Records of the General Assembly, Sixty-fifth Session, Supplement No. 20 (A/65/20).
6
Ibid., para. 339.
7
Ibid., chap. II.D; and A/AC.105/942.
8
See Official Records of the General Assembly, Sixty-fifth Session, Supplement No. 20 (A/65/20),
paras. 228–231.
3

2

A/RES/65/97

5.
Urges States that have not yet become parties to the international treaties
governing the uses of outer space 9 to give consideration to ratifying or acceding to
those treaties in accordance with their domestic law, as well as incorporating them
in their national legislation;
8F

Notes that, at its forty-seventh session, the Scientific and Technical
6.
Subcommittee of the Committee on the Peaceful Uses of Outer Space continued its
work, 10 as mandated by the General Assembly in its resolution 64/86;
9F

7.
Agrees that the Scientific and Technical Subcommittee, at its forty-eighth
session, should consider the substantive items and reconvene the working groups
recommended by the Committee, 11 taking into account the concerns of all countries,
in particular those of developing countries;
10F

8.
Notes with appreciation that some States are already implementing space
debris mitigation measures on a voluntary basis, through national mechanisms and
consistent with the Space Debris Mitigation Guidelines of the Inter-Agency Space
Debris Coordination Committee and with the Space Debris Mitigation Guidelines of
the Committee on the Peaceful Uses of Outer Space, 12 endorsed by the General
Assembly in its resolution 62/217;
1F

9.
Invites other States to implement, through relevant national mechanisms,
the Space Debris Mitigation Guidelines of the Committee on the Peaceful Uses of
Outer Space;12
10. Considers that it is essential that States pay more attention to the problem
of collisions of space objects, including those with nuclear power sources, with
space debris, and other aspects of space debris, calls for the continuation of national
research on this question, for the development of improved technology for the
monitoring of space debris and for the compilation and dissemination of data on
space debris, also considers that, to the extent possible, information thereon should
be provided to the Scientific and Technical Subcommittee, and agrees that
international cooperation is needed to expand appropriate and affordable strategies
to minimize the impact of space debris on future space missions;
11. Urges all States, in particular those with major space capabilities, to
contribute actively to the goal of preventing an arms race in outer space as an
essential condition for the promotion of international cooperation in the exploration
and use of outer space for peaceful purposes;

_______________
9

Treaty on Principles Governing the Activities of States in the Exploration and Use of Outer Space,
including the Moon and Other Celestial Bodies (United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 610, No. 8843);
Agreement on the Rescue of Astronauts, the Return of Astronauts and the Return of Objects Launched into
Outer Space (United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 672, No. 9574); Convention on International Liability for
Damage Caused by Space Objects (United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 961, No. 13810); Convention on
Registration of Objects Launched into Outer Space (United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 1023, No. 15020);
and Agreement Governing the Activities of States on the Moon and Other Celestial Bodies (United
Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 1363, No. 23002).
10
See Official Records of the General Assembly, Sixty-fifth Session, Supplement No. 20 (A/65/20),
chap. II.C; and A/AC.105/958.
11
See Official Records of the General Assembly, Sixty-fifth Session, Supplement No. 20 (A/65/20),
paras. 170 and 171.
12
Ibid., Sixty-second Session, Supplement No. 20 (A/62/20), paras. 117 and 118, and annex.

3

A/RES/65/97

12. Endorses the United Nations Programme on Space Applications for 2011,
as proposed to the Committee by the Expert on Space Applications and endorsed by
the Committee; 13
12F

13. Welcomes the progress made by the International Committee on Global
Navigation Satellite Systems towards achieving compatibility and interoperability
among global and regional space-based positioning, navigation and timing systems
and in the promotion of the use of global navigation satellite systems and their
integration into national infrastructure, particularly in developing countries, and
notes with satisfaction that the International Committee held its fifth meeting in
Turin, Italy, from 18 to 22 October 2010, which was jointly organized by Italy and
the European Commission;
14. Notes with satisfaction the progress made within the framework of the
United Nations Platform for Space-based Information for Disaster Management and
Emergency Response (UN-SPIDER) in the implementation of the workplan of the
UN-SPIDER programme for the biennium 2010–2011, 14 in particular the work of
the UN-SPIDER office in Bonn, Germany, which is establishing a systematic
compilation of relevant information with respect to disasters and making it
accessible to all end-users, as well as the work of the UN-SPIDER staff in Vienna
who are coordinating all the programme activities, including the work of the
regional support offices, and encourages Member States to provide all necessary
support, on a voluntary basis, to UN-SPIDER, including financial support, to enable
it to carry out the workplan;
13F

15. Welcomes with appreciation the signing of a host country agreement on
17 June 2010 by the Government of China and the Office for Outer Space Affairs of
the Secretariat for the establishment of the UN-SPIDER Beijing office, and
welcomes the fact that, in accordance with General Assembly resolution 61/110,
regional support offices have been established in several countries to support the
implementation of the activities of the UN-SPIDER programme; 15
14F

16. Agrees that the Office for Outer Space Affairs should ensure, within
existing resources, the coordination of the UN-SPIDER SpaceAid framework with
mechanisms and initiatives that are making space-based information available to
support responses to emergency events, thus avoiding duplication of efforts;
17. Notes with appreciation that the African regional centres for space
science and technology education in the French and English languages, located in
Morocco and Nigeria, respectively, as well as the Centre for Space Science and
Technology Education in Asia and the Pacific and the Regional Centre for Space
Science and Technology Education for Latin America and the Caribbean, affiliated
to the United Nations, have continued their education programmes in 2010, and
agrees that the regional centres should continue to report to the Committee on their
activities;
18. Emphasizes that regional and interregional cooperation in the field of
space activities is essential to strengthen the peaceful uses of outer space, assist
States in the development of their space capabilities and contribute to the
_______________
13
Ibid., Sixty-fifth Session, Supplement No. 20 (A/65/20), para. 79; and A/AC.105/969, sects. II and III, and
annex III.
14
See A/AC.105/937.
15
See Official Records of the General Assembly, Sixty-fifth Session, Supplement No. 20 (A/65/20),
para. 113.

4

A/RES/65/97

achievement of the goals of the United Nations Millennium Declaration2 and to that
end fosters interregional dialogue on space matters between Member States;
19. Recognizes, in this regard, the important role played by conferences and
other mechanisms in strengthening regional and international cooperation among
States, such as the African Leadership Conference on Space Science and Technology
for Sustainable Development, the Asia-Pacific Regional Space Agency Forum, the
Asia-Pacific Space Cooperation Organization and the Space Conference of the
Americas;
20. Notes with appreciation that since the adoption of the Declaration of San
Francisco de Quito by the Fifth Space Conference of the Americas in July 2006,
more States in the Latin American and Caribbean region have set up national space
entities of a civilian nature, thus laying the foundation for enhanced regional
cooperation in the peaceful uses of outer space, and recalls that in the Declaration,
States in the Latin American and Caribbean region were invited to, inter alia, “set up
national space entities to lay the foundation for a regional entity for cooperation”;
21. Welcomes with appreciation the organization by the Government of
Mexico of the Sixth Space Conference of the Americas, to be held in Pachuca,
Mexico, from 15 to 19 November 2010, and notes with satisfaction that the
proposed results of the Conference will be aimed towards strengthening the
participation of the academic, public and private sectors, as well as youth and
non-governmental organizations, in regional and international programmes and
projects using space science and technology to support the economic, social,
cultural and scientific development of the region;
22. Urges Member States and invites international organizations to
participate actively in the four committees that will meet during the Sixth Space
Conference of the Americas;
23. Emphasizes the need to increase the benefits of space technology and its
applications and to contribute to an orderly growth of space activities favourable to
sustained economic growth and sustainable development in all countries, including
mitigation of the consequences of disasters, in particular in the developing
countries;
24. Notes that space science and technology and their applications make
important contributions to economic, social and cultural development and welfare,
as indicated in the resolution entitled “The Space Millennium: Vienna Declaration
on Space and Human Development”, 16 its resolution 59/2 and the Plan of Action of
the Committee on the Peaceful Uses of Outer Space on the implementation of the
recommendations of the Third United Nations Conference on the Exploration and
Peaceful Uses of Outer Space (UNISPACE III); 17
15F

16F

25. Notes with satisfaction that a number of the recommendations set out in the
Plan of Action have been implemented and that satisfactory progress is being made in
implementing the outstanding recommendations, and that Member States continue to
contribute to the implementation of the recommendations of UNISPACE III through
national and regional activities and by supporting and participating in the
programmes established in response to those recommendations;
_______________
16
See Report of the Third United Nations Conference on the Exploration and Peaceful Uses of Outer
Space, Vienna, 19–30 July 1999 (United Nations publication, Sales No. E.00.I.3), chap. I, resolution 1.
17
See A/59/174, sect. VI.B.

5

A/RES/65/97

26. Urges all Member States to continue to contribute to the Trust Fund for
the United Nations Programme on Space Applications to enhance the capacity of the
Office for Outer Space Affairs to provide technical and legal advisory services in
accordance with the Plan of Action, while maintaining the priority thematic areas
agreed by the Committee;
27. Reiterates that the benefits of space technology and its applications
should continue to be brought to the attention, in particular, of the major United
Nations conferences and summits for economic, social and cultural development
and related fields and that the use of space technology should be promoted towards
achieving the objectives of those conferences and summits and for implementing the
United Nations Millennium Declaration;
28. Notes with satisfaction that the working paper by the Chair of the
Committee on the Peaceful Uses of Outer Space for the period 2008–2009 entitled
“Towards a United Nations space policy” will be considered by the Committee at its
fifty-fourth session; 18
17F

29. Welcomes the increased efforts to strengthen further the Inter-Agency
Meeting on Outer Space Activities, notes with satisfaction that the open informal
meetings, held in conjunction with the annual sessions of the Inter-Agency Meeting
on Outer Space Activities, provide a constructive mechanism for an active dialogue
between the entities of the United Nations system and Member States, and
encourages entities of the United Nations system to participate fully in the work of
the Inter-Agency Meeting;
30. Urges entities of the United Nations system, particularly those
participating in the Inter-Agency Meeting on Outer Space Activities, to continue to
examine, in cooperation with the Committee, how space science and technology and
their applications could contribute to implementing the United Nations Millennium
Declaration on the development agenda, particularly in the areas relating to,
inter alia, food security and increasing opportunities for education;
31. Agrees that the Director of the Office for Outer Space Affairs should
continue to participate in the sessions of the Commission on Sustainable
Development to raise awareness and promote the benefits of space science and
technology for sustainable development;
32. Calls upon the United Nations University and other institutions of the
same nature, within the framework of their mandates, to provide training and to
carry out research in the areas of international space law and, in particular, matters
relating to disasters and emergencies;
33. Requests the Economic Commission for Latin America and the Caribbean
and other relevant regional organizations to offer the assistance necessary so that
countries can carry out recommendations of regional conferences;
34. Requests the Committee to continue to consider, as a matter of priority,
ways and means of maintaining outer space for peaceful purposes and to report
thereon to the General Assembly at its sixty-sixth session, and agrees that during its
consideration of the matter the Committee could continue to consider ways to
promote regional and interregional cooperation based on experiences stemming
from the Space Conferences of the Americas, the African Leadership Conferences
_______________
18

See Official Records of the General Assembly, Sixty-fifth Session, Supplement No. 20 (A/65/20),
para. 337; and A/AC.105/L.278.

6

A/RES/65/97

on Space Science and Technology for Sustainable Development and the role space
technology could play in the implementation of recommendations of the World
Summit on Sustainable Development;
35. Invites the Committee to consider how it can contribute to the objectives
of the United Nations Conference on Sustainable Development, to be held in Rio de
Janeiro, Brazil, in 2012;
36. Notes that, in accordance with the agreement reached by the Committee
at its forty-sixth session on the measures relating to the future composition of the
bureaux of the Committee and its subsidiary bodies, 19 on the basis of the measures
relating to the working methods of the Committee and its subsidiary bodies, 20 the
Group of Asian States, the Group of Latin American and Caribbean States and the
Group of Western European and Other States nominated their candidates for the
offices of Chair of the Committee, Chair of the Scientific and Technical
Subcommittee and First Vice-Chair of the Committee, respectively, for the period
2012–2013; 21
18F

19F

20F

37. Urges the Group of African States to nominate its candidate for the office
of Chair of the Legal Subcommittee and the Group of Eastern European States to
nominate its candidate for the office of Second Vice-Chair/Rapporteur of the
Committee, for the period 2012–2013, before the next meeting of those bodies;
38. Agrees that, upon the nomination of the candidate of the Group of
African States and the candidate of the Group of Eastern European States, the
Committee and its subsidiary bodies should elect their officers;
39.

Decides that Tunisia shall become a member of the Committee; 22
21F

40. Endorses the decision of the Committee to grant permanent observer
status to the International Association for the Advancement of Space Safety; 23
2F

41. Notes that each of the regional groups has the responsibility for actively
promoting the participation in the work of the Committee and its subsidiary bodies
of the member States of the Committee that are also members of the respective
regional groups, and agrees that the regional groups should consider this
Committee-related matter among their members;
42. Notes with satisfaction that a panel discussion on space and emergencies
was held at United Nations Headquarters on 12 October 2010, and agrees that a
panel discussion should be held at the sixty-sixth session of the General Assembly
on a topic to be selected by the Committee, taking into account the panel
discussions held on climate change, food security, global health, and emergencies;
43. Requests the entities of the United Nations system, other international
organizations and the Secretary-General to continue and, where appropriate, to
enhance their cooperation with the Committee and to provide it with reports on the
issues dealt with in the work of the Committee and its subsidiary bodies, and to

_______________
19
See Official Records of the General Assembly, Fifty-eighth Session, Supplement No. 20 (A/58/20),
annex II, paras. 4–9.
20
Ibid., Fifty-second Session, Supplement No. 20 (A/52/20), annex I; and ibid., Fifty-eighth Session,
Supplement No. 20 (A/58/20), annex II, appendix III.
21
Ibid., Sixty-fifth Session, Supplement No. 20 (A/65/20), paras. 301–303.
22
Ibid., paras. 305 and 306.
23
Ibid., para. 308.

7

A/RES/65/97

address the issues covered by the panel discussions held in conjunction with
sessions of the General Assembly;
44. Welcomes the fact that the Committee will celebrate at its fifty-fourth
session the fiftieth anniversary of the Committee and the fiftieth anniversary of
human space flight.
62nd plenary meeting
10 December 2010

8
