United Nations

A/RES/57/307

General Assembly

Distr.: General
22 May 2003

Fifty-seventh session
Agenda item 123

Resolution adopted by the General Assembly
[on the report of the Fifth Committee (A/57/768)]

57/307. Administration of justice in the Secretariat
The General Assembly,
Recalling section XI of its resolution 55/258 of 14 June 2001,
Recognizing that a transparent, impartial and effective system of administration of
justice is a necessary condition for ensuring fair and just treatment of United Nations staff,
and important for the success of human resources reform in the Organization,
Having considered the report of the Secretary-General on the administration of
justice in the Secretariat,1
Having also considered the report of the Joint Inspection Unit entitled “Reform of
the administration of justice in the United Nations system: options for higher recourse
instances”2 and the comments of the Secretary-General and those of the United Nations
System Chief Executives Board for Coordination thereon,3
Having further considered the report of the Advisory Committee on Administrative
and Budgetary Questions4 and the letter from the President of the United Nations
Administrative Tribunal to the Chairman of the Fifth Committee,5
Affirming the importance of continuing efforts to ensure that the administration of
justice within the United Nations is of the highest standard,
Also affirming the importance of the United Nations as an exemplary employer,
1.
Stresses the urgent need to ensure effective and expeditious administration of
justice in the Organization, and requests the Secretary-General to ensure that the highest
standards of efficiency, competence and integrity, as well as the principles of fairness and
due process, serve as the paramount considerations in the system of administration of
justice within the United Nations;

_______________
1

A/56/800.
See A/57/441.
3
See A/57/441/Add.1.
4
A/57/736.
5
A/C.5/57/25.
2

02 56179

A/RES/57/307

2.
Notes with concern that the related reports were not introduced at its fifty-sixth
session, as requested in its resolution 55/258, in addition to being issued late for
consideration at its current session;
3.
Regrets that the present system of administration of justice in the Secretariat
continues to be slow, cumbersome and costly;
4.
Also regrets the serious delays in the appeals process, and requests the
Secretary-General to ensure full cooperation and accountability in the internal system of
justice of the department or programme manager whose decision has been challenged by
the appellant, at all stages of the process;
5.
Requests the Secretary-General to take steps to ensure the independence of the
United Nations Administrative Tribunal and the separation of its secretariat from the Office
of Legal Affairs, to study the possibility of its financial independence and to report thereon
to the General Assembly at its fifty-eighth session;
6.
Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General on the administration of
justice in the Secretariat,1 the report of the Joint Inspection Unit entitled “Reform of the
administration of justice in the United Nations system: options for higher recourse
instances”2 and the comments of the Secretary-General and those of the United Nations
System Chief Executives Board for Coordination thereon3 and the report of the Advisory
Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions;4
7.
Endorses the recommendation of the Advisory Committee contained in
paragraph 8 of its report;
8.
Welcomes the initiative taken by the Secretary-General in requesting the Office
of Internal Oversight Services to conduct a management review of the appeals process, and
in this regard concurs with the observations and recommendations contained in
paragraphs 6 and 7 of the report of the Advisory Committee;
9.
Requests the Secretary-General, taking due account also of the findings of the
Office of Internal Oversight Services, to submit a report containing alternatives on
strengthening the administration of justice by means of ensuring transparency and fairness
in the provision of justice to staff of the Organization, for consideration by the General
Assembly at its fifty-eighth session;
10. Also requests the Secretary-General to entrust the Office of Internal Oversight
Services with the inclusion in its report of measures to shorten the period required for the
disposal of cases, including imposing deadlines at all stages of the process;
11. Further requests the Secretary-General to ensure that the Office of Internal
Oversight Services includes in its report not only the procedures and functions related to
the Joint Appeals Board but also those related to the Panel of Counsel, the Administrative
Law Unit and the secretariats of the Joint Appeals Board and the Joint Disciplinary
Committee, as well as their impact on and contribution to the administration of justice;
12. Welcomes the establishment of the post of Ombudsman to strengthen informal
mechanisms for conflict resolution;
13. Also welcomes the organization of basic legal training courses for new
members of the Joint Appeals Board and the Joint Disciplinary Committee, and encourages
the Secretary-General to continue his efforts in this regard without additional budgetary
implications;
14. Agrees that the United Nations Administrative Tribunal should be strengthened
through an amendment to its statute requiring that the candidates for the Tribunal possess
judicial experience in the field of administrative law or its equivalent within the
2

A/RES/57/307

candidate’s national jurisdiction, as recommended in paragraph 13 of the report of the
Advisory Committee, and decides to take a decision on this matter at its fifty-eighth
session;
15. Notes that the staff of the United Nations Secretariat and the specialized
agencies are subject to two different systems of administration of justice, and in this regard
requests the Joint Inspection Unit to continue to study the possibility of harmonizing the
statutes of the United Nations Administrative Tribunal and the International Labour
Organization Administrative Tribunal, bearing in mind the information contained in
paragraphs 39 to 42 of the report of the Secretary-General,1 for consideration by the
General Assembly at its fifty-ninth session;
16. Requests the Secretary-General to undertake a more in-depth analysis of the
implications of ensuring that the executive heads of organizations collaborate with the staff
associations in the development of comprehensive legal insurance schemes to cover legal
advice and representation for staff, with a view to ensuring equality of all staff in adversary
procedures and the widest possible access of staff to the administration of justice;
17. Also requests the Secretary-General to strengthen the Panel of Counsel, as
appropriate, taking into account the management review report to be submitted by the
Office of Internal Oversight Services;
18. Affirms that the functions of staff members appointed to serve on joint bodies
in the administration of justice are official in nature and are valuable to the Organization;
19. Encourages the Secretary-General to ensure that staff members appointed to
serve on joint bodies of the internal justice system are given sufficient time off from their
substantive responsibilities to discharge their responsibilities, including adjustment of
work in their substantive offices;
20. Requests the Secretary-General, in consultation with the Ombudsman and staff
representatives, to submit detailed proposals on the role and work of the Panel on
Discrimination and Other Grievances for consideration by the General Assembly at its
fifty-eighth session;
21. Also requests the Secretary-General to include statistics on the disposition of
cases and information on the work of the Panel of Counsel in his annual report on the
administration of justice in the Secretariat;
22. Further requests the Secretary-General to distribute a hard copy of the annual
report of the Panel of Counsel to Member States, upon request;
23. Requests the United Nations Administrative Tribunal to
comprehensive report on its activities to the General Assembly;

submit a

24. Reiterates its request to the Secretary-General to establish a clear linkage
between the administration of justice and responsibility and accountability in the United
Nations Secretariat when decisions of the Administrative Tribunal result in losses to the
Organization due to management irregularities;
25. Also reiterates its request to the Secretary-General to develop, as a matter of
priority, an effective system of personal responsibility and accountability to recover
financial losses to the Organization caused by management irregularities, wrongful actions
or gross negligence of officials of the United Nations Secretariat that result in judgements
of the Administrative Tribunal, and to report thereon to the General Assembly at its fiftyeighth session;

3

A/RES/57/307

26. Requests the Secretary-General to expeditiously finalize and issue an
administrative instruction on the implementation of section XI, paragraph 9, of General
Assembly resolution 55/258;
27. Also requests the Secretary-General to continue to ensure that all decisions
affecting the status of the staff should be communicated to the staff members concerned;
28. Decides to amend staff rule 110.4 (a) to read: “No disciplinary proceedings
may be instituted against a staff member unless he or she has been notified, in writing, of
the allegations against him or her and of the right to seek the assistance of counsel in his or
her defence at his or her own expense, and has been given a reasonable opportunity to
respond to those allegations”, and to make similar amendments to staff rules 210.1 (b) and
310.1 (d);
29. Also decides to amend staff rule 111.2 (i) to read: “A staff member may arrange
to have his or her appeal presented to the panel on his or her behalf by counsel, at his or
her own expense”;
30. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its fifty-eighth session the item
entitled “Administration of justice at the United Nations”.
83rd plenary meeting
15 April 2003

4
