A /73/PV.51

United Nations

General Assembly

Official Records

Seventy-third session

51

st plenary meeting
Wednesday, 12 December 2018, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Ms. Espinosa Garcés . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (Ecuador)

In the absence of the President, Mr. Ten-Pow
(Guyana), Vice-President, took the Chair.
The meeting was called to order at 10 a.m.
Agenda item 15
Culture of peace
Report of the Secretary-General (A/73/391)
Draft resolutions (A/73/L.43, A/73/L.48,
A/73/L.52 and A/73/L.55)
The Acting President: I give the floor to the
representative of Bangladesh to introduce draft
resolution A/73/L.43.

our national context to promoting a culture of peace.
Beginning in 1999, Bangladesh has facilitated this
seminal resolution for 19 years in a row. Once again,
we thank delegations for their active participation in the
informal consultations on the draft resolution this year.
We take note of the growing interest in addressing
a range of pertinent issues through resolutions under
this agenda item. The recurrent reference to the
original resolution in the subsequent resolutions further
consolidates the commitment of Member States to the
Declaration and Programme of Action on a Culture of
Peace. This year, the draft resolution has the following
salient additions.

A culture of peace is an aspiration of all humankind.
Promoting and inculcating a mindset of a culture
of peace is at the core of the creative management
of differences and divisions. A culture of peace can
become a credible pathway to sustaining peace.

First, the draft resolution acknowledges the highlevel event of the President of the General Assembly
held on 5 September on the theme “The culture of
peace: a credible pathway to sustaining peace”. The
event provided an opportunity for Member States
to deliberate on the interplay and complementarity
between those two seminal notions at the United
Nations. The President’s summary of the event has been
duly noted, and we believe it can be useful reference
material for our collective work towards a surge in
peace diplomacy.

Over the years, Bangladesh has remained
committed to the values and principles enshrined in
the Charter of the United Nations and worked alongside
the international community to promote and protect
peace. The Government of Prime Minister Sheikh
Hasina remains committed to the issue and underscores
the importance of a whole-of-society approach in

Secondly, in the spirit of the President’s highlevel event, the draft resolution recognizes that efforts
towards peacebuilding and sustaining peace should
take into account the promotion of a culture of peace,
and vice versa. It further acknowledges the potential
contribution of the United Nations peacebuilding
architecture to promoting a culture of peace, pursuant

Mr. Islam (Bangladesh): I have the honour to
introduce draft resolution A/73/L.43, entitled “Followup to the Declaration and Programme of Action on a
Culture of Peace”.

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of speeches
delivered in other languages. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only.
They should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

18-43387 (E)

*1843387*

A/73/PV.51

to resolution 72/276, entitled “Follow-up to the report
of the Secretary-General on peacebuilding and
sustaining peace”. We believe there is scope for further
exploring and streamlining that issue through informed
consultations in all relevant forums.
Thirdly, in further recognition of the contribution
of a culture of peace towards a comprehensive and
balanced approach to combating terrorism, the draft
resolution contains a reference to resolution 70/254
of 12 February 2016, on the Secretary-General’s Plan
of Action to Prevent Violent Extremism. It is worth
recalling that resolution 72/284 on the United Nations
Global Counter-Terrorism Review reaffirms the
enduring relevance of the Declaration and Programme
of Action on a Culture of Peace.
Fourthly, the draft resolution encourages Member
States, United Nations entities, regional and subregional
organizations and relevant actors to consider instituting
mechanisms to involve young people in the promotion
of a culture of peace, tolerance and intercultural
and interreligious dialogue, among other issues.
That provides an opportunity to further explore the
promotion of a culture of peace in the context of the
ongoing discussion on youth, peace and security
pursuant to Security Council resolution 2250 (2015).
Fifthly, while recognizing the important
contribution of the relevant United Nations entities in
promoting a culture of peace, the draft resolution makes
particular reference to the recent work of the United
Nations Alliance of Civilizations and its Group of
Friends. This reflects the continued support of Member
States for the Alliance’s contribution to promoting
a culture of peace through the entire spectrum of
its activities.
On 13 September 2019, we will celebrate the
twentieth anniversary of the adoption of the Declaration
and Programme of Action on a Culture of Peace. To
that end, the draft resolution requests the President of
the General Assembly at its seventy-third session to
give special attention to its appropriate and befitting
observance by holding the High-level Forum on that
date next year, which will be an opportunity to renew
our shared commitment to further strengthening the
global movement for the culture of peace. We look
forward to working with the Office of the President of
the General Assembly to make the event a success.
We sincerely thank those delegations that have
already sponsored the draft resolution and encourage
2/24

12/12/2018

others to follow suit prior to its upcoming adoption
by consensus.
The Acting President: I now give the floor to the
representative of the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela
to introduce draft resolution A/73/L.48.
Mr. Moncada (Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela)
(spoke in Spanish): On behalf of the 120 Member States
that make up the Movement of Non-Aligned Countries
(NAM), the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela has the
honour to introduce draft resolution A/73/L.48, entitled
“International Day of Multilateralism and Diplomacy
for Peace”.
Many delegations have brought up the need to
defend multilateralism at this session of the General
Assembly — during the general debate, in the various
committees, at the high-level dialogue in October on the
theme of “Renewing commitment to multilateralism:
high-level dialogue between the Presidents of the
General Assembly, the Economic and Social Council
and the Security Council”, and in the November Security
Council debate on strengthening multilateralism and
the role of the United Nations (see S/PV.8395).
For its part, NAM has always insisted on the need
to promote, defend and strengthen multilateralism,
especially given the current international situation.
We also heed the Secretary-General’s calls to make the
United Nations an instrument for increased diplomacy
for peace, which would help our efforts to make our
Organization relevant to all. That is why in September
ministers discussed the need to defend the Charter of
the United Nations and the purposes and principles of
NAM, and unanimously adopted a political declaration
to initiate consultations with a view to establishing this
important international day.
The Movement thanks all delegations that have
constructively and actively participated in the process
of negotiating the draft resolution that is before the
Assembly today. The consensus text is the result of
inclusive and transparent informal consultations among
the States Members of the United Nations, following a
process of mutual engagement that took into account the
positions, concerns and aspirations of all delegations.
We thank all Member States that have decided to
sponsor this important and timely draft resolution.
We also recognize the Group of African States, the
Group of Arab States, the Group of Asian and Pacific
States, the Association of Southeast Asian Nations,
18-43387

12/12/2018

A/73/PV.51

the Caribbean Community, the Group of Latin
American and Caribbean States, the Organization of
Islamic Cooperation and other friendly delegations
that expressed their support for this initiative from
its inception.

At the outset, I would like to thank all States
Members of the United Nations for their active and
constructive engagement, and for their valuable
input during the informal consultations on this
draft resolution.

As a reaffirmation of its principles and commitment
to strengthening its role as an anti-war and peace-loving
entity, the Movement has decided to submit this draft
resolution under agenda item 15, “Culture of peace”, in
the belief that it will contribute to our joint efforts for
peace, security, stability, sustainable development and
the promotion of human rights.

Last year, during the general debate of the
Assembly’s seventy-second session, the President
of Uzbekistan, Shavkat Mirziyoyev, proposed the
adoption of a draft resolution on education and religious
tolerance (see A/72/PV.5), given the current challenges
in ensuring tolerance among followers of different
faiths in various parts of the globe.

We, the States members of NAM, are also
convinced that an approach based on multilateralism
and diplomacy reinforces the three pillars of the
United Nations and that the proposed international
day constitutes a means to promote the values of our
Organization, to strengthen the faith of our peoples
in the principles of our founding Charter, to reaffirm
the validity of international law and to advance our
common goal of achieving lasting peace.

His initiative was based on our country’s centuriesold tradition and positive experience of ensuring the
peaceful coexistence of representatives of various
religions. In proposing that draft resolution, Uzbekistan
sought to do its part for advancing interconfessional
tolerance and harmony. The draft resolution is fully
in line with the Charter of the United Nations, the
Universal Declaration of Human Rights, the Declaration
on the Elimination of All Forms of Intolerance and of
Discrimination Based on Religion or Belief and the
relevant provisions of Assembly resolutions, including
the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development. As
President Mirziyoyev has outlined, the main goal of the
draft resolution is

We affirm our commitment, once the draft
resolution is adopted, to promoting every 24 April — a
historic day for our Movement — as the International
Day of Multilateralism and Diplomacy for Peace through
educational activities and raising public awareness.
We support the Office of the President of the General
Assembly in its preparations for the high-level meeting
to be held on 24 April 2019, with the participation of
the Secretary-General, to inaugurate the proposed
international day. We also take this opportunity to
respectfully urge all Member States to participate in
this event at the highest possible level.
In conclusion, I would like to convey the wish of
the 120 member States of the Non-Aligned Movement
and all the sponsors of draft resolution A/73/L.48 that
it be adopted by consensus, taking into account the
importance that the States Members of the United
Nations attach to multilateralism and diplomacy for
peace. In that way we can share our message of unity
and cohesion with the world.
The Acting President: I now give the floor to
the representative of Uzbekistan to introduce draft
resolution A/73/L.52.
Mr. Ibragimov (Uzbekistan): Today I have the
honour to present draft resolution A/73/L.52, entitled
“Enlightenment and religious tolerance.”

“to promote universal access to education and
eradicate illiteracy and ignorance. It would be
designed to promote tolerance and mutual respect,
ensure religious freedom, protect the rights of
believers and prevent discrimination against them”
(A/72/PV.5, p. 16).
From Uzbekistan’s perspective, the draft resolution
is conducive to encouraging States Members of the
United Nations and its relevant agencies to continue
expanding activities in the field of public education,
making efforts to improve curricula and focusing on
promoting religious tolerance. The importance of
adopting the draft resolution is also underpinned by
the need to promote friendly relations and cooperation
among States and to confront radicalism and extremism,
issues of special relevance in today’s world. In
particular, the dynamic processes of globalization and
the current profound transformation of the system of
international relations challenge the global community
in new ways.
Given that complex situation, strengthening
mutual respect for cultural diversity and advancing

18-433873/24

A/73/PV.51

tolerance among people and representatives of different
confessions are of vital importance and have an enormous
effect on Member States. The draft resolution therefore
seeks to protect freedom of thought, conscience and
religion by teaching mutual understanding, tolerance,
non-discrimination and respect in all matters relating
to freedom of religion by promoting, in society at large,
a broader understanding of the diversity of religions
and beliefs and of the history, traditions, languages and
cultures of the various religious groups.
It should be noted that the draft resolution
specifically calls for promoting education while taking
into account two important circumstances. First, the
lack of access to quality education in today’s world
often leads to the radicalization of certain segments
of society, especially among young people. Only by
fostering education and encouraging the desire for
knowledge and self-improvement among young people
can we ensure prosperity and tolerance in our society.
In that regard, the draft resolution underlines the
key role of UNESCO in contributing to world peace
by promoting collaboration among nations through
education, science and culture.
Secondly, in the contemporary world, a
large-scale public awareness campaign for rejecting all
manifestations of religious extremism acquires special
significance. The draft resolution therefore highlights
the valuable role of the United Nations Alliance of
Civilizations in contributing to a more peaceful, socially
inclusive world by promoting greater understanding
and respect among civilizations, cultures, religions
and beliefs.
In conclusion, given the importance of ensuring
interreligious tolerance and education for all, it is my
country’s sincere hope that the draft resolution will
enjoy the unanimous support of all States Members of
the United Nations, which I also encourage to become
its sponsors. Uzbekistan, for its part, stands ready
to cooperate closely with all Member States in the
practical implementation of the draft resolution, which
will contribute to ensuring interreligious harmony and
advancing education, as well as reaching the targets of
the 2030 Agenda and its Sustainable Development Goals.
The Acting President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Pakistan to introduce draft resolution
A/73/L.55.
Mr. Munir (Pakistan): I have the honour to present
draft resolution A/73/L.55, entitled “Promotion of
4/24

12/12/2018

interreligious and intercultural dialogue, understanding
and cooperation for peace”.
Since 2004, Pakistan, together with the Philippines,
has been a proud facilitator of this annual resolution.
Adopted by consensus by the General Assembly, it
has evolved over the years into a significant document
for promoting genuine and constructive dialogue
across the cultural and religious divide. Introduced
under the item “Culture of peace”, in many ways it
symbolizes the timeless aspirations behind the creation
of the United Nations itself. While all of us, through
our interactions and exchanges in the Organization,
work as ambassadors of cross-cultural and religious
dialogue, such resolutions are crucial reminders of the
significance of endeavours that bring the peoples of the
world together.
The world is at a crossroads. Questions that
were considered settled decades ago have started
resurfacing. The very need for collaborating and
cooperating with one another as equal partners in
this interconnected and interdependent world is being
challenged. Multilateralism is facing an unprecedented
assault from a new kind of populist nationalism based
on a myopic world view. Xenophobia and Islamophobia
are on the rise and diversity is increasingly considered
a threat. Fear is being deployed openly as a tactic to
sway public opinion. Suspicion and ignorance among
various civilizations and religions are being exploited
by demagogues, extremists and terrorists to further
their interests and fuel discord and hatred.
It is therefore all the more important to reinforce
our collective commitment to the ideals of peaceful
coexistence and to strengthen it by encouraging
peacemakers and bridge-builders in their work. We
must also support efforts that promote healthy and
productive dialogue and understanding among all
religions and civilizations with a view to finding
common ground and convergence of opinion. As they
are based on eternal values that benefit humankind,
religions and cultures have more in common than what
divides them. We must build on those shared values.
Our diversity remains our biggest asset. It enables us to
appreciate that there is an intrinsic value and advantage
in interacting with those who appear different or follow
other religions or cultural traditions. But for that to
happen, we all have to come together and join hands to
eliminate prejudices, stereotypes and biases and engage
in constructive dialogue. We also have to rethink our
18-43387

12/12/2018

perspectives in order to pursue our goals in a structured
and all-inclusive manner.
This draft resolution does exactly that. It promotes
interreligious and intercultural dialogue and encourages
those working for peace, harmony, moderation, better
understanding among people and a global cultural for
peace. In that context, we also recognize the important
work of UNESCO and the invaluable contribution of
the United Nations Alliance for Civilization — they
both do a remarkable job in promoting interreligious
and intercultural dialogue at the national, regional and
international levels.
On behalf of the delegations of Pakistan and the
Philippines, I would like to thank all Member States for
taking an active part in the negotiations this year and
enriching the text further with their invaluable input.
We also appreciate those who have been able to join
us as sponsors and hope that more will be able to do so
now. By adopting this draft resolution, we hope that the
General Assembly will send a strong message to those
who attempt to take advantage of our differences.
Ms. Md Jaini (Brunei Darussalam): I have the
honour to deliver this statement on behalf of the 10
States members of the Association of Southeast Asian
Nations (ASEAN).
At the outset, we would like to thank the SecretaryGeneral for his insightful report (A/73/391) and for
UNESCO’s valuable input. As the report aptly captures,
we have a pressing need not only for peace but also for
the collective commitment and action required to meet
our shared global responsibility, particularly against
the current global backdrop.
We also take this opportunity to thank Bangladesh,
Pakistan and the Philippines for their efforts in
facilitating the draft resolutions proposed under this
item. In addition, we congratulate the representatives
of Venezuela, who spoke on behalf of the Movement of
Non-Aligned Countries, and Uzbekistan on presenting
their respective initiatives. ASEAN is pleased to
participate once again in this year’s debate and share
with the international community what it is doing to
advance this noble endeavour.
Home to more than 600 million people, South-East
Asia is blessed with a multitude of ethnicities, religions,
languages and cultures. Indeed, promoting a culture of
peace has been an intrinsic value of our Association
since its establishment more than 50 years ago. ASEAN

A/73/PV.51

continues to strongly uphold that notion through the
implementation of the its Community Vision 2025,
which encompasses our shared aspiration for a rulesbased, inclusive, people-oriented, people-centred and
resilient ASEAN community.
ASEAN is also committed to maintaining and
promoting enduring peace, security and stability in
the region, as well as to the peaceful resolution of
disputes without resorting to the threat or use of force,
in accordance with the purposes and principles of the
Charter of the United Nations, the ASEAN Charter, the
Treaty of Amity and Cooperation in Southeast Asia and
universally recognized principles of international law.
In line with the shifting global focus on prevention,
in 2017 ASEAN adopted the Declaration on a Culture of
Prevention for a Peaceful, Inclusive, Resilient, Healthy
and Harmonious Society. The Declaration represents a
paradigm shift in our mindset that will better enable
us to comprehensively respond to challenges that
hamper sustainable human and social development
in the region. Among other things, it recognizes the
need to support a culture of prevention across the
three pillars of ASEAN and encapsulates six driving
principles — first, promoting a culture of peace and
intercultural understanding; secondly, promoting a
culture of respect for all; thirdly, promoting a culture
of good governance at all levels; fourthly, promoting
a culture of resilience and care for the environment;
fifthly, promoting a culture of leading a healthy
lifestyle; and sixthly, promoting a culture of supporting
the values of moderation.
We believe that ASEAN’s initiative to promote
a culture of prevention complements the culture
of sustainable peace and the prevention agenda at
the United Nations, and we look forward to closer
cooperation with the Organization in jointly developing
project initiatives to promote a culture of prevention.
ASEAN also places great emphasis on quality
education and inculcating the values of togetherness,
harmony and tolerance from a very young age. We
have several initiatives in that regard, such as the
ASEAN Youth Volunteer Programme, a dedicated
volunteer platform for young people that supports the
exchange of learning experiences, seeks to develop
capacities and enhance cross-cultural understanding
and good neighbourliness and fosters a sense of
shared responsibility.

18-433875/24

A/73/PV.51

Furthermore, we were happy to participate in the
convening of the second ASEAN Youth Interfaith
Camp in Indonesia last month, which brought together
a religiously and culturally diverse group of young
people from the region to participate in dialogue,
discussions and seminars. There is certainly much
interest in making that a recurring project, and we
encourage the international community, in particular
our dialogue partners, to collaborate with ASEAN in
supporting that initiative.
ASEAN commends the work of various regional
and international organizations, notably the United
Nations, for promoting a culture of peace and stressing
the importance of intercultural and interreligious
dialogue. Given that next year marks the twentieth
anniversary of the adoption of the Declaration and
Programme of Action on a Culture of Peace, the
convening in September of the High-level Forum on the
Culture of Peace was timely and afforded participants
the opportunity to exchange views on ways to further
promote a culture of peace.
We welcome the invaluable role of the United Nations
Alliance of Civilizations in promoting intercultural
dialogue, greater understanding and respect among
civilizations, cultures, religions and beliefs. ASEAN
appreciates the role played by Turkey and Spain, as the
sponsors of the Alliance, at its eighth Global Forum,
held recently in New York. The Secretary-General’s
strong support of that initiative is also much appreciated.
Finally, we want to acknowledge the dedicated service
and outstanding contribution made to the Alliance by
the outgoing High Representative.
ASEAN continues to support efforts by UNESCO,
including through its action plan for the International
Decade for the Rapprochement of Cultures (2013-2022).
We are pleased to note the emphasis on harnessing the
potential of the media to foster mutual understanding
and respect, tolerance and cooperation, as well as
the involvement of youth and women in cultivating a
culture of peace.
In conclusion, ASEAN remains steadfast in
its commitment to upholding a culture of peace, as
enshrined in our founding principles and Charter, and
will continue to play an active role in that endeavour.
We stand ready to work alongside all regional and
international partners and complement the work of the
United Nations to that end.
6/24

12/12/2018

Mr. Elmajerbi (Libya) (spoke in Arabic): My
delegation has taken note of the report of the SecretaryGeneral (A/73/391) on the promotion of a culture of
peace and interreligious and intercultural dialogue,
understanding and cooperation for peace, which
reviews progress in the reporting period on preventing
conflict and maintaining peace, as well as the measures
taken at the level of the United Nations system.
The concept of a culture of peace has been closely
linked to the United Nations Organization since its
inception in 1945. The Preamble to the Charter of the
United Nations states:
“We the peoples of the United Nations
determined to save succeeding generations from
the scourge of war… and to reaffirm faith in
fundamental human rights”.
UNESCO has also played a crucial role in the
inclusion of issues related to peace and a culture of
peace in all its programmes and regular activities, in
line with its Constitution, which states that “since wars
begin in the minds of men, it is in the minds of men that
the defences of peace must be constructed”. In addition,
in its resolution 53/243 of 6 October 1999, on a culture
of peace, the General Assembly provided guidelines
for Governments, international organizations and
civil society that can be used to support and foster a
culture of peace. The link between culture and peace
has therefore become established as a new concept
in peacebuilding.
We all know that peace involves reconciliation
between two parties in the presence of harmony
and the absence of hatred. In that regard, peace is a
state of harmony, security and stability in the family,
society and the whole world, since it contributes to
prosperity for all. We must work to realize the three
concepts of peace: peacemaking — helping the
parties to a conflict to reach a negotiated agreement;
peacekeeping — preventing parties from relapsing into
conflict; and peacebuilding — creating the necessary
conditions for societies to live in peace. That involves
work on many levels, such as educating people about
human rights, achieving economic development,
increasing aid and realizing social solidarity.
Fostering a culture of peace requires that we work
together, shoulder to shoulder, to combat intellectual
extremism in all of its forms and manifestations, such
as the exclusion of others and incitement to violence.
It requires educating our young people and nurturing
18-43387

12/12/2018

our educational institutions. The role of the media and
modern technical means must also be revitalized.
The concept of peace does not mean merely putting
an end to war. As I have said before, it is an ongoing
process that must be based on a set of values and
principles for the creation of a culture of peace that
brings stability to human societies and constitutes a
source of power and prosperity.
We all know that the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development is a commitment to strengthening
peaceful and inclusive societies. It stresses that
sustainable development cannot be achieved without
peace and security, which is why we must work together
to achieve Sustainable Development Goal 16 and
ensure that inclusive and participatory decisions are
made at all levels with a view to achieving sustainable
development. We emphasize that Governments, the
international community and local communities should
work together to implement lasting solutions to end
violence, achieve justice and guarantee the participation
of all.
The promotion of a culture of peace and
interreligious and intercultural dialogue, understanding
and cooperation for peace does not mean fusing
religions and faiths or even cultures. Rather, a culture
of peace is the sphere within which people’s religions
and cultures coexist. The aim of dialogue among
civilizations is to study and address the root causes
of their differences and to humbly learn the ethics of
tolerating those differences.
Advancing a culture of peace is a process that
requires belief and freedom of thought and expression,
as well as the eradication of poverty and unemployment
and fostering public awareness about the peacemaking
process. It is impossible to instil a culture of peace and
non-violence in people who are deprived of their most
basic right to a decent life. My country calls from this
rostrum for the Assembly to respect and apply such
rights in order to create a better world that will include
all of us, a world that enjoys friendliness, tolerance
and peace.
In conclusion, I thank all Member States that
submitted draft resolutions calling for the promotion of
a culture of peace and interreligious and intercultural
dialogue, understanding and cooperation for peace,
which will foster the principles of tolerance and respect
for cultural diversity as a means to prevent the outbreak
of conflicts.

A/73/PV.51

Mr. Mohammad (Kuwait) (spoke in Arabic):
At the outset, my delegation would like to thank the
Secretary-General for his report (A/73/391), which
contains information on topics and actions undertaken
by key United Nations entities in order to promote a
culture of peace and interreligious and intercultural
dialogue, understanding and cooperation for peace. My
country also commends all the efforts, good offices
and pivotal role of UNESCO in strengthening and
consolidating a culture of peace, culminating in the
implementation of the Declaration and Programme of
Action on a Culture of Peace and the Action Plan for
the International Decade for the Rapprochement of
Cultures (2013-2022).
More than ever before, the world today is facing
increasingly complex threats and challenges at all
levels — State, societal and even individual — including
challenges and threats that undermine and threaten
the spread of a culture of peace. Regrettably, disputes
and conflicts are sometimes fuelled by intolerance,
extremism, violence and religious and ethnic tensions,
owing to, among other things, the rejection of others,
intolerance, exclusion and a lack of awareness of
the need to coexist. Some have been using violent
extremism as a means of expression. Such acts prompt
us to make concerted efforts at the local, regional and
international levels to achieve the goal to which we
all aspire, namely, to transform the culture of hatred,
intolerance and war into one of dialogue, coexistence
and peace. In that context, Sustainable Development
Goal 16 represents a compass and a road map for all
countries and societies to achieve that goal, which calls
for establishing inclusive and peaceful societies for all.
As peace and development are interrelated, promoting
a culture of peace and dialogue among societies and
religions is crucial to achieving the Sustainable
Development Goals.
The report of the Secretary-General highlights
important tools and means for contributing to the
achievement of peace, such as preventive diplomacy,
conflict prevention, mediation and dialogue. In that
regard, we call on Member States and international
and regional organizations to redouble their efforts
to operationalize such preventive tools and measures,
which aim to prevent conflicts by tackling them as
soon as they emerge and determining their root causes.
Preventive diplomacy, mediation and the resolution of
conflicts by peaceful means are fundamental pillars of
Kuwaiti foreign policy. Applying those tools has been

18-433877/24

A/73/PV.51

a priority for the State of Kuwait during its current
membership on the Security Council.
A culture of peace is deeply entrenched in my
country. One of the articles of the Kuwaiti Constitution
explicitly states that peace is the goal of the State. In
the State of Kuwait, we have fostered freedom and
a culture of tolerance and coexistence as a means of
developing our society. The Constitution of the State
of Kuwait enshrines those values and concepts in its
articles, which set forth the rights and duties of every
citizen, irrespective of their ethnicity, origin, language
or religion. The Constitution also stresses that justice,
freedom and equality are the pillars of our society and
that cooperation and compassion forge a strong bond
among citizens.
The State of Kuwait is ranked highest among
Middle East and North African countries on the 2018
Global Peace Index, reflecting my country’s faith in a
culture of peace, which was deeply rooted in Kuwaiti
society even before the emergence of our modern State.
That culture includes tolerance, the acceptance of others
and dialogue among different cultures and religions.
Our history shows many examples of rapprochement
with and openness towards different peoples and
civilizations. In our modern era, those values have
been translated into our Constitution, which guarantees
the right to freedom of speech, freedom of belief and
freedom of practicing religious rituals, in complete
liberty and safety.
The State of Kuwait is considered an amalgam of
different peoples, embracing people of many different
nationalities, religions and cultures who enjoy security,
stability, mutual respect and a dignified life.
In conclusion, my country’s delegation stresses
the importance of intensifying our efforts to promote
a culture of peace, reinvigorate the dialogue among
civilizations, disseminate the values of moderation,
tolerance and mutual respect and renounce extremism,
hatred and violence in all its forms and manifestations.
That is a responsibility that must be shouldered by all
Member States and that requires us to work together
through our multilateral system.
Ms. Al Daah (United Arab Emirates) (spoke in
Arabic): A culture of peace is not a new concept for
us. Our shared values call for tolerance, respect and
appreciation for individuals, irrespective of their
ethnicity, religion, culture or ideology. That is a
fundamental principle of the Muslim, Christian and
8/24

12/12/2018

Jewish faiths and others. The United Nations is working
to enhance a culture of peace. It represents a forum
in which we celebrate the differences that enrich our
human civilizations and the multiplicity of our cultures.
United Nations principles are based on strengthening
friendly inter-State relations while promoting dialogue
and understanding among peoples and nations in
order to unite international efforts to achieve peace
throughout the world.
Despite the progress that has been made in this
area, the world is now in dire need of intensified
international efforts to disseminate a culture of
peace and dialogue among religions and civilizations,
because we are facing the dangerous threat posed by
extremist and terrorist groups that seek to achieve
their destructive goals through hatred and sectarianism
among individuals. Those groups try to destroy human
and civilized values and cultural heritage in order to
establish a culture based on violence and extremism.
Since its founding, my country has realized that
building strong and coherent societies and stable and
secure States requires strengthening the values of
tolerance, respect and the acceptance of other people.
We recall the late Zayed Bin Sultan Al Nahyan,
leader and founder of the United Arab Emirates,
whose 100th birthday we are celebrating this year,
who fostered human and compassionate values and
whose just principles and wise leadership left a great
legacy for successive Emirati generations, which they
have emulated in our country’s domestic and foreign
relations. There are representatives of more than 200
nationalities living in my country today in peace
and harmony.
Based on that, the United Arab Emirates has
become a centre of tolerance and rapprochement among
religions and global civilizations. We have embraced
mosques, churches and many other houses of worship
so as to enable all to practice their religions. In order
to entrench a culture of tolerance among religions,
my country gave the Sheikh Mohammed Bin Zayed
Mosque in Abu Dhabi the name Mary the Mother of
Jesus Mosque. We held the first World Tolerance
Summit in November, chaired by the State Minister for
Tolerance, which was attended by 1,500 representatives
from Governments, media, cultural and academic
organizations, as well as peace experts and religious
leaders from around the world. I would like to take this
opportunity to announce that Pope Francis, a world
symbol of peace and tolerance, will visit Abu Dhabi in
18-43387

12/12/2018

A/73/PV.51

February to participate in an international interreligious
dialogue entitled “Human brotherhood”.

Minister of the United Arab Emirates, said at the
inauguration of the Louvre Museum in Abu Dhabi:

My country is a sponsor of the draft resolutions
(A/73/L.43, A/73/L.48, A/73/L.52 and A/73/L.55) to be
adopted under today’s agenda item, based on our belief
in their importance in spreading a culture of peace. In
that regard, we would like to recommend taking the
following fundamental steps to promote a culture of
peace, in line with respect for the principles established
by the Charter of the United Nations.

“Welcome to a dome of enlightenment in a region
where people of dark thoughts are attempting to
bring back the eras of backwardness and ignorance”.

First, national, regional and international strategies
must be put in place to promote peace and tolerance
among peoples. We stress that those strategies must
be inclusive, in order to address the root causes of
extremism, while ensuring that every sector of society,
especially minorities, can enjoy protection from
crimes such as those committed against the Yazidi and
Rohingya peoples.
Secondly, specialized agencies must be established
to implement those strategies. For example, my country
hosted the Council of Muslim Sages and the Forum for
Promoting Peace in Muslim Societies in order to engage
religious leaders in promoting a culture of peace. The
Sawab Centre in Abu Dhabi is intended to combat
extremist thought and foster a culture of peace and
tolerance. And the International Institute for Tolerance
supports those values in the Arab world.
Thirdly, relevant legislation must be adopted, such as
the United Arab Emirates law to combat discrimination
and hatred, which criminalizes discrimination against
individuals or groups of people based on religion,
sect, ethnicity, colour or origin, while fighting the
exploitation of religion through takfir.
Lastly, there must be innovative initiatives to
promote a culture of peace and openness among all
generations of young people. In that regard, we should
focus on curriculums and school programmes that
play a crucial role in instilling awareness in future
generations so that they can confront extremism.
My country has initiated the Mohammed Bin Rashid
Tolerance Award with the aim of producing young Arab
leaders in tolerance-related areas to support cultural
and media initiatives designed to entrench tolerance as
a value in the Arab world.
In conclusion, His Highness Sheikh Mohammed
Bin Rashid Al Maktoum, Vice-President and Prime

Mrs. Rodríguez Camejo (Cuba) (spoke in
Spanish): As we approach the twentieth anniversary of
the adoption of resolution 53/243, Cuba reiterates the
validity of the Declaration and Programme of Action
on a Culture of Peace, as well as our commitment to
that agenda and multilateralism. First and foremost, the
international community’s efforts to achieve peace must
focus on full respect for the principles of the sovereignty,
territorial integrity and political independence of States
and non-interference in matters strictly under their
domestic jurisdiction, in accordance with the Charter
of the United Nations and international law. The root
causes of conflicts, including extreme poverty, hunger,
inequality, exclusion and a lack of access to quality
health and education services, must be eliminated
immediately. Understanding, tolerance, solidarity and
respect for the cultures, histories, religions and the
specificities of every nation must be promoted.
Despite the continued international call to achieve
and strengthen a culture of peace, problems hindering
and undermining the real possibilities of achieving such
a noble goal persist. They include the covert promotion
of regime change in developing countries; certain
States’ violation of principles of international law; the
use or threat of use of force, which runs contrary to
the Charter of the United Nations; the development of
new, more lethal and extremely sophisticated weapons,
including the continued existence of large nuclear
arsenals; unilateral coercive measures; and intolerance
and discrimination based on ethnic, religious or racial
grounds. All of that must end. A culture of peace
also requires the unwavering condemnation of all
acts, methods and practices of terrorism, as well as
concrete action to combat that scourge, regardless of
the form it takes and who perpetrates it, including
terrorism perpetrated by States. Nor do manipulative
policies and double standards on issues such as human
rights, aimed at singling out developing countries and
discrediting their legitimate Governments, contribute
to the ideal of a culture of peace. The Proclamation of
Latin America and the Caribbean as a Zone of Peace,
adopted in 2014 in Havana during the second Summit
of Heads of State and Government of the Community
of Latin American and Caribbean States, demonstrated

18-433879/24

A/73/PV.51

our region’s commitment to strengthening peace and
negotiated solutions to conflicts and differences, as
well as representing a contribution to the culture of
peace at the international level. We therefore reaffirm
its full force and effect.
We take this opportunity to express Cuba’s gratitude
and support for the draft resolutions (A/73/L.43,
A/73/L.48, A/73/L.52 and A/73/L.55) presented under
this agenda item. They are all very relevant. We
note in particular draft resolution A/73/L.48, on an
international day of multilateralism and diplomacy for
peace, introduced by the representative of Venezuela
on behalf of the Movement of Non-Aligned Countries.
That initiative demonstrates the firm commitment of the
Movement’s members and observers to fostering peace,
understanding and mutual respect among nations. We
count on everyone’s support for its adoption.
Mr. Mohamed (Maldives): The natural form
of human culture is peace, not war. For every one
of us to live a normal life, we have to communicate
with other human beings with love and compassion.
Governments, individuals, civil-society organizations
and international organizations, including the United
Nations system, can work individually and collectively
to restore that natural human relationship, cultivate the
values of respect, promote mutual understanding and
cherish our shared human identity.
Yet those ideals and the principles that underpin the
Declaration and Programme of Action on a Culture of
Peace, adopted by the General Assembly in 1999, are
under threat. Innocent women and men, girls and boys
are attacked because of their ethnicity or religion. The
Declaration rightly puts enormous faith in the power
of education, propelled by an extraordinary level of
political commitment to overcoming such challenges.
We are quite encouraged to observe, based on the report
of the Secretary-General (A/73/391), the progress that
UNESCO has made, especially in incorporating the 2030
Agenda for Sustainable Development and the targets of
the Sustainable Development Goals in its programme
of work to promote a culture of peace. We encourage
UNESCO to work more closely with Governments and
education providers in various countries to ensure that
the knowledge that is being transferred to students
is founded on the values of inclusivity, tolerance and
respect. It is important to ensure that the creative minds
of children and young people are taught to recognize
and appreciate the mutual dependence whereby we
10/24

12/12/2018

naturally rely on one another rather than the factors that
divide us.
Maldives believes that we must work to overcome the
challenges that countries face in maintaining a continued
focus on the Declaration on a Culture of Peace. Among
the most important relevant challenges, especially for
small island developing States such as Maldives, is
climate-induced threats. Vulnerable populations and
their cultural heritage, which make up a significant
part of the global tapestry of diversity, require security.
The changing climate, which the disasters we have
experienced in recent years have made apparent, puts
the sustainability of a culture of peace at risk.
The media, especially social media, represent an
important platform for disseminating information.
At the same time, we have a collective responsibility
to ensure that advances in technology are used to
increase awareness and educate, not incite hatred and
intolerance. The Maldives condemns all attempts to
promote violent extremism and terrorist activities.
Terrorism is the antithesis of a culture of peace, and
therefore we must take a stand against terrorism in all
its forms and manifestations with full conviction.
The newly elected President of Maldives,
Mr. Ibrahim Mohamed Solih, believes that cultivating
a culture of peace requires a policy shift towards
tolerance, respect, acceptance and unity. That includes
respect for democratic values and principles that can
foster a culture of peace while eliminating all forms
of prejudices, discrimination and marginalization.
At the international level, it involves ending coercive
measures to resolve conflict and overcoming issues
through negotiations and dialogue. My Government
hopes that today’s discussions and the draft resolutions
(A/73/L.43, A/73/L.48, A/73/L.52 and A/73/L.55) that
we are about to adopt will help strengthen our faith and
efforts in promoting the values and principles in the
Declaration on a Culture of Peace so that we can create
a more tolerant global society for a more harmonious
and peaceful world for generations to come.
Mr. Elnour (Sudan) (spoke in Arabic): I would first
like to thank the Secretary-General for his report before
us (A/73/391). I also thank the Permanent Mission of
Bangladesh for facilitating the negotiations on draft
resolution A/73/L.43, to be adopted today.
We also want to express our thanks and
appreciation to UNESCO for its leading role in
consolidating a culture of peace and coordinating
18-43387

12/12/2018

efforts by United Nations agencies, programmes and
all other international partners in this vital domain.
This is an increasingly important area, given the
growing problems of xenophobia, targeting migrants
and refugees, Islamophobia and populist rhetoric in
many parts of the world. If we do not take measures to
address them as soon as possible, they will damage the
future of peace and security throughout the world.
We also want to note the importance of providing
the necessary support to developing countries so that
they can build their national capabilities in areas
directly related to a culture of peace, strengthening
national unity and implementing the eight action
areas of the Declaration and Programme of Action
on a Culture of Peace, with a view to leaving no one
behind in implementing the Sustainable Development
Goals. It is important to note that developing nations
are the countries most affected by armed conflict, and
some face great challenges in managing diversity. It is
therefore important to implement intensive programmes
on a culture of peace, with the aim of strengthening
the values of tolerance, respect for others and peaceful
coexistence as a firm foundation for sustainable peace
in the future. We must also work together in order to
enable those States to benefit from the tremendous
communication and information technology revolution
and the great opportunities for enhancing a culture of
peace and tolerance, as opposed to using such modern
technology to promote xenophobia, reject the other and
advance stereotypes.
The Sudan firmly believes that preventing wars
and silencing guns are a first step necessary to promote
a culture of peace, especially in countries dealing with
internal conflicts. My country has made tireless efforts
to achieve peace and security in neighbouring countries.
Mediation undertaken by the Intergovernmental
Authority on Development and led by my country
culminated on 12 September in the signing of the
Revitalized Peace Agreement on the Resolution of the
Conflict in the Republic of South Sudan. My country
is also making tireless efforts within the framework
of the African Union (AU) to achieve peace and
reconciliation in the Central African Republic. In that
regard, my delegation would like to express its hope for
support from all the relevant parties and the AU. On
29 November, my country hosted a meeting of Foreign
Ministers of Libya’s neighbours to advance the peace
process in that brother country, and that was on top
of efforts that we undertook with Chad, Libya and the

A/73/PV.51

Niger with a view to securing Libya’s southern border.
We hope those efforts will be successful in terms of
achieving peace and stability in our sister State of Libya.
With respect to completing the peace process in
the Sudan, my Government is continuing its tireless
and intensive efforts to resume negotiations with the
armed movements in Darfur, South Kordofan and Blue
Nile states. We hope that African mediation efforts and
those of all our other partners will come to fruition and
help to promote a culture of peace. We are also making
efforts to extend the ceasefire in order to ensure an
environment conducive to holding political negotiations
and facilitating humanitarian work.
In conclusion, my delegation would like to stress
that a culture of peace at the international level can be
established and strengthened only in a world where there
is strict commitment to the principles of international
law and respect for the Charter of the United Nations,
one where conflicts are resolved through peaceful
means and preventive diplomacy, while avoiding double
standards in international politics, respecting human
rights and eschewing political manipulation.
Mr. Al Shuaibi (Oman) (spoke in Arabic): The
report of the Secretary-General (A/73/391) on the
activities of United Nations entities to promote a culture
of peace and interreligious and intercultural dialogue
stresses the importance of preventive diplomacy and
adapting the concepts of peacebuilding and sustaining
peace. The efforts of UNESCO and other organizations
noted in the report faced significant challenges from
issues such increased migration, growing populations
and technological advances, highlighting the fact that
intercultural and interreligious dialogue are more
important than ever.
The Sultanate of Oman has a diverse heritage of
culture and civilization. Historically, the people of Oman
have communicated with peoples all over the world and
have promoted peace through their dealings and ethical
behaviour, especially maritime voyages, which imbued
our people with diverse cultural experiences and
confidence in their values, enabling Oman to establish
strong partnerships with countries around the world.
We have also benefited from our unique geographic
location, which has helped us strengthen our foreign
relations and support regional and international peace.
Based on our firm positions, as established by
Sultan Qaboos Bin Said, the State of Oman has been
able to build the right foundations for tolerance and

18-4338711/24

A/73/PV.51

12/12/2018

coexistence within Omani society, promoting them
through an inclusive development policy in all areas
of society, while consolidating legal, educational and
media values and giving human values sustainability
and depth at the individual and societal levels. Omani
people have therefore been encouraged to be open and
respectful of other peoples while maintaining their
personal Omani culture, of which they are proud.

El Salvador believes that safeguarding and
promoting historical memory and a culture of peace
is a decisive element in building a tolerant society
capable of harmonious coexistence. It also offers a
wide range of possibilities and capacities for promoting
a comprehensive transformation aimed at achieving an
inclusive society, especially where historically excluded
population groups are concerned.

With regard to the concept of intercultural dialogue,
the Sultanate of Oman has adopted several measures
to make its successful experience known abroad. That
includes, for example, a series of exhibitions entitled
“The Message of Islam from Oman”. Many scientific
chairs and fellowships have also been established in
numerous world-renowned universities. There are now
16 Sultan Qaboos Scientific Chairs so far, teaching
about Arab and Islamic cultures and their relationship
to other cultures and religions.

The draft resolution highlights the contribution
of early-childhood development to the development
of more peaceful societies. In that regard, one of my
Government’s objectives is to ensure not only that girls
and boys complete primary and secondary education,
but also that they emerge with relevant and effective
academic results, including an appreciation for
coexistence and a culture of peace.

Regarding other Government actions, the National
Omani Commission for Education, Culture and
Science is launching an international initiative to
foster communication between cultures designed to
enable young people from around the world to meet in
our country and conduct a cultural dialogue aimed at
promoting the concepts of tolerance and acceptance of
others. The Sultanate of Oman also annually invites a
number of students from other countries to teach them
Arabic, part of a policy of introducing young people to
other cultures and languages.
With regard to international relations, our firm
policies are based on the concepts of mutual respect,
good-neighbourliness and the promotion of justice and
international legitimacy and non-interference in the
affairs of other countries so as to foster international
peace and security.
In conclusion, we thank all the countries that have
submitted draft resolutions on a culture of peace, all of
which we emphatically support.
Mr. Escalante Hasbún (El Salvador) (spoke in
Spanish): My delegation welcomes the adoption of
the annual draft resolution contained in document
A/73/L.43, on the follow-up to the Declaration and
Programme of Action on a Culture of Peace, which
highlights the important inclusion of the promotion of
a culture of peace in the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development. As always, we thank the Permanent
Mission of Bangladesh for its efforts to facilitate the
draft resolution.
12/24

Our country highlights the important role played
by women and young people in contributing to
prevention and conflict resolution in peacebuilding, as
evident in our national promotion of Security Council
resolutions 1325 (2000) and 2250 (2015), on the role
of women and youth in peace and security, on which
my country has made progress in establishing national
plans and committees.
We greatly appreciate the call in the draft resolution
that we are about to adopt for ensuring that the United
Nations peacebuilding architecture continues to promote
post-conflict consolidation activities and achieving
sustainable peace. At the national level, El Salvador,
both as a member of the Peacebuilding Commission
and of the General Assembly, actively participated in
this year’s negotiations on the peace and security pillar
reforms proposed by the Secretary-General.
This draft resolution is becoming a frame of
reference for the implementation of actions and
decision-making in countries such as mine that have
moved from conflict towards peace. In El Salvador we
reached a predominantly political peace agreement that
enabled us to end our conflict, but today, 26 years after
that feat, we realize that a political agreement is not
enough, and that a national socioeconomic agreement
that includes all sectors of the population is essential.
My Government recognizes the importance of
building a culture of peace in the process of implementing
the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development and its
17 Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs). With regard
to SDG 16, El Salvador has already joined a global
working alliance through which, between 2015 and
18-43387

12/12/2018

October of this year, we reduced the homicide rate in
our country by 27 per cent. We did that by implementing
policies, plans and institutions for safety and security
and peaceful coexistence among our citizens, while
giving women a leading role, deepening alliances with
non-State actors and increasing statistical capacities.
As part of creating an inclusive and participative
society, we believe it is important to develop and
establish strong institutions aimed at disseminating
and promoting a culture of access to information and
Government accountability. We have established a
secretariat for active transparency in order to promote
initiatives to reduce all forms of corruption and bribery.
We would obviously like to highlight UNESCO’s
work in mobilizing actors and synergies in support of a
culture of peace, and we consider it important to ensure
that all Member States support UNESCO in playing
an active role in implementing a culture of peace and
its linkages with the various targets and Goals of the
2030 Agenda, as well as in the related events taking
place here in New York. In that regard, we also want to
highlight paragraph 16 of draft resolution A/73/L.43,
and to reiterate to the President of the Assembly our
recommendation that we convene a high-level forum
dedicated to the implementation of the Programme of
Action in September 2019, as part of its follow-up and
ties to the sustainable development frameworks in force
since 2015.
Mr. Suan (Myanmar): My delegation thanks
the Secretary-General for his comprehensive report
(A/73/391), and UNESCO for its valuable input.
My delegation aligns itself with the statement made
by the representative of Brunei Darussalam on behalf
of the Association of Southeast Asian Nations.
We would also like to express our appreciation to
all delegations that have taken the initiative to present
draft resolutions under this agenda item.
Building peace and national reconciliation are
the most important tasks that the Government and the
people of Myanmar are undertaking today to ensure the
rule of law, stability, democracy and development in
our country. A series of 21st Century Panglong Peace
Conferences is being held to forge lasting peace. The
Conferences seek to put an end to the armed strife that
has ravaged Myanmar since it became an independent
nation in 1948, and to build a democratic federal union
founded on lasting unity created out of diversity. Our

A/73/PV.51

national experience has taught us that the road to peace
has never been an easy path to tread, but that it is the
only way that will lead to our long-held aspiration of a
peaceful and prosperous nation. We believe in a culture
of dialogue for reconciling differences, building
trust and confidence and pursuing lasting peace and
sustainable development for all.
Myanmar is one of the most ethnically diverse
countries in the world. It is home to 135 officially
recognized ethnic groups, each with its own distinctive
culture and adherence to different faiths. As a
multireligious country, where faithful followers of
all four major religions live in peace and harmony,
freedom of religion and the right to preserve one’s
cultural identity and heritage are guaranteed by the
Constitution. The promotion of interfaith dialogue plays
a vital role in creating a culture of tolerance, mutual
respect and understanding among people from diverse
religions and cultures. We have established interfaith
friendship groups at the national level, with more than
100 subgroups across the country. Interfaith dialogues,
awareness talks and combined prayer services for peace
and national reconciliation have been held all over the
country.
Recently, on 1 November, we held a Religions for
Peace Advisory Forum on National Reconciliation and
Peace in Myanmar at the highest national level in order
to promote peace among religions. At the meeting,
State Counsellor Daw Aung San Suu Kyi highlighted
interfaith dialogue as a vital path to peace, saying
that we must promote interfaith dialogue and that
respect and understanding for religious and cultural
diversity contribute to lasting peace and security. She
went on to emphasize that for interfaith dialogue to
be truly effective, it should not be limited to religious
leaders but should extend to all, so that it results in a
meeting of hearts and minds. She also emphasized the
importance of addressing education, which is essential
in overcoming prejudices, stereotyping, mistrust and
discrimination. Through education we can promote a
culture of peace that ensures mutual respect.
We see today how in many parts of the world
religion is being misused by extremists to justify
violence and acts of terrorism. Intolerance and religious
extremism are extremely damaging to sustaining peace
and harmony in a diverse society. We must address
the root causes of violent extremism. The terrorist
attacks committed by the Arakan Rohingya Salvation
Army, which began in October 2016 and recurred

18-4338713/24

A/73/PV.51

on 25 August 2017 in northern Rakhine state, have
triggered an immense humanitarian problem that has
affected innocent people of all religions. Today peace
and reconciliation are urgently needed in Rakhine
state. In fact, for my Government the rule of law and
development in Rakhine are among its highest priorities
in addressing long-neglected, fundamental issues of
fear, anger, frustration and poverty in the region. We
believe in finding constructive and sustainable ways to
build harmony and trust among all communities and
bring about peace and prosperity for all in Rakhine.
Sustainable peace is not simply the absence of
conflict. The presence of values and beliefs in our
hearts will strengthen peace and reconciliation. In this
increasingly interconnected and interdependent world,
we must all work together in partnership for peace and
development through dialogue on a basis of equality
and mutual respect.
Sustainable peace is essential for sustainable
development. Peace and development are two sides of
the same coin. Only by promoting a culture of peace
will it be possible to create peace and harmony among
diverse communities and societies, thereby creating a
conducive environment and favourable conditions for
sustainable development. I am confident that through
dialogue and by fostering closer cooperation among
different faiths, we will be able to build a global culture
of peace that will ensure that our world is a better place,
with a better future for succeeding generations.
Mr. Musayev (Azerbaijan): The efforts of the
international community to promote a culture of peace
have gained strong impetus from the relevant annual
resolutions of the General Assembly, which have
proclaimed fundamental principles and commitments
and defined a set of actions at the national, regional and
global levels.
Azerbaijan supports draft resolutions A/73/L.43,
A/73/L.48, A/73/L.52 and A/73/L.55, and looks
forward to their adoption by consensus. We thank the
delegations of Bangladesh, the Bolivarian Republic of
Venezuela, Uzbekistan, Pakistan and the Philippines
for their skilful efforts and leadership in facilitating
the negotiations on the draft resolutions and for their
strong commitment to promoting interreligious and
intercultural dialogue.
The 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development
acknowledges the world’s natural and cultural diversity
and recognizes that all cultures and civilizations can
14/24

12/12/2018

contribute to sustainable development and are crucial
to enabling it. The promotion of a culture of peace is
also important in the context of addressing conflicts.
Azerbaijan fully supports the Secretary-General’s
efforts aimed at preventing conflicts, responding early
and effectively to crisis situations, assisting Member
States in their endeavours to sustain peace and build
resilient and prosperous societies and making the
United Nations more coherent, integrated, effective
and efficient.
We note the leading role of UNESCO and the
work of the United Nations Alliance of Civilizations in
promoting intercultural dialogue, and we commend the
cooperation in that area between the United Nations and
regional and other organizations. Azerbaijan considers
the promotion of intercultural and interreligious
dialogue at the national and international levels to be
of major importance. In recent years, my country has
hosted a number of results-oriented international events
and put forward important initiatives to encourage
dialogue and mutual understanding.
Among them is the Baku Process, successfully
implemented under the leadership of Azerbaijan,
which provides a large-scale platform for the exchange
of knowledge on interreligious and intercultural
dialogue. In the Secretary-General’s report on the
topic submitted to the General Assembly at its seventysecond session (A/72/488), he specifically mentioned
the important role of the Baku Process in advocating
for dialogue among cultures. The Process marks its
tenth anniversary this year, with the high-level sixth
Baku International Humanitarian Forum held earlier
this year with the participation of Governments,
international organizations, scholars, young people and
civil society.
An integral part of the Baku Process is the World
Forum on Intercultural Dialogue, organized biennially
by Azerbaijan in cooperation with several international
organizations. We welcome the reference to the
World Forum as a key global platform for promoting
intercultural dialogue made in resolution 72/136,
entitled “Promotion of interreligious and intercultural
dialogue, understanding and cooperation for peace”,
and in draft resolution A/73/L.55, to be adopted today.
In the Secretary-General’s report on the promotion
of a culture of peace and interreligious and intercultural
dialogue, understanding and cooperation for peace
(A/73/391), submitted to the General Assembly at its
18-43387

12/12/2018

seventy-third session, he also noted the contribution
of the Government of Azerbaijan to the development
by UNESCO of its e-platform aimed at serving
as an international hub to facilitate networking
among different stakeholders working in the field of
intercultural dialogue.
Continued support from the United Nations and
the broader international community for successful
initiatives on intercultural dialogue, a culture of peace
and multiculturalism is essential to building peaceful
and inclusive societies, overcoming stereotypes
and misconceptions and implementing development
frameworks and policies. The Republic of Azerbaijan is
keen to continue its efforts towards promoting mutual
understanding, respect for diversity and enhanced
cooperation to that end.
Mr. Arrocha Ruíz (Panama) (spoke in Spanish):
My delegation would like to make a general statement
on agenda item 15, entitled “Culture of peace”, and in
that regard, I want to begin by welcoming the report of
the Secretary-General (A/73/391) entitled “Promotion
of a culture of peace and interreligious and intercultural
dialogue, understanding and cooperation for peace”.
As we continue the International Decade for the
Rapprochement of Cultures (2013-2022), whose efforts
are led by UNESCO, it is worth reflecting on our
current global context. Although the United Nations
has promoted a series of measures aimed at promoting
a culture of peace, the complex reality of conflicts in
various parts of the world that threaten international
peace and security demonstrates the importance of
focusing on adjusting our approach. Consequently,
as we commemorate the twentieth anniversary of the
adoption of the Declaration and Programme of Action
on a Culture of Peace, the international community
must work actively to renew its global commitment
undertaken in 1999, in order to entrench a culture of
sustainable peace built on a set of values, attitudes,
traditions, behaviours and lifestyles based on respect,
non-violence, the promotion of human rights, the
peaceful settlement of conflicts, the protection of the
environment, development, gender equity and freedom
of expression and information, among other things.
As we have noted before, a culture of peace
represents the very essence of our Organization and
cuts across the three pillars that guide the work of the
United Nations — sustainable development, peace
and security and human rights. We therefore agree

A/73/PV.51

that collective efforts for peacebuilding, through a
preventive approach, are fundamental to promoting the
inclusion of all actors in our society and ensuring that
multilateralism attains its full significance.
Today’s threats to peace are not minor. Our
complex global reality is also challenged by climate
change, migration and terrorism, among other issues of
concern to the international community, because they
threaten our peoples’ lives. For that reason, addressing
the causes of conflicts and putting into practice the
principles of non-violence are objectives that have now
become ever more important.
Panama welcomes the draft resolutions (A/73/L.43,
A/73/L.48, A/73/L.52 and A/73/L.55) to be adopted
today in the context of the debate under the item
“Culture of peace”, as they essentially promote
knowledge of, and respect for, cultural diversity in
all its forms — tolerance, solidarity, equality and
non-discrimination. In that regard, and in line with
the Secretary-General’s approach outlined in his
report, my country recognizes the role that women and
young people can play in peace negotiations, conflict
prevention and especially in the consolidation of postconflict processes.
As a multi-ethnic and multicultural country,
Panama has unwavering respect for cultural and
religious diversity, as well as for intercultural and
interreligious dialogue, and it is with that vision that in
January next year we are honoured to be hosting World
Youth Day, to be attended by Pope Francis. Panama will
open its doors to receive young people from all over the
world in the quest to achieve our shared and paramount
objective of a culture of peace, thereby overcoming
religious and cultural barriers.
In conclusion, I want to reiterate Panama’s
commitment to observing human rights, the security
and freedom of the individual, the promotion of conflict
prevention, peace and security and engagement in
dialogue and consensus-building as true catalysts for
the promotion of a culture of tolerance and peace.
Mr. Mamdouhi (Islamic Republic of Iran): I would
first like to commend the President and her predecessors
for effectively pursuing the implementation of
this important mandate, with which she has been
entrusted by General Assembly resolutions, to further
following up on realizing a culture of peace, promoting
multilateralism and contributing to establishing a world
against violence and violent extremism.

18-4338715/24

A/73/PV.51

This kind of meeting undoubtedly provides us
with an unparalleled opportunity to consider urgent
challenges and highlight emerging trends that have an
impact on the realization of a culture of peace, enable
stakeholders to exchange views on how to further
promote and sustain peace through multilateralism and
find further sound and decent solutions to the existing
challenges in that regard.
We align ourselves with the statement delivered
by the representative of Venezuela on behalf of
the Movement of Non-Aligned Countries (NAM),
especially NAM’s proposal to designate an international
day of multilateralism and diplomacy for peace. I
would like to briefly highlight a number of issues of
particular importance.
We are witnessing how the current global scenario
presents great challenges in the areas of peace and
security. Existing, new and emerging threats and
challenges at the international and regional levels
continue to impede efforts by States to promote peace
and security. Undoubtedly, one of those major threats is
a growing resort to unilateralism.
Today, as the Secretary-General has rightly said,
the world order is increasingly chaotic, democratic
principles are under siege, the rule of law is being
undermined and multilateralism is under fire, precisely
when we need it most. In fact, unilaterally imposed
measures, the use or threat of use of force and unilateral
coercive sanctions as a means to achieve national policy
objectives have emerged in the wake of obvious failings
in the multilateral system and equitable world order.
Moreover, the launching of unilateral military
invasions, a willingness to ignore historical facts on the
ground and the rising threats of terrorism and violent
extremism, which are the root causes of every crisis in
the Middle East, are the sum effects of unilateralism. It
cannot be ignored that withdrawing from international
organizations, especially UNESCO and the Human
Rights Council, as well as from international
agreements such as the Paris Climate Change
Agreement and the Iran nuclear deal, are among other
typical instances of a me-first, self-centred policy that
flows from unilateralism.
Threatening States’ sovereignty, independence and
freedom of trade and investment and preventing them
from exercising their right to decide their own political,
economic and social systems by their own free will are
policies that do not work anymore. A me-first policy
16/24

12/12/2018

might work at first but in the end is doomed to failure.
In that respect, challenges to peace must be directly
addressed at their root causes. We must therefore shift
to a new, democratic and balanced approach.
If we are to handle the serious current challenges at
the global level effectively, multilateralism is not just an
option, it is the only option, and of course it is a viable
and realistic one. It is the only realistic and practical
option for addressing global challenges collectively and
pursuing common international goals cooperatively.
The reason is simple. Certain transnational challenges
and threats, such as terrorism, know no boundaries. It is
therefore not possible for a single country or countries,
however powerful, to address them.
We must promote true, effective and strong
multilateralism. We must ensure that it is founded on
inclusion rather than exclusion, cooperation rather
than confrontation, equality rather than inequality,
the rule of law rather than the rule of power. We must
solve differences peacefully and justly, not violently
and unfairly. We must also pursue the common good
of all States, not the goals of one State or group of
States. Nor should we forget that in order to promote
multilateralism, we must build on the important
milestones we have achieved, and prevent our past
disastrous mistakes and tragedies from ever recurring.
We should not allow self-centred unilateral policies
to be pursued at the price of weakening multilateralism.
We cannot and should not allow that highly alarming
trend to continue unabated if we want our world to be
governed by law and not the rule of power, and if we
want to remain a true United Nations — nations united
for peace and for saving succeeding generations from
the scourge of war. We should therefore address the
chronic and emerging challenges to multilateralism
comprehensively and seriously and create a reformed,
strong, effective and reinvigorated multilateral
system founded on the rule of law, justice, equality
and accountability.
Given that the United Nations, as the world’s most
representative international organization, represents
the highest expression of multilateralism, our efforts
to achieve a strengthened multilateral system should
start from this Organization. That is how we can make
the United Nations relevant to all people, which is the
theme of the General Assembly at its seventy-third
session, during which many world leaders have called
for support to multilateralism and for strengthening the
18-43387

12/12/2018

role of the United Nations. That is what we need today
in our highly interconnected and interdependent global
village, where the nature, gravity, complexity and
scope of challenges are unprecedented. That is what we
need to do together, resolutely and responsibly. It is our
common responsibility.
In conclusion, I want to take this opportunity
to emphasize that the Islamic Republic of Iran, as
initiator of the concept of a world against violence and
extremism, stands ready to cooperate in fulfilling that
responsibility. We are fully prepared to play an active
part in promoting multilateralism as the appropriate
framework for providing sustainable methods to resolve
existing challenges.
Ms. Lahmiri (Morocco) (spoke in French): My
delegation is pleased to be participating in the debate
on a culture of peace, a universal value that my country
is fully committed to. We note with satisfaction the
annual report of the Secretary-General (A/73/391) on
the issue, and we thank the various facilitators for
the draft resolutions on it that we will be adopting
this morning.
Because we live in a world that is constantly
changing, we must adapt to it through appropriate
common responses. The growing number of ideological
conflicts and increasing intolerance, cultural
isolationism, violence and extremism challenge us all
and must push us to take effective collective action.
Morocco considers diversity a source of wealth and is
determined to implement innovative methods to ensure
respect for cultural and faith-based pluralism. In that
regard, we have undertaken tangible action at the
national, regional and international levels. For example,
at the national level we have undertaken religious
reform, including of our religious education system, and
a review of the religious content of school textbooks.
We believe firmly that education is a key tool in
ensuring that the culture of peace can grow in the
minds of men and women. We promote an enlightened,
moderate religious education based on the value of
tolerance. with a view to preventing radicalism, we
provide an education that promotes peace. In that
framework, Morocco is training imams, murshidins and
murshidats who are called on to exercise their duties
in Morocco and abroad, both in Africa and Europe.
That commitment was translated into reality by the
establishment in 2015 of the Mohammed VI Institute
for the Training of Imams, Murshidins and Murshidats.

A/73/PV.51

I should point out in that regard that the commitment
of young people and women is essential to fighting
radicalization, violence and extremism, as well as to
promoting tolerance and respect for others.
The second point that we want to focus on concerns
dialogue, which can be local, national, regional or
global. A culture of dialogue is essential to coexistence,
and vice versa. We commend the tireless efforts
undertaken by the various stakeholders, especially
those of UNESCO and the Alliance of Civilizations.
Morocco is pleased to have hosted the second
iteration of the International Conference on Intercultural
and Interfaith Dialogue, held from 10 to 12 September
in Fez, on the theme of otherness. It provided an
opportunity to take stock of actions undertaken to
implement the call made in Fez underlining the urgent
need there is for bringing about new ways to ensure
interaction and understanding among civilizations.
During the Conference, King Mohammed VI called
for the implementation of a new global order for
peace structured around the principles of coexistence,
acceptance, plurality and difference. In the wake of the
historic adoption in Marrakech of the global compact
for safe, orderly and regular migration, we think it
important to stress the connection between the values
of peace, tolerance and coexistence and the issue of
migration. On that issue, the Kingdom of Morocco
takes a proactive and humanistic approach based on
full respect for the rights of migrants.
Before concluding, we want to reiterate that the
international community should redouble its efforts
and continue to work for the preservation of peace and
prosperity and to ensure good-neighbourly relations.
Finally, on 13 September 2019 we will celebrate
the twentieth anniversary of the Declaration and
Programme of Action on a Culture of Peace, and we
hope that occasion will enable us to have a frank
discussion, present our tangible commitments and
reflect constructively together on how we can work to
advance peace, dialogue and mutual respect.
The Acting President: We shall now proceed
to consider draft resolutions A/73/L.43, A/73/L.48,
A/73/L.52 and A/73/L.55. Before giving the floor for
explanations of vote before the voting, I would like to
remind speakers that explanations of vote are limited
to 10 minutes and should be made by delegations from
their seats.

18-4338717/24

A/73/PV.51

12/12/2018

Mr. Bagwell (United States of America): As a
multi-ethnic, multicultural and multi-faith nation, the
United States recognizes the importance of dialogue,
understanding and cooperation among individuals of
different religious and cultural backgrounds. The United
States strongly believes in the value of programmes,
including those of the United Nations system, that
encourage a culture of peace and promote justice,
democracy, human rights and fundamental freedoms.

As United States Secretary of State Pompeo recently
underscored in Brussels, we are supporting institutions
that we believe can be improved and that work in
American interests and in those of all Member States,
in the service of our shared values. We will continue to
work with our friends and allies towards realizing the
promise of effective multilateral institutions that serve
our citizens and our values. To quote George Marshall’s
address to the General Assembly in Paris in 1948:

We welcome initiatives, including the upcoming
high-level forum, that concretely address the root causes
of conflict by promoting efforts to counter terrorism,
reject violence and highlight the positive contribution
of young people. We also welcome the updating of
the draft resolutions to reflect the importance for a
culture of peace of preventing violent extremism. The
Secretary-General’s plan of action to prevent violent
extremism lays out key recommendations for concerted
preventive action by the international community in
order to address the underlying conditions that drive
individuals to radicalize to violence. Young people play
an important role in efforts to prevent violent extremism,
as well as in the promotion of peace and security, and
we welcome efforts to enhance their involvement in
preventing violent extremism and promoting a culture
of peace.

“International organizations cannot take the place
of national and personal effort, or of local and
individual imagination. International action cannot
replace self-help”.

However, with regard to an international day of
multilateralism and diplomacy for peace, we have stated
on many occasions that we worry that a proliferation
of international days tends to dilute whatever value
there is in highlighting or commemorating legitimate
international developments or urgent issues of
international concern. We do not see that such an
international day will have any tangible impact on the
furtherance of multilateral objectives or the cause of
peace and security. Certainly it is an irony not lost on
us that draft resolution A/73/L.48 is being proposed by
Venezuela, which is led by a brutal regime that flagrantly
flouts its international human rights obligations and
commitments. For those reasons, we are calling for
a vote, and we will vote against the draft resolution
entitled “International Day of Multilateralism and
Diplomacy for Peace”.
The United States has always been a strong supporter
of effective multilateral institutions. However, many
multilateral organizations and agreements are failing
the very Member States that they were created to serve
effectively, and multilateralism should not be viewed as
an end unto itself.
18/24

Mr. Grigoryan (Armenia): I would like to present the
position of the delegation of Armenia on draft resolution
A/73/L.55, entitled “Promotion of interreligious and
intercultural dialogue, understanding and cooperation
for peace”. At the outset, my delegation would like to
express its appreciation to the co-facilitators for their
efforts in bringing the draft resolution to a successful
outcome, as well as for their constructive approach in
accommodating some of Armenia’s proposals during
the negotiations.
As a staunch advocate of the continuing promotion
of interreligious and intercultural dialogue, we agree
with the purposes of the draft resolution. Our objection
to the draft resolution’s twenty-fifth preambular
paragraph, which refers to an event named the World
Forum on Intercultural Dialogue as a key global
platform for promoting intercultural dialogue, is
based on the fact that a particular Member State has
developed a tradition of abusing various international
forums, especially those organized in its country,
thereby distorting the principles of international law
and the basic elements of peaceful conflict resolution
while disseminating hate speech at the State level.
In that regard, we regret that the event referred to
in the draft resolution, which was aimed at promoting
multilateralism and intercultural dialogue, was
misused by the country that hosted it to manipulate an
international gathering aand turn it into an instrument
of propaganda. We firmly believe that in organizing
international events on multilateralism, intercultural
dialogue and the promotion of peace, due regard should
also be given to the record of the host country in
terms of adherence to human rights and international
humanitarian law, as well as to the protection of cultural
heritage of historical and religious significance.
18-43387

12/12/2018

A/73/PV.51

The Acting President: We have heard the last
speaker in explanation of position before the adoption
of the draft resolution.
The Assembly will now take action on draft
resolution A/73/L.43, entitled “Follow-up to the
Declaration and Programme of Action on a Culture
of Peace”.
I give the
the Secretariat.

floor

to

the

representative

of

Mr. Nakano (Department for General Assembly
and Conference Management): I should like to
announce that since the submission of draft resolution
A/73/L.43, and in addition to those delegations listed in
the document, the following countries have also become
sponsors: Albania, Algeria, Argentina, Armenia,
Australia, Azerbaijan, Belarus, Belize, Benin,
Bhutan, the Plurinational State of Bolivia, Bosnia and
Herzegovina, Brunei Darussalam, Bulgaria, Burundi,
Cameroon, Canada, the Central African Republic,
Chad, Chile, China, Colombia, Costa Rica, Djibouti,
the Dominican Republic, Ecuador, Egypt, El Salvador,
Equatorial Guinea, Eritrea, Estonia, Fiji, the Gambia,
Greece, Guinea, Hungary, India, Indonesia, Iraq,
Ireland, Italy, Japan, Kazakhstan, Kenya, Kuwait, the
Lao People’s Democratic Republic, Lebanon, Lesotho,
Libya, Lithuania, Madagascar, Malaysia, Malawi,
Maldives, Malta, Mexico, Mongolia, Montenegro,
Morocco, the Niger, Norway, Oman, Pakistan, Palau,
Panama, Paraguay, Peru, the Philippines, Poland,
the Republic of Korea, Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent
and the Grenadines, Samoa, Sao Tome and Principe,
Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Singapore, Solomon Islands,
Somalia, Sri Lanka, the Sudan, Suriname, Tajikistan,
Thailand, the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia,
Togo, Tunisia, Turkmenistan, Tuvalu, the United
Arab Emirates, Uruguay, Uzbekistan, the Bolivarian
Republic of Venezuela, Viet Nam and the United
Republic of Tanzania.
The Acting President: May I take it that it is the
wish of the General Assembly to adopt draft resolution
A/73/L.43?
Draft resolution A/73/L.43
(resolution 73/126).

was

adopted

The Acting President: The Assembly will now
take a decision on draft resolution A/73/L.48, entitled
“International Day of Multilateralism and Diplomacy
for Peace”.

I give the
the Secretariat.

floor

to

the

representative

of

Mr. Nakano (Department for General Assembly
and Conference Management): I should like to
announce that since the submission of draft resolution
A/73/L.48, and in addition to those delegations listed
in the document, the following countries have become
sponsors: Canada, China, El Salvador, Norway, Palau
and the Russian Federation.
The Acting President: A recorded vote has
been requested.
A recorded vote was taken.
In favour:
Afghanistan, Algeria, Andorra, Angola, Argentina,
Armenia, Austria, Azerbaijan, Bahamas, Bahrain,
Bangladesh, Barbados, Belarus, Belgium, Belize,
Benin, Bhutan, Bolivia (Plurinational State
of), Bosnia and Herzegovina, Brazil, Brunei
Darussalam, Bulgaria, Burkina Faso, Burundi,
Cambodia, Cameroon, Canada, Central African
Republic, Chad, Chile, China, Colombia, Congo,
Costa Rica, Croatia, Cuba, Cyprus, Czech
Republic, Democratic People’s Republic of Korea,
Denmark, Dominican Republic, Ecuador, Egypt,
El Salvador, Equatorial Guinea, Estonia, Finland,
France, Georgia, Germany, Greece, Guinea,
Guyana, Hungary, Iceland, India, Indonesia, Iran
(Islamic Republic of), Iraq, Ireland, Italy, Jamaica,
Japan, Jordan, Kazakhstan, Kenya, Kuwait,
Kyrgyzstan, Lao People’s Democratic Republic,
Latvia, Lebanon, Libya, Liechtenstein, Lithuania,
Luxembourg, Malawi, Malaysia, Maldives, Mali,
Malta, Mauritius, Mexico, Monaco, Mongolia,
Montenegro, Morocco, Mozambique, Myanmar,
Nepal, Netherlands, New Zealand, Nigeria,
Norway, Oman, Pakistan, Palau, Panama, Papua
New Guinea, Peru, Philippines, Poland, Portugal,
Qatar, Republic of Korea, Republic of Moldova,
Romania, Russian Federation, Saint Lucia, Saint
Vincent and the Grenadines, Samoa, San Marino,
Sao Tome and Principe, Saudi Arabia, Senegal,
Serbia, Sierra Leone, Singapore, Slovakia, Slovenia,
South Africa, South Sudan, Spain, Sri Lanka,
Sudan, Suriname, Sweden, Syrian Arab Republic,
Tajikistan, Thailand, the former Yugoslav Republic
of Macedonia, Timor-Leste, Togo, Turkey, Tuvalu,
United Arab Emirates, United Kingdom of Great
Britain and Northern Ireland, United Republic

18-4338719/24

A/73/PV.51

12/12/2018

of Tanzania, Uruguay, Uzbekistan, Venezuela
(Bolivarian Republic of), Viet Nam, Yemen,
Zambia, Zimbabwe
Against:
Israel, United States of America
Draft resolution A/73/L.48 was adopted by 144
votes to 2 (resolution 73/127).
[Subsequently, the delegation of Nicaragua
informed the Secretariat that it had intended to vote
in favour.]
The Acting President: The Assembly will now
take a decision on draft resolution A/73/L.52, entitled
“Enlightenment and religious tolerance”.
I give the
the Secretariat.

floor

to

the

representative

of

Mr. Nakano (Department for General Assembly
and Conference Management): I should like to
announce that, since the submission of the document,
the following countries have become sponsors of draft
resolution A/73/L.52: Algeria, Bahrain, Bangladesh,
Belarus, Benin, Cambodia, Cameroon, Canada, Chad,
Djibouti, Egypt, Ghana, Iraq, Japan, Lebanon, Libya,
the Marshall Islands, Morocco, Myanmar, the Niger,
Oman, Pakistan, the Philippines, Qatar, the Republic
of Korea, the Russian Federation, Sao Tome and
Principe, Saudi Arabia, Singapore, Sri Lanka, the
Sudan, Suriname, Thailand, Togo, Tunisia, Turkey,
Turkmenistan, Uganda and the United Arab Emirates.
The Acting President: May I take it that it is the
wish of the General Assembly to adopt draft resolution
A/73/L.52?
Draft resolution
(resolution 73/128).

A/73/L.52

was

adopted

The Acting President: The Assembly will now
take a decision on draft resolution A/73/L.55, entitled
“Promotion of interreligious and intercultural dialogue,
understanding and cooperation for peace ”.
I give the
the Secretariat.

floor

to

the

representative

of

Mr. Nakano (Department for General Assembly
and Conference Management): I should like to
announce that, since the submission of the document,
the following countries have become sponsors of
draft resolution A/73/L.55: Austria, Bangladesh,
20/24

Benin, Brunei Darussalam, Burkina Faso, Burundi,
Cambodia, Cameroon, Chad, Djibouti, Ecuador,
Eritrea, Guinea, Guatemala, Hungary, Indonesia, Italy,
Japan, Kyrgyzstan, Malaysia, Morocco, Myanmar,
the Niger, Oman, Panama, Papua New Guinea, Peru,
Poland, Samoa, Singapore, Slovenia, the Sudan,
Suriname, Timor-Leste, Togo, Turkey, Uzbekistan and
the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela.
The Acting President: May I take it that the
Assembly wishes to adopt draft resolution A/73/L.55?
Draft resolution
(resolution 73/129).

A/73/L.55

was

adopted

The Acting President: Before giving the floor to
those wishing to speak in explanation of vote or position
on the resolutions just adopted, I would like to remind
delegations that explanations are limited to 10 minutes
and should be made by delegations from their seats.
Mr. Charwath (Austria): I have the honour of
speaking on behalf of the European Union (EU). The
candidate countries the former Yugoslav Republic
of Macedonia, Montenegro and Albania, the country
of the Stabilization and Association Process and
potential candidate Bosnia and Herzegovina, as well
as the Republic of Moldova, align themselves with
this statement.
I would first like to explain our vote on resolution
73/127, on the International Day of Multilateralism and
Diplomacy for Peace. At a time when the rules-based
international order is being increasingly challenged,
we attach great importance to reiterating our collective
support for multilateralism, building on the strong call
to promote the multilateral system made by our leaders
at the general debate in September.
Europe’s commitment to multilateralism, with the
United Nations at its core, is based on our values and
beliefs, but it is also an act of realism. Today’s complex
threats require complex, articulated responses.
Only together can we have a real impact in ensuring
sustainable development, peace and security and the
universal promotion and protection of human rights.
Only together can we achieve education for all, gender
equality and our commitment to leaving no one behind.
The European Union is a staunch supporter of
dialogue and cooperation. That is why we will continue
to defend multilateral diplomacy and its achievements,
from the Iran nuclear deal to the Paris Agreement on
18-43387

12/12/2018

Climate Change, and to support the essential work
of all United Nations programmes and agencies.
We welcome the efforts of the facilitators to try to
accommodate the EU’s concerns during negotiations
on the draft resolution, during which the EU expressed
its view that as a general principle it is not in favour
of the multiplication of international days. The most
effective way to promote multilateralism lies in our
commitments and actions.
In addition, we continue to believe that the singling
out of one international grouping in a resolution goes
against the principle of multilateralism. We note that the
political declaration of the Movement of Non-Aligned
Countries, as referred to in the resolution, also contains
elements that are not conducive to multilateralism.
However, in the spirit of dialogue and cooperation to
which we just referred, and taking into account the
overarching theme of the resolution, we decided to vote
in favour of it. We remain ready to engage constructively
with all partners in pursuing a consensus approach in
support of multilateralism.
I would now like to turn to resolution 73/128, on
enlightenment and religious tolerance. The European
Union was founded on the values of non-discrimination,
tolerance and respect for human rights, including
freedom of expression and freedom of thought,
conscience and religion or belief. Furthermore,
promoting and protecting freedom of religion or
belief as a universal human right, and eliminating
discrimination on the basis of religion or belief, are
key priorities of the European Union’s human rights
policy. For those reasons, the EU has for a number of
years been the main sponsor of the annual resolution on
freedom of religion or belief.
The EU has always acknowledged the great value
and crucial role of education in promoting mutual
understanding, tolerance, non-discrimination and
respect in all matters relating to freedom of religion
or belief, which is highlighted both in this year’s draft
resolution on freedom of religion or belief (A/73/589/
Add.2) and in our guidelines on the promotion and
protection of freedom of religion or belief.
In that regard, we welcome the focus of resolution
73/128 on education as a tool for promoting religious
tolerance, and we continue to support efforts by States
to encourage a wider knowledge in society at large of
the diversity of religions and beliefs and of the history,
traditions, languages and cultures of the various

A/73/PV.51

religious minorities existing within their jurisdiction.
We also appreciated the open and collaborative
negotiation process on the draft text, which we believe
is positively reflected in resolution 73/128, and we
would like to thank the delegation of Uzbekistan for its
open and constructive approach. However, the EU does
not support the proliferation of resolutions as a general
principle and was not therefore in a position to sponsor
the resolution, whose theme is already covered at
length in existing resolutions. Nevertheless, we remain
strongly committed to promoting efforts to combat
religious intolerance, and for that reason the States
members of the European Union joined the consensus
on resolution 73/128.
Mr. Bagwell (United States of America): With
regard to the adoption of resolution 73/129, on
the promotion of interreligious and intercultural
dialogue, understanding and cooperation for peace,
and resolution 73/128, on enlightenment and religious
tolerance, the United States firmly supports efforts to
promote interreligious and intercultural dialogue and
cooperation. However, while we joined the consensus
on those resolutions, we would like to take this
opportunity to clarify some important points.
The United States strongly supports freedom
of expression and freedom of religion or belief. We
oppose any attempts to unduly limit the exercise of
those fundamental freedoms, and therefore dissociate
ourselves from the new text negotiated in this year’s
resolutions that suggests that the protections for
freedom of expression and freedom of religion or
belief are at odds with each other. We strongly believe
that protecting freedom of religion and freedom of
expression promotes mutual respect and pluralism and
is essential to human dignity and a robust civil society.
We firmly believe that all people should be free to choose
and practice their faith, based on the persuasion of the
mind and heart. Freedom of religion plays an important
societal role and is crucial to the creation of tolerant
and respectful societies in which negative stereotypes
carry little meaning. Rather than seeking restrictions
on self-expression in order to deal with intolerance, the
United States advocates robust protections for speech,
as well as the enforcement of appropriate legal regimes
dealing with discriminatory acts and hate crimes.
The United States strongly believes in working
together to build a more secure and peaceful world
through the promotion of justice, democracy, human
rights and fundamental freedoms. With regard to calls

18-4338721/24

A/73/PV.51

for moderation, we are concerned about the possibility
that the implementation of moderation-focused
programmes and policies could be subject to abuse.
We are particularly concerned that such programmes
and policies could undermine people’s enjoyment of
freedom of expression and thought, conscience and
religion or belief.
With regard to the references in resolution 73/128 to
the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development, we have
addressed our concerns regarding such references in a
general explanation of position delivered in the Second
Committee on 8 November and in an explanation of
position in the General Assembly (see A/73/PV.44)
regarding resolution 73/24, entitled “Sport as an enabler
of sustainable development”, which was adopted on
3 December under agenda item 12.
Mr. Margaryan (Armenia): I would like to
present our position on resolution 73/127, entitled
“International Day of Multilateralism and Diplomacy
for Peace”. Armenia would like to reiterate its support
and commitment to multilateralism as an effective
instrument for addressing the complex issues relating
to the challenges that the world is facing today. We
recognize the importance of multilateralism and
diplomacy in advancing sustainable development,
peace and security and human rights. Restoring our
humanity, sustaining peace and respecting human
dignity are important priorities that can be achieved only
through concerted efforts and a coordinated response.
We should all collectively do more to help mitigate
situations involving crises in which basic human rights,
including the right to life, are increasingly challenged,
and that require a stronger emphasis on the capacity of
multilateral institutions to deliver an adequate response.
The date of 24 April, designated by the Movement
of Non-Aligned Countries to mark the International
Day of Multilateralism and Diplomacy for Peace, has
crucial significance for Armenia and the Armenian
people, as it holds important meaning and touches on
special sensitivities for all Armenians. It is the day
when the Armenian people and their friends around
the world pay tribute to the memory of the victims
of the Armenian genocide. The Armenian genocide
is a stark case in point in the argument for promoting
and fostering prevention and upholding collective
faith in the fundamental human rights and the dignity
and the worth of the human person. It is a reminder
that impunity fosters the recurrence of crime. It
also illustrates what happened 100 years ago in the
22/24

12/12/2018

absence of effective multilateral institutions, when the
international community failed to provide any adequate
response or international protection.
Today, as a State, Armenia has a duty to work within
multilateral cooperative frameworks to prevent future
atrocities. Armenia is resolved to continue to contribute
to multilateral efforts to advance prevention, including
the prevention of identity-based discrimination, mass
atrocities and the crime of genocide, as an important
function of the United Nations. The adoption in 2015
of resolution 69/323, designating 9 December as the
International Day of Commemoration and Dignity
of the Victims of the Crime of Genocide and of the
Prevention of This Crime, was a powerful manifestation
of responsible multilateralism. And this year marks the
seventieth anniversary of Convention on the Prevention
and Punishment of the Crime of Genocide and the
Universal Declaration of Human Rights, which is yet
another milestone in our reaffirmation of our collective
determination to fight impunity and prevent any
recurrence of human suffering.
We hope that the designation of the International
Day of Multilateralism and Diplomacy for Peace will
become an important contribution to enhancing global
cooperation for peace, development and human rights
at the national and global levels.
The Acting President: We have heard the last
speaker in explanation of vote or position.
The representative of Azerbaijan has asked to
speak in exercise of the right of reply. I would like to
remind members that statements in exercise of the right
of reply are limited to 10 minutes for the first statement
and to five minutes for the second, and should be made
by delegations from their seats.
Mr. Musayev (Azerbaijan): There is nothing
surprising in the inadequate and irrelevant comments
made by the delegation of Armenia at today’s
plenary meeting. The fact is that the objectives of a
culture of peace are alien to Armenia. Otherwise,
it would not have become a uniquely mono-ethnic
State as a result of its consistent policies of exclusion,
discrimination and incompatibility on ethnic and
religious grounds.
In obstructing efforts aimed at the promotion
of intercultural and interreligious dialogue and
challenging the various global initiatives to that
end, solely because of its relations with Azerbaijan,
18-43387

12/12/2018

Armenia has demonstrated that the prospects of its
good-faith engagement in ongoing efforts to resolve our
conflict as soon as possible are elusive. The Armenian
representative’s comments on human rights and socalled hate propaganda are beneath criticism. The
relevant United Nations bodies and other international
organizations have more than once expressed serious
concern about the spirit of intolerance prevailing
in Armenia. I am confident that the international
community would be more interested in hearing from
the delegation of Armenia about the real problems that
the country and its people are facing in the political,
economic, social and humanitarian spheres than its
comments on human rights and democracy elsewhere.
The Acting President: The General Assembly has
thus concluded its consideration of agenda item 15.
Agenda item 116 (continued)
Elections to fill vacancies in subsidiary organs and
other elections
(a) Election of members of the Committee for
Programme and Coordination
Note by the Secretary-General (A/73/608)
The Acting President: Pursuant to General
Assembly decision 42/450, of 17 December 1987, and
upon their nomination by the Economic and Social
Council, the Assembly elects the members of the
Committee for Programme and Coordination.
The Assembly has before it document A/73/608,
which contains the nominations by the Economic and
Social Council to fill the vacancies in the Committee
that will occur as a result of the expiration, on
31 December 2018, of the terms of office of Argentina,
France, Peru, the Russian Federation, the United
Republic of Tanzania and Zimbabwe.
Those States are eligible for immediate re-election.
I should like to remind members that after 1 January
2019, the following States will remain members of the
Committee: Bangladesh, Belarus, Botswana, Brazil,
Bulgaria, Burkina Faso, Cameroon, Chad, Chile, China,
Cuba, Egypt, Eritrea, Germany, Haiti, India, the Islamic
Republic of Iran, Italy, Japan, Pakistan, Portugal, the
Republic of Korea, the Republic of Moldova, Senegal,
the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern
Ireland and the United States of America. Those 26
States will therefore not be eligible in this election.

A/73/PV.51

I should now like to inform members that the
following States have been nominated by the Economic
and Social Council: Angola and Ethiopia for the two
seats for the African States; the Russian Federation for
the one seat for the Eastern European States; Argentina
for one of the two seats for the Latin American and
Caribbean States; and France for one of the two seats
for the Western European and other States.
In accordance with rule 92 of the rules of procedure,
all elections should be held by secret ballot. However,
I should like to recall paragraph 16 of decision 34/401,
whereby the practice of dispensing with the secret ballot
for elections to subsidiary organs when the number of
candidates corresponds to the number of seats to be
filled should become standard, unless a delegation
specifically requests a vote on a given election.
In the absence of such a request, may I take it that
the Assembly decides to proceed to the election on the
basis of dispensing with the secret ballot?
It was so decided.
The Acting President: The number of States
nominated from among the African States, the Eastern
European States, the Latin American and Caribbean
States and the Western European and other States is
equal to or lower than the number of seats to be filled
in each of those groups.
May I therefore take it that the Assembly wishes to
declare those States nominated by the Economic and
Social Council — Angola, Argentina, Ethiopia, France
and the Russian Federation — elected as members of
the Committee for Programme and Coordination for a
three-year term beginning on 1 January 2019?
It was so decided.
The Acting President: I congratulate the States that
have just been elected members of the Committee for
Programme and Coordination. Members are reminded
that two vacancies remain for a term beginning on the
date of election by the General Assembly: one member
from the Western European and other States for a term
expiring on 31 December 2018, and one member from
the Latin American and Caribbean States for a term
expiring on 31 December 2020.
Members are also reminded that the Economic
and Social Council postponed the nominations of one
member from the Latin American and Caribbean States
and one member from the Western European and other

18-4338723/24

A/73/PV.51

States for a three-year term beginning on 1 January
2019 and expiring on 31 December 2021, respectively.
The General Assembly will be in a position to act on
those vacancies upon nomination by the Economic and
Social Council.

12/12/2018

Agenda item 117 (continued)

the resulting vacancies. Those members will serve for
a period of three years, beginning on 1 January 2019.
Consequently, after consultations with the Chairs of
the Groups of the African States, the Eastern European
States, the Latin American and Caribbean States and
the Western European and other States, the President
of the General Assembly has appointed Ecuador,
Germany, Ghana, Guyana, Senegal and Ukraine for a
period of three years, beginning on 1 January 2019.

Appointments to fill vacancies in subsidiary organs
and other appointments

May I take it that the Assembly takes note of
these appointments?

We have thus concluded this stage of our
consideration of sub-item (a) of agenda item 116.

(e) Appointment of members of the Committee on
Conferences
Note by the Secretary-General (A/73/107)
The Acting President: The General Assembly has
before it a note by the Secretary-General, contained in
document A/73/107. As indicated in that document, as
the terms of office of the representatives of Ecuador,
Germany, Ghana, Guyana, Hungary, the Islamic
Republic of Iran and Liberia will expire on 31 December
2018, it will be necessary for the President of the
General Assembly to appoint seven members to fill

24/24

It was so decided.
The Acting President: I should like to remind
members that one seat from the Asia-Pacific States for
a period of three years, beginning on 1 January 2019,
still remains to be filled. I urge the Group to submit
their candidate as soon as possible.
The General Assembly has thus concluded this
stage of its consideration of sub-item (e) of agenda
item 117.
The meeting rose at 12.40 p.m.

18-43387
