S/PV.7524

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventieth year

7524th meeting

Wednesday, 16 September 2015, 11 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Churkin. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Russian Federation)

Members:

Angola. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Chad . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Chile . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Jordan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Lithuania. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Malaysia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
New Zealand . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Nigeria . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Spain. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Lucas
Mr. Mahamat Zene
Mr. Olguín Cigarroa
Mr. Liu Jieyi
Mr. Delattre
Mr. Hmoud
Ms. Murmokaitė
Mr. Ibrahim
Mr. Van Bohemen
Mrs. Ogwu
Mr. Oyarzun Marchesi
Mr. Rycroft
Ms. Sison
Mr. Ramírez Carreño

Agenda
The situation in the Middle East
Report of the Secretary-General on the implementation of Security Council
resolutions 2139 (2014), 2165 (2014) and 2191 (2014) (S/2015/698)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

15-28185 (E)
*1528185*

S/PV.7524

The situation in the Middle East

The meeting was called to order at 11 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in the Middle East
Report of the Secretary-General on the
implementation of Security Council
resolutions 2139 (2014), 2165 (2014) and
2191 (2014) (S/2015/698)
The President (spoke in Russian): In accordance
with rule 39 of the Council’s provisional rules of
procedure, I invite Mr. Stephen O’Brien, UnderSecretary-General for Humanitarian Affairs and
Emergency Relief Coordinator, to participate in this
meeting.
In accordance with rule 37 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite the representative
of Syria to participate in this meeting.
The Security Council will now begin its consideration
of the item on its agenda.
I wish to draw the attention of Council members to
document S/2015/698, which contains the report of the
Secretary-General on the implementation of Security
Council resolutions 2139 (2014), 2165 (2014) and 2191
(2014).
I now give the floor to Mr. O’Brien.
Mr. O’Brien: The recent images of the 3-year-old
boy Aylan Kurdi lying lifeless on a beach in Turkey
encapsulate the profound and prolonged desperation
of the Syrian people, too long exposed to the horrors
of a brutal and savage conflict. I recount the words
of Abdullah Kurdi, Aylan’s father, who said, “I tried
to catch my children and wife, but there was no hope.
One by one they died.” Tragically, far too many Syrian
families have spoken similar words over the last five
years. It is civilians who continue to bear the brunt of
this war.
As the plight of Syrian refugees desperately
trying to reach Europe in recent weeks has shown,
the effects of the Syria crisis are not just national or
regional, but global in nature. The conflict in Syria
has propelled one of the largest refugee exodus since
the Second World War. These refugees are fleeing for
their lives from war and violence, and have a right to
seek asylum without any form of discrimination. As

2/6

16/09/2015

an international community, it is our responsibility to
support the neighbouring countries that shoulder most
of the burden. At the same time, stronger efforts must
be made to address the root causes that force people to
leave their homes and seek asylum abroad — addressing
the flee-or-die response natural to each and everyone of
us faced with peril or a challenge to our survival. For
Syria, it should be clear to all that this means a political
settlement that brings about an end to the crisis.
In the absence of such a political solution, the
Security Council adopted resolution 2139 (2014) in
February, which demands action by the parties in a
number of areas, including an end to attacks against
civilians and civilian infrastructure and facilitating
unhindered humanitarian access. I deeply regret to
inform the Council that, some 18 months later, the
Council’s strong demands continue to go unheeded. By
any measure, human suffering in Syria has worsened,
not diminished.
Over the past month, violence has continued
throughout the country. There has been no reduction
in the appalling patterns of violations of international
humanitarian law and human rights law. Indiscriminate
attacks, including with explosive weapons, continue to
cause widespread death and destruction. For example,
between 17 and 26 August, Government forces
repeatedly attacked residential areas in Douma, in rural
Damascus, killing at least 90 civilians and wounding
nearly 300 more. Meanwhile, in the last week of August,
non-State armed groups launched hundreds of shells
on civilian-populated areas of Damascus and rural
Damascus, killing at least 20 civilians and injuring
many more, while yesterday, shelling by non-State
armed groups on civilian populated areas of Aleppo
killed at least 33 people, including women and children,
and injured over 150 more people.
Allegations of attacks with chemical agents
continue to be received. The joint mechanism of the
United Nations and the Organization for the Prohibition
of Chemical Weapons established by resolution
2235 (2015) is the relevant body to investigate those
allegations.
The deliberate targeting of civilian infrastructure
continues to occur with alarming frequency. Attacks
by non-State armed groups have resulted in significant
disruption to municipal water and electricity networks
in Aleppo, Damascus and in Dar’a over the past weeks
and months. Most recently, approximately 2 million
people went without water in Aleppo city for two
15-28185

16/09/2015

The situation in the Middle East

weeks in August. Deliberately depriving families and
communities of water and electricity only serves to
worsen humanitarian conditions and drive ordinary
Syrians into greater despair and desperation.
Hospitals and medical facilities continue to be
attacked. In August, Physicians for Human Rights
documented 12 attacks on medical facilities, while
15 medical workers were killed. Since the start of 2014,
there have been 169 attacks on medical facilities and
252 medical workers have been killed. Attacks on such
facilities have had a multiplier effect, not only killing
and injuring, but also destroying the health-care system
as a whole, leaving many Syrians unable to obtain the
most basic levels of care.
Schools, which should be safe places for children
to learn and grow in, continue to be attacked. Since
the start of 2014, the United Nations has verified at
least 84 attacks on or near schools, although the actual
number of schools attacked is likely higher. One in four
schools cannot be used because it has been damaged or
destroyed, or is being used as a shelter for the internally
displaced or for military purposes. Deliberate attacks
on hospitals and schools are war crimes. All parties will
unquestionably be held to account now and however
far into the future it takes after investigation and due
judicial process.
I have spoken before about the impact of the
conflict on Syria’s children and young people, but
it bears repeating once again. Today, Syria is one
of the most dangerous places on Earth to be a child.
Over 5.6 million children are in need of immediate
assistance. Although the school year commenced this
past week, over 2 million children — one out of every
three — are not in school in Syria, and an additional
450,000 children are at risk of dropping out. We are
extremely concerned about hundreds of thousands of
children in areas controlled by the Islamic State in Iraq
and the Levant (ISIL), forced to follow a curriculum
designed by the designated terrorist group. According
to reports of the Commission of Inquiry and others,
children are murdered, tortured and subjected to
sexual violence by all parties to the conflict. Millions
of children have been traumatized by the horrors they
have witnessed. Young people have few prospects. The
conflict is not only destroying Syria’s present, but it
is also destroying its future. One missing cohort of
educated young people will soon become two cohorts.
Despite the volatile and insecure environment, the
United Nations and non-governmental organization

S/PV.7524

partners continue to deliver life-saving assistance to
millions of people in need. In the past month alone,
4.2 million people received food aid, medicines and
supplies for 1.1 million treatments were dispatched, and
nearly 450,000 received relief items and other support.
We should all recognize the commitment and bravery
of the thousands of workers who deliver much-needed
aid at great personal risk, particularly the Syrian
organizations and volunteers who are often the first
responders on the front lines.
While we are reaching a significant number
of people, we are still unable to deliver sufficient
quantities of aid to people in the hardest-to-reach
areas. Fighting and insecurity hamper our ability to
respond. For example, during August, the World Food
Programme was unable to reach over 1 million people
in rural Damascus, rural Homs and rural Hama. A
further 750,000 people in ISIL-controlled areas cannot
be reached with food due to safety concerns.
In addition to insecurity, the parties to the conflict
continue to place restrictions that limit or obstruct
where, to whom and how often we deliver assistance.
Some 422,000 people continue to live under the most
intolerable siege conditions, unable to leave their
communities, and we are largely unable to get in to
deliver much needed humanitarian assistance. Over the
past three months, only 9 per cent of people in besieged
areas have received much-needed health assistance
from the United Nations per month, while no food or
other basic relief supplies have entered these areas
despite the overwhelming need.
Approval for 46 requests for inter-agency convoys
remains pending with the Government of Syria. If
approved, the United Nations could reach an additional
1.2 million people in desperate need of assistance.
Meanwhile, Government-approved convoys to Nubul,
Zahra, Afrin in Aleppo and to Foah and Kefrayah
in Idlib have been stalled by the lack of approval
by non-State armed groups for safe passage. There
can be no justification for deliberately obstructing
humanitarian access and depriving civilians of access
to services essential to their survival.
On a more positive note, I welcome the recent
progress made in August on visas, with the Government
of Syria granting of 109 visas for United Nations staff
members from 12 different offices. Some 96 per cent
of the visa applications submitted in August were
approved during the same month. I very much hope that

15-281853/6

S/PV.7524

The situation in the Middle East

this trend will continue, not only with visas, but also for
other administrative obstacles.
The lack of funding for humanitarian operations
continues to be a major challenge. We require some
$738 million to fund essential life-saving operations
until the end of this calendar year in Syria. I appreciate
the generosity of donors in 2015 already, and ask
them to consider making additional pledges given the
extraordinary level of need we are facing.
We are running out of words to describe the utter
disregard for human life and dignity that has become
the hallmark of this crisis. Every day that passes, more
Syrian children, women and men die. Millions more are
forced to live in appalling conditions where there is no
safe refuge in their country, where their basic needs for
protection are unmet, where their fundamental rights
are trampled upon, and where their futures and that of
their country appear increasingly bleak.
While the parties to this conflict are responsible
for upholding their obligations under international law,
the members of the Security Council and other Member
States with influence can and must do more to demand
that the indiscriminate violence stop, that sieges be
lifted, that civilian infrastructure be respected, and
that vital humanitarian assistance reach all areas of the
country without delay.
But above all else, the Council must focus its
efforts on finding a political solution. I call again on
members of the Council to set aside their differences
and work together to finally bring an end to this
nightmare for the Syrian people. As bestowed by the
Charter of the United Nations, the Security Council has
an inescapable responsibility to help the Syrian people
realize a future of peace. I very much hope that, for the
sake of the people of Syria, a political solution will be
found as soon as possible.
The President (spoke in Russian): I thank
Mr. O’Brien for his briefing.
I give the floor to the representative of the Syrian
Arab Republic.
Mr. Ja’afari (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in
Arabic): I should like to thank the Under-SecretaryGeneral for Humanitarian Affairs and Emergency Relief
Coordinator, Mr. Stephen O’Brien, for his briefing to
the Security Council. I should like to share with the
Council my views regarding certain significant aspects
of that very important briefing.

4/6

16/09/2015

First, Mr. O’Brien was right to say that the root
causes of the Syrian crisis must be addressed. Naturally,
they are political and not humanitarian in nature. I will
therefore proceed on the basis of that understanding.
It is not my intention to criticize the report of the
Secretary-General (S/2015/698) or to comment on
the Under-Secretary-General’s statement; rather, I
wish to clarify the overall scenario that underlies the
humanitarian situation in my country, Syria.
As members are aware, the Security Council has
adopted a series of important resolutions to combat
terrorism. To its credit, two days ago the Russian
presidency of the Security Council organized an
important event on the ocassion of the tenth anniversary
of the adoption of resolution 1624 (2005). That resolution
was followed by resolutions 1989 (2011) and 2199
(2015). While all of them prohibit inciting, funding or
supporting terrorism, above all they make it mandatory
on States Members of the United Nations not to adopt
terrorism as a policy to pressure the Governments of
other States. That is splendid as a pronouncement, but
it is not applied at all in practical terms.
There are illegal armed terrorist groups operating
in northern Syria, such as Jaish Al-Fatha, which is
financed by Turkey and Qatar. This group daily fires
thousands of shells against our people in Aleppo,
killing hundreds and injuring thousands and preventing
normal life. Another so-called army is operating in the
south, this one funded by Saudi Arabia and Jordan,
the latter being a member of the Council and a brother
country of Syria. That army carries out the same dirty
terrorist tactics in targeting our people in the south.
And then there is another such army in the town of
Duma, a suburb of Damascus, to which Mr. O’Brien
referred. That group, which calls itself Jaish Al-Islam, is
funded by Saudi Arabia. I have thus, in a single minute,
referred to three “armies” of terrorists — one working
under Turkey’s command, another under Jordan’s and
yet a third under Saudi Arabia and Qatar’s command.
Unfortunately, the report of the Secretary-General
refers to those terrorist groups as non-State armed
groups, not terrorist groups. As the Council is aware,
this is a neutral phrase that is completely out of line
with Council provisions on combating terrorism. The
question is therefore eminently political in nature.
That, in turn, has led to the deterioration of the
humanitarian situation and led, in part, to the refugee
exodous to which Mr. O’Brien referred. That is now
the main preoccupation of world public opinion and

15-28185

16/09/2015

The situation in the Middle East

of international media. My people’s tragedy is a major
tragedy. Unfortunately, thus far, here in the Council we
have not yet touched upon the real reason for segments
of the Syrian people leaving their country by force.
Terrorism is the main reason that the masses of Syrians
fleeing their country.
Terrorism first, but then the coercive and misnamed so-called “economic sanctions” imposed on the
Syrian people. They, too, are a major factor in paralysing
economic activity and destroying our infrastructure,
including the shuttering of hundreds, if not thousands,
of factories, destroying employment opportunities and
increasing unemployment.
The third reason for the crisis in my country is the
huge wave of terrorists and mercenaries being sent to
Syria from all over the world — from 100 States Members
of the Organization, including Australia, the United
States, the United Kingdom, France, Belgium, Libya,
Tunisia, Saudi Arabia, the United Arab Emirates and
Qatar. This information is from a Council report. Those
thousands of terrorists are destroying archeological
sites in Syria and Iraq, killing and kidnapping women,
smuggling archeological artefacts as well as oil and gas
through Turkish brokers to the European Union. That
funds terrorism. Syrian antiquities are being sold at
auction in London. How did they get there?
The image of the child Aylan Turki has rendered
a great service to the Syrian people, as it served to
highlight certain aspects not being addressed by the
media, politicians or diplomats. Why are children not
going to school? Well, the reason is now clear: they
do not go because terrorists control a vast region,
where schools are located. They prevent chilren from
attending, while also developing terrorist curriculums
inspired by Saudi and Gulf State curriculums in order
to teach our children about beheading and hatred for
other religions, as well as hatred of all those with
different views.
Did the Islamic State in Iraq and Syria (ISIS)
spring from a vacuum? No, there are those who have
sponsored, helped, funded and facilitated ISIS and its
smuggling of oil, gas and antiquities out of Syria. But
some still persist in their circular logic, concerned only
about slandering the Syrian Government, its President
and its army — to the extent that one representative
called for an Arria Formula meeting to talk about two
gay people, a Syrian and an Iraqi, as if that were the
concern of the Council instead of resolving the Syrian
crisis politically in a Syrian-led process without external

S/PV.7524

interference and in accordance with the Council’s own
resolutions.
Today I sent a series of letters to the President of
the Council. The first entails a reply by the Syrian
Government to the nineteenth report of the SecretaryGeneral on the implementation of resolutions 2139
(2014), 2165 (2014) and 2191 (2014), which is before
the Council today. I also sent another set of letters on
the number of victims in Aleppo and Damascus caused
by shelling by what the Secretary-General refers to as
non-State armed groups — the terrorist “armies” funded
by Turkey, Qatar, Saudi Arabia and Jordan. There have
been hundreds of victims in those two cities, and they
are mentioned by name.
We have brought all of this to the Council’s
attention over the past few years. This scenario is
still unfolding, although some ignore it and are still
referring to these terrorists as non-State armed groups.
Why is it only in Syria that they are referred to this
way? Why is it only in Syria and Iraq that terrorists are
called non-State actors? A terrorist in the United States
is called a terrorist. If a terrorist appears in France,
Spain, Belgium or Britain, he is called a terrorist. Why
is he not called a terrorist in Syria? This is a coverup. Why are his actions justified in this way? Why are
such terrorists called non-State armed groups? Syria’s
Government is a legitimate Government whose duty
is to protect its people, implement its Constitution and
combat terrorism, but we cannot do that on our own.
We need the Council’s support and assistance, and its
understanding of the magnitude of the terrorist threat
being faced in Syria, Iraq and the region. It is a threat
that is beginning to reach the countries of Council
members.
I hope sincerely that the Syrian crisis will be
addressed without reference to the interventionist
political agendas of some Governments, including
some members of the Security Council. The agony of
the Syrian people has grown far enough. Our misery is
not up for sale; we are not a bazaar of immoral business,
trafficking in the pain of our people. We do not want
our people to leave our country; we want them to come
back. The support for terrorism, economic sanctions,
and Turkish, Jordanian and Qatari intervention must
be stopped. The training of the so-called moderate
terrorist opposition must be stopped. At that point the
situation will be conducive to a political settlement,
and the Syrian Government is open to discussion of
it. It is open to coming to an understanding with the

15-281855/6

S/PV.7524

The situation in the Middle East

16/09/2015

national opposition in Syria, but not with terrorism.
The members of the Council themselves refuse to have
any dialogue with terrorists.

The President (spoke in Russian): I shall now give
the floor to the Council member who wishes to make a
statement.

I repeat, for the last time, that our pain and agony
and sorrow are vast, thanks to foreign intervention
in our internal affairs and to misleading political
interpretations of the situation in Syria. When there
is a cover-up of actions by ISIS, the Al-Nusra Front,
Jaish Al-Fatha, Jaish Al-Islam and all those terrorist
gangs, that implies that their actions are legitimate
and that there are countries protecting them, and as
a result they persist with their terrorism. Meanwhile,
what we need is concrete implementation of President
Putin’s initiative for establishing a genuinely effective
international coalition against terrorism.

Mr. Hmoud (Jordan) (spoke in Arabic): Jordan
will respond in writing to the accusations made by
the representative of the Syrian Arab Republic this
morning.

6/6

The President (spoke in Russian): There are no
more names inscribed on the list of speakers. I now
invite Council members to informal consultations to
continue our discussion on the subject.
The meeting rose at 11.35 a.m.

15-28185
