A/RES/72/243

United Nations

General Assembly

Distr.: General
23 January 2018

Seventy-second session
Agenda item 65

Resolution adopted by the General Assembly
on 22 December 2017
[without reference to a Main Committee (A/72/L.39 and A/72/L.39/Add.1)]

72/243.

Nelson Mandela Peace Summit
The General Assembly,
Guided by the purposes and principles enshrined in the Charter of the United
Nations and the Universal Declaration of Human Rights, 1
Recalling the determination of the United Nations to save succeeding
generations from the scourge of war and its purpose of maintaining international
peace and security, and to that end to take effective collective measures for the
prevention and removal of threats to peace,
Acknowledging the calls by the Secretary-General for a renewed commitment to
preventing conflict and sustaining peace with the support of prevention, conflict
resolution and peacekeeping, peacebuilding, human rights and long -term
development initiatives,
Recalling its resolution 64/13 of 10 November 2009, in which it, inter alia,
recognized Nelson Mandela’s values and his dedication to the service of humanity, as
a humanitarian, in the fields of conflict resolution, race relations, promotion and
protection of human rights, reconciliation, gender equa lity and the rights of children
and other vulnerable groups, as well as the upliftment of poor and underdeveloped
communities, and acknowledges his contribution to the struggle for democracy
internationally and the promotion of the culture of peace through out the world,
Welcoming the support of all Member States, organizations of the United
Nations system and other international organizations, as well as civil society,
including non-governmental organizations and individuals, for the annual
commemoration of Nelson Mandela International Day,
Noting that 2018 will mark the centenary of the birth of the late Nelson Mandela,

__________________
1

17-23325 (E)

Resolution 217 A (III).

260118

*1723325*

A/RES/72/243

Nelson Mandela Peace Summit

1.
Decides to convene a high-level plenary meeting of the General Assembly,
to be known as the Nelson Mandela Peace Summit, a day before the start of the
general debate of the Assembly at its seventy-third session, which will consist of an
opening plenary meeting from 9.30 a.m. to 10.30 a.m. and a plenary meeting from
10.30 a.m. to 6. 00 p.m. focusing on global peace, in honour of the centenary of the
birth of Nelson Mandela;
2.
Declares that the high-level plenary meeting will be held in the General
Assembly Hall;
3.
Decides that the opening plenary meeting will feature statements by the
President of the seventy-third session of the General Assembly, the SecretaryGeneral, the Chairperson of the African Union Commission and an eminent person
and a representative of civil society, both of whom are to be identified by the President
of the Assembly;
4.
Also decides that the plenary meetings will hear statements by Member
States and all observers of the General Assembly, the list of speakers will be
established in accordance with the rules of procedure and established practice of the
Assembly and the time limits for statements will be three minutes for statements of
individual delegations and five minutes for statements made on behalf of a group of
States;
5.
Invites all Member and observer States to participate in the high-level
meeting at the highest possible level, preferably at the level of Heads of State and
Government;
6.
Also invites intergovernmental organizations and related entities that have
observer status with the General Assembly to be represented at the highest possible
level;
7.
Further invites non-governmental organizations that are in consultative
status with the Economic and Social Council with relevant expertise to register with
the Secretariat to attend the high-level meeting;
8.
Requests the President of the General Assembly to draw up a list of other
relevant representatives of relevant non-governmental organizations, civil society
organizations, academic institutions, the private sector, diaspora communities and
migrant organizations that may attend and participate in the preparatory process,
taking into account the principles of transparency and equitable geographical
representation and with due regard to the meaningful participation of women, and to
submit a list to Member States for their consideration on a non -objection basis; 2
9.
Also requests the President of the General Assembly, in consultation with
Member States, to finalize the organizational arrangements for the high -level plenary
meeting;
10. Further requests the President of the General Assembly, at the seventysecond session, to hold open, transparent and inclusive intergovernmental
negotiations with all Member States and intergovernmental organizations that have
observer status with the Assembly, through two co-facilitators to be appointed by the
President, with a view to producing a short and concise political dec laration for
adoption at the opening plenary meeting of the Nelson Mandela Peace Summit;

__________________
2

2/3

The list of proposed as well as final names will be brought to the attention of the General Assembly.
Where a name is objected to, the objecting Member State will, on a voluntary basis, make known
to the Office of the President of the General Assembly the general basis of its objections and the
Office will share any information received with any Member State upon its request.
17-23325

Nelson Mandela Peace Summit

A/RES/72/243

11. Calls upon the Secretary-General to submit a report on the state of global
peace and security in line with the central mandates contained in the Charter to the
General Assembly at its seventy-fourth session.
75th plenary meeting
22 December 2017

17-23325

3/3
