S/2019/819

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
15 October 2019
Original: English

Implementation of Security Council resolution 1559 (2004)
Thirtieth semi-annual report of the Secretary-General

I. Background
1.
The present report is the thirtieth semi-annual report of the Secretary-General
on the implementation of Security Council resolution 1559 (2004). It provides a
review and an assessment of the implementation of the resolution since the issuance
of my previous report on the subject, on 25 April 2019 (S/2019/343), and covers
developments until 30 September 2019.

II. Implementation of resolution 1559 (2004)
2.
Since the adoption of resolution 1559 (2004) by the Security Council on
2 September 2004, limited progress has been made in its implementation. A number
of provisions, including with respect to the existence and activities of Lebanese and
non-Lebanese militias, remain pending.

A.

Sovereignty, territorial integrity, unity and political independence
of Lebanon
3.
Through the adoption of resolution 1559 (2004), the Security Council sought to
strengthen the sovereignty, territorial integrity, unity and political independence of
Lebanon under the sole and exclusive authority of the Government of Lebanon
throughout the country, in accordance with the Taif Accords of 1989, to which all the
political parties in Lebanon had committed themselves. That objective has remained
the priority of my efforts.
4.
In my most recent report on the implementation of Security Council resolution
1701 (2006) (S/2019/574), I reported on the progress made by the Government of
Lebanon in addressing pressing economic issues that could have an impact on the
stability of Lebanon. After the Council of Ministers had approved the draft 2019
national budget and presented it to Parliament on 27 May, Parliament adopted it on
19 July. The International Support Group for Lebanon, in a statement issued on that
day, “welcome[d] the adoption of the 2019 budget as an urgently needed first step by
Lebanon in fiscal management and towards reducing its deficit, as part of Lebanon ’s
economic vision and its commitments at the Conférence économique pour le
développement, par les réformes et avec les entreprises (CEDRE)”. The President of

19-17842 (E)

171019

*1917842*

S/2019/819

Lebanon, Michel Aoun, signed the budget into law on 31 July. Subsequently, in a
meeting on 2 September, President Aoun, the Prime Minister, Saad Hariri, and the
Speaker of Parliament, Nabih Berri, together with heads of political parties and
parliamentary blocs and their representatives, declared a “state of economic
emergency” through a statement in which the seriousness of the economic situation
in Lebanon was recognized. The International Support Group for Lebanon, in a
statement dated 13 September, welcomed that meeting “as a catalyst for political
leaders to address the economic challenges Lebanon faces in light of its own economic
assessments and in line with Lebanon’s economic vision and its commitments at the
Conférence économique pour le développement, par les réformes et avec les
entreprises (CEDRE)”. On 11 September, the Minister of Finance, Ali Khalil,
submitted the draft 2020 budget to the Council of Minister for review, to be presented
to Parliament by mid-October in accordance with the constitutional time frame.
5.
Further to my reporting (S/2019/574) on the statements of the Minister of
Defence, Elias Bou Saab, on 29 April, the Minister stated that President Aoun would
soon launch an initiative to gather Lebanese actors together for a dialogue on the
national defence strategy. On 14 May, the Minister of Interior and Municipal ities,
Raya al-Hassan, stated that “the Prime Minister was clear when he asked to put aside
the strategic disagreement about weapons until it is time to discuss this issue within
the defense strategy”, while noting that the matter’s resolution should take place
within a regional framework. It was reaffirmed in a presidential statement of
20 August that “the President is committed to the positions already announced on the
subject of the defense strategy”. In an interview on 4 September, the Prime Minister
likewise referenced the decision of President Aoun to open a “strategic dialogue on
how to defend Lebanon from any intrusion, or wars”.
6.
On 9 May, Lebanon ratified the Arms Trade Treaty, which entered into force for
the country on 7 August in accordance with article 22 (2) of the Treaty. On
5 September, Lebanon became a party to the International Convention for the
Suppression of the Financing of Terrorism. On 12 September, the Lebanese Cabinet
endorsed the national action plan on Security Council resolution 1325 (2000) on
women and peace and security.
7.
As previously noted (S/2019/574), at its April meeting, the Higher Defence
Council requested the Ministry of Defence to establish a mechanism to, among other
things, address smuggling through illegal crossings. The Council also requested the
State authorities to take appropriate measures against people crossing borders
illegally, including Syrians registered as refugees. As at 31 August, 942,565 refugees
and asylum seekers were registered with the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees in Lebanon. The long-term sizeable presence of Syrian
refugees in Lebanon, in particular in the context of an economic crisis and high
unemployment, represents a growing challenge and is increasingly affecting the
public perception of refugees and intercommunity relations at all levels.
8.
Tensions arose during the reporting period in relation to the decision by the
Ministry of Labour to address foreign employment. On 3 June, the Minister of Labour,
Camille Bou Sleiman, announced a plan, entitled “Action against illegal foreign
employment on the Lebanese territory”, to enforce previous labour legislation that
would require Palestine refugees, among other things, to obtain work authorizations.
On 15 July, after the Ministry had begun to implement the law, Palestine refugees in
camps throughout the country participated in marches and demonstrations to express
their opposition to the plan. Some also conducted a general strike in the camps,
erected roadblocks, burned tires, closed the camp entrances and exits and called for
the boycott of Lebanese businesses and banks. On 17 July, the President of the State
of Palestine, Mahmoud Abbas, issued a statement in which he called for dialogue and
rejected all forms of escalation. On his behalf, a member of the Executive Committee
2/10

19-17842

S/2019/819

of the Palestine Liberation Organization, Azzam al-Ahmad, met key leaders in
Lebanon and reiterated the Palestinian leadership’s commitment to respecting
Lebanese laws and resolving any issue through dialogue. On 18 July, the head of the
Lebanese-Palestinian Dialogue Committee, Hassan Mneimneh, underscored the
importance of implementing decrees regarding the relevant legislation in order to
protect the special status of Palestine refugees in Lebanon. The Lebanese-Palestinian
Dialogue Committee has pointed to A Unified Lebanese Vision For the Palestinian
Refugees Affairs in Lebanon (S/2017/867) as setting out a way forward for dealing
with the issues of labour, social security and mechanisms regulating Palestine refugee
employment. On 22 August, the Lebanese Cabinet formed a committee chaired by the
Prime Minister with five ministers to study the Palestinian file.
9.
The United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near
East (UNRWA) continued its efforts to deliver essential health, education, relief and
social services to Palestine refugees in Lebanon, in the face of a serious funding
shortfall affecting the Agency, which currently stands at $89 million.
10. In its resolution 1680 (2006), the Security Council strongly encouraged the
Government of the Syrian Arab Republic to respond positively to the request made
by the Government of Lebanon to delineate their common border. This remains critical
to enabling proper border control and management, including the movement of people
and the potential movement of arms. In a meeting chaired by the Prime Minister of
Lebanon on 11 September dedicated to tackling the issue of border smuggling, the
Minister of Defence of Lebanon reported on a decision by the Prime Minister to bring
together all parties, including the Ministries of Defence, Interior, Finance, Customs
and General Security, with a view to addressing smuggling collectively.
11. The delineation and demarcation of the boundaries of Lebanon also remain
elements essential to guaranteeing national sovereignty and territorial integrity. While
border delineation is a bilateral matter, progress on the issue remains an obligation
for Lebanon and the Syrian Arab Republic, in accordance with resolution 1680
(2006). There were no reports of cross-border incidents on the eastern and northern
borders through 30 September.
12. Israel continued to occupy the northern part of the village of Ghajar and an
adjacent area north of the Blue Line, in violation of the sovereignty of Lebanon and
resolutions 1559 (2004) and 1701 (2006).
13. There was no progress in relation to the issue of the Shab‘a Farms area. In
addition, neither the Syrian Arab Republic nor Israel has responded to the provisional
definition of the area contained in my predecessor’s report of 30 October 2007 on the
implementation of resolution 1701 (2006) (S/2007/641).
14. Unmanned aerial vehicles and fixed-wing aircraft, including fighter jets, of the
Israel Defense Forces continued to make almost daily overflights of Lebanon during
the reporting period, in violation of Lebanese sovereignty and resolutions 1559 (2004)
and 1701 (2006).
15. On 25 August, two drones crashed in the southern suburbs of Beirut. In identical
letters to the President of the Security Council and to me dated 25 August (A/73/988–
S/2019/683), the Permanent Representative of Lebanon to the United Nations
conveyed that the Orientation Directorate of the Lebanese Army Command had
determined that, on “25 August 2019 at 0230 hours, while two Israeli reconnaissance
aircraft were violating Lebanese airspace … in the Dahiyah area south of Beirut, the
first fell to the ground and the second exploded in the air, causing material damage.
Lebanon condemns in the strongest possible terms this flagrant Israeli violation of
Lebanese sovereignty and of Security Council resolution 1701 (2006)”. In a statement
on 27 August, Hizbullah announced that, “after the experts of the Islamic Resistance
19-17842

3/10

S/2019/819

dismantled the first plane … [it was found to contain …] C4 explosive material and
weighed 5.5 kg”. In announcing the findings of the Lebanese Armed Forces
investigation, the Minister of Defence, in a press conference on 19 September,
denounced the incident as “the most serious since the July war of 2006”. He added
that “there have been 480 Israeli violations of resolution 1701 within the last two
months, the most serious of which has been the explosive-loaded drones that passed
over Beirut airport and endangered air traffic, and then headed to the city ’s southern
suburbs …; one of the two drones was carrying 4.5 [kg] plastic explosives and the
second had eight engines. The drone … is a sophisticated military one which aimed
to attack the city of Beirut. It was launched from Habonim Airfield in Israel and could
be controlled via UAV”.
16. On 25 August, the Prime Minister called the drone crash “a blatant aggression
against Lebanese sovereignty and a clear violation of resolution 1701”. In a meeting
with ambassadors of the five permanent members of the Security Council on 26 August,
the Prime Minister stressed the interest of the Government of Lebanon in avoiding a
serious escalation, but noted that the international community should “prove its
rejection of this flagrant violation of our sovereignty and of resolution 1701”.
17. On 26 August, President Aoun characterized these events as “tantamount to a
declaration of war”, further declaring that they allowed Lebanon to assert its right to
defend its sovereignty, independence and territorial integrity. He denounced the attack
on the southern suburbs and on the Qusaya area on the Lebanese-Syrian border as
violations of resolution 1701. Meanwhile, on 27 August, the Lebanese Higher
Defence Council affirmed the right of the Lebanese to self-defence by all means and
against any aggression.
18. In a speech on 25 August, the Secretary-General of Hizbullah, Hassan Nasrallah
deemed the incident involving the drones to be “the first aggressive act since 14 August
2006”. He added, “This is a violation of the rules of engagement that were established
after the July war of 2006”. He referenced an air raid on 24 August in the town of
Aqraba, outside Damascus, in the Syrian Arab Republic, later claimed by Israel,
which he said had targeted a Hizbullah centre and killed two Lebanese young people
from Hizbullah. He reiterated his earlier pledge that, “if Israel kills any of our brothers
in Syria, we will respond to that killing in Lebanon and not in the Shebaa Farms ”. In
a letter to me dated 27 August (S/2019/688), the Permanent Representative of Israel
to the United Nations claimed Israeli responsibility for the strike in the Syrian Arab
Republic and said that it had “neutralized the threat of launching the armed drones
from the Quds Force and Shiite militia site in Aqrabeh”. He added that “the ongoing
Iranian military entrenchment and malign activities in the region, including its
direction of Hezbollah, pose a significant threat to international peace and security ”.
19. On 1 September, anti-tank missiles were fired from southern Lebanon at a vehicle
from the Israel Defense Forces south of the Blue Line. Hizbullah claimed responsibility
for the attack, stating it was on behalf of the Lebanese young people from Hizbullah
killed in the Israeli air raid of 24 August in the Syrian town of Aqraba. In response,
the Israel Defense Forces conducted artillery fire directed at the general area from
where the missile attack had originated. There were no casualties reported as a result
of the exchange. On 3 September, I expressed serious concern about the incidents
across the Blue Line, called for maximum restraint and urged all concerned to cease all
activities that violate resolution 1701 (2006) and endanger the cessation of hostilities.
20. The Secretary-General of Hizbullah, in a speech on 2 September, stated that,
“while [Prime Minister] Netanyahu was trying to change the equation … we told him
there are no longer red lines at all because you tried to change the terms of engagement.
We moved from responding in occupied Lebanese land called the Shebaa Farms and
Kfarshouba Hills to responding in occupied Palestine. This is new”. He added, “It is
4/10

19-17842

S/2019/819

our right, the right of the Lebanese to defend their land, their sky, their water, their
sovereignty, their security and we [confront] the drones in Lebanon ’s sky”.
21. On 3 September, the Prime Minister of Lebanon, in response to a journalist ’s
question about those recent developments, stated “the Lebanese state contained what
happened diplomatically, starting with the drones to Hezbollah’s reaction. We should
preserve stability and UNSCR 1701”. On 6 September, President Aoun said that “the
latest Israeli attack on the southern suburbs of Beirut marked a departure from the
rules of engagement reached after the issuance of UN Security Council Resolution
1701 and pointed out that any attack on Lebanon’s sovereignty and territorial integrity
would be met with legitimate self-defense and Israel would bear all the consequences”.
22. In identical letters to me and to the President of the Security Council dated
3 September (A/73/996–S/2019/708) referencing the above incident, the Permanent
Representative of Lebanon to the United Nations, on behalf of her Government,
condemned in the strongest possible terms what she said was an Israeli violation of
Lebanese sovereignty and of resolution 1701 (2006), drew attention to “the serious
human cost of cluster bomb remnants” and called upon the Council “to condemn the
use by Israel of cluster and incendiary munitions and bombs, and to use its infl uence
to press Israel to accede to the relevant international conventions and protocols ”.
23. On 28 August, the Lebanese Armed Forces stated that it had fired at three Israeli
unmanned aerial vehicles in southern Lebanon, prompting them to return south of the
Blue Line. Later that evening, the Israel Defense Forces issued a statement saying
that shooting had taken place in an area where one of the unmanned aerial vehicles
had been overflying.
24. On 9 September, Hizbullah stated that “the resistance [had] intercepted with the
appropriate weaponry an Israeli drone that was crossing the Palestinian-Lebanese
border”. The Israel Defense Forces confirmed that a drone had fallen inside Lebanese
territory that day. In a speech for Ashura on 10 September, the Hizbullah SecretaryGeneral stated that “we are here to reassure, Lebanon respects 1701 and Hizbullah is
part of the Lebanese government that respects resolution 1701. But … if Israel attacks
Lebanon … it is then the legitimate [human] right of the Lebanese … and through the
ministerial statement and the Higher Defense Council to defend Lebanon, its
sovereignty, their dignity, their life and their property … There are no red lines at all.
This is over”.

B.

Extension of control of the Government of Lebanon over all
Lebanese territory
25. The Government of Lebanon continued its efforts to extend the authority of the
State throughout all the Lebanese territory, as called for in the Taif Accords and in
resolution 1559 (2004), but challenges remained.
26. The Lebanese Armed Forces continued its operations to maintain security and
stability in the country, including through their counter-terrorism activities. As I
previously reported (S/2019/574), on 3 June, two members of the Internal Security
Forces and two members of the Lebanese Armed Forces were killed in a suicide attack
perpetrated by a Lebanese national affiliated with Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant
in Tripoli. Four servicemen were wounded, and eight suspects were arrested in
connection with the attack. On 17 June, in Nabatiyah, the Internal Security Forces
arrested two Syrian nationals over their affiliation with Islamic State and for planning
bomb attacks at Christian and Muslim religious sites. Separately, on 9 June, the head
of public relations of the Al-Jama'a al-Islamiya group, Sheikh Mohammad Jarrar, was
killed in Shab‘a by unidentified individuals.

19-17842

5/10

S/2019/819

27. On 30 June, in protest of a planned visit by the Minister for Foreign Affairs of
Lebanon, Gebran Bassil, to the Aley district, south of Beirut, supporters of the
Progressive Socialist Party blocked several roads. The convoy of the Druze Minister
of State for Refugee Affairs and member of the Lebanese Democratic Party, Sale h
al-Gharib, encountered the protestors, leading to a firefight, during which two of the
Minister’s bodyguards were killed, one injured and two supporters of the Progressive
Socialist Party wounded, while the Minister escaped unharmed. He denounced the
clashes as “an armed ambush and a clear assassination attempt”. The head of the
Lebanese Democratic Party, Talal Arslan, subsequently called for the case to be
referred to the Judicial Council for being an attack on a minister and thus a matter of
State security. As a result of the incident, on 2 July, the Prime Minister suspended
Cabinet sessions.
28. On 7 August, the Embassy of the United States of America in Beirut issued a
statement expressing support for a “fair and transparent judicial review without any
political interference. Any attempt to use the tragic June 30 event in Qabr el -Shamoun
to advance political objectives should be rejected”. The United States conveyed to the
Lebanese authorities its expectation that they would handle the matter in a way that
achieved justice without the politically motivated inflammation of sectarian or
communal tensions.
29. On 9 August, the leader of the Progressive Socialist Party, Walid Jumblatt, and
the leader of the Lebanese Democratic Party, Talal Arslan, met under the auspices of
President Aoun and in the presence of Speaker of Parliament and the Prime Minister.
In a statement after the meeting, the Prime Minister said that “the participants
condemned the unfortunate [Aley] incident…that resulted in two victims and a
number of wounded, which is now under the jurisdiction of the military judiciary,
which is investigating its circumstances”. The Cabinet resumed its meetings on
10 August.

C.

Disbanding and disarmament of Lebanese and non-Lebanese militias
30. In its resolution 1559 (2004), the Security Council called for the disbanding and
disarmament of all Lebanese and non-Lebanese militias, a key provision of the
resolution that has yet to be implemented. The provision reflects and reaffirms a
decision to which all Lebanese committed themselves in the Taif Accords.
31. Lebanese and non-Lebanese militias within the country continued to operate
outside the control of the Government, in violation of resolution 1559 (2004). While
several groups across the political spectrum in Lebanon possess weapons outside
government control, Hizbullah is the most heavily armed militia in the country. In a
speech on 12 July on the anniversary of the breakout of the July 2006 conflict, the
Hizbullah Secretary-General warned that a war against the Islamic Republic of Iran
would mean that “war has opened in the whole region”. In an interview on
4 September, the Prime Minister stated, “Hizbullah is not a Lebanese problem only,
it is a regional problem”.
32. There has been no tangible progress towards the disbanding and disarming of
Lebanese and non-Lebanese militias, as called for in the Taif Accords and resolution
1559 (2004). Since the adoption of that resolution, no specific steps have been taken
to tackle that crucial issue, which lies at the heart of the sovereignty and political
independence of Lebanon. The maintenance by Hizbullah of a military arsenal outside
of a legal framework and its involvement in the Syrian Arab Republic continued to
be denounced by a number of voices in Lebanon, who consider those issues to be
destabilizing factors in the country and ones that undermine democracy. Many

6/10

19-17842

S/2019/819

Lebanese see the continued presence of such arms as an implicit threat that the
weapons could be used within Lebanon for political reasons.
33. The self-acknowledged maintenance of arms by Hizbullah and other groups and
the alleged increase by Hizbullah of its arsenal pose a serious challenge to the State’s
ability to exercise full sovereignty and authority over its territory. In a speech on
31 May, the Hizbullah Secretary-General denied that either Hizbullah or the Islamic
Republic of Iran possessed factories for precision or non-precision missiles in
Lebanon. He added, however, “it is our right to own any arms to protect our country.
It is our right to manufacture any weapons…There is no factory for manufacturing
weapons now but [the United States] ha[s] no right to discuss this issue with us. We
have the right to own weapons, whether buying or manufacturing…If the United
States keeps this file open, we will establish factories for manufacturing precision
missiles in Lebanon”.
34. At the quarterly open debate of the Security Council on the situation in the
Middle East, on 23 July, the Permanent Representative of Israel to the United Nations
stated, “The Port of Beirut is now the Port of Hezbollah. Led by the Quds
Force…dual-use items are smuggled into Lebanon to advance Hezbollah’s rocket and
missile capabilities and conversion program”. The Hizbullah Secretary-General, in a
speech on 26 July, denied the claims of the Israeli Ambassador at the Council that
Hizbullah was using the port of Beirut to transfer arms to Lebanon.
35. On 29 August, the Israel Defense Forces released a video in which it named
three senior officers from the Islamic Revolutionary Guard Corps whom it said were
“inside Lebanon leading Hizbullah’s precision-guided missile project in order to
attack Israel”. The Hizbullah Secretary-General, in a speech on 31 August, stated,
“We have enough precision missiles that are sufficient for us but we don’t have
factories for the production of precision missiles”.
36. In a letter to the President of the Security Council and to me dated 3 September
(S/2019/704), the Permanent Representative of Israel to the United Nations stated that
“Israel has warned the international community time and again against Iran and
Hizbullah’s ongoing efforts to expand Hizbullah’s military build-up in violation of
Security Council resolutions, including resolutions 1559 (2004) and 1701 (2006).
Hizbullah’s precision-guided missile programme is the most alarming expression of
these efforts. Over the past few months, Iran and Hizbullah have redoubled their
efforts to convert and produce precision-guided missiles in Lebanon by attempting to
build manufacturing and conversion facilities in a number of locations in Lebanon”.
He further said that the Government of Lebanon was “fully aware of the existence of
Hizbullah’s precision-guided missile. Unfortunately, it has never taken any steps to
shut down the programme”. On 3 September, the Prime Minister of Israel, Benjamin
Netanyahu, reportedly announced that “the Israel Defense Forces has exposed another
precision missile facility in Lebanon”.
37. In a letter to the President of the Security Council and to me dated 7 September
(S/2019/716), the Permanent Representative of Israel to the United Nations said that,
“on September 3, the Israel Defense Forces exposed a facility belonging to Hezbollah,
located near Nabi Chit in the Bekaa Valley in Lebanon, designed to manufacture
precision guided missiles”, the accuracy of which was less than 10 m.
38. The participation of Hizbullah and other Lebanese in the conflict in the Syrian
Arab Republic continued to breach the policy of disassociation and the principles of
the Baabda Declaration.
39. At the Mecca conference of the Organization of Islamic Cooperation and the
emergency summits of the League of Arab States and the Cooperation Council for the
Arab States of the Gulf on 30 and 31 May 2019, the Prime Minister of Lebanon voiced
19-17842

7/10

S/2019/819

support for the summit statement. In a speech on 31 May, the Hizbullah Secretary General, referencing the Prime Minister’s support for the statement, stated that “the
position of the official Lebanese delegation does not correspond to the ministerial
statement and is in violation of commitments of the Lebanese government [on
disassociation]”. On 11 June, the Prime Minister stated, “My speech and stance at the
Mecca summit are the peak of commitment to the ministerial statement, the
disassociation policy and the interest of the country”.
40. Tensions in some Palestine refugee camps, in particular Ein el-Hilweh, persisted
during the reporting period and at times involved the use of weapons. On 26 April, a
member of Fatah was reportedly killed by an unidentified gunman in the camp of Ein
el-Hilweh, leading to an escalation of tensions there. This came within the context of
recurrent clashes between Fatah and members of Islamist armed groups. On 2 August,
Hussein Alaaeddine, the brother of a member of Islamist group Asbat al-Ansar,
reportedly died after being shot while marching in a rally in Ein el-Hilweh in protest
of the decision by the Minister of Labour to address foreign employment, as
referenced in paragraph 8. This triggered clashes involving the use of rocketpropelled grenades and heavy gunfire in the Safsaf neighbourhood of the camp
between the family of the deceased and the group of Bilal Abu Arqub, accused by the
family of being behind the assassination. On 4 August, Bilal Abu Arqub was
reportedly killed, while two of his sons were arrested and handed over to the Lebanese
army intelligence. Bilal Abu Arqub had been responsible for several violent incidents
in the camp, as previously reported (S/2017/867, S/2018/920 and S/2019/343). On
14 August, a man was reportedly shot and killed in the camp, triggering tensions.
41. In an effort to address the persistent presence and use of weapons in some of the
Palestine refugee camps, as reported previously (S/2019/574), initial steps were taken
in Mieh Mieh, including dismantling a security checkpoint and eliminating the
carrying of weapons and the wearing of military fatigues.
42. The presence of Palestinian armed groups outside the camps also continued.
Notwithstanding the decision taken in 2006 in the context of the national dialogue,
and confirmed at subsequent sessions, to disarm Palestinian militias outside the camps
within a six-month period, no progress was made during the reporting period with
regard to dismantling the military bases of the Popular Front for the Liberation of
Palestine-General Command and Fatah al-Intifada in the country.

III. Observations
43. I remain seriously concerned about the incidents that took place in Beirut on
25 August and across the Blue Line on 1 September. The events demonstrate the need
for progress in addressing some of the outstanding provisions of resolution 1559
(2004), namely, the disarmament and disbandment of Lebanese and non-Lebanese
militias and the strict respect for the sovereignty and territorial integrity of Lebanon.
There has been limited progress in the extension of the control of the Government of
Lebanon over all Lebanese territory.
44. The incident of 1 September demonstrates anew that Hizbullah maintains heavy
weapons, including in southern Lebanon. It could have led to a dangerous escalation.
It again shows the risks posed to the security and stability of Lebanon by Hizbullah ’s
maintenance of weapons outside of State control and its lack of accountability to State
institutions.
45. I note the statement of 27 August of the Higher Defence Council in which it
underlined the right of the Lebanese to exercise self-defence with all means against
any aggression. All concerned must contribute to efforts to reinforce the institutions

8/10

19-17842

S/2019/819

of the Lebanese State. The Lebanese State should increase its efforts to achieve a
monopoly over the possession of weapons and the use of force throughout its territory.
I continue to urge the Government and the armed forces of Lebanon to take all
measures necessary to prohibit Hizbullah and other armed groups from acquiring
weapons and building paramilitary capacity outside the authority of the State, in
violation of resolutions 1559 (2004) and 1701 (2006).
46. The allegations by Israel that Hizbullah possesses a facility designed to
manufacture precision-guided missiles, as well as the claim by the Hizbullah
Secretary-General that Hizbullah possesses such weapons and could establish
factories for manufacturing precision missiles in Lebanon, run the risk of triggering
an escalation in a tense regional context. I urge all concerned to exercise restraint.
47. Hizbullah’s continued involvement in the conflict in the Syrian Arab Republic
not only is in breach of the disassociation policy and the principles of the Baabda
Declaration, but also carries a risk of entangling Lebanon in the regional conflicts and
poses risks to the stability of Lebanon and the region. Furthermore, it demonstrates
the failure of Hizbullah to disarm and its refusal to be accountable to the very State
institutions that the implementation of resolution 1559 (2004) was intended to
strengthen.
48. The reported involvement of Hizbullah, as well as that of other Lebanese
elements, in fighting elsewhere in the region remains of serious concern. Separately,
the statement issued on 12 July by the Hizbullah Secretary-General suggesting that a
war against the Islamic Republic of Iran would lead to a regional war is a cause for
grave concern. I call upon countries that maintain close ties with Hizbullah to
encourage the transformation of the group into a solely civilian political party, and its
disarmament, in accordance with the requirements of the Taif Accords and resolution
1559 (2004).
49. I have repeatedly condemned all violations of the sovereignty and territorial
integrity of Lebanon. I reiterate that such violations, both by air and ground, run the
risk of triggering an escalation and could jeopardize stability in Lebanon and Israel
and beyond. They undermine the credibility of the Lebanese security and State
institutions and generate anxiety among the civilian population. I renew my calls for
Israel to adhere to its obligations under relevant Security Council resolutions and
immediately cease its overflights of Lebanese airspace. I similarly urge Israel to
withdraw its forces from northern part of the village of Ghajar and an adjacent area
north of the Blue Line without further delay.
50. The clashes in Aley underline that the widespread presence of weapons outside
the control of the State remains an issue throughout Lebanon and continues to
undermine security and stability in Lebanon. These clashes compromised effective
institutional functioning and presented risks to the power-sharing arrangements
enshrined in the Taif Accords at a time when Lebanon needs to address urgent
priorities. It is critical that the Accords be preserved and implemented by all to avoid
the spectre of a renewed confrontation among Lebanese citizens and to strengthen the
institutions of the State.
51. The agreement in Mieh Mieh, with a view to improving the safety and security
in the camp, is a step in the right direction. I encourage Lebanese leaders to make
progress in that regard.
52. These crucial and interlinked issues demonstrate the importance of holding a
national dialogue on the development of a national defence strategy through a
Lebanese-led, Lebanese-owned process in line with the country’s international
obligations. I reiterate my earlier encouragement to the President to spearhead a
renewed dialogue on a national defence strategy and to political leaders to support
19-17842

9/10

S/2019/819

him in that endeavour. It is important that such a dialogue address the need to achieve
a State monopoly over the possession and use of weapons and the use of force, a
crucial issue that stands at the heart of the sovereignty and the political independence
of Lebanon.
53. The steps being taken by Lebanese leaders on addressing pressing economic
issues are welcomed. The same sense of unity should inform the preparation of and
speedy agreement on the 2020 budget in line with the constitutional time frame. I
urge Lebanese leaders to maintain that spirit of unity and sense of urgency in
implementing the critical fiscal, structural and sectoral reforms.
54. The adoption of the national action plan on resolution 1325 (2000) is welcomed.
This is an opportunity to take forward core provisions of the resolution, including to
increase the role and participation of women in decision-making at all levels and to
engage women effectively in conflict prevention and resolution.
55.

I renew my calls to donors to support the State institutions of Lebanon.

56. I encourage donors to provide funding to UNRWA so that it can continue to
perform its essential role and deliver services, which are vital to the dignity and
security of Palestine refugees. Such efforts are without prejudice to the need for the
just resolution of the Palestine refugee question in the context of a comprehensive
settlement in the region.
57. I count on the continued commitment of the Government of Lebanon to its
international obligations and I call upon all parties and actors to fully abide by
resolutions 1559 (2004), 1680 (2006) and 1701 (2006). The United Nations will
continue its efforts towards the full implementation of those and all other resolutions
pertaining to Lebanon.

10/10

19-17842
