S/2020/515

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
10 June 2020
Original: English and French

Letter dated 9 June 2020 from the President of the
Security Council addressed to the Secretary-General and the
Permanent Representatives of the members of the Security Council
I have the honour to enclose herewith a copy of the briefings provided by
the Under-Secretary-General for Peace Operations, Jean-Pierre Lacroix, and His
Excellency the Minister for Foreign Affairs of Mauritania, Ismail Ould Cheikh
Ahmed, as well as the statements delivered by the representatives of Belgium,
China, the Dominican Republic, Estonia, France, the Niger (on behalf of the three
African members — the Niger, South Africa and Tunisia — and Saint Vincent and
the Grenadines), the Russian Federation, the United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland, the United States of America and Viet Nam, in connection with
the video teleconference on “Peace and security in Africa” convened on Friday,
5 June 2020.
In accordance with the procedure set out in the letter dated 7 May 2020 from
the President of the Security Council addressed to Permanent Representatives of
the members of the Security Council (S/2020/372), which was agreed in the light of
the extraordinary circumstances caused by the coronavirus disease pandemic, the
briefings and statements will be issued as an official document of the Security Council.
(Signed) Nicolas de Rivière
President of the Security Council

20-07726 (E) 150620 130720

*2007726*

S/2020/515

Annex I
Statement by the Under-Secretary-General for Peace Operations,
Jean-Pierre Lacroix
[Original: English and French]
I thank you, Mr. President, for giving me the opportunity to address the Council
in the presence of His Excellency the Minister for Foreign Affairs of the Islamic
Republic of Mauritania, whose country currently holds the rotating presidency of the
Group of Five for the Sahel (G-5 Sahel).
My statement is aimed at taking stock of the support that the international
community, and more particularly the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated
Stabilization Mission in Mali (MINUSMA), have provided over the past few
months to operationalize the Joint Force of the G-5 Sahel. As members are aware,
at the request of the Council the Secretariat has just carried out an assessment of
MINUSMA’s support to the Joint Force. The conclusions of the assessment are taken
into account in the Secretary-General’s latest report on MINUSMA of 2 June 2020
(S/2020/476).
Since the last meeting of the Security Council on the Sahel on January 15 (see
S/PV.8703) and despite the current context of the coronavirus disease (COVID-19)
pandemic, the fight against terrorism and the matter of development in the Sahel
region continue to mobilize the international community at the regional, continental
and international levels in order to stem the violence and create a conducive
environment for peace and prosperity. Efforts to mobilize additional resources
continue, while the African Union and regional organizations continue to provide
political support to the G-5 Sahel’s fight against terrorism and poverty.
Since last year, there has been tangible and encouraging progress in the
operationalization of the G-5 Sahel, notably through the reform of its permanent
secretariat and the development of management and decision-making tools. At the
operational level, progress has been made in strengthening the Joint Force, through
force generation efforts, the revision of its strategic concept of operation and the
operationalization of the Sahelian Threat Analysis and Early Warning Centre.
In addition, the establishment of a joint command mechanism in Niamey has
strengthened coordination with other international forces. All of those efforts have
resulted in the Joint Force launching a major military operation, known as Sama,
which is currently under way and progressing well.
Against that background, MINUSMA’s support to the Joint Force through
the provision of water, rations and fuel, as mandated by the Security Council, has
also been critical. In the past months, the consumption and disbursement rate of the
support provided by the Mission — so generously funded by the European Union —
has increased from 21 per cent to almost 50 per cent. I am pleased to note that, on
3 June, the European Union Ambassador to Mali and Special Representative Annadif
handed to General Namata Gazama, Commander of the G-5 Sahel Joint Force, its
new temporary headquarters. The support of MINUSMA and the European Union
ensured a rapid completion of the temporary structures.
The provision of life support consumables by the Mission has been proved
particularly useful, and at times critical, to sustaining the Joint Force. However, and
as outlined in the reports of the Secretary-General on the Joint Force (S/2020/373)
and on Mali, the limitations of the current support model present significant
obstacles. Transporting rations and fuel to Joint Force contingents remains the
biggest challenge. MINUSMA has done its utmost to accommodate requests within
the framework of its mandate and the technical arrangement. The Mission has added
2/23

20-07726

S/2020/515

additional drop-off locations for life support consumables within Mali as close to
the Joint Force’s areas of operation as possible. However, MINUSMA is operating
at maximum capacity and cannot go further in its support to the Joint Force with the
mandate and resources with which it has currently been bestowed.
As requested by the Council, the Secretariat carried out an assessment. It
concluded that international support to the Joint Force remained crucial, but that
the current support model was not suited to addressing the Joint Force’s transport
and equipment shortages. In that regard, the assessment defined different options,
ranging from a comprehensive support package to some more modest adjustments
to the existing system. The comprehensive support package includes a dedicated,
separate United Nations support office providing full logistical and operational
support, funded by United Nations assessed contributions or at least supported
through a dedicated trust fund. Those would be temporary arrangements to allow
the G-5 Sahel Joint Force to build its own capacities.
A second category of options aims at addressing immediate challenges in the
short term. The options include strengthening the G-5 Sahel Joint Force’s capacity
to procure and provide life support for its contingents, as well to conduct medical
evacuations outside of Mali; readjusting the current support model to allow other
partners to contract their own freight-forwarding companies for the delivery of
life support closer to the Joint Force’s areas of operations; authorizing MINUSMA
to undertake the delivery of life support supplies beyond its area of operations;
expanding MINUSMA engineering support.
In line with the outcome of the assessment, I would like to iterate once again the
Secretary-General’s call for a comprehensive support package, funded by assessed
contributions. That would not only allow for predictable and sustainable support,
it would also make it easier to pursue a long-term strategy to phase out the support
and render the Joint Force autonomous. In addition, it would free up MINUSMA to
dedicate itself completely to supporting the peace process and the stabilization of
central Mali. Expecting MINUSMA to do more in addressing transportation gaps
would require expanding the Mission’s mandate. Any authorization for MINUSMA
to do more in support of the Joint Force would require additional resources and
consistent and continuous fundraising. The generous financial support of the
European Union has been critical to sustain the support MINUSMA has provided to
the Joint Force so far, and I express my profound gratitude to the European Union
in that regard. I call on the international community and the other donors to come
forward and support this important cause.
The G-5 Sahel Joint Force is on the right track, but there is still a long way to go.
Strengthening the Joint Force is only one strand in the comprehensive international
approach required to tackle the root causes of instability in Mali and the Sahel
region. Improving governance, eradicating poverty and protecting the human rights
of all citizens, including the most disenfranchised, remain critical and more needs to
be done to ensure that such efforts are given the same weight as military operations.
As a result of the political commitment at the highest level of its contributing
States, the G-5 Sahel Joint Force has laid the groundwork to integrate international
human rights law and international humanitarian law obligations into the planning,
conduct and review of military operations. However, efforts remain necessary to fully
uphold this commitment. Preventing, mitigating and addressing violations during
operations are crucial, and the United Nations remains committed to continuing its
support to the G-5 Sahel in addressing challenges, in close coordination with other
stakeholders. Strengthening the police component of the Joint Force would be an
important step not only in improving the oversight of military operations, but also in
sustaining efforts by linking them to State-building, support of the justice sector and
20-077263/23

S/2020/515

prison reform and efforts under the human rights compliance framework. I welcome
the launch of the Partnership for Stability and Security in the Sahel in that regard. I
also urge the Joint Force and the G-5 Sahel member States to spare no effort for the
full establishment and implementation of the different pillars of the human rights
compliance framework.
The past six months have been particularly challenging. The COVID-19
outbreak has added another layer of complexity to the already highly complex and
challenging security situation in the Sahel. We are seeing attempts by terrorist and
other groups in the region to capitalize on the pandemic in order to undermine
State authority and destabilize Governments. Attacks on national and international
forces, as well as civilians, who continue to bear the brunt of the instability, continue
unabated. Innocent lives are lost every day. Schools remain closed, and many are
denied access to the most basic social services.
Even in the best circumstances, it will take years to rebuild affected
communities in the Sahel and sustained efforts to ensure that nobody is left behind.
In the face of such loss and devastation, we cannot be passive.
The international community can be successful in the fight against terrorism
only if we stand united and follow a comprehensive, joint approach. Despite the
difficult start to this year, there have been some positive developments that give
us hope. I welcome the establishment of the Coalition for the Sahel following the
summit in Pau in January, which provides a broader framework to coordinate
security, development and governance initiatives in the region. It will remain
important that we continue to lend our support to regional initiatives, including the
Economic Community of West African States and the African Union.
In conclusion, let me reiterate that we have a shared responsibility for the
Sahel. We must each deliver our part of a promise to help provide much-needed
relief and empowerment to the populations across the region who need it most. Let
us together strive for a solution that is the most effective and practical and that makes
it possible to bring about lasting change, to the benefit of the most disenfranchised.

4/23

20-07726

S/2020/515

Annex II
Statement by the Minister for Foreign Affairs of Mauritania,
Ismail Ould Cheikh Ahmed
[Original: French]
Allow me first to welcome the initiative of the French presidency to organize
this important Security Council meeting, which takes place in an international
context strongly marked by a health crisis that is unprecedented in the recent history
of nations, as well as an increasingly worrying security situation in the Sahel with
the upsurge in terrorist attacks.
We are very pleased at the interest the Security Council has shown in the
Sahel, and since we want to build a relationship of trust with the Council, the duty of
loyalty requires me to speak in the language of truth and frankness.
The security situation in the Sahel is visibly deteriorating with unusual
consistency. For several years, the evil alliance of terrorist and drug-trafficking
groups has been ravaging the Sahel region with successive malignant tumours.
The Sahel is already structurally weakened by the heavy burden of climate
change effects that we have long been the only ones to suffer: recurrent droughts
ruining our fragile agro-pastoral economies, depopulating our lands and casting
those in need of ongoing support into the periphery of our major cities.
Insecurity and underdevelopment have taken such a heavy toll in the Sahel
to the point that it is deeply scarred. Violence spreads to new territories every day.
However, let there be no mistake: the security threat that is sweeping the Sahel is not
only a local problem, but is of global dimension and scope. It therefore warrants a
comprehensive response.
We are still legitimately requesting the Security Council to consider the Joint
Force of the Group of Five for the Sahel under Chapter VII of the Charter of the
United Nations. But because we will never be content to do nothing while waiting
for that, we have undertaken, each individually and as the five countries together, a
robust effort to recover lost territories and assist those in distress.
Our objective is not only to restore military control over the land taken from
us by the terrorists but also, above all, to return to the areas devastated by the
occupying criminals, to restore, as I said, the protecting State and the public services
so essential to people’s lives, in particular schools and hospitals.
The response is currently being undertaken simultaneously on all fronts, from
security to development, but the challenge is huge and the gains are always tentative
and reversible. We and our allies need to have staying power, the patience to persevere
and the steadfastness to succeed. Several initiatives are under way on the ground,
which have been intensified since January 2020 in the devastated tri-border area.
In that regard, I mention with pride the Chadian army’s resounding successes
against Boko Haram in the Lake Chad area in the past few weeks. This shows that
the terrorists can be defeated and that fear has now changed sides. We Sahelians have
the special trait of resilience. This remarkable ability to cope will lead us to victory
against the terrorists. We have the stubbornness and the patience of those who well
know that they are right, even if they are unable to prove it today. We will defeat
them because the future belongs to us.
With regard to development, the Coalition for the Sahel is a relevant political,
strategic and operational framework, which is structured around four pillars and
20-077265/23

S/2020/515

focuses efforts on the fight against terrorism, military capacity-building, support for
the restoration of the State in conflict areas and development aid.
This is also an opportunity to thank all multilateral and bilateral partners for
their support to the G-5 Sahel countries. By way of example, I will mention France,
the United States of America, Germany, the European Union (EU), Saudi Arabia,
the United Arab Emirates, the African Union and the United Nations. However,
mobilizing funds to finance of the Priority Investment Programme, which is critical
to our populations, is not yet commensurate with expectations.
The Mauritanian Presidency realizes the extent to which the operationalization
of the Joint Force is a complex, long-term undertaking. Today we have put aside any
doubts about the relevance and the capacity of the Force, which is tangible proof of
the readiness of the Heads of State of the G-5 Sahel to jointly counter terrorism in
their common area.
The support of our partners in all its forms and cooperation with the United
Nations Mission are therefore crucial in every respect. In addition, the implementation
of the tripartite agreement among the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated
Stabilization Mission in Mali (MINUSMA), the European Union training mission
in Mali and the G-5 Sahel Joint Force will significantly contribute to strengthening
the capacities of the Force. Such technical arrangements should be continued in the
future in order to strengthen and develop cooperation in that area of activity.
This is an opportunity to commend the close collaboration between the Joint
Force and MINUSMA. The inauguration two days ago of the third Joint Force
command post in Mali, built by MINUSMA with funds made available by the EU,
demonstrates not only the resilience of the Force but also the firm commitment of
the international community at its side.
Since we are a few days away from discussing the report of the SecretaryGeneral on the mandate renewal of MINUSMA (S/2020/481), on behalf of my G-5
colleagues, I would like to take this opportunity to reaffirm our firm support for
MINUSMA and for the extension and strengthening of its mandate. Its added value
and contribution to stability and peace in Mali are well recognized.
In conclusion, the Sahel is today a region where almost all world’s problems
converge. It is determined to recover and become a region of promise and opportunity.

6/23

20-07726

S/2020/515

Annex III
Statement by the Permanent Representative of Belgium to the
United Nations, Marc Pecsteen de Buytswerve
[Original: English and French]
I thank the briefers for their statements.
Belgium remains a committed partner of the five countries of the Sahel and
of the Group of Five for the Sahel (G-5 Sahel) and its Joint Force. We share their
determination to fight insecurity and promote development.
Belgium’s initiative is also part of the many efforts of the European Union
(EU) in the region, as demonstrated by a new edition of the annual meeting of the
EU and the G-5 at the level of Foreign Ministers on 12 June, following the EU-G-5
summit in April. We are also partnering in the launch of the Coalition for the Sahel
and the Partnership for Stability and Security in the Sahel, and the Belgian defence
forces are engaged in several missions in the region, in partnership with the G-5
national forces.
Despite the still very worrying security and humanitarian situation, there is
good news, such as the increase in security operations under the aegis of the Joint
Force in recent months and the revised concept of operations. We also recognize the
support role played by France in that regard. The good news includes the inauguration
just a few days ago of the Joint Force headquarters in Bamako, built by the United
Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in Mali and funded by
the EU. We hope it will be used and will contribute to the effectiveness of future
operations. The achievements also include the increased capacity and autonomy of
the G-5 executive secretariat. More equipment has been delivered and more is on its
way. Nevertheless, since we joined the Council last year, we have always encouraged
the G-5 not to condition progress on the availability of resources or equipment. For
example, the crucial police component is still in its early development, and we believe
further operationalization depends little on additional resources or equipment.
That said, let me stress that military operations and development projects
alone will not defeat terrorism in the Sahel, as they have not done anywhere else in
the world. Since the terrorists make political demands, we believe that countering
them needs political commitment and ownership at the highest levels to strengthen
the democratic institutions of the Sahel, advance political solutions, where possible,
and challenge the terrorist narrative. Efforts to fight the stigmatization of particular
ethnic groups, provide basic services, including security, and combat impunity,
whether financial or criminal, should probably be the highest priority.
Another important issue is the allegations of extrajudicial killings by security
forces of G-5 countries. These allegations are very serious and warrant a thorough
investigation rather than outright rejection. Let me assure the Council that Belgium
understands the enormous challenges and fragility of the security forces of our G-5
partners. However, let me be clear that our call for respect for the rule of law and
basic human rights is not merely philosophical. In our view, it is an indispensable
condition for defeating terrorism. Progress on security and development is of course
essential but, if human rights and the rule of law are not respected, such progress
will remain transitory and terrorism and insecurity will continue to prosper.
To conclude, I would like to encourage both the five countries and the Joint
Force to strengthen the implementation of the human rights compliance framework,
supported by the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human
Rights (OHCHR), as this is one of the main tools that can help prevent possible
20-077267/23

S/2020/515

violations in the future. In that context, I would like to acknowledge the fact that
most G-5 countries have accepted such assistance by opening OHCHR offices in
their countries in order to fully benefit from its support. We encourage the countries
that have not yet done so to accept OHCHR’s offer to open offices in their country.

8/23

20-07726

S/2020/515

Annex IV
Statement by the Permanent Representative of China to the
United Nations, Zhang Jun
I thank Under-Secretary-General Mr. Lacroix and Foreign Minister Mr. Cheikh
Ahmed for their briefings.
As a good friend of African countries, China has been actively supporting the
efforts of the Sahel countries to maintain peace, security and stability and to promote
development in the region. We are encouraged to see that the political situation in
the Sahel remains generally stable, and we commend the efforts of countries of
the region in that regard. Meanwhile, we also share the concerns of countries in
the region over the serious security challenges posed by terrorism, transnational
organized crime and intercommunal violence. Having carefully studied the report of
the Secretary-General (S/2020/373) and listened to the interventions of the briefers,
I wish to share the following points.
First, continued efforts should be made to support political solutions to
regional issues. China maintains that African issues should be resolved in an African
way and through an African-led and African-owned process. We hope that the
international community will continue to respect the political will of the people and
the sovereignty of the countries of the region and to support the important role of
regional organizations, including the African Union.
Secondly, continued efforts should be made to tackle the challenges arising
from terrorism and transnational organized crime. We still remember that in March,
the Security Council held an open debate (see S/PV.8743) and adopted a presidential
statement (S/PRST/2020/5) on countering terrorism in Africa. We hope that the
international community can strengthen effective coordination and increase its
support and investment in the fight against terrorism in Africa. The Joint Force of
the Group of Five for the Sahel has played an important role in maintaining regional
peace and security. China supports the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated
Stabilization Mission in Mali (MINUSMA) providing logistical support to the Joint
Force within its mandate and the strengthening of its mandate with the necessary
financial assistance.
It is also our view that the United Nations agencies should provide more
support to Sahel countries to strengthen capacity-building in countering terrorism.
China has provided ¥300 million in aid to counter-terrorism operations in the Sahel
and the Joint Force, and will continue to help.
Thirdly, efforts should continue to eradicate the root causes of regional
instability. Underdevelopment is one of the main causes of many issues in the Sahel.
We hope that the international community will provide more support to countries
in the region in eradicating poverty and improving health care, education and
employment so that they can achieve the 2030 Sustainable Development Goals and
Agenda 2063 of the African Union in a more timely and effective manner. China is
actively assisting countries the region, especially on infrastructure and connectivity,
and by offering scholarships for study in China, among other means.
Fourthly, the pandemic is still severely affecting the Sahel region and the
African continent. It is the strong hope of China that the international community
will work closely with African countries in fighting the pandemic and addressing its
negative social and economic impacts. In this regard, our support should go beyond
mere political slogans, and be implemented through concrete actions.

20-077269/23

S/2020/515

We need to support MINUSMA in strengthening its capacity to fight the
pandemic. President Xi Jinping has promised that China will work together with
African countries in fighting the pandemic. We have promised to establish a
cooperation mechanism for our hospitals to pair up with 30 African hospitals, and to
make any vaccine a global public good, while making sure African and developing
countries are among the first to benefit. We hope that, through our joint efforts, we
will be able to bring hope to the Sahel and Africa as a whole. China will always be a
strong supporter of African countries.

10/23

20-07726

S/2020/515

Annex V
Statement by the Special Envoy to the Security Council of the
Dominican Republic, José Singer Weisinger
We express our sincere appreciation to Under-Secretary-General Lacroix and
the Minister for Foreign Affairs of Mauritania for their insights.
Let me begin by expressing our deepest condolences to the families and
colleagues of the two peacekeepers in Mali, one from Cambodia and the other from
El Salvador, who recently died as victims of the coronavirus disease pandemic.
The world is facing a major threat, which is impacting us profoundly and
testing our resilience at all levels. For this reason, it is now more important than ever
that we secure the gains accomplished thus far to bring about peace and security in
the Sahel.
We understood and supported, as a matter of principle and common sense, the
plea for a ceasefire in all conflicts during the pandemic, bearing the hope that the
pandemic threat would somehow raise awareness of certain groups and lead to halt
in their operations. However, the sad reality is that the Sahel region continues to be
destabilized by terrorist groups and intercommunal violence.
It is deeply disturbing to witness the dramatic deterioration of security in
the Sahel region, in countries such as Burkina Faso, Mali and the Niger, resulting
from terrorist attacks on civilians and security forces, as well as the surge in
intercommunal violence, exacerbated by the same terrorist groups, which claimed
the lives of more than 4,000 people in 2019 in those three countries alone and created
a dire humanitarian situation, with 14.7 million people in need of assistance and
more than 1.4 million internally displaced across the countries of the Group of Five
for the Sahel (G-5 Sahel).
Another matter of concern is the increased coordination and cooperation
among terrorist groups in the Sahel, which are currently taking advantage of the
COVID-19 pandemic to increase their attacks and usurp State authority, as well
as their connection to transnational organized crime syndicates to finance their
operations. This confirms that our efforts to accomplish peace and security in the
Sahel region must continue and be strengthened.
It is encouraging to hear about the progress made in the reporting period in
operationalizing the Joint Force of the Group of Five for the Sahel, which allowed
it to carry out a number of operations, and in implementing several necessary
regional and international security initiatives launched to support the Force and
counter-terrorism efforts in the region, such as Task ForceTakuba, under Operation
Barkhane, supported by a number of countries, including Belgium, Estonia, France,
Germany, the Niger, and the United Kingdom; the Coalition for the Sahel; as well as
the efforts of the African Union, the Economic Community of West African States
and the G-5 Sahel to increase the number of troops.
Challenges, on the other hand, do remain and should be promptly addressed
to pave the way to the full operationalization of the Joint Force, demanding greater
coordination at the tripartite level — among the European Union, the Joint Force
and the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in Mali
(MINUSMA) — to tackle shortcomings in the model of support used by MINUSMA.
As we all know, the security situation in the Sahel region is a complex one,
demanding a comprehensive approach. We therefore commend the initiative of
the Heads of State of the G-5 Sahel region, through the Coalition of the Sahel, to
focus on four pillars: efforts to combat terrorism; capacity-building for defence
20-0772611/23

S/2020/515

and security forces; support for the re-establishment of State presence; and
development assistance.
We encourage the leadership of the Sahel to guarantee the proactive and broad
participation of women and youth across these pillars and other efforts towards the
consolidation of peace and security in the region.
Finally, we highlight the importance of accountability and adherence to
human rights and international humanitarian law, especially within the framework
of counter-terrorism strategies, to strengthen the credibility of and receptiveness to
all efforts.

12/23

20-07726

S/2020/515

Annex VI
Statement by the Permanent Representative of Estonia to the
United Nations, Sven Jürgenson
I would like to thank today’s briefers for their valuable input and the French
presidency for convening the meeting.
The growing number of terrorist attacks against civilians and national and
regional security forces in the Sahel region is extremely concerning. More attacks
often result in the withdrawal of the State presence from already fragile areas,
which in turn negatively affects the humanitarian situation on the ground. We must
therefore work even more efficiently together to strengthen the State and security
presence in those areas most affected. In this regard, we commend the efforts of
regional and subregional organizations, such as the African Union and the Economic
Community of West African States, to coordinate and further mobilize joint counterterrorism operations.
It is encouraging that the Joint Force of the Group of Five for the Sahel (G-5
Sahel) has conducted an increased number of operations over the past six months and
strengthened its capabilities. The terrorist threat is often cross-border in nature and
therefore needs to be addressed in such a manner. It is positive that the G-5 countries
took the decision at the beginning of the year to allow for more flexibility when
conducting Joint Force operations across State borders.
In order to make counter-terrorism efforts in the Sahel region as effective as
possible, we need to strengthen cooperation among the various actors operating in
the region. Estonia closely monitors the developments in the Sahel and contributes
to restoring security and stability in a number of ways, including by contributing
personnel to the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission
in Mali and the French-led Operation Barkhane, and making financial contributions
to the European Union Trust Fund for Africa. Furthermore, we are part of the recently
created Task Force Takuba, which will seek specifically to tackle the terrorist threat
in the Liptako-Gourma area.
Allow me to stress the importance of adhering to human rights principles and
the framework of international humanitarian law when conducting counter-terrorism
operations. We commend the G-5 States for the steps taken to raise awareness in and
train the Joint Force, as well as for the announcements regarding the investigation of
alleged human rights violations, and we stand ready to support that process further.
Finally, to achieve long-term security in the Sahel, we need to address the
root causes of the instability. In this regard, it is necessary to make efforts to reduce
poverty and the marginalization of certain groups, and to promote gender equality. It
is of the utmost importance to keep those aspects in mind when designing strategies
and mandates together with the countries of the region.

20-0772613/23

S/2020/515

Annex VII
Statement by the Permanent Representative of France to the
United Nations, Nicolas de Rivière
[Original: English and French]
I thank the Under-Secretary-General for Peace Operations and the Minister
for Foreign Affairs of Mauritania for their interventions.
I would like to extend our sincere condolences to the countries of the Sahel
as well as to the victims’ families following the recent violence, especially in
Burkina Faso.
I want to share two messages today.
First, France is convinced that the international community can succeed in
stabilizing the Sahel if it acts in a united and determined manner. The Joint Force
of the Group of Five for the Sahel (G-5 Sahel), under the resolute command of
General Namata Gazama, and the national armies of these countries have recently
increased their military operations. Despite heavy losses, they achieved concrete
results: the neutralization of many terrorists, seizure of weapons and equipment,
and release of hostages. These armed forces gain more and more autonomy and
coordination. In addition, the countries of the region, including the Niger, a member
of the Security Council, despite limited resources, show resilience and maintain a
dynamic democratic life. We must salute their commitment.
Then, and this is my second point, the international community has recently
increased its support, which is a key milestone for the success of our collective efforts.
At the request of the G-5 Sahel countries, France, together with the European Union,
supported the launch of the Coalition for the Sahel this year. It rests on four pillars
the fight against terrorism, capacity-building, return of the State, and economic
development because all of these issues must work together. That mobilization
will continue in June with the first meeting of ministers for foreign affairs of the
Coalition on 12 June, preceded by a meeting of defence ministers.
On the ground, the launch of the Coalition resulted in the establishment
of a joint command mechanism between the French Operation Barkhane and the
armies of the G-5 Sahel; increased commitment on the part of partners, notably the
European Union, but also the African Union, as well as the Economic Community
of West African States and the West African Economic and Monetary Union, which
are funding a $2.3 billion counter-terrorism plan; and, finally, the launch of Task
Force Takuba, which brings together European special forces to support the Malian
armed forces.
The United Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in
Mali plays an essential role in this game, thanks to the support it provides to the
operations of G-5 Sahel forces. We must consolidate this United Nations support for
the countries of the Sahel to help them ensure the security of their territories and
their populations.

14/23

20-07726

S/2020/515

Annex VIII
Statement by the Permanent Representative of the Niger to the
United Nations, Abdou Abarry
On behalf of the three African countries that are members of the Security
Council — namely, Niger, South Africa and Tunisia — and Saint Vincent and the
Grenadines (A3+1), I would like to thank Mr. Jean-Pierre Lacroix, Under-SecretaryGeneral for Peace Operations, very sincerely for his excellent presentation and
sustained commitment to stabilizing the situation in the Sahel.
We welcome and thank Mr. Ismael Ould Cheikh Ahmed, Minister for Foreign
Affairs of Mauritania, current Chair of the Group of Five for the Sahel (G-5 Sahel), for
the honour he has bestowed upon us in taking part in the work of the Council today.
The recent report of the Secretary-General (S/2020/373) highlights the
security challenges posed by armed terrorist groups within the G-5 Sahel States,
which are among the most economically challenged in the world. These have placed
a burden on our populations, increasing the number of internally displaced persons
to an alarming 1.4 million. The number of people in need of humanitarian assistance
has also rocketed to 14.7 million. We express our grave concern at these trends
and underscore the additional resources required to alleviate the conditions of those
in need.
In addition to those factors, the effects of climate change, particularly
on pastoral activity essential to local economies, and of the coronavirus disease
(COVID-19) pandemic could further aggravate the already precarious situation of
the populations of the Sahel.
We deplore the fact that terrorist groups in the Sahel have ignored the SecretaryGeneral’s call for a humanitarian truce and sought instead to take advantage of the
pandemic by continuing their murderous attacks and propaganda.
It is undeniable that since the last report of the Secretary-General (S/2019/868),
the security situation in the Sahel has deteriorated. The increasing asymmetrical
attacks by armed terrorist groups have indiscriminately affected our defence and
security forces and allied forces such as Operation Barkhane, as well, unfortunately,
as our civilian populations, primarily women and children.
In the face of this unprecedented violence, the G-5 Sahel countries, devoting
between 15 per cent and 30 per cent of their budget to the defence sector, have pursued
their dedicated efforts to eradicate terrorism with the unwavering support of their
partners. Thanks to those efforts, on 3 March, as indicated in the report, the Joint
Force freed six hostages following a particularly complex operation. That clearly
demonstrated the military capacity of the Force and the tenacity and dedication of
its soldiers.
Additionally, the G-5 Sahel Joint Force has been active in many red zones and
carried out successful operations, either on its own or with the support of Operation
Barkhane, depending on their nature.
We welcome the fact that the complex situation prevailing in the Lake Chad
region has improved significantly thanks to the excellent results of Operation Colère
de Bohoma, led by the Chadian army, whose Commander-in-Chief, President Idriss
Deby Itno, was on the battlefield himself.
At the same time, the security arrangements of the G-5 Sahel have been
strengthened with the recent establishment in Niamey, the Niger, of the joint
command mechanism for all forces operating in the Liptako-Gourma triangle and the
20-0772615/23

S/2020/515

extension of the area of intervention of the G-5 Sahel Joint Force from 50 kilometres
to 100 kilometres on both sides of the State borders.
The three African members of the Council, together with Saint Vincent
and the Grenadines, appreciate the efforts of the international community and, in
particular, those of the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization
Mission in Mali (MINUSMA) in support of the Joint Force of the G-5 Sahel. The
fight against terrorism has thereby been strengthened, in particular with the launch
of the Coalition for the Sahel at the Pau summit on 13 January, and the prospect of
the start of operations by Task Force Takuba, in which European special forces will
be engaged.
In this context, we also recall the communiqué of the African Union Peace
and Security Council, issued at its 920th meeting, which welcomed the collaborative
efforts towards realizing the deployment of 3,000 troops to the Sahel for six months.
We likewise welcome the continued determination of the Economic
Community of West African States and the West African Economic and Monetary
Union to combat terrorism and achieve peace, security and stability in the Sahel. This
showcases the resilience and resolve of regional organizations on issues affecting
their member States.
We call on the international community to intensify its support for the fight
against terrorism by strengthening the military capabilities of the G-5 Sahel States,
assisting with the restoration of State presence and authority in areas under terrorist
threat and also by supporting economic and social development efforts in the
affected areas.
We wish to reiterate the legitimate request, often expressed by the G-5 Sahel
States, that the Joint Force be placed under Chapter VII of the Charter of the United
Nations. That would undoubtedly bolster the efforts of the G-5 Sahel Joint Force,
as well as regional and continental efforts, and strengthen the impetus for the fight
against terrorism in the Sahel.
We are encouraged by the fact that despite the multiple challenges faced by the
Joint Force, efforts have been made by the G-5 Sahel States to advance the women
and peace and security agenda by agreeing to adopt a gender-sensitive approach
to force-generation efforts, which is a clear recognition of the need for the greater
participation of women in operations. In that context, we call on the relevant United
Nations agencies, in particular UN-Women, and the international community to
provide the support necessary to optimize those efforts.
Keeping the issue of the Sahel high on the international agenda is of the utmost
importance, even more so as we face this unprecedented COVID-19 crisis.
As was recalled during the fourth extraordinary session of the Conference of
Heads of State of the G-5 Sahel, held on 15 December 2019, it is important that a
Marshall Plan be put in place to support development actions in the Sahel.
As we approach the renewal of the mandate of MINUSMA, which is closely
linked with the operations of the G-5 Sahel Joint Force, the A3+1 cherish the hope
that this renewal will strengthen the framework of that cooperation in a practical and
sustainable manner. It is against that background that the A3+1 is of the view that
emphasis should be placed on optimizing the current support mechanism so that it
reaches the Joint Force’s battalions with fewer constraints while strengthening its
capacities and competencies. Complete operational support should be provided to
the Joint Force, both tactically and strategically.

16/23

20-07726

S/2020/515

In conclusion, allow me to reaffirm here the firm commitment of the G-5 Sahel
States to respect for international human rights law and international humanitarian
law as well as the commitment to their implementation of the human rights and
international humanitarian law compliance framework. The fight against terrorism,
whether in the Sahel or elsewhere, should not place a burden on civilian populations
or be a source of additional fear for them. On the contrary, it should free them from
the grip of criminal terrorists, whose attacks caused more than 4,000 deaths in 2019
alone in the region.
In the pursuit of this asymmetrical war, if, unfortunately, doubts and suspicions
of abuses or inappropriate behaviour are noted with regard to the civilian population,
everything should be done, with professionalism and determination, to identify the
perpetrators of such acts and bring them to justice.
The effectiveness of our response in our common fight against terrorism in
the Sahel lies in our ability to develop a robust, coherent and integrated strategy to
address the security, humanitarian and development challenges.

20-0772617/23

S/2020/515

Annex IX
Statement by the Permanent Representative of the Russian
Federation, Vassily Nebenzia
[Original: English and Russian]
We thank Under-Secretary-General Jean-Pierre Lacroix and the representative
of the Group of Five for the Sahel (G-5 Sahel), the Minister for Foreign Affairs of
Mauritania, Ismail Ould Cheikh Ahmed, for their briefings.
We agree with the alarming assessments of the situation in the Sahel. Security
threats in this part of Africa remain high. Against the backdrop of the coronavirus
pandemic and the related quarantine measures, terrorist activity has again intensified,
and drug trafficking and organized crime are expanding. Unfortunately, we are
receiving almost every week tragic reports of heinous terrorist attacks.
The pandemic has led to serious humanitarian consequences for the region,
which was in a difficult situation long before the current crisis. Schools are closed,
and more and more people need food and medical care. This state of affairs creates
fertile ground for the radicalization of the population. In this regard, the countries
of the region must be assisted in effectively opposing the expansion of extremist
ideology, begin to address the severe socioeconomic problems, strengthen State
institutions and foster a culture of respect for human rights.
We support the efforts of the G-5 Sahel States to deploy the Joint Force to
combat terrorism and organized crime. It seems that in a relatively short period of
time it has already become an important element of regional security. We are pleased
to take note of information on several successful counter-terrorism operations carried
out by the Joint Force in the reporting period. Improved planning and coordination
between military units expanded the scale and duration of operations. We welcome
the establishment of a joint coordination mechanism in Niamey between the G-5
Sahel and other military presences in the region. We hope that the current difficulties
associated with the coronavirus will be temporary in nature and that the Joint Force
will be able to resume operations in the near future.
We are convinced of the importance of further coordinated steps on the part
of both Africa and the international community aimed at combating terrorism in the
Sahelo-Saharan region. We support the initiative of the African Union to develop
a plan for the deployment of the African Standby Force there. We note the timely
decision of the West African Monetary and Economic Union to adopt an action plan
to finance the fight against terrorism in the region through 2024.
It is obvious that the full-fledged functioning of the G-5 Sahel forces depends
on two important factors: ensuring its stable and predictable financing and providing
appropriate transport and logistics assistance. We note that the funds promised by
foreign donors are gradually reaching the region. We support the assistance provided
to the Joint Force by the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization
Mission in Mali (MINUSMA), in accordance with the mandate set out in resolution
2480 (2019). We are ready to consider options for improving the assistance provided
by MINUSMA, which were included in the recent report of the Secretary-General
on Mali (S/2020/476).
Russia is closely monitoring the developments of the situation in the region.
We are already providing a number of countries with appropriate military and
technical assistance and training of military and police personnel. In general, we
believe that in the near future the armed forces of the Sahel region will become an
even more effective tool in restoring and maintaining peace in West Africa.
18/23

20-07726

S/2020/515

Annex X
Statement by the Acting Deputy Permanent Representative of the
United Kingdom to the United Nations, James Roscoe
I wish to thank Under-Secretary-General Lacroix and His Excellency the
Foreign Minister of Mauritania for their briefings.
I want to begin by paying tribute to the forces of the Group of Five for the
Sahel (G-5 Sahel), to United Nations peacekeepers serving in the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in Mali (MINUSMA), to the
international troops deployed in Operation Barkhane, and to all those working to
bring peace and security to the people of the Sahel.
Our thoughts are with the families of those who have paid the ultimate price
in the service of this cause, and with the innocent civilians who continue to suffer
the impact of the deteriorating security situation in the Sahel. Just last weekend three
attacks by jihadist armed groups in northern and eastern Burkina Faso led to the loss
of more than 50 lives. The United Kingdom strongly condemns all such attacks and
calls for all parties to conflict to respect international humanitarian law and ensure
the protection of civilians.
Since the Council last discussed the situation in the Sahel (see S/PV.8670),
the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) has created new challenges to bringing about
stability and development in the region. It will increase pressure on limited State
resources and risks diverting international attention away from tackling the drivers
of instability. In response, the United Kingdom is supporting Governments and our
humanitarian implementation partners in the Sahel to manage escalating health and
humanitarian needs.
But we recognize that the secondary impacts of COVID-19 will also hit these
countries hard, and so we are also helping the Governments of the region to address
the longer-term socioeconomic impacts of the pandemic. This is in addition to the
$665 million that the United Kingdom is contributing to global efforts to develop
vaccines, treatments and testing for COVID-19 and to the International Monetary
Fund to support vulnerable economies.
In this highly challenging context, we commend the efforts of the G-5 Sahel
nations and their partners to address security concerns and tackle cross-border
threats. We welcome the increased operational output and improved capabilities of
the Joint Force and the positive trajectory of improving coordination with regional
and international forces.
The United Kingdom is proud to be supporting efforts to stabilize the Sahel
through our deployment to MINUSMA later this year, through our non-combat
assistance to Operation Barkhane and our ongoing contribution to the European
Union training mission in Mali. We are also supporting the G-5 Sahel Joint Force
itself with United Kingdom bilateral contributions so far totalling $3.4 million, in
addition to our contributions through other organizations. We would welcome all
partners who have committed to supporting the Force to deliver their pledges in full.
I would like to reiterate that there can be no sustainable peace and security in
the Sahel without the protection and promotion of human rights and compliance with
international human humanitarian law. The United Kingdom welcomes the progress
made in implementing the human rights compliance framework for the G-5 Sahel
Joint Force, but we would underscore that all reports of human rights violations
and abuses — whether by violent extremist groups, “self-defence” militias or State
security forces — need to be addressed. That is essential to prevent not only human
suffering but also impunity, strengthen the social contract between citizens and
20-0772619/23

S/2020/515

the State, and avoid creating grievances that fuel further violence. We urge all G-5
Governments to ensure that any allegations of violations committed by their security
forces are thoroughly and transparently investigated and that all perpetrators are
brought to justice.
The United Kingdom is also concerned by the increasing pressures on
humanitarian access in the region. It is critical that all parties respect the neutrality
and impartiality of humanitarian actors and facilitate unimpeded access to ensure
that emergency assistance reaches those in need.
In conclusion, the United Kingdom will continue to play its part, working
with the United Nations, the G-5 Sahel States and all our partners across the region
in pursuit of peace, stability, sustainable development and justice for the people of
the Sahel.

20/23

20-07726

S/2020/515

Annex XI
Statement by the Acting Deputy Permanent Representative
of the United States of America to the United Nations,
Cherith Norman Chalet
I thank Under-Secretary-General Lacroix for his briefing today. The situation
in the Sahel remains one of the United States top security concerns in Africa, and
the challenges of the coronavirus disease pandemic make it all the more important
for the international community to work together.
The Joint Force of the Group of Five for the Sahel (G-5 Sahel) remains the
long-term solution to re-establishing security in the Sahel. The United States is
committed to supporting the Joint Force by providing equipment, training and
advisory support to fill critical capability gaps on a bilateral basis, and continues
to call on other countries to do the same. We commend the steady progress we have
seen over the past few months in Joint Force operations.
But Joint Force operations alone will not be enough. Root causes of conflict
must be addressed through coordinated humanitarian aid and long-term assistance
in health, agriculture, citizen-responsive governance, democracy and human rights.
We urge the signatory parties to the Algiers accord to act on their commitments
and swiftly implement the agreement. The provisions of the accord will have a
stabilizing effect not just in northern Mali but also in the entire Sahel region. Once
the Government of Mali and those of its partner countries take real, substantive
action on the accord, they can focus more resources and attention on terrorist threats
that are spreading in the region.
The sustainability of our collective efforts to stabilize the region will depend
on the progress of the Governments, civil society and the private sector in G-5
Sahel States to create effective, citizen-responsive governance, increase access to
opportunity for all citizens and respect and embrace human rights, accountability,
and inclusiveness. Also critical will be increasing the meaningful participation
of women, youth and marginalized groups in decision-making. Together, these
endeavours can achieve durable peace and stability and unleash the potential of this
vital region and its people.

20-0772621/23

S/2020/515

Annex XII
Statement by the Permanent Representative of Viet Nam to the
United Nations, Dang Dinh Quy
I would like to thank Under-Secretary-General Jean-Pierre Lacroix and
Mr. Ismail Ould Cheikh Ahmed, representative of the Group of Five for the Sahel (G-5
Sahel) and Minister for Foreign Affairs of Mauritania, for their insightful briefings.
Viet Nam is very concerned about the security situation in the Sahel
region. There has been an increase in the number of terrorist attacks on civilians,
peacekeepers and security forces in the Sahel countries. Viet Nam would like to
extend its deepest condolences to the Governments and the families of those who
lost their lives due to recent attacks in Mali, Burkina Faso, the Niger and Chad. The
perpetrators of those barbaric acts must be brought to justice.
Viet Nam is also concerned about the withdrawal of State presence in the
areas concerned and the further deterioration of the humanitarian situation in the
region. In Burkina Faso, Chad, the Gambia, Guinea, Mali, the Niger and Senegal,
14.7 million people are in need of humanitarian assistance. In addition, the outbreak
of the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic has been putting the Sahel region
at risk of further instability and insecurity.
Viet Nam welcomes the initiatives on capacity-building for the region, which
include workshops on the role of women, national surveys on gender and human
rights capacity-building for security-sector actors of the G-5 Sahel countries in Mali,
and a regional workshop on human rights monitoring and the protection of sources,
victims and witnesses in the Niger.
Viet Nam welcomes the efforts of the United Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in Mali (MINUSMA) in response to requests by
the Joint Force of the G-5 Sahel. We call on the international community to support
MINUSMA and other organizations in accomplishing their tasks and mandates in
support of the operations of the G-5 Sahel Joint Force.
Against that backdrop,
following observations.

my

delegation

wishes

to

make

the

First, we urge all concerned parties to continue the fight against terrorism
and violent extremism across West Africa and the Sahel. Without collective efforts,
strong will and collaboration, the region cannot win this fight.
Secondly, we also call on the Governments in the Sahel, regional and
international organizations and other partners to strengthen their cooperation to
tackle the root causes of terrorism. We join the Secretary-General in welcoming
the adoption of the action plan to eradicate terrorism for the period 2020-2024 by
the Heads of State and Government of the Economic Community of West African
States, on 21 December 2019. We also welcome the outcomes of the sixth annual
summit of the G-5 Sahel Heads of State, held on 25 February 2020; the Pau summit,
in January; and the high-level video-teleconference between the European Union
and the G-5 Sahel Heads of State, held on 28 April 2019.
Thirdly, we urge Governments and other concerned parties to uphold their
obligations and responsibilities to implement international humanitarian law and
ensure that humanitarian aid reaches those who most need it, without hindrance.
Moreover, it is urgent to have a comprehensive plan and coordination among
Governments in the Sahel, international organizations and other partners in the fight
against the COVID-19 pandemic.

22/23

20-07726

S/2020/515

Fourthly, we call for a coherent and integrated approach to security,
humanitarian, climate-change and development challenges in the region. It is
necessary for the various forces to enhance coordination, the exchange of information,
transparency and mutual support through the establishment of the Coalition for the
Sahel. There should also be more workshops, seminars on capacity-building and
training courses for women and youth on sustainable development in the region.
In conclusion, we commend the tireless efforts of MINUSMA, the United
Nations Office on Drugs and Crime, and the Coalition for the Sahel’s joint
command mechanism.
We call for closer cooperation among and further efforts on the part of the
United Nations, international partners and all parties in West Africa and the Sahel
to fight terrorism and violent extremism, ensure unimpeded access to humanitarian
aid and join hands to fight the COVID-19 pandemic.

20-0772623/23
