'1,II .,

?,Y,’

TWENTY-SECOND

YEAR

,,

s,, >.,,Y,

th
MEETING: 6 JUNE 1967

NEW YORK:

CONTENTS
Page

Provisional agenda @/Agenda/1 348) . , . . . . , . . . . . . . . . , . . . , . . , . . . . . .

1

Adoptionoftheagenda

. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .,. . . . . . . . . , . . . . , . . . .

1

Letter dated 23 May 1967 from the Permanent Representatives of Canada and
Denmark addressed to the President of the Security Council (S/7902) . . . , . .

1

Complaint of the representative of the United Arab Republic in a letter to the
President of the Security Council dated 27 May 1967 entitled: “Israel aggressive
policy, its repeated aggression threatening peace and security in the Middle East
and endangering international peace and security” (S/7907) , . . . . . . , . . . . .

1

Letter dated 29 May 1967 from the Permanent Representative of the United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland addressed to the President of
the Security Council (S/79 10) , . . . , . . . , . , . . , . . , . . , , , . , , . . . . . . + .

i

S/PV. 1,348

NOTE
Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined with
figures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United Nations document.

Documents of the Security Council(symbo1 SI. . .) are normally published in quarterly
Supplements of the Officia1 Records of the Security Council. The date of the document

indicates the supplement in which it appears or in which information about it is given.
The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a system
adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of Resolutions and Decisions of the
Securi@ Council. The new system, which has been apphed retroactively to resolutions
adopted before 1 January 1965, became fully operative on that date.

THIRTEEN

WUNDRED

AND FORTY-EIGHTH

Held in New York on Tuesday,
President: Mr. Hans R. TABOR (Denmark).

MEETING

6 June 1967, at 6.30 p.m.
Lebanon, Iraq, Morocco, Saudi Arabia and Kuwait to take
the places reserved for them at the side of the Council
Chamber in order to participate without vote in the
discussion.

Present: The representativcs of the following States:
Argentina, Brazil, Bulgaria, Canada, China, Denmark, Ethiopia, France, India, Japan, Mali, Nigeria, Union of Soviet
Social% Republics, United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland and United States of America.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. A. Eban (lsrael),
Mr. M. A. El Kony (United Arab Republic), Mr. M. H.
El-Farra (Jordan), Mr. G. J. Totneh (Syria), Mr. G. Hakim
(Lebanon), Mr. A. Pachachi (Iraq), Mr. A. T. Benhima
(Morocco), Mr. G. AI-Rachuch (Saudi Arabia) and Mr. G, A.
Al-Rashid (Kuwait) took the places reserved for them

Provisional agenda &/Agenda/1 348)
1. Adoption of the agenda,

2. The PRESIDENT: Letters bave now also been received
from the Permanent Representatives of Tunisia [X/7928]
and \Libya [S/7934/ requesting that they be invited to
participate without vote in the discussion. If there is no
objection, Kpropose to invite those two representatives also
to take the places reserved for them at the side of the
Council Chamber in order to participate without vote in the
discussion.

2. Letter dated 23 May 1967 from the Permanent Representatives of Canada and Denmark addressed to the
President of the Security Council(S/7902).
3. Complaint of the representative of the United Arab
Republic in a letter to the President of the Security
Council dated 27 May 1967 entitled: “Israel aggressive
policy, its repeated aggression threatening peace and
security in the Middle East and endangering international peace and security” (S/7907).

At the invitation of the President,
(Tunisia) and Mr. W. El Boun’ (Libya)
reserved for them

4. Letter dated 29 May 1967 from the Permanent Representative of the United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland addressed to the President of the
Security Council (S/7910).

Mr. M. Mestiri
took the places

3. The PRESIDENT:
The Security Council Will now
continue its discussion of the three items inscribed on its
agenda.

Adoption of the agenda

4. Since the Council was convcned yesterday morning to
consider immediately the serious situation in the Middle
East, members bave been continuously engaged in urgent
consultations as to the course of action to be taken by the
Council in this emergency situation. These consultations
have now resulted in unanimous agreement on a draft
resolution which calls for an immediate cesse-fire, In my
capacity as President of the Council, 1 have the honour to
present this draft resolution (S/7935], the text of which
reads as foilows:

The agenda was adopted,
Letter dated 23 May 1967 from the Permanent Representatives of Canada and Denmark addressed ta the President
of the Security Council (S/7902)
Complaint
of the representative of the United Arab
Republic in a letter to the President of the Security
Council dated 27 May 1967 entitled: “lsrael aggressive
policy, its repeated aggression threatening peace and
security in the Middle East and endangering international
peace and security” (W7907)

“The Security Council,
“Noting the oral report of the Secretary-General in this

situation,

Letter dated 29 May 1967 from the Permanent Representative of the United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern
Ireland addressed to the President of the
Security Council (S/7910)

“‘Having heard the statements made in the Council,
Y’oncerned at the outbreak of fighting and with the
menacing situation in the Near East,

1. The PRESIDENT: In accordance with the decisions
previously taken by the Council, and with the consent of
the Council, 1 now invite the representatives of Israel, the
United Arab Republic, Jordan, the Syrian Arab Republic,

“1. Culls upon the Governments concerned to take
forthwith as a first step all measures for an immediate
1

cesse-fire and for a cessation of a11military
the area;

activities in

Government considered that the flrst and foremost urgent
step was to put an end to the tragic bloodshed by bringing
an immediate halt to the hostilities. For that reason, the
United States and other members for the past thirty-six
hours have vigorously urged as a first step the adoption of a
resolution calling for an immediate cesse-fire by a11the
Governments concerned.

“2. Requests the Secrctary-General to keep the Councll
promptly and currently informed on the situation.”
5. 1 would suggest, if members of the Council agree, that
we proceed to the vote on this draft resolution without
debate.

11. We deeply regret that SO much time has been lost in
the process. However, it is gratifying that other members of
the Council have now reached the same conclusion and that
we cari now issue a unanimous appeal to the parties to lay
down their an-ns. It is our fervent hope that the Council’s
appeal Will be immediately and fully complied with.

It was SOdecided.

A vote was taken by show of hands.
The draft resolution was adopted unanimously. 1

12. We believe that a cesse-fire represents the urgent flrst
step in restoring peace to the Near East. Once this is
accomplished, my delegation believes that the Couneil
should then turn its immediate attention to the other steps
that Will be required to achieve a more lasting peace. In that
approach, my country’s policy remains as President
Johnson stated it on 23 May in these words:

6, The PRESIDENT: 1 shah ask the Secretary-General to
transmit the resolution to the parties concerned and to
report to the Council as soon as possible. 1 am confident
that 1 express the unanimous wish of the members of the
Council when 1 appeal most urgently to the parties to
comply immediately with the provisions of this resolution.

‘<TO the leaders of a11nations of the Near East 1 wish to
say what three American Presidents have said before-that
the United States is firmly commltted to the support of
the political independence and territorial integrity of a11
the nations of the area.
“.. .

7. There are a number of representatives who wish to
explain their vote. The first speaker on my list is the
representative of the United States, on whom 1 now call.
8. Mr. GOLDBERG (United States of America): In the
resolution just adopted the Security CounciI, acting in the
exercise of its responsibilities under the Charter, has issued
a clear cal1 for an end to the hostilities in the Near East.
This resolution is a first step on the road back towards
peace. It carrles the full authority of the United Nations. It
is now the duty of a11the parties concerned to comply fully
and promptly with the terms of this resolution. It is equally
the duty of every Member of the United Nations to support
the implementation of the resolution by the full weight of
its influence.

“The United States has consistently sought to have
good relations with a11States of the Near East. Regrettably this has not always been possible, but we are
convinced that our differences with individual States in
the area and their differences with each other must be
worked out peacefully and in accordance with accepted
international practice.” [sec the 1343th meeting,
para. 24.1

9. The resolution itself, as a11 members of the Council
know, is the result of intensive political efforts here at the
United Nations during the past thirty-six hours, under the
leadership of our President and by various Governments
and their representatives here. It reflects a successful
harmonizing of our respective points of view towards a
single goal: to quench the flames of war in the Near East
and to begin to move towards peace in the area.

13. It was our concern about this that brought us to this
Council very early and prompted us in a series of efforts
here to avert what has occurred. In implementation of thls
policy directed to a11countries in the Near East, when the
fïres have been dampened and tension reduced we stand
ready to join in efforts to bring a lasting peace to the area
in which co-operative programmes for the economic and
social development of a11countries of a11countries of the
region would be an integral part.

10. This resolution, with its appeal for a cesse-fire, calls
for precisely the action which my delegation has been
urging since we met yesterday morning (1347th meeting]
to consider the outbreak of hostilities. Indeed, it is
consistent with the spirit in which we have approacbed
every stage of ,this crisis. We have throughout supported
every effort by our distinguished Secretary-General to
maintain the peace in the area and sought, to the best of
our ability, to exercise a restraining influence on the parties
COnCeTMd. We have expressed willingness to join in the
search for peace here in the United Nations and by our own
diplomatie efforts as well. Regrettably, our efforts and
those of many others, including the Secretary-General, to
prevent a war ended in failure. When that was apparent, my

14. Before concluding, it is my duty to speak of a specific
matter related to the position 1 have just reiterated. During
the past twenty-four hours fantastic allegations have been
made about United States aircraft being involved in the
hostilities in the Near East. Those allegations are totally
without foundation in fact. They are made up out of whole
cloth. 1 take this opportunity in the Security Council on
the complete authority of the United States Government to
deny them categorically without any ifs, ands or buts.
Indeed, yesterday morning, 5 June, within hours after first
hearing such charges, my Government denied them in a
forma1 statement issued by the Department of Defense as
follows:
“There have been reports that United States aircraft
from aircraft carriers assigned to the Sixth Fleet have

1 See resolution 233 (1967).

2

flown to Israel airfields. Other reports have stated that
Sixth Fleet aircraft have participated in air activity
elsewhere in the area of conflict. Al1 such reports are
erroneous. Al1 Sixth Fleet aircraft are and have been
several hundred miles from the area of conflict.”
15. Charges of this sort at a time Iike this car-mot be
treated lightly. They are in the category of a cry of “Fire! ”
in a crowded theatre. They have been used in tbe overt
incitement of mob violence against United States diplomatic and other installations in several Arab States. These
false reports, on the motives for which 1 do not wish to
speculate, have been propagated in a highly inflammable
situation. In these circumstances, my Government considers
it necessary to take prompt steps to prevent the further
spread of these dangerous falsehoods.

21. For two days now the Security Council has been faccd
with a situation of a highly dangerous mihtary COIlfiiCt
in
that area. Our primary and urgent responsibility is to hait
the outbreak which we were unable to avert. Al1 signs
indicate that we are faced with a ferocious war in this
troubled area. Scarcely two days have passed since hostilities broke out, but we see that this war is indeed a total war
involving ail the Arab States and Israel. We also see that this
war bas developed into an open and dangerous conflict in
the air, involving much danger and suffcring for civilian
populations. If this war is allowed to continue, it Will no
doubt bring about untold damage and suffering to a11
peoples involved and much devastation and damage to the
many historic and holy shrines held in such high esteem and
reverence by millions in a11of the world’s continents.
22. In this regard, 1 wish to associate my delegation with
the urgent appeal that has been made by the world’s
religious Ieaders and by the Secretary-General, that tlic
,Holy City of Jerusalem be dcclared an apen city and thus
be spared from involvement in the present conflict.

16 ‘With this in mind, 1 am authorized to announce in this
uncil and to propose two concrete measures. he United
States is prepared, first, to co-operate in anYmrediate
impartial investigation by-- the United Nations of Zhese
charges, apd.to offer>%cilities
to the United Nations in
that investigation; and second, as a part of or in addition to
such an investigation, the United States is prepared to invite
United Nations personnel aboard our aircraft carriersin the
Mediterranean today, tomorrow, or at the convenience of
the United Nations, to serve as impartial observers of the
activities of our planes in the area and to verify the past
activities of our planes from our officia1 records and from
the log that each ship carries. These observers Will, in
addition, be free to interview air crews on these carriers
without inhibition, SOas to determine their activities during
the days in question. Their presence as observers on these
carriers will be welcomed throughout the period of this
crisis and SOlong as these ships are in the eastern waters of
the Mediterranean.

Q

23. The immediate objective of the Council must be to
return the present situation of military conflict to a
situation and position from which a fair and just settlement
of issues cari be obtained. The Council has been wise, whcn
faced with such a situation fraught with dangers not only to
the areas concerned but also to the peace of the whole
world, to avoid the experience and spectacle of the past
weeks of allowing itself to be bogged down in futile debate
which cari only take it into a vicious circle of evercontinuing discussion.
24. Now that we have agreed on the first step, let us make
up for the lost time and opportunity by following up our
decision of today with concerted action which cari lead to
the creation of fair and equitable conditions for a just and
lasting settlement.

17. In tbe meantirne, 1 ask any Government interested in
peace to see to it that these false and inflammatory charges
are given no further credence by any source within its
control,

25. As the representative of a country that is a neighbour
of long and good standing of this area of the Middle East,
the great cradle of religions and civilizations, 1 speak today
with a heart filled with sorrow. My country and people
have been closely associated with all the peoples of this area
and have lived with them in friendly coexistence based on
mutual respect throughout a long and glorious history
stretching from time immemorial to the present day. This is
obviously. not the time for historical soliloquy, but my
mind’s eye cannot help looking back on the long history
and experience we have shared with a11the peoples of this
@on down through the ages. We had fruitful associations
with tlie peoples of this regic,~ when the great pharaohs of
Egypt built the wondrous pyrdmids; when the great kings
of Jerusalem built the temples; when the Assyrians and
Babylonians were the great powers of their day; when tlle
meaningful message of “Peace on earth, goodwill toward
men” went out from the manger of Bethlehem. And again
we were there when the great Prophet, the Father of Islam,
proclaimed his clarion cal1 for the glory of the Everlasting
God.

18, In conclusion, let me commend to every State the
Council’s resolution just adopted. Our duty now as Member
States bound by the Charter is to place a11the influence at
the command of our respective Governments behind the
fulfilment of the decision unanitnously arrivcd at by the
Council. Properly carried out, this resolution Will be a
major step towards peace and security in the Near East and
Will provide a point of reference from which to resolve
underlying problems in a spirit of justice and equity.
19. Mr. MAKONNEN (Ethiopia): 1 thank you, Mr. Presi.
dent, for the opportunity
to explain my delegation’s
understanding of the cesse-fire resolution that tbe Council
has just adppted.
20. 1 should say first of a11 that my delegation looks on
this resolution as the first of many urgent steps, and as one
with a limited but vital objective: that of meeting the
pressing requirement of a tragic situation of large-scale
armed conflict which has corne to exist in the area of the
Middle East,

26. Similarly, today, in this age of freedom and progress,
we share with our brethren in the Middle East common
aspirations solidified by our African-Asian union of peace,
progress and a better life for ail of our peoples.
3

from British aircraft carriers have taken part in the
fighting. During the past week, the only British aircraft
carriers in the area have been HMS Victorious, which has
been in Malta, and HMS Hermes, which has been in Aden,
each over a thousand miles away.”

27. The Council cari therefore appreciate how painful it is
for my country to witness the tragic and bloody developments that bave overtaken this area. It was with sentiments
of deep and sincere concern for the quick reestablishment
of peace in the area that the Ethiopian delegation supported the Council’s first concerted move to avert further
disaster before more destruction is wrought and before it is
too late.

34. 1 have today, Mr. President, addressed to you a letter
on this important matter dealing with these lies which have
been circulated in various forms here in New York. 1 shall
read out this short letter, if 1 may, because it is necessary
that these matters should be finally disposed of. The letter
reads as follows:

28. We consider this to be the first vital step that the
Council has to take, and we shall of course continue to add
our modest but genuine efforts to those of the members of
the Council in the urgent steps we must take together in
order to bring a just and lasting peace to this war-tormented
region.

“Her Majesty’s Government have been shocked by
reports emanating from the Middle East and carried by
officia1 news media alleging that British aircraft have
taken part in the recent fighting in the Middle East on the
side of Israel. These reports are malicious fabrications.
There is no grain of truth in them.

29. In conclusion, 1 should like to present to the delegations of India and Brazil my Government’s sincere
condolences at the tragic death of Indian and Brazilian
soldiers serving the United Nations cause of peace in the
area. May the memory of their sacrifice be a shining
example to a11 servants of peace and to a11 peoples
everywhere dedicated to the preservation of international
peace and security now and for a11time.

“It is the policy of Her Majesty’s Government to avoid
taking sides in the conflict in the Middle East and they
have done everything they cari to bring about a cesse-fire
as soon as possible. As stated by my Secretary of State in
the House of Commons yesterday, a11British forces in the
area have been under the strictest instructions not 10
become involved in any way.

30. Mr. SEYDOUX (France) (transluted jkom French):
The Council has thus called for a cessation of hostilities.
This decision which would have spared us SOmuch death
and destruction had it been possible to make it earlier, as
we would SOdearly have wished, must now be implemented
and without any delay. Lives and property must be
safeguarded and among that property my country gives a
preeminent place to the historical and spiritual capital
which the Holy Places reprcsent for Christendom.

“Al1 United Kingdom Ambassadors in the Arab countries have been instructed to make clear to the Govemments to which they are accredited that these reports are
malicious and mischievous inventions and that no British
aircraft, whether carrier-based or land-based, nor any
other British forces, have taken any part whatsoever in
the recent fighting.

3 1. The French delegation, for its part, cari scarcely
imagine that the appeal which thc Council has just
unanimously addressed to the parties involved Will go
unheeded, for the States in question are surely aware that
behind this resolution stands the full authority of the
United Nations,

“1 should be grateful if you would have this letter
circulated immediately as a Security Coundl document.”
/S/7936.]
1 thank you for allowing me to deal with that urgent and
important matter first.

32. Once the hostilities have ceased, in accordance with
the Council’s Will, we shal1 have a long road before us. We
shall bave to exercise close watch over the implementation
of our resolution and over the consequences flowing from
implementation.
The United Nations Will bave major
problems to salve; and we are confident that it Will be able
to set purposefully about solving them. It is the stability of
the Near East and pe’acethat are at stake,

35. 1 would also wish, turning to the resolution which we
have just unanimously adopted, to express our gratitude to
you, Mr. President, for the patience and the steady
determination which you have shown in leading us through
difficult and most anxious discussions since you took over
the duties of your high office. We express our appreciation
also to a11 who have contributad to the result which we
have now recorded.

33. Lord CARADON (United Kingdom): Mr. President, I
must first ask your indulgence if 1 make a short statement
on a matter of great importance to my Government and my
country. Speaking today in the House of Commons, my
Prime Minister referred to false accusations that British
aircraft have taken part in the fighting on the side of Israel.
These are the words that my Prime Minister usecl:

36. In expressing my Government’s warm welcome for the
resolution which we have just adopted, 1 have no intention
of going over now a11the ground covered in our debates in
recent weeks. It is quite unncessary to do SO, since the
position of my Government on a11the main issueshas been
made absolutely plain, both in statements in this Council
and in speeches by my Prime Minister and my Foreign
Secretary in the House of Commons. Our position on those
main issues remains unchanged.

“Her Majesty’s Government have already categorically
denied this monstrous story, and a11our Ambassadors in
the Arab countries have been instructed to make clear to
the local Governments that this’ is a malicious and
mischievous invention. One story alleges that aircraft

37. 1 have only one other comment to make now
following the decision we have just taken together. Those
4

of us who have supported the United Nations, and those of
us who have faith that only in international understanding
and international co-operation cari the world hope for
progress and peace, have realized that in this crisis the
hopes of international authority have been in jeopardy.
There was a danger that those high hopes would be
betrayed and destroyed. One thing, 1 am sure, is uppermost
in a11 our minds now: an overwhelming sense of the great
responsibility-a responsibility from wh$h we around this
table cannot escape-the responsibility to go forward, to
take the other steps now SOurgently required. Neither cari
we escape the realization that if we fail now, our faiIure Will
result in more bloodshed and more suffering. Innocent
people Will suffer. We need not look farther than the Near
East to see evidence that when conflict cornes it is always
the innocent who suffer most, and suffer worst.

circles regard Israel as the main force against the Arab
States which pursue an independent national policy and
resist the pressure of the forces of imperialism.
44, The Soviet Government has warned Tel-Aviv again and
again that the responsibility for the consequences of its
aggressive policy rests squarely on the shoulders of the
ruling circles in Israel. Judging from everything that has
happened, however, a reasonable approach bas not yet
triumphed in Tel-Aviv. The upshot is that Israel has once
again proveù guilty of a dangerous aggravation of tension in
the Near East.
45. For decades, the Soviet Union has provided assistance
of ail kinds to the peoples of the Arab countries in their
just struggle for national liberation, against colonialism and
for their peaceful economic development. The Soviet Union
is doing and intends to go on doing eveiything possible to
prevent any vioIation of peace and security in the Near East
in order to protect the legitimate rights of nations.

38. 1 should also like to join with my fellow members of
the Council in expressing to the representatives of India and
Brazil our sorrow and our concern that their soldiers, who
have represented SO long the cause of international peace
and the cause of the United Nations, have been lest. 1 wish
to express to them the sympathy and respect and gratitude
of my Government.

46. We consider it our duty to make a full affirmation
once again of the Soviet Union% position of principle.
47. Had the Security Council taken the necessary
measures to restrain the fanaticism of extremist circles in
Tel-Aviv, the world would not now be witnessing a new
aggression by Israel against the United Arab Republic and
other Arab countries, an aggression which has taken the
form of open military conflict. It is important, in this
connexion, to note that the extremist circles in Tel-Aviv
launched this aggression at the very time when the Council
wasengaged in considering the question of the Near Eastern
situation and hurled a challenge at the Council in SOdoing.

39. Having today taken this first essential step, we realize
that only a supreme effort cari enable us to rise to our
obligation-our obligation to search for and establish a just
settlement and to restore the authority of the United,
Nations. 1 trust that we shall not fail to make that supreme
effort together now.
40. Mr. FEDORENKO (Union of Soviet Socialist Republits) (transluted from Russian): The Security Council has
just adopted a resolution calling for an immediate cesse-fire
and the cessation of military activities in the Near East. The
Council members have thus unanimously corne out in
favour of putting an immediate and decisive end to Israel’s
aggression against the Arab countries.

48. In ,his statement here in the Council on 5 June 1967
[1347th meeting], the representative of the United Arab
Republic, Mr. El Kony, said that Israel had “committed a
cowardly and treacherous aggression against my country”,
and adduced the relevant facts. The representative of the
United Arab Republic informed the Council that Israel
armed forces had launched attacks in the Gaza strip, the
Sinai peninsula, and the Suez Canal zone, and on the Cairo
airport and other airports in the territory of the Republic.
An extremely serious situation has thus been created;
hostilities have not only not ceasedbut are spreading, and a
military conflict has flared up in the Near East which, the
Soviet Government is convinced, is not in the interest of
the peoples, to say the least.

41. The military conflict in that region has certainly not
arisen without cause, As is well known, during the past few
weeks tension in the Near East increased considerably and
from Tel-Aviv there resounded threats against the Arab
States and appeals for large-scale punitive operations against
them, for a so-called “decisive” blow, and SO on and SO
forth.
42. Even before the Arab countries took legitimate defcnsive measures, a state of war psychosis had developed in
Israel and the Governmcnt of Israel, as we .a11 know,
received authority from its Parliament on 9 May to carry
out rnilitary operations against the Arab countries.

49. On 5 June the Soviet Government made the following
statement, to which we wish to draw the Security Council’s
attention:
“On 5 June 1967, Israel commenced hostilities against
the United Arab Republic, thereby committing an aggression. The armed forces of the United Arab Republic are
engaged in battle against the Israel troops which have
invaded the territory of that State. Tank, artillery and air
force units of both sides are in action.

43. The Soviet Union here in the Security Council and
elsewhere bas repeatedly stated its attitude and presented a
basic evaluation in respect of #he events in the Near East.
The statement of the Soviet Government of 23 May 1967
emphasized, inter ah, that Israel ;rould have been unable
to carry out its policy of aggression and provocation against
the Arab countries but for the direct and indirect encouragement of that line by certain irnperialist circles whieh
seek to bring back colonial oppression to Arab lands. It is
no secret to anyone that in the present circumstances these

“The Syrian Arab Republic has taken the side of the
United Arab Republic and is giving it armed assistancein
repelling aggression. Jordan has announced that it is in a
5

state of war with Israel ancl Will give military support to
the United Arab Republic. Iraq, Algeria and other Arab
States have also declared that they Will support the
United Arab Republic with their armed forces and
resources.

Council should do at the present stage. As stated in the
resolution itself, it is only a first step.
5 1. The Soviet Union delegation’s view had been that the
Council should also have taken a decision concerning the
immediate withdrawal of the aggressor’s troops behind the
armistice line. Because of opposition by certain Council
members, however, it has not been possible to reach
agreement on that important issue.

“Thus a military conflict has broken out in the Near
East because of the adventurism of the rulers of one
country, Israel, encouraged by covert and overt actions of
certain imperialist circles. The country has been driven
into such dangerous actions by leaders who keep saying
that they are waging a struggle for the existence of Israel
as a State. But if anything could underrnine the foundations of the development as well as the very existence of
the State of Israel, it is the policy of reckless adventurism
which the ruling circles in Israel have chosen today.

52. The Soviet Union delegation forthrightly condemns
Israel’s aggression and considers it the duty of the Security
Council to adopt a decision calling for the immediate and
unconditional withdrawal of the aggressor’s troops behind
the armistice line.
53. Mr. RUDA (Argentina) (translated from Spanish): In
our previous intervention during this debate on the grave
situation in the Middle East, we stated [1343rd meeting/
that our immediate task was to use every means at our
disposa1 to maintain international peace and security. We
felt that the problems of the moment were SOgreat that we
should not seek final solutions then and there, but that we
should confine our efforts to avoiding an outbreak of
fighting. In our favour, to that end, was the fact that the
parties had not yet begun hostilities. Unfortunately,
although the pause requested by the Secretary-General did
last for several days, it was not long enough to calm
emotions, and yesterday saw the outbreak of fighting on a
larger scale. What we must do now, therefore, is not
maintain peace but re-establish it.

“By launching aggression against neighbouring Arab
States, the Government of Israel has defied the United
Nations Charter and the elementary rules of international
law. The Government of Israel cannot say that it was
unaware of where its policy was leading, nor cari it say
that it was unsure what position peace-loving States
would take in the event of its unleashing a war of
aggression. The Government of Israel knew that war
could be avoided. The Soviet Union and other peaceloving States had called upon it to do precisely that. But
it chose the path of war. There cari be no doubt that the
military adventure undertaken by Israel Will rebound first
of a11upon Israel itself.
“The Soviet Union, faithful to its policy of assisting
peoples who are victims of aggression, and States which
havc freed themselves from the colonial yoke, declares its
resolute support for the Governments and peoples of the
United Arab Republic, Syria, Iraq, Algeria, Jordan and
other Arab States and expresses confidence in the success
of their just struggle for their independence and sovereign
rights.

54. Confronted by this situation, the Security Council,
directly it wasnotified of the fighting, should with a11speed
have taken immediate provisional steps to halt the hostdities. This is a situation in which it is imperative for the
Security Council to cal1 for an immediate cesse-fïre. This is
our first duty if we are to prevent the conflict from
spreading; this is the first essential step before we cari
undertake once again the long and diffïcult task of resolving
the dispute. The urgency of this first basic step and the
evident need makes it unnecessary for us to expatiate
further in support of a provisional measure which is obvious
in these circumstances.

“In condemning Israel aggression, the Govemment of
the USSR demands that the Govemment of Israel, as a
first urgent step towards ending the military conflict,
cesse military activities against the United Arab Republic,
Syria, Jordan and the other Arab countries immediately
and unconditionally and withdraw its troops behind the
armistice line I

55. The hopes of the world rested on the work of this
Council; we have taken vigorous action and should continue
to do SO, What is at stake here, perhaps today more than
ever before, is the Organization’s prestige. Peace and the
future depend on our ski11 and decision. Let us not
tomorrow have to rue the fact that we failed to act today.

“The Government of the USSR expresses the hope that
the Governments of other States, including those of the
great Powers, Will for their part take a11 steps to
extinguish the military conflagration in the Near East and
restore peace.

56. The cesse-fire, which is the fïrst step, should be
immediately followed by the most intensive efforts to bring
about a just and lasting peace in the Middle East. Yesterday
my Government defined its position in the light of the
events as follows:

“The United Nations should fulfil its direct obligations,
namely, condemn Israel’s actions and take the necessary
steps forthwith to restore peace in the Near East.

“We must calmly and composedly weigh the causes of
the conflict and claims of the parties; we must maintain
impartial and independent judgement; we must above all
weigh the equity of our statements, and we must do SOin
order the more effectively to serve the higher interests of
peace and world order as well as the permanent legitimate
interests of the Argentine Republic ,”

“The Soviet Government reserves the right to carry out
a11the measures which the circumstances require.”
50. The resolution unanimously adopted by the Security
Council calling for an immediate cesse-fire and a cessation
Of military
activities, represents the minimum which the
6

57. Il was for these reasons that my delegation voted in
favour of this resolution, which we consider historic
because it reaffirms our countrymen’s faith that in this time
of crisis the United Nations and the Security Council are
capable of, and are, fulfilling their primary responsibility to
maintain peace.
58. On behalf of my delegation, 1 should like, Mr.
President, to emphasize our appreciation for your patient
and fruitful efforts to ensure the unanimous adoption of
this resolution. And before concluding, I should like to
express my condolences to the delegations of India and
Brazil for the losses suffered by their contingents in UNEF
on their peace mission in Gaza.
59. Mr. IGNATIEFF (Canada): The calamity which all of
us feared and which most of us have tried to prevent is
upon us. The Secretary-General has been proved a11too
right in his assessment that the situation in the Middle East
was more menacing than at any time since the fall of 19.56.
60. When 1 first intervened in this series of meetings on 24
May /1341st meeting], 1 had just joined with you, Mr.
President, in requesting the inscription of an item on the
agenda of the Council regarding the extremely grave
situation menacing peace and security in the Middle East. 1
proposed at that time that the Council should put its
weight collectively behind the efforts of the SecretaryGeneral by asking that no Member of the United Nations
take any action which would worsen the situation. Notwithstanding the conscientious efforts made, in particular
by you, Mr. President, consultations among the members
failed to produce that clear endorsement of the SecretaryGeneraI’s appeal for a breathing spell which most members
of this Council had in one form or another in fact
supported and to which my colleague from Argentina has
just alluded. 1 also agree with my friend, the representative
of Ethiopia, that much valuable time waslost which today’s
decision has helped to make up for-due in no small
tneasure, Mr. President, to your patient and effective
leadership.
61. But events did,overtake us and the Council had to turn
its hand, on an urgent and emergency basis, to the question
of the cessation of hostilities and steps which codd restore
calm in the area. In the view of my delegation it Will not
serve the interests of the Security Council or of peace in the
Middle East to fall into the temptation of recriminations at
this stage or of attampts to assessthe rights and the wrongs.
We are on the threshold only of an understanding of the
awesome facts. But one thing is clear. There is heavy
fïghting in the Middle East; both Israel and Arab forces are
actively participating in it and there is grave danger of the
war spreading. And at this point 1 wish to associate myself
with the remarks made by several of my colleagues and to
express the sympathies of the Canadian Government at the
tragic casualties sustained by the Indian and Brazilian
contingents in the United Nations Emergency Force in the
course of duty on behalf of the United Nations.

one certain way to prevent the fighting from spreading and
that is to end it.‘, We would expect that the United Nations
Truce Supervision Organization would take steps to observe
the cesse-fire once it came into effect and that ail
concerned would help it to carry out this task. Further
action Will, of course, have to be taken by this Council, but
the urgent and immediate requirement is that the fîghting
be stopped.
63. We have therefore weIcomed the agreed text and we
are glad to have been able to vote for it. We earnestly hope
that a11 parties, a11 Member States, and especially the
permanent members, wiI1 now exercise a11their influence to
bring this fighting to an end. We would now expect that the
parties Will promptly comply with the cal1 for a cesse-fire
which the Council has now adopted.
64. We note that the resolution is only a fïrst step. We
believe that the Council must take advantage of the
opportunity which this unanimously agreed resolution
represents, to deal effectively and in an equitable rnanner
with the fundamental problems which underlie the maintenance of peace and security in the area. We cannot and we
must not wait for another ten years, for another crisis’
which Will result again in fighting and blood-letting and
bring us a11once more to the edge of catastrophe.
65. Mr. SETTE CAMARA (Brazil): From the time the
Council convened to consider the outbreak of fighting in
the Middle East, my delegation, as members of the Council
are aware, has engaged in a number of talks and consultations with a view to arriving at a text which might prove
acceptable to a substantial majority of the Council and
thereby enable this body to take effective action to hall the
hostilities and to restore peace in the area. The main
purpose of our efforts was to cal1 upon ail Governments
concerned, as a first step, to put into effect an immediate
cesse-fire, to be followed by other measures conducive to
the peaceful settlement of the Arab-Israel situation. In SO
doing, we were guided by the sole concern to take a stand
which would meet the urgent demands the open conflict in
the Middle East had placed upon the Security Cou&. An
immediate cesse-fire was envisaged by the Brazilian delegation as a first but essential step towards re-establishing
peace and checking the threat it presented to world peace
and security.
66. For the above reasons, my delegation was able to
support the draft resolution that has just been adopted. We
are happy to note that the consultations among members of
the Council, conducted under your able guidance, Mr.
President, although they were strenuous and painstaking,
have finally resulted in an agreement on the course of
action upon which we should embark at this hour. My
delegation gave its full support to the draft resolution
introduced by our President, and we hope that it Will bring
about an end to the hostilities in the Middle East and be an
effective and constructive step towards restoring peace to
a11nations involved in the fighting, nations to which Brazil
is tied by traditional links of esteem and friendship.

62. The Canadian delegation believes that the Councjl has
now properly exercised its responsibilities in calling upon
all the parties concerned to cesse fire immediately. As the
Prime Minister of Canada said yesterday: “There is only

67. j It was with deep grief that my delegation received this
very morning confirmation from our Government that a
soldier of the Brazilian contingent in the United Nations
7

Emergency Farce had been killed after the outbreak of
fighting between Egyptian and Israel forces in the area.
Since the establishment of UNEF, the soldiers of the
Brazilian contingent have served with dedication the cause
of peace in the Middle East under the flag of the United
Nations. Our deep respect and fraternal feelings go to these
compatriots.

create a new situation characterized by a fait accompli to
serve the interests of those who have always been opposed
to national liberation struggles, to the struggle of all peoples
to defeat colonialism and achieve national independence.
74. The Bulgarian Government made the following state- ment on 5 June:
“The Bulgarian people and their Government follow’
with anxiety the development of events in the Near EastThey condemn Israel aggression against the United Arab
Republic and a11other Arab countries and voice their fuu
solidarity with the Arab peoples who are struggling to
beat off aggression and for the defence of their freedorn
and independence against the actions of imperialism and
neo-colonialism. The Government of the People’s Republit of Bulgaria and. the Bulgarian people join in the appeal
of peace-loving nations for an immediate end to Israel
aggression and for a withdrawal of Israel troops behind
the armistice line. The Bulgarian Government believes
that the Security Council should take immediate steps to
condemn and stop Israel’s aggressiveaction and to restore
peace in the Near East.”

68. May 1 take this opportunity to extend our heartfelt
sympathy to the Indian delegation for the casualties
suffered by the Indian contingent in UNEF, and to thank
my colleagues from Ethiopia, the United Kingdom, Argentina and Canada for their expressions of sympathy to my
delegation.
69. Mr. MATSUI (Japan): On two separate occasions
within the past two weeks, 1 have expressed the very grave
concern of my Government regarding the situation in the
Near East, and urged the Governments concerned to
exercise maximum restraint, scrupulously avoiding any
action of any kind which might lead to a further deterioration of the then already very grave situation, It was most
unfortunate that, despite our clearly expressed grave
anxiety, the situation prevailing in the area during recent
weeks has resulted in very serious and widespread armed
conflict.

The aggression launched by Israel against the United Arab
Republic and the other Arab countries is merely the
culmination of the policy which extremist circles in IsraeI
have been following for a very long time,

70. There cari be no doubt whatsoever that immediate
cesse-fire orders should be issued by the Governments
concerned to a11their military forces and that the Governments concerned, with the help of the Security Council,
should promptly and fully explore a11possible ways and
means of resolving the questions at issue between them,
strictly by peaceful means only. My delegation, therefore,
was gratified that the draft resolution [S/7935] whi&
appealed for measures to be taken by the Governments
concerned, as a first step, for an immediate cesse-fire and
for the cessation of a11military activities in the area, was
adopted unanimously.

75. This policy was reflected in the fact that despite the
urgent appeals addressedto it, the Government of Israel did
not see fit to give an assuranceto the Secretary-General, or
the Security Council or world public opinion, that it would
not initiate an armed offensive against any Arab country.
The fact that the attack on the United Arab Republic was
launched at a time when it had been announced that the
Government of that country had accepted President
Johnson’s invitation and was sending one of its Vice-Presidents to discuss the situation shows that the Israel
Government was not interested in a political solution but
was seeking to impose a newfait accompli, as it had done in
the past. Israel’s open and premeditated aggression against
the United Arab Republic, Syria and Jordan is one of the
most brutal episodes resulting from imperialistic policy in
the Middle East. The Secretary-General5 reports and the
subsequent course of events have confirmed that it was
carried out against the Arab countries along broad lines.

71. May 1 join the other members of the Council in
conveying, through their respective representatives, my
delegation’s profound condolences to the Governments and
people of India and Brazil and to the families of those who
have given their lives in the service of UNEF and who have,
by their sacrifice, demonstrated their devotion to the cause
of peace and security to which our Organization is
dedicated.
72.

76. Viewing this resolution as a first step, the delegation
of the People’s Republic of Bulgaria Will make it its duty to
insist, as far as lies within its power, that the Security
Council take all necessary steps to condemn IsraeI’s
aggression against the Arab countries and to effect the
prompt withdrawal of the aggressor behind the armistice
demarcation line, as specifïed in the Bulgarian Government’s statement.

Mr.

TARABANOV
(Bulgaria) (translated from
delegation of the People’s Republic of
Bulgaria voted in favour of the draft resolution calling for
an immediate cesse-fire. The very terms of the draft text
indicate that it is only a first step towards halting the brutal
aggression launched by extremist circles in Israel against the
United Arab Republic, the Syrian Arab Republic and
Jordan.

French): The

77. The Bulgarian delegation maintains that the Securlty
Council should continue to deal with this question with a
view to taking the necessary steps to make further
aggression impossible on the part of imperialist circles and
their agents in the Middle East. This is an urgent duty
which the Council should carry out forthwith.

73. In adopting this draft resolution the Security Council
cannot fail to recognize that further aggression was perpetrated by Israel extremists against the United Arab Republit and the other Arab States. By this aggression, plotted at
the instigation of certain Western imperialistic circleswhich some have preferred not to mention-they
sought to

78. On behalf of the delegation of the People’s Republic
of Bulgaria, 1 should like to convey to the Indian and
8

-

:to
sed
,les
Ite-

1
I

outbreak of hostilities before coming to grips with the
situation, and even then allowed SO much time to elapse
before making a simple appeal in the name of peace, is
something for a11 of us to ponder and reflect upon. None
the less, to arrive at a unanimous appeal for the cessation of
hostilities, even at this late hour, is no mean achievement.

Brazihan delegations and to the Secretary-General our most
heartfelt condolences on the loss of life sustained by the
United Nations Emergency Force in performing its task in
the Middle East.

=

79. Mr. KEITA (Mali) (translated f’rom French): My
dehsgation would like, at the outset, to pay its tribute of
mourning for the victims of the surprise attack recently
directed against the United Arab Republic. It also mourns
the death of Indian and Brazilian citizens who laid down
their lives in the service of the United Nations. We wish to
convey to the people and to the Governments of India and
Brazil, through the intermediary
of the distinguished
representatives of those countries here present, our heartfelt condolences and those of our Govemment on the loss
they have suffered through the death of their countrymen
who have fallen in the service of the United Nations and the
cause of peace.

85. May 1 join with all previous speakers in appealing to
the parties concerned to comply with the terms of the
resolution, which has behind it the support of aIl members
of the Council and, 1 believe, of a11peace-loving peoples
throughout the world.
86. Mr. PARTHASARATHI
(India): 1 should like to make
a very brief explanation of my delegation’s vote.
87. Speaking in Parliament in New Delhi earlier today, my
Prime Minister said:
“The world today faces a disastrous war in West Asia.
The armed forces of Israel and those of the United Arab
Republic and other Arab countries are locked in combat
and the situation becomes graver by the hour. If not
stopped, this war is likely to expand into a much wider
one, drawing into its vortex other countries and developing, perhaps, into a world war.

80. My delegation has already had repeated occasion not
only to express its devotion to peace, but also to prove it.
And in this Council, which we continue to regard as the
supreme peace-keeping body, it would be unthinkable for
any Member to refuse to support an appeal for peace. My
delegation accordingly voted, Mr. President, in favour of
your appeal. We nevertheless wish to,‘state, first, that we
condemn Israel’s aggression of Monday, 5 June 1967, and
secondly, that our Government fully supports the United
Arab Republic and the other Arab peoples in their just and
high-principled
struggle for their sovereignty and their
legitimate rights.

“World peace is in grave peril. It is our solemn duty to
help in the restoration of peace in the present perilous
situation, It is the bounden duty of a11countries, large
and small, to work towards this end.”
88. It is in the spirit of what my Prime Minister said,
which is in accord with our consistent policy of peace, that
we welcome the unanimous decision just taken by this
Council ordering an immediate cesse-fire in the Middle
East. We note that the resolution states clearly and
unambiguously that the cesse-fire is only a Brst step,
although a most important fïrst step. It is well known that
my delegation, among others, wouId bave preferred a
resolution which called upon the Govemments concemed
for a withdrawal of armed forces to positions held by them
prier to the outbreak of hostilities, that is as on 4 June
1967, along with the cesse-fire. Such a linking of the
cesse-fire with a withdrawal would be in accordance with
the practice which this Council has evolved in the past. This
practice is obviously based upon the sound principle that
the aggressor should not be permitted by the international
community to enjoy the fruits of aggression. This is also a
most important tenet of international law and practice
indeed, and is ,the only basis on which lasting peace can’be
built in the troubled area of the Iciiddle East.

81. We therefore trust that the Security Council Will not
consider its task completed with this appeal, which is no
more than the unanimous but simple expression of the
Council members’ desire and Will for peace. We trust that
this step Will be followed by a searching study of the whole
problem which has SO long featured in our agenda; for
unless further action is taken, we shah merely have added a
few more lines on another sheet of paper under the illusion
of having solved a problem that will soon be confronting us
again at the next crossroads.
82. Mr. LIU (China); My delegation heartily welcomes the
resolution. It is our sincere conviction that in a conflict
such as the one going on in the Middle East, there cari be no
victors. In the present circumstances, the first order of
business for the Security CounciI is obviously to arrange for
a cesse-fïre. There are, of course, deep-rooted and complex
problems still awaiting solution. 1 hope that with the
cesse-fire those problems, difficult as they are, will eventualIy be resolved.

89. My delegation is of the opinion that the Council
should take up on an urgent bas& the question of
withdrawal.

83. 1 further hope that the Council Will be able to follow
up this initial step by other effective means to seek the just
and peaceful solution of the conditions that underlie the
present conflict. For the situation we are now confronted
with is not a crisis for the Middle East alone, but a supreme
test for the United Nations: whether this Organization is
capable of discharging the responsibilities and fulfilling the
purposes for which it wascreated.

90. May 1 take this opportunity, Mr. President, to express
our appreciàtion of the admirable manner in which you
conducted the consultations with ail delegations, and of
your untiring efforts to bring about a unanimous decision
by the Council.

84. The fact that the Council, in spite of a timely warning
by the Secretary-General, had to wait for the actual

9 1. 1 should like now to refer to another tragic aspect of ^
the conflict in the Middle East. Yesterday we were shocked
.
9

to learn from the Secretary-General that three Indian
soldiers had been killed and nine wounded in an attack by
Israel aircraft on an Indian convoy of the United Nations
Emergency Force. Subsequent to what the SecretaryGeneral stated in the Council yesterday11347th meeting],
1 have learned that two more Indian soldiers were killed and
one injured in shelling by Israel artillery yesterday. This
morning 1 was informed that three more Indian soldiers
have been killed and three injured in further shelling by
Israel artillery. We reiterate our strong protests against these
treacherous and dastardly attacks on withdrawing Indian
forces.

97. 1 would also like to thank the representatives of the
United Arab Republic, Ethiopia, the United Kingdom,
Argentina, Canada, Brazil, Japan, Bulgaria and Mali for
their moving expressions of sympathy, which 1 deeply
appreciate, May 1, in my turn, convey to the delegation of
Brazil my deepest sympatlly for the loss they have
sustained in the death of a member of their contingent.
98. The PRESIDENT: There are no more representatives
who wish to explain their votes, and 1 should like now, in
the name of DENMARK, to say a few words. Since this is
meant to be an explanation of vote, 1 cari indeed be brief,
In Denmark we believe in the peaceful settlement of
disputes. As a member of the Security Council, we feel it
our obligation to contribute to the realization of the
Council’s primary purpose: the maintenance of international peace and security.

92. We must ask for an unqualified guarantee for the
safety and security of those portions and elements of the
Emergency Force which continue to be in the area where
for ten long years they laboured SOhard and SOselflessly as
keepers of the peace. In this context, we have noted with
appreciation, from the Secretary-General’s report of 5 June,
that he has already addressed a forma1 note of protest to
tlle Government of Israel regarding what he himself has
characterized as the “tragic and unnecessary loss of lifc
among Force personnel” (5/7930, para. 111. We note also
that the Secretary-General has asked the Israel authorities
“to take urgent measures to ensure that there is no
recurrence of such incidents” (ibid./.

99. We are these days witnessing a tragedy. A war has
broken out, with death and cruel consequences for
numerous people anrl families. As early as yesterday
morning, 1 advocated a cal1 for a cesse-fire, to concentrate
on first things first.
100. The Danish Government is happy that it has now
proved possible as a first step to adopt unanimously a
resolution calling for a cesse-fire.

93. The Secretary-General’s report makes it clear-clearer
than ever-that the loss of life wantonly caused by the
Israel armed forces was unnecessary, cruel and tragic.

101. 1 do not find it necessary to give any further
explanation of my vote for this call, for which 1 imagine the
whole world has been waiting.

94. May I be permitted to quote from the statement made
earlier this morning by my Prime Minister in our Parliament
in New Delhi:

102, Speaking now as PRESIDENT, 1 should like to say
that a number of representatives have indicated that they
wish to make statements at this stage. The first speaker on
my list is the Foreign Minister of Iraq, whom 1 invite to
take a seat at the Council table and to make a statement.

“Honourable Members have no doubt learned with deep
rcsentment of the wanton Israel attack and subsequent
strafing by Israel aircraft, resulting in the death and injury
of a number of personnel of the Indian UNEF contingent
in Gaza. These attacks appeared deliberate and without
provocation, in spite of clear and unmistakabie United
Nations markings and identification of our contingent. 1
have addressed a message to the Secretary-General of the
United Nations on this subject expressing our grief and
indignation at these incidents and 1 have asked for
effective steps to be taken to ensure their safety and early
evacuation from the area of hostilities.

103. Mr. PACHACHI ‘(Iraq): 1 wish to make a brief
statement following the Council’s adoption of its resolution
on this question.
104. Mr. President, you will recall that less than a week
ago, whan 1 had the privilege of addressing the Security
Council, 1 stated [1345th meeting/ that while the Arab
States had indicated to the Secretary-General, and had
reaffirmed here, that they would not initiate any offensive
action against Israel, no such assurance had been given by
the Israel Government. 1 also pcinted out that it was the
duty of the Security Cour& to determine from where the
threat to peace came and to take necessary action to
prevent the one party which declared its intention to go to
war from carrying out its threat. Efforts were exerted by ail
members of the Council and by many other Member States
of the Unittd Nations, including Iraq, to find a basis for the
breathing spell which the Secretary-General proposed SO
that the Council would be in a position to undertake a
discussion of the problem with a view to finding solutions
that would prevent the outbreak of hostilities. While those
efforts were going on, Israel initiated offensive action
against the United Arab Republic and other Arab States.

“There cari be no justification for Israel armed forces to
have attacked our contingent. whose whereabouts, identification, markings and intention to withdraw were clearly
known to th; Israel authorities. 1 am sure the House will
unreservedly condemn this cowardly attack on our men
who have been sentinels of peace in West Asia.”
95. 1 must thank the Secretary-General for the expression
of his deep regret at the heavy casualties which the Indian
contingent has suffered. As he rightly points out, they had
no means of defending themselves. I shall, of course,
transmit to the Government of India and to the families
concerned his deep condolences and sympathies.
96. May 1 also express my appreciation for the efforts he
is making to arrive at an arrangement for the earliest
possible repatriation of the Indian contingent.

105. 1 do not need to prove who initiated the offensive
action in this war. The Secretary-General? report of 26
10

.

been encouraged by its friends. It is for this reason that my
country, along with others, decided to break off diplomatie
relations with the United States of America.

May [S/7906], the pronouncements of Israel representatives and, indeed, the actions themselves prove beyond any
shadow of doubt that it was Israel that started these
actions. 1 ask each and every member of the Council to
search bis conscience and to say whether Israel was or was
not responsible for initiating this offensive action. There is
no doubt-even the staunchest friends of Israel would
concede the fact-that it was the Israelis that started the
war.

112. This is a most painful heur, in fact, the most painful
that 1 personally have witnessed in my long and, I hope,
fruitful association with the United Nations. But here we
find the Council, instead of pointing its finger at thc
obvious aggressor, adopting a resolution that in fact allows
the aggressor to retain the fruits of its aggression. By doing
that, the Council has not fulfilled its duty. It has dashed the
hopes which the peoplcs of the world had placed in it.

106. What makes this particularly serious is that this war
was initiated while the Council was seized of the problem
and while talks and negotiations and efforts were being
undertaken by a11the members of the Council to find a
peaceful solution.

113, Many countries of the world have corne to the
support of the Arab nations. In this Council several
members have indeed stated their support for us. But 1
must say that 1 am a little puzzled. While they concede that
an act of aggression was committed against Arab countries,
they would still go along with a resolution that does not in
any way ask that this responsibility be pinned down, or at
least that those who committed the act of aggression be
asked to give up the fruit of their aggression.

107. It would have been natural, indeed necessary, for the
Council, before ordering or recommending a cesse-fire to
determine the responsibility for the breach of peace and the
act of aggression which had been committed. That is what
this Council is for. When a clear breach of the peace and a
clear premeditated act of aggression is committed, is it right
for the Council merely to satisfy itsclf with a cesse-fire
resolution, without making even an effort to determine the
responsibility for the outbreak of hostilities?

114. Mr. President, 1 would be dishonest with you if 1 did
not say that the meaning of this Will not be lost upon the
Arab people. In this grave and solemn hour, you may be
sure that our people, who have been led into this war
against their Will in order to defend their homeland against
Israel aggression, Will definitely reconsider their position. It
is not up to us-Governments corne and go-but you may
be. sure that the people Will never tolerate this abject
surrender to Israel.

108. 1 have had the privilege of working with many of the
representatives around this table as the representative of my
country at the United Nations. 1 am honoured by the fact
that 1 consider many of you as my friends. Therefore, you
must excuse me if 1 state my views honestly and clearly. 1
owe it to myself as a rpan and as an Arab to state my views
clearly. If 1 did not do that, 1 would be violating my
conscience as a human being and my national duty as an
Arab.

11.5. The PRESIDENT:
1 now give the floor to the
representative of the United States in exercise of his right
of reply .

109. The cesse-fïre resolution which the Council adopted
today is a complete surrender to Israel. 1 do not tare what
anybody says. That is a fact and it is very well known. For
two days there have been negotiations to see whether a
cesse-fire resolution would be adopted that would be
accompanied by a cal1 for the withdrawal of forces back to
the point from which hostilities started. That was not done
because of the fact that certain States, and 1 mention the
United States of America in particular, refused to go along
with it. It refused to go along with it for the very simple
reason that Israel refused to go along with it. And why did
Israel refuse? Was it not in order to be able to keep control
of territories which it had been able to occupy through its
treacherous and surprise attack on the Arab countries while
the Council was discussing this problem?

116. Mr. GOLDBERG (United States of America): 1 am
impelled to exercise this right of reply to the statement just
made by the Foreign Minister of Iraq, who is a man well
known to a11of us and who deservedly enjoys a very great
and eminent reputation here at the United Nations.
Nevertheless, I must reject as completely unfounded what
he has just said. And 1 should like to do that by reference
to the record, which is well known to evcry member of this
Council.
117. The United States took the lead in supporting the
proposa1 of other countries on this Council to bring this
matter before the Council, SO that in the exercise of its
responsibilities the Council could take the action necessary
to prevent any-and 1 emphasize “any’‘--warlike action in
the Middle East. Our record in this respect is a clear and
plain record. We did what we did, 1 should like to recall,
despite the fact that when we joined in this effort, there
were members of the Council who took the position that
we were attempting to drarnatize the situation, that
everything was a11 right, that it was not necessary for the
Council to take any action, that things were tranquil, that
a11we had to do was sit by and let events happen.

110. It pains me to say that 1 personally went SOfar as to
have talks with the President of the United States and with
the Secretary of State of the United States about the
problem and about what should be done in order that the
Council might adopt a resolution that would make it
possible to have the breathing spell which the SecretaryGeneral proposed. Little did 1 know-1 repeat, little did 1
know-that
while these talks were going on, massive
assistance was being given to Israel, SOthat it was able to
launch its treacherous attack against our people.

118. We had a great Governor of this State of New York,
Governor Al Smith, and his very favourite expression was:
“Let us look at the record”. Now 1 shall recall the record,
since our attitude is brought into question.

111. It is quite obvious that Israel would not have dared
to defy world public opinion and the Council had it not
11

119. Incidents broke out in the Middle East on 5 May and
8 May. These incidents were reported to the Security
Council [A’/78771 by our distinguished Secretary-General in
the most objective terms, which is characteristic of him,
and also in statements on 11 May and 13 May. What was
the response of my Government? 1 should like to read the
following Press statement issued on 15 May:
“The United States strongly supports the efforts of the
Secretary-General on behalf of the United Nations to
maintain peace in the Middle East. We share bis concern
about the situation as expressed in his recent statements
of Il May and 13 May, and are distressed over reports of
increased tension and military preparation.

further steps that might be required in support of peace
and the role of the United Nations in preserving it in the
Middle East.”
123. On 20 May, when the Secretary-General announced
his welcome decision to proceed on an arduous mission to
Cairo in the interests of peace in the area, 1 issued a forma1
statement on behalf of my Government, as follows:
“In the light of the extreme gravity of the current
situation in the Middle East and the state of tension
prevailing there, the United States greatly welcomes the
decision of the Secretary-General to travel to that area in
an effort to assure peace.

“Diplomatie efforts on the part of my Govemment in
support of the Secretary-General? appeals are now under
way and we hope the response to his efforts Will be
positive.”

“We ‘note with great concern the Secretary-General?
report today to the Security Council [S/7896] warning
that the situation is becoming more menacing than at any
time since the fa11of 1956. We share that concern.”

May 1 interject at this point that in our diplomatie efforts
we went to a11important
including those of a11the
.- capitals,
^
. concerned,. with
countnes
a fervent
plea for restraint in the
situation, a plea to avoid a11threats and acts of force.

124. On 23 May 1 made the following statement here in
New York:
“We have been consulting intensively with other
members over the last several days, since the crisis first
arose, to determine in what way the Security Council
could best contribute to the cause of peace in the area.
We entirely agree that the time has now corne, in the light
of the gravity of the circumstances, for the Security
Council to discharge its primary responsibility under the
Charter for the maintenance of international peace and
security.”

120. On 18 May-and we were fairly lonely at that tirne;
there were only a few others with us-1 made a statement
on behalf of my Government after visiting the Secretary
General and hearing at first hand a report from him onhis
concerns, which he had elaborated in his reports of 11 May
and 13 May. 1 should like to read to the Council what 1 said
publicly on that occasion:

125. Then we had a meeting of the Security Council.
Some members here resisted a meeting because they said
that the Secretary-General was on his mission. We had said
that we did not want to do anything in any way to
prejudice the result of the Secretary-General’s mission;
nevertheless, in the light of the increased tension in the
area, we supported the effort made by Canada and
Denmark to cal1 a meeting to support the efforts of the
Secretary-General, and at that meeting 1 said the following
on behalf of my Government:

“The Secretary-General and 1 reviewed the present
situation in the Middle East. I expressed the deep concern
of the United States over reports of increased tension and
military movements in the area.”
121. On the same day 1 met with the Press here at the
United Nations, after meeting with the Secretary-General,
and this is what 1 said:
“We are concerned over reports of increased tension
and military movements in the area and we would hope
very much that the situation would be stabilized. 1 know
of no other subject at the moment that is of greater
concern.”

“It has been said, for example, that one of the possibly
adverse effects of a discussion at this time would be to
dramatize a situation better left quiet. But this Council
would be burying its head in the sand if it refused to
recognize the threat to peace implicit in the developments
which have occurred since the Secretary-General left New
York two days ago.

122. On 19 May 1 again made a statement of a public
nature, and 1 now repeat that statement:
“The United States fully shares the serious misgivings
expressed by the Secretary-General in his report of 18
May fA/6669/’ about the effect of the withdrawal of the
United Nations Emergency Force in the present tense
situation in the Middle East and his expression of belief
that UNEF has been an important factor in maintaining
relative quiet in the area. We deeply regret the developrnents that are taking place.

“It is precisely because of these developments, not
known to him or to any member of the Council, that we
have been called here today urgently to consider what the
Council ought to do in the discharge of its responsibility
to further his efforts-and not to impede them.
“This Council meeting cannot dramatize a situation
which at this moment is at the centre of the stage pf
world concern. It cari, however, play a role, as we hope,
in drawing the curtain on a tragedy which potentially
threatens the peace and well-being of ail the people in the
area and, indeed, of a11 mankind.” (1341s meeting,
paras. 49-51.1

“In the light of today’s developments we are giving
urgent consideration in consultation with others to the
2 Same text as A/6730; see OfficM Records of the General Assembly, Fifth Emergence Special Session, Annexes, agenda item 5.

12

126. On 24 May in the Security Council 1 said:

diplomatically to Israel and the Arab States and have urged
since 15 May-when we had the Secretary-General? reports
before us-restraint and pacifie settlement. We, along with
others, made every effort to get the Security Council to
exercise its own responsibilities in the area. We are one of
the members of the Security Council, only one; we cannot
order its deliberations.

“The United Rates strongly supported the request
made by Canada and Denmark last evening for an
immediate meeting of the Security Council. We did SOout
of our grave concern over the Sharp increase of tension
between Israel and its Arab neighbours since the Secretary-General’s departure, and out of our belief that the
Secretary-General should be accorded a11possible support
in the difficult peace mission on which he is now
embarked.” [1342nd meeting, para. 3.1

132. The picture of a country egging someone on is
scarcely compatible with our record of urging the Council
to take action which we at a11times supported and have
supported today; that is to urge all parties-I emphasize “all
parties”-to refrain from force and to follow the Charter
prescription to settle disputes by peaceful means. More
than that, any allegation that the United States has given in
these circumstances “massive assistance to Israel”-and 1
quote the Foreign Minister of Iraq-is completely and
entirely without foundation. What we have done is to urge
restraint. Every communication, public and private, has
been directed to that end.

1 added:
“ . . . since the Secretary-General made his reportindeed, in the two days since he departed for Cairoconditions in the area have taken a still more menacing
turn . , . . This has led us to the belief that the Council, in
the exercise of its responsibilities, should meet without
delay and take steps to relieve tension in the area.
L‘. . .

133. 1 regret very much that the Council did not heed our
advice. Under the Charter we did not have to wait, as we
pointed out in our presentation to the Council, until a
breach of the peace had occurred. The Charter uses the
words “threats to the peace”. It was our considered
judgernent, based on events which were reported by the
Secretary-General, that the Council should exercise its
collective judgement, collective responsibility, collective
power, in the interest of restraining a11of the parties and
bringing about a peaceful composition of the situation and
averting the tragedy of war.

“Great Powers have bath interests and responsibihties
in this matter-and the greater the Power the greater the
responsibility.“/Ibid.,
paras. 5 and 13.J
127. On 29 May 1 said this in the Council:
“This grave appeal from the Secretary-General has lost
none of its relevance”-this was after the return of the
Secretary-General-“since
his report was issued. , . .
Incidents have occur-red . . . Thus, the dangers in these
three areas, which the Secretary-General has rightly
identified as the most sensitive of all, remain. at their
height. Passions, regrettably, are stiI1 high and the need
for utmost restraint on a11sides has in no way abated.”

134. That is the record of the attitude of my countiy in
this matter. It is a record not of partisanship, but of so,ber
responsibility. It is a record of attempting to work through
the United Nations, the organ that we created for this
purpose. It is a record also of exerting a11diplomatie means
at the disposal of my country to avert what has occurred in
the last few days.

f 1343rd meeting, para. 18.1

128, On 30 May in this Council 1 said that the situation
“is by common recognition very tense, very grave, very
serious and menacing to the cause of world peace and
security” [13#4th meeting, para. 1081.

135. Therefore, 1 cannot accept the concept that the
United States, which took the lead even to the extent of
presenting a draft resolution to the Council for a breathing
spell, is in any way to be charged with having fomented and
encouraged anything that occurred. It is just inconsistent
with the facts, which are a matter of public record, as well
as a matter of private record, known to a11the Arab States
involved in this conffict, as weIl as to Israel. For those were
widespread communications designed to do by diplomatie
means everything that we could do to bring restraint into
what the Secretary-General had correctly pointed out was
the most grave and menacing situation in the Middle East
that we had faced since the Suez crisis.

129. On 31 May-and a11 the events to which 1 am
referring transpired before the outbreak of hostilities-1
said: “The events since then bave certainly underscored the
urgency which the Secretary-General expressed to us last
Friday in his report.” [1345th meeting, para. 34.J
130. Then on 3 June 1 said this: “The Secretary-General,
in this grave situation, has made an appeal for restraint to
all concerned. The United States is supporting this appeal.”
(1346th

meeting, para. 229.J

131. 1 am sorry to burden the Council with this recital of
the position of our Government, but 1 want to make one
thing crystal clear. Our position is not compatible with the
statement that has been made that the United States in any
way contributed to the cause of tension in the area. On the
contrary, the United States, conscious of what the Secretary-General called to our attention, has devoted every
means at the disposaI of the Government, public and
private, in the interest of restraint in the area. We have gone

136. 1 only regret-and I say this without recriminationthat our appeals, diplomatically and to this CounciI, were
not heeded. 1 only regret that there were members of this
Council who took the position that we were artificially
dramatizing a situation which already at that time was the
most dramatic on the world scene and which today has
resulted in the catastrophe of which we warned. In ail
friendship 1 say this to those who have spoken in that way:
It is not good to take a stand which attributes to our
13

country a position which our country does not have, a
stand which the facts belie and which cannot be support&.

141, The PRESIDENT: 1 now invite the Foreign Minister
of Israel to take a place at the Council table and to make a
statement.

137. But something more is involved. It has been a basic
concept of the United States, as a principal supporter of the
United Nations and as one of its founders, that this
Organization had a responsibility to avert the catastrophe.
And it was our effort to get this Council to discharge that
responsibility which brought us here at the time of the
meeting to which 1 have referred. In the negotiations which
took place we made every attempt, we did everything we
could, to urge restraint. And we shall continue to do SOin
light of the Council’s resolution which was adopted today.

142. Mr. EBAN (Israel): 1 thank you, Mr. President, for
giving me this opportunity to address the Council. 1 have
just corne from Jerusalem to tel1 the Security Council that
Israel, by its independent effort and sacrifice, has passed
from serious danger to successful resistance.
143. Two days ago Israel’s condition caused much concem
across the humane and friendly world. Israel had reached a
sombre hour. Let me try to evoke the point at which our
fortunes stood.
144. An army, greater than any force ever assembled in
history in Sir-rai, had massed against Israel’s southem
frontier. Egypt had dismissed the United Nations forces
which symbolized the international interest in the maintenance of peace in our region. Nasser had provocatively
brought five infantry divisions and two armoured divisions
up to our very gates; 80,000 men and 900 tanks were
poised to move.

138. 1 would not like by any omission to indicate that we
do not share, with the greatest regret and sorrow, the views
of my colleagues about the deaths of members of the
Indian and Brazilian contingents of the United Nations
Emergency Force in the service of the United Nations. We
believe in peace-keeping. We think those brave soldiers paid
the supreme sacrifice for their dedication to the United
Nations. We express this regret now, and my Government at
the highest levels is expressing .its regrets to the Heads of
State. We think that this is a regrettable and sorrowful
chapter in the history of the United Nations. We have no
hesitancy in condemning those responsible. We think that
the lives of those soldiers are the first priority for a11men
who believe in the great peace-keeping effort of the United
Nations.

145. A special striking force, comprising an armoured
division with at least 200 tanks, was concentrated against
Eclat at the Negev’s southern tip. Here was a clear design to
tut the southern Negev off from the main body of our
State. For Egypt had openly proclaimed that Eclat did not
form part of Israel and had predicted that Israel itself
would soon expire. The proclamation was empty; the
prediction now lies in ruin. While the main brunt of the
hostile threat was focussed on the southern front, an
alarming plan of encirclement wasunder way. With Egypt’s
initiative and guidance, Israel was already being strangled in
its maritime approaches to the whole eastem half of tbe
world. For sixteen years, Israel had been illicitly denied
passage in the Suez Canal, despite the Security Council’s
decision of 1 September 1951 (resolution 95 (1951)j. And
now the creative enterprise of ten patient years which had
opened an international route across the Strait of Tiran and
the Gulf of Aqaba had been suddenly and arbitrarily
choked. Israel was and is breathing with only a single lung,

139. My country desires, as 1 have said, good relations
with ah. We try to have good relations with all. Good
relations are not going to be the product of statements
which are not founded upon fact. Indeed, 1, in this Council,
conscious of some documents that had been circulated,
categorically stated on the highest authority of my Govemment that if there was any doubt about the position of the
United States with respect to any régime, whatever its
ideology, in the Middle East, 1 wanted to lay that doubt to
rest. The passage 1 read today-and have read three
times-that we respect the territorial integrity and political
independence of every State in the Middle East, stands. It
has been our consistent policy. We believe in it. We believe
in it in a spirit of friendship for a11 of the countries
concerned. That is our position. That remains our position.
It has not been changed by anything that has been said,
because it represents the fundamental policy of my
country.

146. Jordan had been intimidated, against its better
interest, into joining a defence pact. It is nota defence pact
at all: it is an aggressive pact, of which 1 saw the
consequences with my own eyes yesterday in the shells
falling upon institutions of health and culture in the City of
Jerusalem. Every house and street in Jerusalem now came
into the range of fire as a result of Jordan’s adherence to
this pact; SOalso did the crowded and pathetically narrow
coastal strip in which SO much of Israel’s life and
population is concentrated.

140. Finally, when the historical record of this period is
written, the United States Will yield to no one in what it
has done through private channels to urge that everyone
concerned should exercise restraint in this situation, We
have worked day and night in the Council and outside the
Council. We have accepted every suggestion made by
members of the Council to try to compose this situation. 1
repeat the offer 1 made earlier-and 1 know of no similar
offer that has been made in the history of the United
Nations-t0 admit on naval vessels of the United States, in
conditions of intimacy and confidence, representatives of
the United Nations and to give them complete access to
everything needed to verify the peaceful activities of the
United States in this situation.

147. Iraqi troops reinforced Jordanian units in areas
immediately facing vital and vulnerable Israel communication centres. Expeditionary forces from Algeria and
Kuwait had reached Egyptian territory. Nearly a11 the
Egyptian forces which had been attempting the conquest of
the Yemen had been transferred to the coming assault upon
Israel. Syrian units, including artillery, overlooked thc Israel
villages in the Jordan Valley. Terrorist troops came regularly into our territory to kill, plunder and set off
explosions; the most recent occasion was five days ago.
14

148. In short, there was peril for Israel wherever it looked.
Its manpower had been hastily mobilized. Its economy and
commerce were beating with feeble puises, Its streets were
dark and empty. There was an apocalyptic air of approaching peril. And Israel faced this danger alone.

our destruction, but we still hoped that others would not
join the aggression. Prime Minister Eshkol, who for weeks
had carried the heavy burden of calculation and decision,
published and conveyed a message to other neighbouring
States proclaiming:

149. We were buoyed up by an unforgettable surge of
public sympathy across the world. The friendly Governments expressed the rather ominous hope that Israel would
manage to live, but the dominant theme of our condition
was danger and solitude.

‘ ‘We shall not attack any country unless it opens war on
us. Even now, when the mortars speak, we have not given
up our quest for peace. We strive to repel all menace of
terrorism and any danger of aggression to ensure our
security and our legitimate rights.”

150. Now there could be no doubt about what was
intended for us. With my very ears 1 heard President
Nasser’s speech on 26 May. He said:

157. In accordance with this same policy of attempting to
contain the conflict, yesterday 1 invited General Bull, the
Chief of Staff of the Truce Supervision Organization, to
inform the heads of the Jordanian State that Israel had no
desire to expand the conflict beyond the unfortunate
dimensions that it had already assumed and that if Israel
were not attacked on the Jordan side, it would not attack
and would act only in self-defence. It reached my ears that
this message had been duly and faithfully conveyed and
received. Nevertheless, Jordan decided to join the Egyptian
posture against Israel and opened artillery attacks across the
whole long frontier, including Jerusalem, Those attacks are
still in progress.

“We intend to open a general assault against Israel. This
Will be total war. Our basic aim Will be to destroy Israel.”
15 1. On 2 June, the Egyptian Commander in Sinai,
General Mortagi, published his order of the day, calling on
his troops to wage a war of destruction against Israel. Here,
then, was a systematic, overt, proclaimed design at politicide, the murder of a State.
152. The policy, the arms, the men had a11been brought
together, and the State thus threatened with collective
assault was itself the last sanctuary of people which had
seen six million of its sons exterminated by a more
powerfd dictator two decades before.

158. TO the appeal of Prime Minister Eshkol to avoid any
further extension of the conflict, Syria answered at 12.25
yesterday morning by bombing Megiddo from the air and
bombing Deganya at 12.40 with artillery fire and kibbutz
Ein Hammifrats. and Koordani with long-range guns. But
Jordan embarked on a much more total assault by artillery
and aircraft along the entire front, with special emphasis on
Jerusalem, to whose dangerous and noble ordeal yesterday 1
corne to bear persona1 witness.

153. The question then widely asked in Israel and across
the world waswhether we had not already gone beyond the
utmost point of danger. Was there any precedent in world
history, for example, for a nation passively to suffer the
blockade of its only southern port, involving nearly all its
vital fuel, when such acts of war, legally and internationally, have always invited resistance? This was a most
unusual patience. It existed because we had acceded to the
suggestion of some of the maritime States that we give
them scope to concert their efforts in order to find an
international solution which would ensure the maintenance
of free passage in the Gulf of Aqaba for ships of a11nations
and of a11flags.

159. There has been bombing of houses; there has been a
bit on the great new National Museum of Art; there has
been a hit on the University and on Shaare Tsedek, the fïrst
hospital evcr to have been established outside the ancient
walls. 1s this not an act of vandalism that deserves the
condemnation of ail mankind? And in the Knesset Build.
ing, whose construction had been movingly celebrated by
the entire democratic world ten months ago, the Israel
Cabinet and Parliament met under heavy gunfire, whose
echoes mingled at the end of our meeting with Hatikvah,
the anthem of hope.

154. As we pursued this avenue of international solution,
we wished the world to have no doubt about our readiness
to exhaust every prospect, however fragile, of a diplomatie
solution-and some of the prospects that were suggested
were very fragile indeed.

160. Thus throughout the day and night of 5 June, the
Jordan which we had expressly invited to abstain from
needless slaughter became, to our surprise, and .still remains,
the most intense of a11 the belligerents; and death and
injury, as SOoften in history, stalk Jerusalem’s streets.

15.5. But as time went on, there was no doubt that our
margin of general security was becoming smaller and
smaller. Thus, on the morning of 5 June, when Egyptian
forces engaged us by air and land, bombarding the villages
of Kissufim, Nahal-Oz and Ein Hashelosha we knew that
OU~ limit of safety had been reached, and perhaps passed. In
accordance with its inherent right of self-defence as
formulated in Article 51 of the United Nations Charter,
Israel responded defensively in full strength. Never in the
history of nations has armed force been used in a more
righteous or compelling cause.

161. When the approaching Egyptian aircraft appeared on
our radar screens, soon to be followed by artillery attacks
on our villages near the Gaza Strip, 1 instructed Mr. Rafael
to inform the Secupty Council, in accordance with the
provisions of Article 51 of the Charter. 1 know that that
involved arousing you, Mr. President, at a most uncongenia1
hour of the night, but we felt that the Security Council
should be most urgently seized.

156. Even when engaged with Egyptian forces, we still
hoped to contain the conflict. Egypt was overtly bent on

162. 1 should,, however, be less than frank if 1 were to
conceal the fact that the Government and people of Israel
15

terrorist sabotage incidents in the name of what wascalled
“popular war”, together with responses which in the long
run sometimes became inevitable, were for a long period
the main focus of tension in the Middle East.

have been disconcerted by some aspects of the .Unitéd
Nations role in this conflict. The sudden withdrawal of the
United Nations Emergency Force was not accompanied, as
it should have been, by due international consultations on
the consequences of that withdrawal. Moreover, Israel
interests were affected; they were not adequately explored.
No attempt was made, little time given, to help Israel
surmount grave prejudice to its vital interests consequent
on that withdrawal. After all, a new confrontation of forces
suddenly arose. It suddenly had to be met and at Sharm el
Sheikh at the entrante to the Gulf of Aqaba, the Strait of
Tiran, legality walked out and blockade walked in. The
peace of the world trembled. And thus the United Nations
had somehow been put into a position of leaving Sinai snfe
for belligerency.

167. But then there came a graver source of tension in
mid-May, when abnormal troop concentrations were observed in the Sinai Peninsula. For the ten years of relative
stability beginning with March 1957 and ending with May
1967, the Sinai Desert had been free of Egyptian troops. In
other words, a natural geographic barrier, a largely uninhabited space, separated the main forces of the two sides. It
is true that in terms of sovereignty and law, any State has a
right to put its armies in any part of its territory that it
chooses. This, however, is not a legal question: it is a
political and a security question.

163. It is not, 1 think, a question of sovereignty that is
here involved. The United Nations has a right to ask that
when it assumes a function, the termination
of that
function shall not take place in conditions that would lead
to anti-charter situations. 1 do not raise this point in order
to linger upon that which is past, but because of Israel’s
general attitude to the peace-keeping functions of this
Organization. And 1 confess that my own attitude and
those of my colleagues and of my fellow citizens to the
peace-keeping functions of the United Nations have been
traumatically affected by this experience.

168. Experience in many parts of the world, not least in
our own, demonstrates that massive armies in close proximity to each other, against a background of a doctrine of
belligerency and accompanying threats by one anny to
annihilate the other, constitute an inflammatory situation.
169. We were puzzled in Israel by the relative lack of
preoccupation on the part of friendly Governments and
international agencies with this intense concentration which
found its reflection in precautionary concentrations on our
side. My Government proposed, 1 think at least two weeks
ago, the concept of a parallel and reciprocal reduction of
forces on both sides of the frontier. We elicited no
response, and certainly no action.

164. The United Nations Emergency Force rendered
distinguished service. Nothing became it less than the
manner of its departure. Ail gratitude and appreciation is
owed to the individuat who sustained its action. And if in
the course of the recent combats United Nations personnel
have fallen dead or wounded-as they have-then 1 join my
voice in an expression of the most sincere regret.

170. TO these grave sources of tension-the sabotage and
terrorist movement, emanating mostly from Syria, and the
heavy troop concentrations accompanied by dire, apocalyptic threats in Sinai-there wasadded in the third week of
May the most electric shock of ail, namely the closure of
the international waterway consisting of the Strait of Tiran
and the Gulf of Aqaba. It is not difficult, 1 think, to
understand why this incident had a more drastic impact
than any other. In 1957 the maritime nations, within the
framework of the United Nations General Assembly,
correctly enunciated the doctrine of free and innocent
passagethrough the Strait.

165. The problem of the future role of a United Nations
presence in conflicts such as these is being much debated.
But we must ask ourselves a question that has arisen as a
result of this experience. People in our country and in
many countries ask: what is the use of a United Nations
presence if it is in effect an umbrella which is taken away as
soon as it begins to rain ? Surely, then, future arrangements
for peace-keeping must depend more on the agreement and
the implementation
of the parties themselves than on
machinery which is totally at the mercy of the host
country, SOtotaIly at its mercy as to be the instrument of
its policies, whatever those policies may be.

171. Now, when that doctrine was proclaimed-and
incidentally, not challenged by the Egyptian representative
at that time-it was little more than an abstract principle
for the maritime world. For Israel it was a great but still
unfulfïlled prospect; it wasnot yet a reality. But during the
ten years in which we and the other States of the maritime
community have relied upon that doctrine and upon
established usage, the principle has become a reality
consecrated by hundreds of sailings under dozens of flags
and the establishment of a whole complex of commerce
and industry and communication, A new dimension has
been added to the map of the world’s communications, and
on that dimension we have constructed Israel’s bridge
towards the friendly States of Asia and Africa, a network of
relationships which is the chief pride of Israel in the second
decade of its independence.

166. We have lived through three dramatic weeks. Those
weeks, 1 think, have brought into clear view the main
elements of tension and also the chief promise of relaxed
tension in the future. The first link in the cabin was the
series of sabotage acts emanating from Syria. In October of
1966, the Security Council was already seized of this
problem, and a majority of its member States found it
possible and necessary to draw attention to the Syrian
Government’s responsibility for altering chat situation.
Scarcely a day passed without a mine, a bomb, a handgrenade or a mortar exploding on Israel’s soil, sometimes
with Iethal or crippling effects, always with an unsettling
psychological influence. In general, fourteen or fifteen such
incidents would accumulate before a response was considered necessary, and this ceaseless accumulation
of

172. Ail this, then, had grown up as an effective usage
under the United Nations flag. Does Mr. Nasser really think
16

eavy concentration in Sinai-e
had ensured a relative stabihty on the
Egyptian-Israel frontier for ten years. 1 do net use the
words “relative stabihty” lightly, for in faet wl&. bse
elements in the Egyptian-Israel relationship
existed there
wasnot one single incident of violence between Egypt snd
Israel for ten years. But suddenly this Stdus WR this
pattern of mutually accepted stability,
was smashed to
smithereens. It is now the task of the Governments
concerned to elaborate the new conditions of their coexistence, 1 think that much of this work should be done
directly by these Governments themsehw. SUrelY, after
what has happened we must have better assurance than
before, for Israel and for the Middle
East, of peaceful
coexistence. The question is whether there is any reason to
believe that such a new era may yet came to pass. If I am a
little sanguine on this point, it is because of a conviction
that men and nations do behave wisely once they bave
exhausted a11other alternatives. Surely the Other alternatives of war and belligerency have now been exhausted.
And what has anybody gained from that? But in order that
the new system of interstate relationships may flourish in
the Middle East, it is important that certain principles be
applied above and beyond the cesse-tire to which the
Security Council has given its unanimous support.

the established legaI*usage and interests of ten years?

stutus quo whi&

173. There was in this wanton act a quality of malice. For
surely the closing of the Strait of Tiran gave no benefit
whatever to Egypt except .the perverse joy of inflicting
injury on otheis. It was an anarchic act, because it showed a
total disregard for the law of nations, the application of
which in this specific case had not been challenged for ten
years. And it was, in the literal sense, an act of arrogance,
because there are other nations in Asia and East Africa that
trade with the Port of Eclat, as they have every right to do,
through the Strait of Tiran and across the Gulf of Aqaba,
Other sovereign States from Japan to Ethiopia, from
Thailand to Uganda, from Cambodia to Madagascar, have a
sovereign right to decide for themselves whether they wish
or do not wish to trade with Israel. These countries are not
colonies of Cairo. They cari trade with Israel or not trade
with Israel as they wish, and President Nasser is not the
policeman of other African and Asian States.
174. Here then was a wanton intervention in the sovereign
rights of other States in the eastern half of the world to
decide for themselves whether or not they wish to establish
trade relations with either or both of the two ports at the
head of the Gulf of Aqaba.

179. Let me then say here that Israel welcomes the appeal
for the cesse-fire as forrnulated in this resolution. But 1
must point out that the implementation
depends on the
absolute and sincere acceptance and co-operation of the
other parties, which, in our view, are responsible for the
present situation, And in conveyirrg this resolution to my
colleagues, 1 must at this moment point out that these
other Governments have not used the opportunity yet to
clarify their intentions.

175. When we examine, then, the implications of this act,
we have no cause to wonder that the international shock
was great. There was another reason too for that shock.
Blockades have traditionally been regarded, in the preCharter parlance, as acts of war. TO blockade, after ail, is to
attempt strangulation; and sovereign States are entitled not
to have their trade strangled. TO understand how the State
of Israel felt, one has merely to look around this table and
imagine, for example, a foreign Power forcibly closing New
York or Montreal, Boston or Marseille, Toulon or Copenhagen, Rio or Tokyo or Bombay harbour. How would your
Governments react? What would you do? How long would
you wait?

180. 1 have said that the situation to be constructed after
the cesse-fire must depend on certain Princip]es. The frrst
of these principles surely must be the acceptance of Israel’s
statehood and the total elimination
of the fiction of its
non-existence. It would seem to me that after 3,000 years
the time has arrived to accept Israel’s nationhood as a fact,
for here is the only State in the international
community
which has the same territory, speaks tic same language and
upholds the same faith as it did 3,000 years ago.

176. But Israel waited because of its confidence that the
other maritime Powers and countries interested in this new
trading pattern would concert their influence in order to
re-establish a legal situation and to liquidate this blockade.
We concerted action with them not because Israel’s national
interest was here abdicated. There Will not be, there cannot
be, an Israel without Eilat. We cannot be expected to return
to a dwarfed stature, with our face to the Mediterranean
alone. In law and in history, peace and blockades have
never coexisted. How could it be expected that the
blockade of Eilat and a relaxation of tension in the Middle
East could ever be brought into harmony?

181. And if, as everybody knows ta be the fact, the
universal conscience was in the last week or two most
violently shaken at the prospect of danger to Israel, it was
not only because there seemed to be a danger to a State,
but also, 1 think, because the State was Israel, with ail that
this ancient name evokes, teaches, symbolizes and inspires.
How grotesque would be an international
community
which found room for 122 sovereign units and which did
not acknowledge the sovereignty of that people which had
given nationhood its deepest significahoe and its most
enduring grace.

177. These then were the three main elements in the
tension: the sabotage movement; the blockade of the port;
and, perhaps more imminent than anything else, this vast
and purposeful encirclement movement, against the background of an authorized presidential statement announcing
that the objective of the encirclement was to bring about
the destruction and the annihilation of a sovereign State.

182. No wonder, then, that when danger threatened we
could hear a roar of indignation sweep across the world,
that men in progressive movements and members of the
scientific and humanistic cultures joined together in sounding an alarm bel1 about an issue that vitally affected the
human conscience. And no wonder, correspondingly, that a

178. These acts taken together-the blockade, the dismissal of the United Nations Emergency Force, and the
17

189. There are no two categories of States. The United
Arab Republic, Iraq, Syria, Jordan, Lebanon-not one of
these has a single ounce or milligram of Statehood which
does not adhere-in equal measures to Israel itself.

deep and universal sense of satisfaction and relief has
accompanied the news of Israel’s gallant and successful
resis tance.

183. But the central point remains th.e need to secure an
authentic intellectual recognition by our neighbours of
Israel’s deep roots in the Middle Eastern reality. There is an
intellectual tragedy in the failure of Arab leaders to corne
to grips, however reluctantly, with the depth and authenticity of Israel’s roots in the life, the history, the spiritual
experience and the culture of the Middle East.

190. It is important that States outside our region apply a
balanced attitude, that they do not exploit temporary
tensions and divergencies in the issues of global conflict,
that they do not seek to win gains by inflaming fleeting
passions, and that they strive to make a balanced distribution of their friendship amongst the States of the Middle
East.

184. This, then, is the first axiom. A much more conscious
and uninhibited acceptance of Israel’s Statehood is an
axiom requiring no demonstration, for there Will never be a
Middle East without an independent and sovereign State of
Israel in its midst.

I
‘.l

191. Now whether a11the speeches of a11the great Powers
this evening meet this criterion, everybody, of course, cari
judge for himself. 1 do not propose to answer in detail a11
the observations of the representative of the Soviet Union, 1
had the advantage of hearing the same things in identical
language a few days ago from his colleague, the Soviet
Ambassador in Israel. 1 must confess that 1 was no more
convinced this evening than 1 was the day before yesterday
about the validity of this most vehement and one-sided
denunciatibn. But surely world opinion, before whose
tribunal this debate unrolls, cari solve this question by
posing certain problems to itself. Who was it that attempted
to destroy a neighbouring State in 1948, Israel or its
neighbours? Who now closes an international waterway to
the port of a neighbouring State, Israel or the United Arab
Republic? Does Israel refuse to negotiate a peace settiement with the Arab States, or do they refuse to do SOwith
it? Who disrupted the 1957 pattern of stability, Israel or
Egypt? Did troops of Egypt, Syria, Jordan, Iraq, Lebanon,
Kuwait and Algeria surround Israel in this menacing
confrontation, or has any distinguished representative seen
some vast Israel colossus surrounding the area between
Morocco and Kuwait?

185. The second principle must be that of the peaceful
settlement of disputes, The resolution thus adopted falls
within the concept of the peaceful settlement of disputes. 1
have already said that much could be done if the
Governments of the area would embark much more on
direct contacts. They must fmd their way to each other.
After all, when there is conflict between them they corne
together face to face. Why should they not corne together
face to face to solve the conflict. And perhaps on some
occasions it would not be a bad idea to have the solution
before, and therefore instead of, the confIict.
186. When the Council discusses what is to happen after
the cesse-fire, we hear many formulas: back to 1956, back
to 1948-I understand our neighbours would wish to turn
the clock back to 1947. The fact is, however, that most
clocks move forward and not backward, and this, 1 think,
should be the case with the clock of Middle Eastern
peace-not backward to belligerency, but forward to peace.

,

i/
/
’

192. 1 raise these points of elementary logic. Of course, a
great Power cari take refuge in its power from the
exigencies of logic. AI1 of us in our youth presumably
recounted La Fontaine’s fable, “La raison du plusfort est
toujours la meilleure.” But here, after all, there is nobody
who is more or less strong than others; we sit here around
the table on the concept of sovereign equality. But I think
we have an equal duty to bring substantive proof for any
denunciation that we make, each of the other.

187. The point was weIl made this evening by the
representative of Argentina, who said: the cesse-fïre should
be followed immediately by the most intensive efforts to
bring about a just and lasting peace in the Middle East. In a
similar sense, the representative of Canada warned us
against merely reproducing the old positions of conflict,
without attempting to settle the underlying issues of
Arab-Israel coexistence. After all, many things in recent
days have been mixed up with each other. Few things are
what they were. And in order to create harmonious
combinations of relationships, it is inevitable that the States
should corne together in negotiation.

193. 1 would say in conclusion that these are, of course,
still grave times. And yet they may perhaps have fortunate
issue. This could be the case if those who for some reason
decided SOviolently, three weeks ago, to disrupt the stutus
quo would ask themselves what the results and benefits
have been. As he looks around him at the arena of battle, at
the wreckage of planes and tanks, at the collapse of
intoxicated hopes, might not an Egyptian ruler ponder
whether anything was achieved by that disruption? What
has it brought but strife, conflict with other powerful
interests, and the Stern criticism of progressive men
throughout the world?

188. Another factor in the harmony that we would like to
see in the Middle East relates to external Powers. From
these, and especially from the greatest amongst them, the
small States of the Middle East-and most of them are
small-ask for a rigorous support, not for individual States,
but for specifïc principles; not to be for one State against
other States, but to be for peace against war, for free
commerce against belligerency, for the pacifie settlement of
disputes against violent irredentist threats; in other words,
to exercise an even-handed support for the integrity and
independence of States and for the rights of States under
the Charter of the United Nations and other sources of
international law,

194. 1 think that Israel has in recent days proved its
steadfastness and vigour. It is now willing to demonstrate
its instinct for peace. Let us build a new system of
relationships from the wreckage of the old. Let us discern
18

across the darkness the vision of a better and a brighter
dawn.
195. The PRESIDENT: The next speaker on my list is the
representative of the Syrian Arab Republic. 1 now invite
him to take a place at the Council table and to make a
statement.

the distinguished Secretary-General to the Council, and
knowing of the death of the Indians who were members of
UNEF, and of the Brazilian, also a member of UNEF-and
we express our deepest sympathy, for a11of them died as
victims of the wanton Israel aggression-that the Israelis
were the ones who started the aggression against the United
Arab Republic.
202. In the chain and sequence of events that followed
afterwards, everything was the result of that first act of
aggression; namely, that Israel attacked the United Arab
Republic with premeditation and after a well-prepared
campaign. This was made amply clear by the letter
[$/79X]
presented to the Security Council by the
Permanent Representative of the United Arab Republic on
the morning of 5 June. The letter stated the following:

196. Mr. TOMEH (Syria): Mr. President, when you tïrst
assumed the Presidency of this important body of the
United Nations, you started your, SO to speak, maiden
speech by quoting a poet from your own country. In doing
SO, you indeed placed politics against its human background. For unless and until politics is SOunderstood, we
Will always go on dealing with shadow concepts. It is only
against a background of culture, against a background of
thought and of human history and suffering, that politics
cari be understood, As 1 say this, something cornes to my
mind, the Phaedo of Plato, one of the last dialogues which
he wrote about the human SOU~.In that dialogue, Socrates,
prior to drinking from the chalice that contained the
poison, said this to his students who were trying to
convince him not to drink from the chalice and die: “Life is
a lesson in death and dying”.

“This morning the Israelis launched attacks against the
Gaza Strip, Sinai, airports in Caire, in the Suez Canal area
and several other airports within the United Arab
Republic. Preliminary reports indicate that twenty-three
Israel aeroplanes have been shot down and that several,
Israel pilots have been captured.”
203. It Will take time to go back again to the chain of
events, but members of the Security Council Will remember
that, according to our presentation of the case, the whole
chain of tragic events began with the Israel attack on Syria
on 7 April. The Israel side, in three consecutive letters, has
given its version of that attack. We also gave ours, but when
1 addressed this body [1344th meeting] 1 brought with me
the report of the Israel-Syiian Mixed Armistice Commission
from which 1 quoted unchallenged evidence tbat the Israel
Air Force on that day attacked Syrian villages and killed
Syrian civilians and destroyed civilian properties. 1 &lso
respectfully requested the Secretary-General to submit a
factual report about that attack of 7 April, but then events
followed in such quick succession that it was not possible
to press for this report. But that attack of 7 April against
Syrian villages, civilians and properties should leave no
doubt as to the identity of the real aggressor in this whole
Middle East crisis that we are discussing now.

197. Indeed, this is a great truth, that whatever we go
through in human life, from the greatest actions of nations
to the simplest act of the individual, we are undergoing a
lesson in death and dying. But Socrates had something else
in mind: that when he drank the chalice of poison and
when hc said what he said, he actually was teaching
generations to corne that he wasa victim of sophistry.
198. The whole Socratic doctrine is a refutation of
sophistry-sophistry being, in his time, the art of picturing
evil as good and good as evil. Socrates waslater accused of
having poisoned the mind of the Greek generation. He was
condemned to die, and he died. But it is the death of
Socrates that now condemns those who condemned him to
die.
199. In this tiny land of Palestine, the history of mankind,
in its deepest aspects, has seen a procession of false
prophets, prophets who bave claimed to be real prophets,
but who were not real prophets. They were sophists, the
kind of sophists that Socrates fougbt. Indeed; one regrets,
one wonders at the fact, that with the art of sophistry SO
much evil cari sometimes be put at the service of a bad and
false cause.

204. Mr. Abba Eban has again chosen to raise the issue
which was the subject of a complaint submitted to the
Security Council on 14 October 1966, which the Council
kept under consideration until 12 November of the same
year.

200. 1 must confess that with that introduction 1 did not
have in mind at a11answering in any way the statement
made by Mr. Abba Eban. However, there were allegations,
many false presentations, in his statement that make it
absolutely necessary for me to point out at least some of
the basic sophistries contained in that long statement. One
of them is this: His whole edifice, his whole statement, his
whole presentation of the case, is based on a fallacy. And
the fallacy is this: it is for us here to point out, to
designate, who is the real aggressor, who is the victim of
aggression, who started the aggression.

205. Mr. Eban dwelt at great length on sabotage and
terroristic acts. 1 should like to remind the Council of my
reply to Mr. Rafael when he raised the same issue in the
Council. At that time I alluded to the terrorist and sabotage
roots on which Israel as a State was founded. 1 also quoted
from the Security Council resolution condemning Israel for
the assassination of Count Folke Bernadotte. But 1 shall not
go into a11that again. However, 1 must say this: that it is
indeed ironical for Mr. Eban to speak about saboteurs,
about respect for law,‘when he owes his own position to
the lawlessness perpetrated by the Zionists against the Arab
people of Palestine in what the Israelis have referred to with
pride as a war of liberation.

201. 1 think it should be crystal clear to everyone here in
the Council, having listened to the oral statement made by

206. What was the war of liberation in Palestine? It was+a
war to oust the Arabs from Palestine and to bring in an
19

alien minority from a11over the world. This they did, and - Council/1346th meeting], and on Tuesday, 30 May, in my
these Arabs are s,till living in tents surrounding Israel.
own statement [1344th meeting] -we emphasized -the fact
that Israel would not dare to attack if it were not assured of
207. It is astonishing to me, to say the least, to find
the support and active assistance of its creators and
representatives of Israel speaking about legality and respect
benefactors: that is to say, the United States and the
for the law, for indeed 1 cari refer this whole audience to no
United Kingdom. The events of every day are presenting
other book than one called Haganah, written by one of the
ample proof of what 1 have stated time and again, especially
founders of Haganah, Mr. Munya M. Mardor, published,
when we quoted the Vice-President of the United States,
significantly, in England under the title Stictly Illegal. The
who said: “Israel does not need a written alliance with the
book is written about what the Haganah did between 1936
United States; that alliance is there in spirit.”
and the outbreak of hostilities resulting in the war of
liberation and the ousting of the Arabs from Palestine; how
211, However, before proceeding to more details, let me
they smuggled arms, how they attacked Arabs, and did a11 in ail fairness, perhaps to myself and to those who bave to
these other illegal things. But without going into ail the
judge the issue, point to a very great anomaly of the
details, 1 would be satisfied to quote the following by the
situation in which we find ourselves now, and that is this,
author of ffaganah, 3 showing their concept of law:
The accused in this case are the United Kingdom and the
United States. But their representatives sit hem in the
“There we were, buying arms in strange countries,
Council as judges. Thus, we have the unique situation that
packing them in fantastic receptacles, and loading them
1, as a plaintiff, must accept the answer of the accusedwho
onto foreign ships in foreign ports. With it a11 was the
sets himself up as a judge. 1 am sure that the representative
compelling necessity for secrecy. We were conspirators,
of the United States, with his vast and great legal
outside the law, and yet obeying what to us was a higher
knowledge, knows that such a situation disqualifies the
law.”
judge.
That was the concept of law on which the State of Israel
212. It certainly is no mere coincidence that today the
was built.
countries of Algeria, the United Arab Republic, Iraq and
my own country, Syria, have severed relations with the
208. Since we are dealing with the outer manifestations
United States. No matter how the justification for the
and the inner and deeper roots of the Arab-Israel conflict,
support of the United States Government to Israel is stated,
allow me in this part of my address ta make one final point.
the
conviction remains with us that United States policy is
In a11that Mr. Eban said he avoided one basic issue, and
geared
and has been geared for the last quarter of a Century,
that was not incidental; nor was it because of a poor
to say the least, to the fulfilment of the aims of Zionism.
memory-1 am sure that Mr. Eban, distinguished scholar
Indeed, we quoted [1343rd meeting] the Prime Minister of
that he is, must have a very good memory. The basic issue
Israel,
Mr. Levi Eshkol, as having stated that, when
to which 1 refer is the Arab people of Palestine. Until and
addressing
himself to the American Government, more
unless the Arab people of Palestine are recognized by Israel
specifically,
to the Secretary of Defence, in asking for arms,
and by the Israel people themselves as being the first party
he
was
told-and
this appeared in the 17 April issue of U.S.
to the dispute, we shall only be dealing, as 1 have said many
News
and
World
Report:
“Don’t spend your money. We are
times, with palliatives rather than with solutions of the
here.
The
Sixth
Fleet
is
here.”
What greater proof do you
problem.
want? The Sixth Fleet is now near our shores and everyone
of us has read day after day that they have been patrolling
,209. At this juncture in the Middle East crisis, the
the Mediterranean which they consider to be a lake for
delegation of the Syrian Arab Republic wishes to place on
their tutelage,
record that the Governments of the United States and
Great Britain, by their actions in collusion with the Israel
213. Indeed, American and British intervention is becomaggressors, have proved beyond any doubt to be the bitter
ing clearcr and clearer every day to ail of us. American and
enemies of the Arab nation. Today we have decisive,
British planes are carrying American and British volunteers
irrefutable proof at our disposal that the air forces of Great
to join the Israelis to fight an aggressive war against the
Britain and the United States have actively participated
Arabs. Millions of dollars and pounds sterling are being
with Israel in its aggression. The United States and the
poured into Israel. Not to mention the $8 billion that have
United Kingdom air forces have been participating in two
been poured into Israel since its establishment-this in spite
ways: fïrst, by joining the Israel air force in its attacks
of the fact that the Israelis have occupied by force and
against the Arab cities and civilians and, second, by
expropriated
the Arab property of Palestine which, up to
providing air caver for the Israel armed forces. This they
1948, amounted to 94 per cent of the total area of
have done from the first moment of the Israel attack on
Palestine. Arms shipments, especially from the United
Cairo, Damascus and Amman. The number of aircraft alone
States, never stop.
which simultaneously attacked these three cities at one
time in one day prove beyond any shadow of doubt that it
214. The representative of the United States wanted to
was not the Israel air force alone which carried out the
remind us of the attacks to which some of the American
attacks in these huge numbers.
missions in some of the Arab countries have been subjected.
210. Twice in our interventions-on
Saturday last, 3 June,
But on this occasion 1 would not have said this, believe me
when Mr. Daoudy of the Syrian delegation spoke in the
in a11sincerity and honesty, had it not been for the fact
that since we have spoken here we have been receiving one
3 New York, The New American Library, Inc., 1964.
threat after another, forewarning us against assassination
20

an4 killing. In fact, we have been accompanied all the time
by detectives who even take us from our bedroom to our
mission to the Security Council chamber in order to make
sure that we are not killed or assassinated. For this, 1 wish
to express the thanks of my delegation. But, needless to
say, we are being threatened day and night; more than once
the warning came to us “Get out, your mission is going to
be bombed.” Need 1 remind the members of the Council of
the paramilitary occupation of our mission, which is quite
fresh in the memory of the members of this CounciI.
215. 1 corne now to the representative of the United
Kingdom. Without referring by name to me, he characterized the item of news which was circulated to the Press
prior to our coming here as being a lie. When that item
speaks about collusion and the help given by the British Air
Force to the Israel aggressor, he described that allegation
as a lie. 1 would have expected another word from the very
learned representative of the United Kingdom.
216. But let me refresh the memory of the representative
of the United Kingdom. In 1956, during the attack ‘on
Egypt, they also described tbe accusations of collusion as
being a lie. The same word was used then. But, none other
than the Secretary for Foreign Affairs, Mr. Nutting, wrote a
book? parts of which were recently published in The
Times of London. He made it quite clear that there was a
definite collusion between England and Israel. At the same
time, the very same word “lie” wasused.

part in the aggression against Syria and the United Arab
Republic, and then returned to their base. The record of
this statement by the Israel pilot is on its way to the
Security Council as a document giving further evidence of
Britain’s participation in the aggression.
219. The idea has been artificially propagated, in the
United States especially, that Israel is a small and tiny
peace-loving State Iooking for nothing else but peace,
surrounded by ugly, aggressive Arabs bent on destroying it.
Israel’s spokesmen and Zionist propagandists have been
playing on mass emotions in order to draw sympathy to
their side. 1 will not go into detail to refute for instance the
cal1 for peace which was given by Mr. Eban, but only
remind him of the plight of the Arab refugees and the
confiscation of Arab property and what they did to the
Holy City of Jerusalem, which is a very Holy City to us
also. 1 shall simply repeat here what was said over Radio
Israel yesterday as part of the psychological warfare
conducted by the Israelis against the Arab peoples in aIl
their countries. Addressing the Arabs, it stated:
“Very soon your countries Will be under Israel rule. The
Israel Army Will safeguard the population. Each one of
you must do the following in order to ensure your safety:
(l), stay inside your homes; (2) close the doors and
Windows; (3), display a white flag as a proof that you
have understood our instructions.”
This is a sample of an officia1 broadcast of Israel, whose
spokesmen corne here to declare in the Security Council
that they have no aggressive designs whatsoever against the
Arabs and that they do not covet any Arab land,

217. Unfortunately, however, when we are challenged to
that ,extent, we have to go back to history. I assure the
Council with all the faithfulness of which a human being is
capable that no tragedy exists in the Arab world today, and
that no tragedy would have existed had it not been for the
series of lies that have characterized a British colonial
imperialist policy in the Arab world. Suffice it to mention
that the very deep causes of the tragedy with which we are
dealing now, namely, the Palestine problem, had its roots in
the Balfour Declaration, and that none other than Lord
Balfour himself wrote:

220. The United Kingdom, whose colonial army has been
killing and persecuting the Arabs in Aden, whose ugly
shadow has withdrawn from ail its huge colonial empireexcept some parts of the Arab land, because of very
well-known oil interests-purports to perpetrate its colonial
presence through its creation, Israel.
221. On the other hand, the United States Govemment,
whose huge and powerful armies are killing the people of
Viet-Nam day and night, has started a battle against our
own people, the Arab people. But here and tbere, neither
the Viet-Namese nor the Arabs have committed any
aggression against the Americans. The United States Government, not the people, which is frghting a war of
annihilation against the courageous Viet-Namese people,
through the Saigon generals, is now waging the same war of
annihilation against the Arab peopIe through the Tel-Aviv
generals: Moche Dayan and Menachem Begin, whose nomination to the Cabinet passed unnoticed and who is the
leader of the Herut Party and the famous hero of the
massacre of the Deir Yassin. 1 must say that it was with
great astonishment that 1 read an article in the very
respected The Economist of London, which 1 regularly read
every week, a description of Mr. Menachem Begin who,
having quitted the leadership of his Party at one time, was
described as a gentleman.

“In short, SOfar as Palestine is concerned, the Powers
bave made no statement of fact which is not admittedly
wrong, and no declaration of policy which, at least in the
lettes, they have not always intended to vio1ate.“5
.1 think this statement by Lord Balfour is the best
description of a political lie that could exist.
218. 1 spoke of evidence at our disposal-and we have this
evidence. As a matter of fact, an Israel pilot, by the name
of Abraham Velan, with the rank of First Lieutenant,
whose plane was downed over Damascus, has affnmed that
British military aircraft of the Vulcan type have been
stationed for the last ten days at Israel Ekron Airport. They
participated, he declared, in the assault on the United Arab
Republic, Jordan and Syria. He went on to affirm that
other British aircraft took off from Cyprus in order to take
4 Anthony Nutting, No End of a Lesson; The Story of Suez.
(London, Constable, 1967).
5 United Kingdom. Documents on British Fore@
Poli%
1919-1939, 1st Series, Vol. IV (London, Her Majesty’s Stationery
Office, 195 21, p. 345.

222. The same United States Government that defeated
the nazi war criminals in Germany gives these generals help,
money and arms to commit genocide against the Arabs. But
21

let me tell you, in all honesty, that the people of Viet-Nam
will not die, in spite of the thousands’ of innocent victims,
of the American immoral warfare and in spite of the
destruction of their cities, towns and villages. Force cari
never win over right,

229. The PRESIDENT: 1 cal1 on the representative of the
United States in exercise of his right of reply.
230. Mr. GOLDBERG (United States of Amerlca): 1
cannot allow to stand unchallenged a few of the statements
made to this Council by the representative of Syria, Mr.
Tomeh.

223. Similarly, the Arab people will not be extinguished in
spite of the British Royal Air Force and the Sixth Fleet at
the disposa1 of Mr. Levi Eshkol, by his own recognition.
Our lands, the Arab lands, have been saturated with the
blood of martyrs for freedom, for independence and for the
dignity of man. Our generation, which grew up between
two world wars, has witnessed the struggle against imperialism for the honour and for the dignity of our homeland!
We and our children Will continue the struggle, knowlng
that life is nothing else but a lesson in death and dying. Let
the Zionists not deceive themselves; they started this war
and they Will bear the consequences,

231. First of all, he purported to give me legal advice
about my competence to sit on this Council. In this he joins
the company of others who have attempted to give me legal
advice during the course of these debates. 1 have heard the
legal advlce, and it sounds as if it cornes from someone not
admitted to the practice of law, 1 have before me the
agenda which bas been adopted unanimously. 1 do not find
any complaints against the United States on that agenda,
Mr. Tomeh is always welcome to submit an agenda item,
which cari be discussed at the appropriate time,

224. The news is coming now that my own country, Syria,
the United Arab Republic and Iraq and Algeria have all
severed their relations with the United States Government,
because of the facts which we have tried in a most sincere
manner to put forth to the Council and because of the
inherent enmity of United States policy towards us. The
conclusion we have reached regrettably is unavoidable.
Nevertheless, 1 wish in my closing remarks to express our
regret that we have reached this impasse.

232. 1 cari only conclude that Mr. Tomeh’s speech was
written before 1 made my categorical denial of United
States participation, military or otherwise, in this regretta.
ble conflict which is now going on. 1 shall say again for his
information, for the information of the Councll and for the
information of his countrymen that there are no United
States aircraft carriers, no military aircraft, no military
forces carrying volunteers, or anything else, involved in this
conflict. There is an old American slang expression that
when you are involved in a situation in which your veracity
is challenged, “You put up or shut UP”. 1 do not apply that
to Mr. Tomeh.

225. We have no quarrel with this great nation, with its
highest responsible, intellectual and spiritual centres, with
its colleges, universities and schools, with its great humanitarian institutions and traditions, but surely our quarrel is
with the few politicians, with the Zionists who have misled
and deceived this great people and country against the
Arabs, with Zionist international intrigue that have chained
the United States to their selfish interests. 1s it not strange
that some of the same people who have been objecting to
and opposing the war in Viet-Nam are themselves more
strongly calling now for United States intervention in the
Middle East to support Israel, 1s this not a clear case of
~schizophrenia, a double loyalty whose only victims Will be
the United States people sacrificed on the altar of morbid
Zionist action and neurotic ideology.

233. We have put up before the Council a very simple
method to test the accuracy of statements which are taken
out of whole cloth-that is through the instrumentality of
this Organization. We have issued an invitation to this
Organization to provide obseryers in order to verify the
accuracy of those unfounded statements. They Will receive
the greatest welcome from my country. 1 think that that is
the best proof that 1 could possibly offer concerning these
extremely inflammatory and totally unfounded statements
about the United States.
234. There is a statement which 1 must reject with great
emphasis because it relates to the essential fabric of our
society, and that is the statement charging that any Citizen
of the United States has double loyalty to his country
because he has attachments to his ancestral home. That was
the implication, 1 take it, of Mr. Tomeh’s remark. Our
country is a pluralistic society. We draw our citizenry from
virtually every country on the face of the globe, That is the
source of our strength as a nation from which we derive the
virility of American life in our culture, in our institutions,
in our traditions and in a11that we do. We do not accept the
concept that because our citizens, whatever their faith or
religion or ancestral origin may be, have an interest in their
ancestral homes, this is a sign of double loyalty or lack of
attachment to our American institutions. 1 served in
President Kennedy? administration. One of the finest
features of that administration in terms of world interest
was the visit he paid to his ancestral home, and that was
applauded by a11Americans, regardless of their faith, their
religion, their traditions or their background.

226. With a11these, we certainly quarrel, but deep in our
hearts we are confident that the truth which is SOclear to
us now, which is SO clear by itself and which is certainly
equally clear to quite’a few here, Will become clear to all.
Then the truth of what we have been saying for the last
twenty years Will dawn upon all.
227. With regard to the resolution adopted this evening by
the Council, the position of my Government is clear. We
strongly oppose any gains made by Israel stemming from a
fait accompli.
228. We consider it the utmost duty of the Council to
take immediate measures ta condemn the aggressor,
namely, Israel, and to apply the sanctions provided for by
the Charter. It is needless to say that we have repeatedly
warned the Security Council in the last’two months about
the impending aggression by Israel in collusion with the
imperialist Powers,
22

235. 1 regret that Mr. Tomeh does not understand our
country although he has lived here for a long time. Our
citizens are loyal to our country. His references to the
attitudes of our citizens is, as 1 said the other day,
completely out of order. 1 would have challenged his
statement and asked for a ruling that it was out of order,
but I thought we ought to hear him out because 1 believe
profoundly in free speech for every Member of the United
Nations.
236. But I do wish to state that it is untenable for
Mcmbers of the United Nations to intervene in our
domestic affairs. We would not presume to do chat with
respect to any country in the world. We would not presume
to do it with respect to Mr. Tomeh’s country, which is
composed of several elements of religion and tradition. We
simply cannot accept it as the appropriate thing to say
about our country, and we do not accept it.
237. As 1 said the other day, our policies cari be approved
or disapproved, praised or criticized in this Council, as it is
a world body; we are not immune to that. But what we are
immune to is consideration by this Council of the attitude
of our own citizens, of the points of view, any points of
view, that they may have in terms of the exercise of their
democratic rights as citizens and of their constitutional
rights.
238. Finally 1 would like to say this-and perhaps here we!
cari go back to the origins of this difficulty. The canardand it was a canard-was circulated that the United States
had something to do with alleged plots against Syria. 1
appeared before the Council, and 1 told it on the highest
authority that there was nothing to that allegation. Repeatlng allegations without evidence and just making accusations is trot proof; it does not sustain the charge; it just
spreads defamation. 1 must reject completely a statement
Iike that, which is defamatory and completely unfounded.
239. The PRESIDENT: The representative of the United
Kingdom has asked to exercise his right of reply, and 1 now
call on him.

“The broadcast by Cairo Radio that British Canberra
bombers have taken part in bombing Egyptian positions
in Sinai is also a complete lie, without foundation.”
1 would suggest to the representative of Syria that he does
not help his cause by coming here with repeated allegations
that have already been denied; and 1 would go further and
say to him that if accusations are to be made, it would be
well to be careful that they cannot be immediately and
completely disproved.
243. The tbird allegation was that British aircraft from
British aircraft carriers had taken part in recent attacks. But
the fact of the matter is that there were onIy two British
aircraft carriers in the area at ah-if they cari be said to have
been in the area, because they were both a thousand miles
away-and at the time they were both stationary in
harbour. And though the representative of Syria may not
know it, it is a fact that the aircraft from an aircraft carrier
car-mot take off when the carrier itself is stationary and in
harbour. 1 would therefore ask the representative of Syria
to pay heed to the denials that have been made and to
realize that his cause is not advanced by his coming here to
make accusations which cari be SOcompletely destroyed.
244. Finally, as to the question of policy in this matter, 1
would like to repeat what was said by my Foreign Secretary
in the House of Commons at the beginning of these events.
This is what he said, and this is the policy to which my
Government adheres-it is plain. It is publicly announced
and it is widely accepted by a11parties in my country:
“The Government’s attitude-and
the House Will, 1
know, support me in saying this-is that the British
concern is not to take sides but to ensure a peaceful
solution to the problems of that area, and that in this
situation we have the same interest as that of others in
the area as well as the rest of the world. The House will
wish to know that instructions are being given to all our
forces in the area to avoid any involvement in the
conflict.”
245. That is the policy laid down by my Government,
publicly laid down and scrupulously followed.

240, Lord CARADON (United Kingdom): 1 shall not keep
the Council long in dealing with the accusations that were
made by the representative of Syria just now. But when a
specifrc allegation is made, it is necessary to make a specific
reply.

246. The PRESIDENT: The last speaker on my list is the
representative of Morocco. 1 now invite him to take a place
at the Council table and to make his statement.
247. Mr. BENHIMA (Morocco) (translated from French):
Thank you, Mr. President, for allowing me to speak. 1 must
first say how apologetic 1 feel about taking the floor at this
late hour, after the permanent members of the Security
Council have assured the President that their interventions
would be brief. But just as 1 must beg the Council’s
indulgence for the reason just mentioned, SO1 must crave
indulgence for this intervention, which 1 hope to keep as
brief as possible, even if it exceeds the time the Council was
good enough to allot me, The Council members’ consciousness of having done their duty tonight surely gives them the
right to retire as soon as possible.

241. Three allegations have been made. One came from
Damascus Radio, and what the representative of Syria tells
us this evening is therefore net new. It is already known to
my Government and has already been denied. There was
also an accusation made by Cairo Radio, and a third
accusation to which 1 shah refer in a moment.
242. The statement made by my Ministry of Defence in
regard to the first two allegations 1 shall read:
“The allegation on Damascus Radio that, according to a
captured Israel pilot, seventeen Vulcan aircraft arrived in
Israel ten days ago, is a complete lie which has no-repeat,
no-foundation whatsoever.

248. However, as a representative of an Arab State, 1 iïnd
it difficult, after the decision that has just been taken, to
23

effect which the psychological campaign waged by the Press
and television has had on everyone during the past two
days. And despite the hospitality which 1 should like to
acknowledge publicly here, despite the tare taken by the
United States Mission and the local authorities to ensure
the most hospitable climate for our stay here, the idea has
occured to some people that the Council should consider,
when problems like this are debated, whether it might not
be wise to remove the debates from parts of the world
where the psychological impact of freedom of expression
may be detrimental to their undisturbed progress.

consider that the day’s work now completed gives me the
right to well-earned rest.
249. It is presumptuous, admittedly, to take the floor
straightaway, while still labouring under thè shock of that
decision, and at the same time retain the moral strength ~IO(
to make certain frank comments and the physical strength
not to show the Council how disturbed 1 am.
250. It is true that the Security Council primary duty is to
ensure peace. 1 associate myself with a11the tributes paid to
the Council members for their efforts during the last two
weeks of the crisis, here or in their capitals, to try to bring
it to an end and fïïd a solution that would guarantee, if not
immediately, then at least on a long- or short-term basis,
the permanent conditions for a return to a just peace on a
sound and stable basis.

254. 1 am sure that Ambassador Goldberg Will appreciate
the feelings that have prompted me to round off the Sytian
representative’s statement and express the desire to seethat
the debates in this Council and the actions of the
delegations are protected from certain influences and
pressures.

251. But during the past two days, that is, since Israel’s
aggression against the Arab States, we have seen these
efforts grow in intensity and concentration. As always in
history, it is perhaps too early to discern a11 their
motivations, to ask the walls to speak out and reveal what
went on at the private meetings between various delegations
and prompted the last-minute accommodations. We shall
have time later on to read about what happened. We shall
find writers froni certain countries which today deny
responsibility in connexion with this decision admitting
with a great display of intellectual honesty the roles their
countries played in the present crisis. That was the case
with the Suez affair, on the occasion of which the Members
of the General Assembly and the Security Council heard
denials expressed in tones conveying the ring of sincerity
and moral authority; today, books all over the world often
bearing sensational titles, reveal the true secrets of the Suez
affair. The Members of the Organization Will one day be
able to read the true secrets of this new crisis and its
developments.

255. TO return to the nub of the question, the Council has
just adopted a resolution unanimously. While we reserve
our right to speak on the substantive issue, the Moroccan
delegation would be the last to challenge the Council’s right
to take a decision, particularly when it is unanimous, But
the Council is not only a forum where witnesses are heard;
it is also a courthouse where political and moral judgements
have to be handed down, and the Council’s first duty on
5 June, when the representative of the United Arab
Republic lodged a complaint against Israel’s aggression
should, 1 believe, have been to start by determining the
perpetrator of the aggression. Among a11 the statements
made, even in the Press comments, we have not found a
single sentence indicating that the Arabs had initiated the
fighting or disputing the fact that Israel had made the first
move. If any doubt should remain, the fact that Mr. Eban,
an expert on the procedures of this Organization and a
truly powerful rhetorician, thought it necessary to corne
here to face questions on this problem, questions which
unfortunately were not put, is signifïcant. We consider it
impermissible that when hos,tilities break out-and 1 am
speaking as a Member of the United Nations and not as the
representative of an Arab country-the side-issues should
overshadoti the basic issue or a solution should be sought in
Security Council debates without delving into the underlying reasons which have prompted these debates and
presented the world, for the past twenty-four hours, with
the spectacle of a war whose beginnings we well understood
but whose end it wasimpossible to predict.

252. Having said this, 1 feel called upon to interpret the
statement by my colleague the representative of Syria-and
1 am sure he Will see eye to eye with me on my
interpretation-for
the statement is one which has prompted various remarks and comments by the United States
representative. When the Syrian representative referred ta
the behaviour of a segment of the public in, 1 shall not say
this country, but this City, this was a legitimate observation
on the part of the representative of a delegation which
perhaps has been threatened with death, which has seen
demonstrators parading with impunity in front of the
United Nations building during Security Council meetings,
which has heard the Secretary-General booed and delegations insulted, which has seen people approach cars in order
to find out the country of ownership SO as to have an
opportunity of leaning through the window and shouting
insults which 1 shall not repeat here for fear of shocking the
modesty of my audience.

256. The country which took that responsibility upon
itself has not heard in this Council Chamber a single
expression of regret, let alone condemnation, for the
initiative it took. In Cairo the Secretary-General was given
an assurance by the Arabs that they would not start a war;
and the Arab representatives repeated that assurance here.
The behaviour of the Arab delegations here and of the Arab
countries themselves prove-and we, too, cari send factfinding commissions to verify this-that no steps were taken
which, from a military standpoint, indicated that preparations for attack were under way. We will be told, of course,
that where military measures are concerned it is no use
trying to distinguish between defensive and aggressive
actions. 1 am not prepared to allow Mr, Eban to slip that
insinuation into his speech unchallenged. We are ready to

253. We are not challenging the social structures of a great
country, let alone its democratic institutions. But we cari
challenge-and 1 should like to be understood in an
objective spirit-the pressures under which we and the
Security Council have been living. I have heard distinguished representatives of the United Nations mention the
24

ask him to check the truth of the matter’. He has only to
consult any strate@ or refer to any treatise on strategy to
know that the operations Israel undertook were aggressive
and not defensive.
257. An even more serious aspect of the present decision-and 1 say this without any trace of bitterness but with
profound esteem for the Council members with whom 1 am
privileged to collaborate and who are fully alive to their
high responsibility-is
that the Council has not delivered a
judgement in this matter, a fact fraught with the gravest of
consequences. The Council may have been seeking an end
to its debates, but it was certainly not seeking a solution to
the crisis. The Council may have taken an immediate step,
but, to paraphrase certain historians who say that a current
decision often affects the future, 1 shall say today chat the
Council has committed the future, that it has set a
precedent. Tomorrow, any country which feels itself
strong, either because of its own strength or because it has
hacking, or has rcceived promises of solid hacking, will be
able to launch aggression in the certainty that the Council
Will spend forty-eight hours in debate, and then, in order to
safeguard peace, Will finally decide to cal1 for a cesse-fïre,
leaving undetermined the responsibility of the iniator of the
aggression. As a former member of the Council, 1 feel
bound to make this assertion with the same conviction as
that of the present members of the Council, who have
today tackled the problem and are convinced that they
have discharged their duty.

Members, we were most impressed to see how two great
Powers, despite alliances and many firm ties, very courageously-and this courage has not been forgotten, no matter
what is said today-took decisions to tel1 their allies, their
friends: your responsibility is clear. We were astonished
today not to hear the four big Powers, in a different
international context, say to a self-styled small country
which has always followed a policy of aggression what two
great Powers found it perfectly possible to say at that time.
261. Perhaps those two observations may be felt to be
beside the point, but I was most impressed as a student, by
a book on the Battle of Verdun in which the author wrote
that on one occasion when reports were being made to
Foch and Pétain, the report was tut short with the
comment, “Don? tel1 me about the events, just tel1 me
what they mean.” It is the meaning of this event that 1
wanted to bring more fully to the Council’s notice.
262. However, 1 do not wish to impose upon your
indulgence or continue to give free rein to this exposition
of justifiable considerations which, 1 must point out, 1 have
voiced not only as the representative of an Arab country
but also as the representative of a United Nations Member
State, a Rate which, 1 cari say without fear of contradiction, has in every serious crisis given the Organization all
manner of support commensurate with its possibilities and
sometimes even taxing its financial and political possibilities.
263. Our policy is based on one of tbe few dogmas which
the Second World War and the freedom proclaimed for the
entire world have validated, a dogma which lias been an
article of faith for a generation, namely, that of the moral
authority of the United Nations and the certainty that it
stands as a bulwark against aggression and injustice. It is as
champions of this principle that we have spoken today with
such justifiable emotion.

258, 1 should also like to mention here and now-and 1 do
SO with a11 diffdence, having neither the accumulated
political experience to allow me to make such a statement
nor the presumption, even less, to pass judgement on the
members of the Council-that in this dcbate we have
witnessed a new phenomenon, some aspects of which are
perhaps gratifying, but which has other very serious aspects
that need to be pointed out. We have seen the four great
Powers join together without difficulty in sponsoring a
resolution which is silent as regards determining responsibility.of the aggressor. This is something new. We are the
first to approve of complete understanding between the
great Powers in the interests of world peace. However, if it
is a decision of this nature which has led to the collective
silence as regards determining the aggressoror defming the
actions which provoked this crisis, we cari foresee the
dangers inherent in that attitude in the years ahead. No
dialectic, however powerful, and whatever the ideology or
culture from which it stems, Will suceed in dispelling the
obscurity that surrounds that point for the moment.

264. 1 also have something to say in connexion with
certain observations by the Israel representative who, with
admittedly skillful rhetoric, passed over in silence a11the
underlying causes and stages of this crisis and dwelt at
length on the right of a nation to exist and to have its place
in the world.
265. On more than one occasion, here or elsewhere, my
country has expounded what 1 might cal1 our philosophy
regarding that principle. We do not dispute the right of any
ethnie group in the world, of any racial group of no matter
what faith, to gather in any corner of the world in order to
create a home and a nation, But what we do abject to is the
fact that while many countries are still calling for immigrants in order to fil their empty spaces, the choice fell on
the most fragile political entity of the times-fragile because
it was not yet soundly on its feet and had only just won its
freedom, thus opening the way to the amputation of the
Arab territory in order to put people there who are free to
go wherever they wish but who have evicted others who
had lived there much longer than the oft-mentioned two
thousand years. This mistake, accepted in 1948, has led to a
series of tragic events whose end is not yet in sight.

259. We have witnessed the first meeting and the first
decision of a “club of great Powers” whose members we
sincerely trust Will see eye to eye, on behalf, we hope, of
international justice, equity and a peace in which regional
considerations, with the strategic positions and interplay of
world forces which underlie them, Will not suddenly give
rise to unexpected attitudes.
260. No country attaches more importance than does
mine to the authority of the United Nations. By a happy
chance, we were admitted to the United Nations in 1956
when the Suez crisis was under discussion. As we came in
contact with the work of the Organization and all its

266. Par twenty years the Arabs, have been accused of
preparmg for war. A short time ago someone made the
25

adopted by the Security Council calling upon the Governments concerned to take fortbwith as a first step all
measures for an immediate cesse-fire and for a cessation of
a11military activities in the area.

point that withdrawal of the United Nations Emergency
Force had been, requested although the Force was an
expression of the world’s concern for peace in that region.
But who refused to allow implementation
of the General
Assembly resolution (1001 (ES-l)] calling for United
Nations troops to be sent to the territories concemcd at
that time? The arrogance with which that resolution was
rejected entitles me today to describe Mr. Abba Eban’s
explanation as mefe sophistry, if not hypocrisy, for there
are witnesses here who cari still recall the words of the
Israel Minister for Foreign Affairs at that time, or Mr.
Eban’s own comments, when he was Permanent Representative, on the value of that resolution. Who has
successively ignored the Assembly resolutions, the Armistice Agreements and the Security Council’s condemnations? It was the Arabs who always agreed to be the losers,
and 1 use the word with great sorrow, who agreed to be the
losers in order to safeguard the principle of trust in the
United Nations and recognition of its authority in the hope
that the triumph and endurance of that principle would
bring them justice.

269. We assume that this decision, which was unanimously
adopted by the Council, Will be carried out today, without
any delay, and that the President of the Council Will take
the necessary measures concerning it.
270. The PRESIDENT: 1 said in my initial statement that,
1 was confident that 1 expressed the unanimous wish of the
members of the Council in most urgently appealing to the
parties to comply immediately with the provisions of this
resolution. 1 cari give the representative of the Union of
Soviet Socialist Republics the assurance that 1 Will take the
necessary measures and steps in order to see that, on OUI
side, everything is done in order that the parties Will
comply with this decision.
271, 1 cari further inform the Council that tables have
already been sent by the Secretariat to the capitals
concerned.

267. Tonight they have suffered another disappointment,
1 have no intention of defending a cause which other
speakers before me have SO eloquently defended, but 1
assure you that those who wish to base their country’s
policy on a foundation of international trust have tonight
received a shock that has made them hesitate and which, if
repeated, or rather, if not redressed as it should be, would
largely undermine their belief, if not destroy their entire
faith, in the Organization.

272, 1 have no more speakers on my list. 1 shah consult
with the members of the Council concerning the date of
our next meeting. We shall adjourn now on the understanding that members Will hold themselves in readiness should
the circumstances or the developments necessitate the
convening of a meeting at short notice.

268. Mr. FEDORENKO
(Union of Soviet Socialist Republics) (translated from Russianj: A decision has been

The meeting rose at 11.20 p.m

26
Litho in U.N.

Price: $US. 1.50 (or equivnlent in other currencies)

8356-December

1970-2,100
