S/2006/355

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
31 May 2006
English
Original: French

Letter dated 26 May 2006 from the Secretary-General
addressed to the President of the Security Council
The United Nations Tajikistan Office of Peacebuilding (UNTOP) was
established in 2000 at the request of the Government to assist in the post-conflict
stabilization of the country, following the withdrawal of the United Nations Mission
of Observers in Tajikistan. UNTOP provides the political framework and leadership
for the peacebuilding activities of the United Nations system in Tajikistan. Jointly
with the United Nations country team and in partnership with the Tajik authorities at
all levels, political parties, civil society, and donor countries, the Office works to
establish the necessary conditions for ensuring the irreversibility of the peace
process. UNTOP fosters the continuation of national dialogue and reconciliation,
assists in strengthening democratic institutions and conflict-prevention mechanisms,
promotes the rule of law, and supports national capacity-building in the area of
human rights.
Tajikistan has made considerable progress in strengthening stability and
national reconciliation during the past six years of peacebuilding. However, much
remains to be done in overcoming the consequences of the civil war. To this end,
UNTOP carried out in 2005/06 a national dialogue project on political pluralism and
peace consolidation, which brought together over 500 Government officials,
political party activists, and representatives of civil society in meetings across the
country. Undertaken in cooperation with national authorities, the project provided a
unique forum for building mutual trust and consensus on issues critical to the
sustainability of the peace process. In fostering social partnership between civil
society and the Government, the project contributed to improving the latter’s
transparency at all levels. UNTOP continues to play a unique and indispensable role
as a quiet facilitator of solutions for the most contentious and sensitive issues that
may often emerge in the transition context.
The forthcoming presidential elections, the first to be held during peacetime,
are an important benchmark in the post-conflict political environment. With
guidance from a United Nations electoral needs assessment mission, and the request
of the Government, UNTOP developed a technical assistance project for the
presidential elections to be held in November 2006. The project is to be executed in
close cooperation with the national electoral authorities. The Office also facilitated
the adoption by national authorities of steps to improve government and media
relations and public access to information, such as the institution of a process of
regular press briefings by State ministries.

06-36908 (E) 010606 010606

*0636908*

S/2006/355

With a view to building national capacities for conflict prevention, UNTOP
initiated a series of training seminars on human rights and conflict management for
more than 900 community leaders, educators, lawyers, and local officials through its
network of eight centres around the country.
With a view to strengthening the rule of law, the Office continued its activities
in building professionalism and accountability in the law enforcement sector and
promoting its transition and reform. The UNTOP civilian police adviser enacted the
process of training for Ministry of the Interior personnel on international legal
standards in police operations, with one project encompassing 40 instructors and
over 1,000 Ministry of the Interior staff. The Office facilitated the publication of the
Ministry of the Interior bulletin, thus improving the transparency of the Ministry
and its outreach to society. UNTOP also arranged for the training abroad of 30
Ministry of the Interior personnel in civilian policing and peacekeeping, in
preparation for the establishment of a national unit for possible participation in
United Nations operations.
In the transition environment, violations of human rights may become a source
of fault lines in society. To address these issues, UNTOP contributed to building
national capacities in the legal protection of citizens, human rights education, and
reporting and implementation under treaty obligations. For example, the Office
promoted the establishment of the institution of a National Human Rights
Ombudsman through a conference with 80 participants and international experts, in
close cooperation with the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for
Human Rights; assisted national authorities in implementation of recommendations
of United Nations treaty bodies concerning the Convention on the Elimination of
All Forms of Racial Discrimination and the International Covenant on Civil and
Political Rights, with one project reaching over 115 parliamentarians, judges, and
activists; built consensus on the need to carry out the recommendations of the
United Nations Special Rapporteur on the independence of judges and lawyers;
supported the implementation of the State programme on human rights education by
promoting adoption of the first comprehensive curriculum on human rights in the
secondary school system; and closely monitored human rights developments in the
country and advised the authorities on politically sensitive issues.
The role of UNTOP as a key facilitator of post-conflict peacebuilding efforts
in Tajikistan is recognized by donor countries, which recently pledged over US$ 2
million for the Office’s projects.
In view of the important and very positive role being played by UNTOP, as
well as the country’s continuing need for assistance in the area of peacebuilding,
and in response to the request of the Government of Tajikistan, it is my intention to
continue the activities of UNTOP for a further period of one year, until 1 June 2007.
I should be grateful if you would bring this letter to the attention of the
members of the Security Council.
(Signed) Kofi A. Annan

2
